Unlike professional athletes, actors (Gene Hackman) and some novelists (Philip Roth), visual artists don’t usually retire. Or if they do, they don’t announce it.
But in 2011, Maurizio Cattelan — one of the most expensive living artists, then at the peak of his career and the subject of an uproarious retrospective at the Guggenheim Museum — told the world that he was finished, fatigued both creatively and by the velocity of the money-fueled art world. During the last couple of years, though, Mr. Cattelan found himself itching to make things in three dimensions again. “Actually, it’s even more of a torture not to work than to work,” he said in an interview. And so he is coming out of retirement with a new sculpture that seems designed to proclaim his return with an exclamation point, though the piece is of modest size and will not be on view in a public gallery.
It will, instead, be installed in early May just off one of the ramps of the Guggenheim Museum in Manhattan, in a small, humble room where visitors often feel the urge to spend some time alone. The room has tiles, a sink, a mirror and a lock on the door. And now, instead of its standard Kohler toilet, it will have a solid 18-karat-gold working replica of one, a preposterously scatological apotheosis of wealth whose form is completed in its function: You could go into the restroom just to bask in its glow, Mr. Cattelan said, but it becomes an artwork only with someone sitting on it or standing over it, answering nature’s call.
In one sense, the sculpture is a punning extension of his work on the ribald picture magazine he founded in 2010 with Pierpaolo Ferrari, called Toilet Paper. The toilet also has obvious 20th-century art-historical precedents: Marcel Duchamp’s “Fountain,” the urinal he unsuccessfully submitted to an exhibition in New York 99 years ago this month, and Piero Manzoni’s “Merda d’Artista,” metal cans with the contents labeled as the artist’s feces, each can priced according to its weight in gold. Though Mr. Cattelan began thinking about the piece before the United States presidential campaign was in full swing, the conspicuous gaudiness of the solid-gold facility will surely evoke Donald J. Trump’s taste for gold-plated bathroom fixtures, and the sculpture’s title, “Maurizio Cattelan: ‘America,’” inspired by Kafka’s novel “Amerika,” will engender some heavy-duty interpretations.
Guggenheim officials said that they anticipated lines for the Cattelan bathroom and added that a guard or attendant might be placed near the door to ensure orderly waiting — and also to make certain that no one tries to abscond with a piece of the toilet.
They added that 18-karat gold was chosen for its solidity, though they acknowledged the possibility that the sculpture still could be scratched or damaged.
In the recent interview, Mr. Cattelan said the art market’s emergence over the last dozen years as a kind of hedge fund for billionaires was not his primary motivation for retiring. “But the way it felt was like driving a car and someone else was controlling the speed,” he said, adding that his retirement angered many of his collectors, who feared it would cause the value of his work to decline. That seems not to be the case. A 2001 work, “Him,” a jarringly realistic boy-size Hitler on his knees, is expected to sell at a Christie’s auction in May for between $10 million and $15 million, which would break an auction record for Mr. Cattelan’s work, set in 2010, of almost $8 million.
Creating the toilet, Mr. Cattelan said, gave him a way “to get around the wall I had hit,” and he said coming out of retirement could give him more say in how his older work is exhibited.
