The Golden State Warriors drew one victory closer to basketball nirvana by escaping Saturday night with a 100-99 victory against the host Memphis Grizzlies at FedEx Forum.
If the Warriors (71-9) go on to win their final two games to surpass the mark set by the 1995-96 Chicago Bulls for the best regular-season record in league history, they will probably look back at their win in Memphis as a symbol of their determination — and their worthiness of the record.
After trailing by 10 points midway through the fourth quarter, the Warriors mounted a comeback. With a minute remaining, Draymond Green scored on a tip-in to put the Warriors up by 1. They managed to survive only when the Grizzlies’ Lance Stephenson missed two shots against a number of defenders in the closing seconds.
The Warriors can equal the Bulls’ 72-win total against the San Antonio Spurs on Sunday, and potentially eclipse it when they host the Grizzlies on Wednesday in their regular-season finale.
Green finished with 23 points and 11 rebounds to lead the Warriors, who labored with their outside shooting. Klay Thompson, who finished with 20 points, and Stephen Curry, who added 17, combined to shoot 5 of 24 from 3-point range. Curry missed two 3-pointers late in the fourth quarter that would have sealed the win.
The Grizzlies (42-38) were short-handed because of injuries but still pushed the Warriors to the brink behind Matt Barnes, who scored 24 points.
Even as his players have been clear about wanting to break the record, Warriors Coach Steve Kerr has expressed more caution. The pursuit, he has said repeatedly, has come with its share of physical and emotional burdens, and he wants to guard against fatigue heading into the playoffs.
After the Warriors secured the top seed in the Western Conference by defeating the Spurs on Thursday, Kerr said he would talk with his players about whether any of them wanted to rest in either game this weekend. He referred to the “pact” that he had made with them: If they were tired or banged up, they had to be honest with him.
Against the Grizzlies, Kerr rested Andrew Bogut, his starting center, but everyone else played. Kerr was careful to limit minutes, though. Ten players supplied at least 10 minutes each.
“The game is certainly not more important than our health,” Kerr told reporters at the team’s morning shootaround.
But even as repeating as N.B.A. champions remains their primary goal, the Warriors showed once again how determined they are to make history.
BULLS 105, CAVALIERS 102 Jimmy Butler scored 21 points, the rookie Cristiano Felicio added a career-high 16, and Chicago kept its playoff hopes alive by edging visiting Cleveland.
The Bulls took the lead with a 15-0 run early in the fourth quarter and hung on for the win when J. R. Smith missed a 3-pointer at the buzzer, preventing the Cavaliers from clinching the No. 1 seed in the Eastern Conference, even though LeBron James scored 33 points. Chicago still needs to win its final two games and hope that Indiana drops its remaining three in order to avoid missing the playoffs for the first time since 2008.
James had a huge game for Cleveland, hitting 13 of 17 shots — going 4 of 5 on 3-pointers. James, who is a four-time most valuable player, also contributed seven rebounds.
HAWKS 118, CELTICS 107 Paul Millsap had a season-high 31 points and 16 rebounds, Jeff Teague added 24 points, and host Atlanta defeated Boston.
Kent Bazemore finished with 21 points for the Hawks, who moved to one game ahead of the Celtics to take sole possession of third place in the Eastern Conference.
With two regular-season games left for both teams, the Hawks moved a game and a half ahead of their Southeast Division rivals Miami and Charlotte, while the Celtics have just a half-game lead on the Heat and the Hornets.
SUNS 121, PELICANS 100 Archie Goodwin scored 24 points, Mizra Teletovic added 22, and visiting Phoenix thumped New Orleans in a matchup of lottery-bound teams.
The victory was the second straight for the Suns (22-58), who halted a seven-game losing streak on Thursday with a 124-115 win at Houston.
Toney Douglas had 23 points to lead the Pelicans (30-50), who suffered their worst home loss this season.
Phoenix never trailed, taking the lead for good early in the second quarter on a jumper by Teletovic after New Orleans had gone on a 10-0 run to start the second half to tie the game, 42-42.
