Neil Luck, the composer of this wacky piece, called “Bubbles,” was also the soloist, backed by the players of Ensemble neoN, an impressive group from Norway making its American debut. Whatever one’s take on “Bubbles,” its inclusion on this fascinating program proved that MATA continues to showcase a broad spectrum of music by young, underrecognized voices from around the world.
A piece titled “[’priz(e)m],” by the Italian-born Alexander Kaiser, was written in the aftermath of the paranoia in Europe stirred by the 2013 National Security Agency spying scandal, the composer said after its performance. This 10-minute score for six instruments, including drum set, was the composer’s first attempt to combine the punk music of his youth with a European Modernist style. The piece moves in heaving spurts, with wailing flute and clarinet lines, pounding rhythms and skittish pointillist piano bursts. Screeching sounds and grating rhythms intrude, and are absorbed.
The young Spanish composer Diego Jiménez Tamame packs a lot of dense, restless music into his five-minute “Don’t Condescend [Don’t Even Disagree].” It unfolds with violent shifts and gnashing chords as motifs and cells of pitches interact and recombine.
“All Play,” by the Norwegian Jan Martin Smordal, was inspired by the assaultive improvised performances of the kinetic guitar player Daniel Meyer Gronvold. The piece is a kind of concerto, featuring video clips of Mr. Gronvold in action and reactive music from the ensemble, combining in a visceral, frenzied whole. The American Matthew Welch’s “Comala’s Song,” a monodrama for soprano (here the sweet-voiced Silje Aker Johnsen) and seven instruments (conducted by Magnus Loddgard), tells a Gaelic myth in appealing music of lapping figures, sensual harmonies and delicate vocal lines.
I was especially moved by the young Irish composer Sean Clancy’s “Fourteen Minutes of Music on the Subject of Greeting Cards.” Trite Hallmark-style phrases like “You Are 4” were projected on a screen, tracing life events from graduations to retirements to condolences. As greetings come and go, a flute, violin and piano play compact, beautifully simple yet elusive musical phrases. The piano part is similarly fixated on subtly changing themes.
For this year’s six-day MATA festival, 1,156 composers from 71 countries submitted scores, which suggests how coveted this valuable platform has become.