RALEIGH, N.C. — The North Carolina General Assembly, already buffeted by weeks of bitter debate over a law about gay and transgender rights, faced competing demonstrations and new pressure as lawmakers opened their annual session here on Monday.
The immediate fate of the law, which limits bathroom access for transgender people in public buildings and broadly forbids discrimination claims in state courts, was not in question, after Republican leaders and rank-and-file lawmakers said they anticipated leaving the measure intact. Yet supporters and critics alike used the General Assembly’s return as a rallying point about a law that set off an economic backlash and shoved the state into a rollicking national debate.
“We are using the tools available to us in democracy — petitions, lobbying, public protests, civil disobedience — to say this law is wrong at its core, and it must be immediately repealed,” said the Rev. Jasmine Beach-Ferrara, the executive director of the Campaign for Southern Equality.
During public gatherings across the state government complex, supporters of the law, which many people refer to as House Bill 2, outnumbered critics. At one rally, after church buses ferried supporters from places like Thomasville and Rural Hall, thousands of people, many of them in lawn chairs, heard speaker after speaker praise the measure.
The battle about the law, approved during a one-day special session last month, is poised to ripple throughout the so-called short session, which often deals with the budget.
Democrats have moved to repeal the law. With the repeal proposal widely expected to fail, critics of the law argued Monday that the existing statute is more far-reaching than its supporters like to acknowledge, in part because it blocks local governments from enforcing policies like anti-discrimination and minimum-wage ordinances.
Gov. Pat McCrory, a Republican who is seeking re-election this year, urged legislators to change the part of the law limiting where discrimination claims can be filed. It is unclear whether lawmakers will heed Mr. McCrory’s recommendation.
Republican leaders have framed the law’s preservation as a matter of public safety. Critics, the governor and his supporters contend, are political opportunists who have misconstrued the law.
But legislators were still left to reckon with a law that led companies including PayPal and Deutsche Bank to abandon or pause plans to add jobs in North Carolina, and prompted the Obama administration to weigh whether the state will remain eligible for billions of dollars in federal aid.
Many of the law’s opponents fear that North Carolina’s reputation has already been tarnished, perhaps irrevocably. On Friday, in a development that did not go unnoticed here, the law was even a subject during President Obama’s news conference with Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain.
And so critics renewed their vows for a long campaign of resistance to the law, already the subject of a legal challenge, in a broadening of the Moral Monday movement that has shadowed the Republican-dominated Legislature in recent years.
“The religious right has always been there, but it just seems we’re living in a context now, in the national political discussion, where hateful bigotry is allowed to stand loud and proud in public,” Barbara Zelter said while she considered whether she would stay long enough to be arrested at a sit-in later Monday, when 54 protesters were arrested after chanting inside the General Assembly’s building.
Ms. Zelter, 66, conceded that her display of outrage was unlikely to produce quick results.
