Love is a mess. It’s awkward and clumsy and can lead to the uncomfortable gestation of a small human.
This was the theme of the splendid first season of the British comedy “Catastrophe,” about Rob (Rob Delaney), an American businessman, and Sharon (Sharon Horgan), an Irish schoolteacher, whose several-night stand in London produced an unplanned pregnancy and, eventually, romance. It was a ribald story about grown-ups backing into love with few illusions and fewer boundaries.
But if love between two adults is a mess, consider what happens when you throw in a couple of dependents who do not have control of their excretory functions. This is where the equally sweet and filthy Season 2, appearing Friday on Amazon Prime, finds the couple.
Specifically, it finds them in bed, a couple of years later, she hugely pregnant, he trying to coax her into a quickie. “My old-lady bra turns you on?” she asks.
It may be early for them to be having another baby. (Their first was born on their wedding night, and Sharon is still in Rob’s iPhone contacts as “Sharon London Sex.”) But “Catastrophe” believes in steering into the skid. Life will chuck more problems at you anyway, so what the hell, might as well throw another on the pile.
Where the first season was frank about the physical pitfalls of pregnancy, the second gets real about early parenting, which is 90 percent about the management of bodily discharges. (Along with diaper humor, the show breaks new ground in lactation slapstick.) Meanwhile, Sharon’s father (Gary Lilburn) is beginning to show signs of dementia, and Rob’s self-involved mother (Carrie Fisher) has arrived for an extended and unhelpful visit.
Mr. Delaney and Ms. Horgan share writing duties, emphasizing their characters’ sharp-tongued camaraderie. Ms. Horgan is a comic actress, while Mr. Delaney is a comedian who happens to be acting, but they have a natural rapport. They joke splendidly and fight even better.
Without soapboxing, “Catastrophe” is also casually feminist, partly for illustrating Anne-Marie Slaughter’s point that an equal marriage requires Dad to be more than the backup parent. It’s Rob who’s tempted by the idea of quitting work to stay home, though they need his income; Sharon is desperate to return, though child care would cancel out her paycheck. “So you want to go back to a job that takes you away from your kids to earn no money,” he says.
“Catastrophe” has the raw honesty of a mom on her second martini at a play date. It’s also — time-strapped parents take note — a refreshingly brisk six episodes. Even at that, some subplots feel extraneous, and like the first season, the second ends on a dissonant cliffhanger.
But “Catastrophe” has not become a dramedy about parenting. It’s a comedy about being parents, weathering the emotional and medical terrors that come with responsibility for small lives, yet remaining partners, lovers, allies.
So they go forth together, hand in hand into the muck.