It may be the biggest unfiring in opera since Maria Callas’s New York comeback: Kathleen Battle, a prima donna whose dismissal by the Metropolitan Opera more than two decades ago made front-page news, will return to the Met next season to sing a recital of spirituals.
Ms. Battle was a Grammy-winning soprano who had appeared with the Met 224 times by 1994, when Joseph Volpe, then general manager, fired her from a production of Donizetti’s “La Fille du Régiment” a week before opening night, citing, with a bluntness unusual in classical music, her “unprofessional actions during rehearsals.” Stories quickly circulated about what was described as divalike behavior and rudeness toward colleagues, including demands that other singers leave rehearsals when she was singing and not look at her mouth during duets.
Ms. Battle was said to arrive late to rehearsals, leave early or not to show up at all. Nor was “Fille” the first case of her being temperamental: The year before, she withdrew from a Met production of Strauss’s “Der Rosenkavalier” after clashing with the conductor. A few months before that, in a season-opening appearance with the Boston Symphony Orchestra, she was said to have changed hotels several times and banned an assistant conductor from her rehearsals.
She will give a recital called “Kathleen Battle: Underground Railroad — A Spiritual Journey,” accompanied by Joel Martin on the piano and by a choir led by James Davis Jr., the director of Music Ministries and Fine Arts at the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem. Ms. Battle, who has performed versions of the program in Philadelphia, Detroit and Baltimore, said that she was excited to bring it to the Met.
Then he thought about having her bring her “Underground Railroad” program, and in December Mr. Gelb and Ms. Battle visited the stage together, configured for a recital with the orchestra pit raised and acoustical screens put up, to see if she would be comfortable. “She sounded fantastic, and she said she’d do it,” he said.
On Feb. 23, 1985, Handel’s 300th birthday, she appeared to great acclaim in a concert performance of his “Semele” at Carnegie Hall. (“It had to be,” Donal Henahan wrote in The New York Times, “the performance of her young and still-blossoming career.”) A smiling natural in Mozart and Strauss’s ingénue roles, her fresh and pure (if slender) tone and seemingly effortless agility translated beautifully to recording, and she eventually became one of Deutsche Grammophon’s biggest stars. But a reputation for causing backstage strife began to dog her: Colleagues at the San Francisco Opera were seen wearing T-shirts reading “I Survived the Battle” after one of her appearances.
