Nestled in the neo-Georgian sanctuary of the Knickerbocker Club, one of New York’s oldest and fustiest social establishments, a select group of Republican donors gathered late last month to take up an unexpected task: reconsidering Ted Cruz.
Eager to defeat Donald J. Trump, they seemed willing to overlook a few things: Mr. Cruz’s fiery attacks on Wall Street and “special-interest billionaires,” and his swipes at eminent party leaders and lawmakers. But one wealthy financial executive had a question: What did you mean when you attacked Mr. Trump for having “New York values”?
Of all the teeth-gritting alliances being forged over opposition to Mr. Trump’s rampaging bid for the Republican presidential nomination, few are as unlikely as the emerging bond between Mr. Cruz and his party’s elite donor establishment.
Since Mr. Cruz’s election to the Senate in 2012, many traditional Republican donors have spurned him, viewing him as a hopeless ideologue whose antics — particularly his leading role in the 2013 government shutdown — damaged the party in service of his ambitions.
But in recent weeks, at small events from the Upper East Side of Manhattan to the Republican precincts of Newport Beach, Calif., they are learning to love Mr. Cruz.
Bolstered by Mr. Cruz’s overwhelming win in Wisconsin on Tuesday, his campaign is moving aggressively to take advantage of the thaw, reaching out to some of the party’s most prominent donors to seek a hearing. Many — though not all — said they were now far more inclined to take the senator’s calls. Former backers of Jeb Bush and Senator Marco Rubio of Florida have hosted fund-raising events or meet-and-greets for Mr. Cruz, even while some privately concede that they have their doubts about his temperament.
Starting on Friday in Las Vegas, Trusted Leadership, the chief “super PAC” supporting Mr. Cruz, will host a gathering intended to draw new donors to the group, until now financed by a handful of wealthy families. Not coincidentally, the event will be held at the Venetian, the casino hotel owned by the Republican megadonor Sheldon Adelson, perhaps the most sought-after contributor of all.
One goal is to pry loose some of the large-scale money that went to candidates like Mr. Rubio and Mr. Bush earlier in the campaign. In recent months, as Mr. Cruz rose, some of the party’s wealthiest donors, such as the billionaire New York investor Paul Singer and the Ricketts family, chose to pour money into super PACs that are directly attacking Mr. Trump, rather than openly backing Mr. Cruz.
But the courtship is a delicate one. Some donors said that if Mr. Cruz was perhaps not their ideal choice for president — or even their third or fourth choice — he now seemed to be the only candidate with enough delegates to force a contested convention and deny Mr. Trump the nomination.
The rules for how Republican delegates are selected could end up turning votes for one candidate into delegates who will support another candidate at the convention.
For Mr. Cruz, help from establishment donors could dilute his outsider message and provide a new cudgel for Mr. Trump, who has denounced rivals for their dependence on contributions from the wealthy and powerful.
Forty percent of his overall cash has come from small donors, many in Texas, and only about a fifth of his money for the primary has come from donors giving the maximum $2,700 contributions. At the end of February, according to the most recent financial disclosures, the campaign reported about $8 million cash on hand.
Mr. Cruz’s challenge is to broaden his reach in the world of midlevel Republican fund-raisers — those who can raise tens or hundreds of thousands of dollars for his campaign — and among the elite group of billionaires who could write larger checks to the super PACs supporting him.
Mr. Cruz is not always good at asking for help, sometimes giving the impression that he could as easily do without it. Even in private, donors said, he can be prone to sanctimony, disinclined to adjust his television-ready populism. Allies view Mr. Cruz’s uncompromising style as a virtue, but they concede it can make life difficult on the donor circuit.
Asked what was the biggest worry of prospective supporters, Doug Deason, a major Cruz donor in Dallas, did not hesitate.
“I think his personality, mostly,” Mr. Deason said, before defending him as likable to those who get to know him.
A wider embrace by donors has also been hampered in some quarters by genuine political disagreement between more middle-of-the-road potential donors and Mr. Cruz, a professed conservative purist on economic and social issues.
Andy Sabin, a former Bush supporter who runs a Long Island precious metals company, said that when a fund-raiser from Mr. Cruz’s campaign reached out recently, he insisted on one condition.
“I told him, ‘For me to have any interest in Ted, I need him to accept that the earth has warmed, and that we can solve the problem and create plenty of jobs,’ ” Mr. Sabin recalled. Mr. Sabin said that he was offered a spot on one of Mr. Cruz’s policy advisory committees, but that when he still asked that Mr. Cruz publicly voice a belief in climate change, he never heard back. Even a signal in the right direction would have been enough for him, Mr. Sabin said.
Instead, Mr. Cruz and his surrogates are leaning heavily on his credentials as a supporter of Israel, now the most robust of any candidate. Many pro-Israel Republican donors had already backed him, and while in Washington recently to speak before the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, or Aipac, Mr. Cruz attended a fund-raiser tied to the event. Last month, he also gained the support of Fred Zeidman — a board member of the Republican Jewish Coalition who previously backed Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Mr. Bush — and his son, Jay.
Elsewhere, support for Mr. Cruz has required fewer caveats. He is regarded warmly among Republicans in his home state, Texas, where he has deeper personal relations with a wider portion of the donor class. For longtime Cruz fund-raisers there who seek to expand Mr. Cruz’s fund-raising footprint in other corners of the country, it has been a heady few weeks. There are new calls to make and pitches to massage, given many audiences’ deep reservations.
“We weren’t their No. 1 draft pick,” Mica Mosbacher, a Cruz fund-raiser based in Houston and New York, said of her discussions with new prospects. Ms. Mosbacher is among the supporters assigned to attest to Mr. Cruz’s charms.
Mr. Cruz has taken to making light of his détente with former critics and opponents, donors and otherwise. When Mr. Cruz appeared recently on “Jimmy Kimmel Live,” the late-night host took note of his patience in winning new friends.
“What you did is, you kind of held out until they found someone that they liked less than you,” Mr. Kimmel said.
