Last year, as they entered their first season homestretch, the writers of “Fear the Walking Dead” tried to figure out what to do with the show’s survivors. There was a vague plan to hole them up on the coast in the home of a mysterious wealthy character named Victor Strand as the zombie apocalypse unfolded. But from there … what? Drive north? South? Head for the desert?
From that spark came a blueprint for a very different “Fear the Walking Dead,” returning to AMC on April 10. A tense urban drama in its six-episode first season, this West Coast spinoff of “The Walking Dead” is taking to the high seas for Season 2, uprooting both the story and the production as it sets sail on a yacht. The boat will be the main setting for many episodes, which take their cues as much from thrillers like “Dead Calm” and “Knife in the Water” as from horror fare. There will be zombies, of course, but the greatest menace will be marauders and other seafaring survivors.
It seems counterintuitive to overhaul a show that is already doing well. “Fear the Walking Dead” hit the ground running last summer, notching the highest-rated debut in cable history. The episode total jumps from six to 15 this season, a tougher lift even before the series, which shot in Los Angeles and Vancouver last season, decided to relocate to another country.
But the lure of the sea was tough to ignore. First, it made narrative sense. With Los Angeles disintegrating and the Pacific Coast full of marinas and yachts, “we’re not the only people who would have had this brainstorm,” Mr. Erickson said. There was also the dramatic potential of isolating a group of relative strangers on a boat captained by an enigmatic oligarch.
But a few steps needed to be taken first.
The producers considered locations in Puerto Rico and South Africa before settling on Baja Studios, partly because they wanted to match the Southern California light, but mostly because of “The House That Mr. Cameron Built,” Mr. Erickson said. The 51-acre facility was constructed in the 1990s for James Cameron’s “Titanic.” It has multiple soundstages and shooting tanks.
The production designer Bernardo Trujillo designed and built a “boat” with enough space for cameras to roam among the main deck, the upper deck and a swim deck, from where the actors can dive into the drink or come and go in an inflatable Zodiac boat. (Underwater scenes are shot in a separate, heated tank.) Sets like the staterooms and wheelhouse, which can move to mimic the motion of the tide, sit on a soundstage.
As the season progresses, episodes will become more balanced between those set at sea and others in which the survivors go ashore to explore. Many of the sweeping seascapes were filmed with drones, but the shoots in the surf presented their own problems. In one instance, the production team had scouted out an ideal beach location only to return before filming to find it had been rendered unusable by a storm.
Who’s Steering the Ship?
“Fear the Walking Dead” remains a family drama at its core, following a blended clan headed by Madison and Travis (Kim Dickens and Cliff Curtis). But the show is also shifting its focus toward a character who arrived near the end of Season 1. “The fundamental enigma of the season is Victor Strand,” Mr. Erickson said.
Whether the character has a hidden agenda will be an ongoing subplot, as will be his efforts to keep control of his boat. Mr. Domingo went to yacht school before the season, so he could look comfortable at the controls. But he also learned that the owners of such ships, generally being wealthy enough to employ crews, often don’t actually know how to pilot them. This fact will come into play, he said.
Wait, Can Zombies Swim?
Sadly, they cannot.
True to their name, the walkers can wade. “But when they’re over their head, they either sink or, if they’re decomposed enough, they will float,” Mr. Erickson said.
