On a recent Tuesday evening in SoHo, under a flag recently unfurled, the doors of Raden opened, provided you had the right name to drop to the forbidding doorman stationed before them.
Inside, a circular display stretched nearly to the ceiling, catching the light of a gradient illumination that changed colors like the rising and setting sun. It was an installation conceived and built by Noah Sherburn, an architect and designer who has spent the last few years realizing stage sets for the likes of Kanye West, Jay Z and Future.
It was more pomp and circumstance than usual — or at least more than usual for the opening of a suitcase showroom.
The Raden difference is tech. The company aspires to make more than mere suitcases. Their bags are smart — in the Silicon Valley sense of the word. The included battery, which is approved by the Transportation Security Administration, can charge phones or USB-connected devices and sync to a Raden app that allows you to geo-locate your bag (it can send you a push notification when it reaches the baggage carousel) or weigh it, using a handle sensor. Tell the app your flight details, and it will find what overage fees apply if you’ve overstuffed it.
The goal is “giving humanity to an appliance,” said Josh Udashkin, Raden’s founder and chief executive, citing, with entrepreneurial dreaminess, models like Apple’s iPhones and Dyson’s vacuum cleaners. At 32, Mr. Udashkin, who practiced law and worked for the shoe company Aldo negotiating real estate deals and working on wholesale development, has a practiced way with business-school jargon and a marketing guru’s reverence for the limitless potential of branding. He’s also got a taste for showmanship. Besides the store, he is commissioning a “Richard Serra-style crater dug in the Hudson Valley” to stage a “luggage toss” of Raden converts’ old bags.
So far, his zeal has convinced a cadre of investors — First Round Capital (which also invested in Warby Parker and Birchbox), Lerer Hippeau Ventures (also in Glossier and Everlane), and private individuals including Silas Chou, formerly of Michael Kors, and Rachel Zoe — to the tune of $3.5 million in seed funding.
Raden’s suitcases come in two sizes ($295 for a smaller carry-on size and $395 for a larger check-in size, or $595 for the pair) and seven colors (the expected black and white, as well as navy, hunter green, baby blue, lavender and light pink). It includes a battery that zips out of the bag for any necessary troubleshooting or repairs, and help is as near as the app, where you can chat with customer service representatives.
In its march toward tech-enabled luggage, Raden is not the first, and it is not alone. Fellow direct-to-consumer start-ups like Away and Bluesmart are working similar angles. But Raden’s approach is singularly bombastic.
Back in the showroom, the sun rose and fell — virtually, at least — on 365 Raden in sculptural form as Champagne and canapés circulated. The hope is clear enough: that the sun never sets on Raden’s empire building. The image was a deliberate one, said Mr. Udashkin, in shades and a gold Saint Laurent jacket printed with a tropical sunset and customized with two Raden “Rs.” The Raden Instagram account features picture after picture of sunrises and sunsets as a nod to the possibilities of travel.
And, of course, as one more bit of canny branding.
“I thought the sunrise and the sunset were something we could own,” he said.