A gown from Les Reves Bohemians collection designed by Galia Lahav.
Led by three Israeli designers, a growing number of wedding dresses have taken on a distinctly Mediterranean flavor: low backs that skim the derrière, deep navel-revealing necklines and a shocking amount of sheer fabric.
That sexier bridal aesthetic is shared all across the Mediterranean, not just in Israel, said Christos Costarellos, an Athens-based designer. Also right on trend are the Lebanese evening-wear designers, Zuhair Murad and Elie Saab, who are known for creating red-carpet-style bridal wear.
A design by Inbal Dror, who trained under Roberto Cavalli.
There’s plenty of other new talent in the region to discover, like Sandra Mansour, a Lebanon-based designer who was raised in Switzerland, whose collection features several dresses that could easily cross over to bridal.
Fashion scouts from the Moda Operandi have fanned out to the fashion weeks in Dubai, Tbilisi, Georgia and Ukraine, according to Elizabeth Leventhal, the online retailer’s general merchandising manager.
The American designers — stalwarts like Carolina Herrera and Oscar de la Renta — have been slower to adapt to the barer look, Mr. Ingram said.
A look from the Ivory Tower Collection designed by Galia Lahav.
When it came to finding a dress for her wedding last October, Danielle Kneppel of Manhattan, a 29-year-old software marketer, said she decided that “it was really about the dress,” not the designer name.
She kept an open mind about designers as she scoured Kleinfeld Bridal, Wedding Atelier and the Gabriella New York Bridal salon, ultimately deciding on a lace strapless exposed corset gown by Pnina Tornai, another Israeli designer. It was a win all around.
There is the sexiness trend, but, like Ms. Kneppel, the customer is more willing to try unknown niche brands today.
A dress by Berta Balilti for her namesake bridal line.
As for the notoriously risqué cuts, Ms. Balilti is unapologetic. “Maybe some people see Israel as a religious country, but it’s a very sexy country and a very open-minded country,” she said.
Ms. Dror, who trained under Roberto Cavalli, echoed the skin-baring sentiment. Those bridal boot camps are not for naught. “Women today take great care in their appearance and physique and are not ashamed to be confident and feminine,” she said, adding it is a global trend. Demand for her dresses, which start at $9,000, is also coming from China, Russia and Australia, she said.
Christos Costarellos, a Greek designer, is another of the popular Mediterranean bridal-wear creators.
And when it comes to hugging a woman’s curves, the Israeli designers take their craft seriously. Aside from complex measurements, the designer Galia Lahav, whose gowns start at $8,000, said she specializes in “body contouring” by using innovative custom fabric blends. Other times, it’s old-school construction.
Mr. Ingram said that despite the skimpiness of the cuts, the designers often use hidden corsets and nude materials to practically bind the bride in. “So no matter your figure type, they do enhance you,” he said.
Flattering or not, the sky-high price points can be alienating, said Mr. Costarellos, the Greek designer. Like the Israeli designers, Mr. Costarellos offers a different aesthetic, which he describes as sexier (but not aggressively so) than the standard American looks.
