Paris’s ubiquitous corner boulangeries have long been temples to gluten, with their baguettes, croissants and decadent patisseries. And yet, of all food trends, it is gluten-free that is taking hold. In Paris, you can now find bakeries selling breads and sweet creations made, as the French say, “sans gluten.” Specialized cafes offer gluten-free sandwiches, and gluten-free goods have taken over their own aisle at the supermarket.
The city’s gluten-free pioneer is the pastry chef Marie Tagliaferro, who along with her husband, François, opened Helmut Newcake (helmutnewcake.com), a pastry shop less than a 10-minute walk from the Galeries Lafayette in the Ninth Arrondissement. Ms. Tagliaferro was given a diagnosis of celiac disease while attending pastry school and wanted to offer gluten-free alternatives of French classics to people like her who can’t eat wheat. She now makes delicate fruit tarts and éclairs and even the cream-filled double-decker religieuses typical of the traditional boulangerie. Lauded for taste and texture that is indistinguishable from their gluten-dependent cousins, her take on the classics have brought tears of joy, literally, to gluten-averse customers.
“In the world of pastry, gluten-free is coming into its own,” said Ms. Tagliaferro, who also supplies cakes and pastries to hotels and restaurants in the city. She and her husband used to run a cafe in the 11th Arrondissement known for its gluten-free brunches; it closed in December, something planned before the November terrorist attacks that occurred nearby.
Not far from Helmut Newcake, near the Louvre, the famed French baker Eric Kayser, too, has gluten-free offerings on the Rue de l’Échelle. It took 18 months of fiddling with different flours to develop his line of bread (as well as some sweets). “For a bakery it’s disturbing to make gluten-free bread,” said Élodie de Montbron of La Maison Kayser (maison-kayser.com/en). “It’s more like a cake dough than a bread dough.” Yet she said they were motivated to bake this way because customers were begging them to do so.
Mr. Teffri-Chambelland, a well-known baker, had won accolades for wheat loaves, and gluten-free was a new challenge. “This attracts the curious,” said Mr. Doboin, who left an advertising career. They even have started their own gluten-free flour mill in the south of France. At Chambelland, as at La Maison Kayser and Helmut Newcake, they don’t use the food-grade gums, starches and preservatives that are the norm in North American gluten-free products. Chambelland’s reputation for quality has drawn the attention of one of France’s most renowned chefs today. Alain Ducasse serves Chambelland’s pain aux cinq grains (the five grains being buckwheat, sunflower, gold and brown flax, poppy seed and sesame) with salted butter in two of his Parisian restaurants.
Maybe it’s the quality of these gluten-free products that helps them appeal to those who aren’t forced to eat this way. But there’s also a perception that to cut wheat from your diet is healthier. “We are the generation of bad food,” said Charlotte Rouah whose first Juice It cafe (juice-it.fr) serves gluten-free sandwiches near the Louvre. She said people of her generation — France’s millennials — were raised on trips to McDonald’s. Now their desire is for good, healthy food. So she sells fresh-pressed juice and her specialty sandwiches made with seasonal ingredients. It’s so popular that she’s recently opened a couple of lunch counters in two yoga studios.
