Times Insider shares insights into how we work at The New York Times. In this piece, Andrew C. Revkin, The Times’s Dot Earth blogger, explains why his beat is less a noun — environment, climate, science — than it is a question.
I joined the news staff of The Times in April 1995. I recall how, when working late some nights that first year, rumbling vibrations in the building at 229 West 43rd Street would signal that the printing presses several floors below were turning today’s news into newsprint.
Reflecting on those deadline crunches makes me chuckle now that I live in the nonstop world of online journalism and social media through my Dot Earth blog, in which I explore how humans can navigate this fast-forward century with the fewest environmental and social regrets.
I created Dot Earth in 2007 while I was still a science reporter, sketching thought maps to crystallize its focus with the help of Jeremy Zilar, a skilled knowledge architect (for lack of a better phrase) who was then in charge of blog designs at The Times.
The original logo reflected that conundrum.
But my path from notepads and print stories to blogging really started at the North Pole in 2003. I had the opportunity, with one other reporter, to accompany scientists to a research camp set up on the drifting sea ice a few dozen miles from the point at which everything else is south. I brought plenty of notepads and pencils (I’d been warned that pen ink freezes at 20 below zero), but also a satellite phone and a batch of video and photographic gear.
Andrew Revkin at the North Pole in 2003.
Besides transmitting my conventional articles, along with a few photos, I was going to work with producers on multimedia packages when I got back to Times Square.
But then came a twist. In one phone call with the newsroom, from the sea ice, an editor suggested we do an online forum for readers. Questions would be solicited on The Times’s homepage. She’d call to relay them and type out my answers.
It was funky, for sure, but it gave me my first taste of the interactivity with audiences that I’ve enjoyed, and benefited from, ever since.
One year later, as I was heading to Greenland to write a feature on how the erosion of the great ice sheets there could substantially raise sea levels, another editor, Len Apcar, suggested I do a series of “Postcards From the Arctic.” With these postcards, I was conveying for the first time, in bite-size text and photographic dispatches, the process of reporting a larger story — something I have come to see as a vital part of sustaining credibility in a noisy, contentious age.
My interactive and interrogatory approach to journalism crystallized as I settled in on Dot Earth, which is implicitly a daily experiment. I tried various crude ways to invite readers to join me in annotating significant speeches and documents.
From the start, I began to relish how readers, amid some unavoidable chaff, were pointing me to issues I’d missed. One was Robert Brulle, a sociologist at Drexel University who became a vital guide to the vast literature on behavioral impediments to environmental action.
That was the year Dot Earth moved to the Opinion section (I had left the news staff to teach at Pace University). My style didn’t change much, given that my advocacy is for reality.
All along, I’ve grappled with the eternal problem of fostering constructive commentary and dialogue in an online world quick to devolve into name-calling.
Early on, I tested the idea of revealing the faces behind comments by inviting readers to post video greetings on YouTube that I would then add to Dot Earth as “Meet the Neighbors” items.
I’d love to find a way to revive this practice. I’m convinced that it’s harder to sling mud when you see the person you’re debating.
I also tried a form of positive reinforcement by occasionally highlighting particularly thoughtful comments by non-anonymous contributors as standalone “Your Dot” posts.
The challenges in blogging, and managing commentary, persist.
Like Margaret Sullivan, the paper’s departing Public Editor, I was not very happy with the verified commenter system created by The Times to speed the posting of items by Times readers who passed various algorithmic thresholds for civility.
On Dot Earth, some regulars immediately gamed the system, posting strings of comments, while others sat in a queue awaiting my approval (which often happens too slowly because of my work flow).
As I was pondering options, I was thrilled last November to see two fairly obsessive commenters, “Kurt from Switzerland” and “Wmar,” voluntarily shed their verified status, conceding that it put them at an unfair disadvantage.
I’d love your input on next steps. Would you post a video greeting? What comment practices have you seen elsewhere that you think work best?
Weigh in and I’ll compile the most constructive contributions, and my reactions, in a piece on Dot Earth.