Ice Cube, one of the core members of N.W.A, which will be inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.Credit...Paras Griffin/Getty Images for Warner Bros.
On Friday night in Brooklyn, the rap group N.W.A will join an array of white men with guitars as honorees at the 31st annual Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremony.
As only the fifth hip-hop act ever voted in (after Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five, Run-DMC, the Beastie Boys and Public Enemy), and the first not from New York, this Compton, Calif., group represents by far the most unconventional selection in a Hall of Fame class that is rounded out by classic-rock radio favorites from the late 1960s and ’70s: Cheap Trick, Chicago, Deep Purple and Steve Miller.
Ahead of the ceremony, a mostly diplomatic Ice Cube, 46, who went from incendiary solo albums like “AmeriKKKa’s Most Wanted” to starring in mainstream comedies like “Ride Along 2” and the “Barbershop” movies, discussed the Rock Hall with reverence. He argued that rock ’n’ roll is an attitude, not a sound, and explained why N.W.A would not be performing at the event. (The show, at the Barclays Center, will be aired by HBO on April 30.) These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
How much do you think “Straight Outta Compton” helped to legitimize N.W.A in the eyes of an institution like the Rock Hall and its voters?
I think it was the thing that put us over the top. [N.W.A had been nominated three times before.] The movie was able to remind them of the impact of the group on pop culture and that the music is just as much rock ’n’ roll as anything. Rock ’n’ roll is a form of sped-up blues to me.
Does this help to blunt the disappointment of being overlooked by the Academy Awards?
No. It’s apples and oranges to me. The music business is the music business, and the movie business is the movie business.
Gene Simmons, of Kiss, said a few years ago that rappers didn’t belong in the Hall of Fame, because they don’t play guitar or sing.
I respect Gene Simmons, but I think he’s wrong on this, because rock ’n’ roll is not an instrument and it’s not singing. Rock ’n’ roll is a spirit. N.W.A is probably more rock ’n’ roll than a lot of the people that he thinks belong there over hip-hop. We had the same spirit as punk rock, the same as the blues.
Is everyone in the group planning to attend the ceremony? When N.W.A reunited at the BET Awards last year, Dre didn’t show.
I believe everybody’s going to be there. As it stands now.
Will you be performing?
Nah, we’re not performing. I guess we really didn’t feel like we were supported enough to do the best show we could put on.
By the organizers?
Pretty much, yeah. We wanted to do it on a whole other level, and that just couldn’t happen. But we’re totally honored, humbled and appreciative to the Hall for even just considering us, inducting us and inviting us.
Will you have any words in your speech for N.W.A’s former manager, Jerry Heller, who played an important role at the beginning but is now suing for defamation over the film?
No. I don’t have anything to say to Jerry. He’s never owned up to his participation in the destruction of the “World’s Most Dangerous Group.” So he doesn’t deserve to be mentioned. [Ice Cube left N.W.A in 1989 because of royalty disputes.] The music that we put together, he had little or nothing to do with. We would never listen to his ideas.
Do any of the fellow inductees mean anything to you personally?
These are names I’ve heard my whole life. I’ve probably heard their music at some point, growing up. I’m kind of interested to know what their major hits are. I’ve been in hip-hop, R&B, soul and funk for so long, so it’s always cool to know why people love these groups.  It’s a night of discovery.
What would Eazy have said if you told him in the ’80s that you guys would eventually be in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame?
