Even in times of tumult, history moves at different paces. To see the hit Broadway musical “Hamilton” is to experience the American Revolution as a hotheaded, hotfooted affair, sped forward by impatient firebrands who act as fast they talk.
But take a look at the same era as it’s portrayed in “1776,” the 1969 musical by Sherman Edwards and Peter Stone about one excruciatingly protracted session of the Continental Congress in the year of its title. As Garry Hynes’s stately Encores! concert production of that show reminds us, the birth of great change often involves a slow and difficult labor, especially when a hidebound institution called Congress is involved.
And therein lies what’s radical about a musical often regarded as a square show from a hip era, the age of swinging-’60s frolics like “Hair” and “Promises, Promises.” Running boldly in the face of the belief that a show has to be dynamic to be entertaining, “1776” delivers a portrait of men locked in stasis.
Its suspense hinges on whether its politically constipated characters will ever agree to create and sign that deathless document that begins, “When in the course of human events …” Your instinct is to yell down the corridors of history, “Pick up the pace, guys!” You may occasionally feel like shouting the same instructions at the cast members onstage.
This cleanly mounted production, which features a set by Anna Louizos and lighting by Ken Billington, begins with marvelous gusto, with an adversarial call-and-response number. “For God’s Sake, John, Sit Down” is its mouthful of a title, and it pits Mr. Fontana’s agitating Adams, who wants the Congress to commit to independence from England, against his increasingly annoyed and obdurately stolid fellow politicians.
Mr. Fontana serves much the same function for this show as his character does in Congress. Adams is the prodder in chief, the man who keeps trying to goose everyone around him into active engagement.
Mr. Fontana also sings beautifully and articulately, whether in exasperated political calls to action or epistolary love duets with his wife, Abigail (Christiane Noll), who is tending the family farm in Massachusetts, while dressed up like a model for L. L. Bean. Such songs are catchier than you may remember.
As Edward Rutledge of South Carolina, Alexander Gemignani brings a rich baritone and ominous purpose to the show’s most lush-sounding and perversely beautiful number, “Molasses to Rum,” in defense of slavery. And John-Michael Lyles, as a young military courier, delivers the elegiac soldier’s song that concludes the first act with haunting simplicity.
There is, however, less music than you may recall in “1776.” The stretches between songs here, far more than in the sprightly 1997 Roundabout Theater Company revival, feel long and parched, as the delegates piddle, quibble and insult one another, as well as debate manners of policy.
It is this show’s contention that it is the sexual relief of conjugal reunion that allows Jefferson to overcome writer’s block and pen the Declaration of Independence with the necessary virile eloquence. Now that’s a classically hokey musical comedy premise.
What was, and remains, revolutionary about “1776” is that, in following the long and winding deliberations of contentious men in a closed room, it dares to be as dull as real politics can often be.