The Los Angeles Police Commission says the shooting of an unarmed homeless man last year in the Venice area was unjustified. The commission ruled Tuesday that Officer Clifford Proctor violated department policy when he shot 29-year-old Brendon Glenn in the back near the Venice boardwalk in May. Officer Proctor told investigators that Mr. Glenn had grabbed his partner’s holster as they struggled on the ground, but a report from Police Chief Charlie Beck said surveillance video from a nearby bar contradicted the account. Chief Beck has recommended that the officer face criminal charges — the first time he has made such a recommendation over a deadly officer-involved shooting. Mr. Glenn’s family is suing over the death. A lawyer for the Glenn family could not be reached for comment.
A 16-year-old youth was fatally shot by a police officer on Chicago’s West Side on Monday. The boy, Pierre L. Loury died at Mount Sinai Hospital, coroners said Tuesday. Chief of Detectives Eugene Roy said Mr. Loury had jumped out and run from a car that was believed connected to an earlier shooting. Mr. Roy said that an officer had chased the teenager and that an “armed confrontation” had resulted in the officer shooting him. He said no officers were injured, and a weapon found at the scene was taken into evidence. But Mr. Loury’s mother, Tambrasha Hudson, said her son had not had a gun. The Chicago police say the shooting is being investigated by the Independent Police Review Authority.
Developers want to bring life back to a rusting and ghostly theme park on the edge of the swamps outside New Orleans, more than 10 years after it was abandoned when Hurricane Katrina left it underwater. On Tuesday, two groups of developers urged the city to help them revive the site — once run by Six Flags and called the Jazzland amusement park. The site remains abandoned, and vandals, trespassers and illicit parties are common there. The developers are seeking financial help from the city and the Industrial Development Board, an agency that owns the land. Board members said they wanted to see more financial commitment from the developers. Plans to revive the site have included making it an amusement park, outlet mall and sports complex.