Not many warehouses come with design accolades, but one of the few remaining relics of the old Brooklyn waterfront has not one, but two distinguished architects to add some prestige.
The building that takes up the block of Kent Avenue between North Third and North Fourth Streets in Williamsburg opened as a warehouse in 1915 and was designed by Cass Gilbert, who also designed the Alexander Hamilton United States Custom House and the Woolworth Building. Now, a century later, Morris Adjmi, an architect praised for adding a modern touch to historic structures, has designed plans to convert the building to condominiums.
Opened originally as the Austin, Nichols and Company warehouse, the building became the epicenter of the largest grocery business in the world, according to Nina Nazionale, director of library operations at the New-York Historical Society. The warehouse was converted to rental apartments in 2010. It will be rechristened as the Austin Nichols House, with studios to three-bedroom condos priced from about $535,000 to $3 million. Sales start in about three weeks.
Mr. Gilbert designed the warehouse in Egyptian Revival style, with clean, bold lines emphasized by the enormous scale and proportion of the building. The warehouse was a highly efficient packaging and distribution center of various foods, spices, coffee and eventually liquor, incorporating piers and railway tracks, according to a 2005 report by the Landmarks Preservation Commission. Although the building is listed on the National Register of Historic Places, it is not a city landmark; the City Council reversed its designation by the preservation commission.
Mr. Adjmi was hired by Livwrk and the Kushner Companies, the building’s owners, to help convert 338 rental units into condos. He is currently focused on finishing the lobby and adding greenery to the entire building. “This lobby reflects the history of what the building once was spatially,” he said.
The lobby will have a 500-square-foot green wall, incorporating 3,500 plants and 25 species. A back window in the lobby provides a view of the lower courtyard that will be landscaped to add another layer of green, said Mr. Adjmi, who is also moving the front entrance slightly to the right.
The lobby’s front desk, built with curved walnut tiles, frames the room, which will eventually have neutral hues in tiling and furniture. “I wanted to incorporate the warmth of wood to mix with the cool concrete beams,” Mr. Adjmi said.
The current common area will be overhauled. A kitchen and a large communal table, as well as tables and chairs resembling a cafe, will be added. A large sliding glass door will connect the common room to the lower courtyard, which will have seating around several fire pits.
A soundproofed “jam room” for musicians and a screening room will be new amenities for the building, which already has a gym with views of the East River, a children’s playroom and a communal rooftop.
About 150 of the existing apartments are vacant and will be available for purchase at the initial offering, according to Asher Abehsera, the founder of Livwrk. There will be some 250 different floor plans as available spaces are combined or reconfigured.
Condo conversions can be especially challenging when a building is still occupied. Remaining tenants have had to live through construction, and some have posted complaints about noise and the new design on real estate blogs. Mr. Abehsera said tenants who want to buy their apartments will receive a discount equal to what it would have cost the developers to renovate that unit. For example, a two-bedroom could be reduced by about $90,000 off the initial offering price, he said.
A red herring, or an initial offering plan, to current lease holders will go out in two to three weeks.
