After days of questioning, the National Museum of African American History and Culture, which opens in Washington in September, said on Thursday that it would add a reference to accusations of sexual assault made against Bill Cosby in an exhibition that recognizes pioneering work in comedy and television.
“Visitors will leave the exhibition knowing more about Mr. Cosby’s impact on American entertainment, while recognizing that his legacy has been severely damaged by the recent accusations,” Lonnie G. Bunch III, director of the museum, said in a statement.
The museum, which is part of the Smithsonian, released the statement after days of debate in the news and social media over whether the museum should mention accusations against Mr. Cosby brought by dozens of women over the past year and a half.  Mr. Cosby has denied the accusations.
Curators at the museum, on the National Mall, had said that they felt Mr. Cosby’s achievements should stand alone. But the museum said on Thursday that Mr. Bunch had decided that the museum should mention the accusations, although museum officials could not say yet what the labels would say.
The museum said that Mr. Bunch had already been considering including such a reference, even before the recent questioning.
“While many comedians mined laughter by probing racial and political differences, Bill Cosby (b. 1937) built his groundbreaking career around universal themes of family and childhood,” says one section of the label that curators had drawn up as of mid-March.
His work in support of black Hollywood stuntmen is also mentioned.
One of Mr. Cosby’s accusers, Patricia Leary Steuer, 59, who has said the entertainer assaulted her decades ago, welcomed the inclusion. She said that it wasn’t her call to decide whether he should be included in the museum, but she said that mentioning the accusations presented a fuller picture.
“Without talking about the specter, the pall, hanging over him, it does not feel like a full representation to me,” she said.
“This is not an exhibition that ‘honors or celebrates’ Bill Cosby but one that acknowledges his role, among many others, in American entertainment,” he said.
“Like all of history, our interpretation of Bill Cosby is a work in progress, something that will continue to evolve as new evidence and insights come to the fore,” Mr. Bunch said.
The Smithsonian faced similar questions last year when its National Museum of African Art featured works on loan from the substantial art collection of Mr. Cosby and his wife, Camille.
In that case, the Smithsonian eventually put up a sign telling visitors that the museum did not condone the behavior of which Mr. Cosby was accused.