The essayist Michel de Montaigne thought that quoting well, in a piece of writing, was akin to arranging other people’s flowers. It’s a skill; doing it well takes practice.
A great book of quotations would embarrass certain of your relatives and be banned by lesser school districts. When a writer says something new and real, it can be shocking, like a surprise emission from a bodily orifice.
The books of quotations that rarely let you down are commonplace books, those intellectual scrapbooks made for personal use and compiled by a single avid reader. Packed with miscellaneous delights — phrases, jokes, anecdotes, lovely sentences — they read like secret autobiographies, back catalogs of joy and heartbreak. You can apply them like compresses on the ugly bruises of life.
Ralph Waldo Emerson kept one; so did Thomas Hardy. W. H. Auden issued his under the title “A Certain World” (1970). A lesser-known figure, the English belletrist Geoffrey Madan (1895-1947) had his collected in “Geoffrey Madan’s Notebooks,” published in 1981. It’s become a bit of a cult item.
These days, it’s rare that anyone publishes one. This is a reason to welcome the poet J. D. McClatchy’s “Sweet Theft: A Poet’s Commonplace Book.” Another reason is that it’s civilized and civilizing while being intimate and offbeat. It’s a treat to walk its aisles and browse its well-stocked shelves.
A commonplace book, as Pauline Kael once said about a dialogue-heavy movie, is like a bag of popcorn: Not every kernel has to pop for it to be enjoyable. “Sweet Theft” is buttery indeed, a “heavy bag” by Stephen King’s definition. Its ratio of popped to unpopped kernels is at least 20 to 1.
Some of this book’s aperçus are his own. Many are lovely: “Haiku as High Coo.” And: “Auden’s face: like sweetbreads.” He compares using a yellow highlighter to underline passages in a book (only rookies use them instead of pencils) to a dog marking his territory.
Mr. McClatchy is a stern critic as well as a gifted poet, and one way to read this book is as a rolling, imaginary skewering of a poet he loathes. For example: “X has floured his sauce”; “X leads with his chin”; “X is a rhinoceros, not a unicorn”; “Give X enough string and he’ll hang himself”; “X is the Fretful Porcupine.” Some readers will find themselves solving for X.
I checked only a handful of lines from “Sweet Theft.” Several were off by enough to give me pause. Mr. McClatchy attributes a remark to Eudora Welty that was said by Flannery O’Connor. (Asked if universities stifle writers, O’Connor replied: “They don’t stifle enough of them.”) He tells us that Kingsley Amis hoped to die this way: “Warm in bed and drugged to the eyeballs.” It’s a great remark, and he may have said it. I find no evidence that he did.
There are a surprising number of overexposed quotations in Mr. McClatchy’s book, of the sort you find on throw pillows. “If you can’t say anything good about someone,” Alice Roosevelt Longworth said, “sit right here by me.” According to what’s in Bartlett’s, which I’ve cited here, Mr. McClatchy mangles this one, too.
This is a slack performance, especially in an age when, thanks to fly-by-night Internet quotation websites, definitive sources are hard to come by. Intellectual history is turning into a game of whispers. Children these days think Abe Lincoln said everything that was uttered from 1985 back to Homer.
Some quotes may be “too good to check,” as the journalism adage has it. Hire an eager young person to check them anyway. It’s disloyal to those you’ve stolen from to hastily re-chisel their jewels. If you’re paraphrasing, or providing readers with legend rather than verifiable fact, provide a wink and an asterisk. They can handle it.
There are other small problems. The author has a fondness for deepities from figures like the French poet Paul Valéry, whose utterances here are chloroform. He repeats at least one quotation twice. This book cries out for an index.
The title of Mr. McClatchy’s book comes from Ben Jonson, who wrote: “’Tis no sin love’s fruit to steal/But the sweet theft to reveal.” Mr. McClatchy is definitely a stylish thief, and I’m glad to have his book. But he doesn’t quite get away clean.