A man in search of a pint found one in an Irish establishment in Midtown. He was short and everyday, save for his spikes of gray-white hair and a sizable indentation in his neck — the mark of something endured. He looked like a guy who’d been around, and was grateful to still be.
Sipping his Guinness, he studied the surrounding circus with the half-smile of a child who had slipped under the tent flap to find a vacant ringside seat. Another patron recognized him and approached with unnecessary trepidation to share a text message received the day before from his 17-year-old son in Virginia.
Hey just wanted to tell you I had a lousy day and John Prine brought a smile to my face, the son had written, although in somewhat earthier terms. Love you.
The pint-sipping man’s half-smile became whole. “Real nice,” said John Prine.
And, just recently, PEN New England named Mr. Prine as a recipient of a Song Lyrics of Literary Excellence Award, an honor previously shared by the likes of Leonard Cohen and Randy Newman.
These accolades are all the sweeter given where Mr. Prine has been. In 1996, he found out he had cancer; the subsequent surgery removed a piece of his neck and severed a few nerves in his tongue, while the radiation damaged some salivary glands. A year of recuperation and intensive speech therapy followed before he was able to perform, only now with a voice that grumbled like the trucks that used to pass his roadside childhood home.
Then, as if to provide a gratuitous refresher course in the preciousness of life, Mr. Prine again learned he had cancer in 2013, this time with a spot on the left lung. After the surgery, a physical trainer put him through what seems like peculiarly Nashville post-cancer workouts. The singer would have to hustle up and down the house stairs, grab his guitar while still panting and sing two songs. All to build his stamina.
Six months after lung surgery, Mr. Prine was back on the road, singing his distinctive American songbook: “Angel From Montgomery,” “Hello in There,” “Lake Marie,” “Souvenirs” and so many more. His concerts often have a tent-revival vibe, with people shouting his name and singing along to stories about endangered places and marginalized people, forgotten movie stars and newfound love.
The joy he finds in his continuing presence is evident, but Mr. Prine is too fine a writer to reduce his post-cancer worldview to Hallmark bromides. He does allow, though, that his illnesses forced him to reckon with who he was, exactly.
“That I’m a pretty good guy to hang around with,” he said.
Mr. Prine backed this up one late afternoon by telling his life story with humor and wonder, as waiters in a Manhattan steakhouse tried to hurry him along in anticipation of an evening rush. But he was in none — rush, that is — which he conveyed by tucking a napkin under his chin in cordial welcome to a bowl of lobster bisque.
What came next is music lore. Out of the Army and back as a mail carrier, Mr. Prine was at an open-mike night in Chicago, drinking beer and muttering about the lack of talent, when someone dared him to get up there. He began with a song about a damaged combat soldier, “Sam Stone,” that now ranks among the most searing ballads of the Vietnam War.
As Mr. Prine remembers it, the audience remained silent; unnervingly so. He went on to sing “Hello in There,” about the loneliness of old age, and “Paradise,” about a disappearing Kentucky coal town.
Down by the Green River, where Paradise lay?
Well, I’m sorry, my son, but you’re too late in asking.
Mister Peabody’s coal train has hauled it away.
This trio of future classics won hearty applause, finally, and a deal to sing for $1,000 a weekend — under the table and three times his Civil Service pay. When Mr. Prine told the postmaster that he was quitting to attempt a singing career, the supervisor advised him not to cash out his pension. “You’ll be back,” he said.
The 24-year-old mailman cashed out anyway, banking on his uncommon skills for noticing, listening and transforming it all into poetry set to music.
A month before the release of Mr. Prine’s first album, in 1971, his father died at 55 of a heart attack while watching the highway traffic flow past his front porch. It has seemed ever since that Mr. Prine is still spinning stories for Bill and Verna, the three of them sitting on that porch, laughing and crying about how the world goes round.
He is also admired as a trailblazer for his early rejection of the recording-industry model, which he felt exploited singers and songwriters. When he co-founded an independent label, Oh Boy Records, in 1981, fans sent enough checks in advance of the next album that costs were already covered.
“That’s when I thought I’ve got something here,” he said.
Mr. Prine spent a good chunk of his adulthood on tour, earning a reputation as a solid performer who also liked to smoke and drink and party and fish and just hang out. He got married and divorced a couple of times before meeting Fiona Whelan, from County Donegal, in 1988. Within a few years, he was the married father of two boys and stepfather to his wife’s first son.
Mr. Prine rarely speaks in public about his encounters with cancer, and has not written about it, because, he said, “I just don’t think it would make for a good song.” And though the disease has altered both his voice and appearance — one result of the radical neck surgery is that his head lowers at a tilt when he tires — he harbors no anger.
“He doesn’t take it personally,” his wife said.
Mr. Prine finished his bisque, and his story, in due course, and reached for his coat. He has another studio project coming later this year, there’s a grandchild now, and he turns 70 in October. But he is still hitting the road with his three-piece band.
If his two slow dances with mortality have changed him any, beyond his battle-scarred appearance, it is in how he experiences his own songs — songs that somehow have the power to improve a teenage boy’s lousy day in Virginia.
