Illustrated. 439 pp. Other Press. $25.
Sarah Bakewell’s book is a joint portrait of Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Albert Camus, Karl Jaspers, Martin Heideg­ger and a half-dozen other European writers and philosophers who embodied the movements in 20th-century thought known as existentialism and phenomenology. The apricot cocktails in her subtitle and her sometimes breezy tone — “I like to imagine them in a big, busy cafe of the mind, probably a Parisian one” — seem to promise an undemanding, gossipy romp. Instead, she judges and explains the ways in which each writer responded to the moral and political crises of the 1930s and after, and her book asks demanding questions about the ways in which people think about themselves and their relations with others. She shapes her answers in the form of biographical narratives, because her central theme is that the large impersonal ideas pursued by much modern philosophy are less profound and illuminating than the varied and conflicting truths found in stories of individual lives.
Those stories, in this book, include impressively lucid descriptions of what these thinkers thought and what they said in their writings and cafe arguments. Bakewell is often annoyed but never defeated by Heidegger’s obscurity, and some of her most exciting pages are the engaged, unsimplifying accounts she offers of complex philosophies, even ones that finally repel her.
In her first chapter she summarizes the kinds of things that existentialists do. This is not the same as saying what existentialism is, because to say what it is would present it as something static and definable, whereas it exists only in the form of actions, what happens when someone thinks existentially. Briefly, she explains, “existentialists concern themselves with individual, concrete human existence,” and individual existence is “whatever I choose to make of myself at every moment.” An existentialist’s driving concern is human freedom and the responsibilities and anxieties that are inseparable from it.
The stories she tells begin in medias res, around 1932, in a real Parisian cafe where Sartre is intrigued by his school friend Raymond Aron’s report of a new philosophical movement, phenomenology. It concerned itself, Aron explained, not with the theoretical or moral meaning of things, but with the things themselves and the immediate experience we have of those things. The apricot cocktails are in Bakewell’s subtitle because, as Beauvoir recalled, they were drinking them in the cafe when Aron said you could “make philosophy” out of them.
After this, “At the Existentialist Café” leaves France for Germany and goes backward in time to the early-20th-­century origins of phenomenology in the work of Edmund Husserl and the stirrings of reaction against it in Husserl’s early acolyte Heidegger. From phenomenology, with its emphasis on the experience of things, it was a short step — for, among others, Sartre, Beauvoir and their friend Merleau-Ponty — to existentialism, with its emphasis on the experience of making choices, and on the wider question of what it means to be in the world at all.
Heidegger wrote about the urgency of resisting “the they,” what Bakewell explains as “an impersonal entity that robs us of the freedom to think for ourselves.” As she observes, this sounds like a call to resist Nazi tyranny, “but that was not what Heidegger meant.” Appointed by the Nazis in 1933 to “the post of rector of Freiburg University, a job that required him to enforce the new Nazi laws,” Heideg­ger easily convinced himself, perhaps from reserves of power-worship hidden within, that obedience to Nazism was a form of obedience not to “the they” but to the deepest demands of being itself.
One of many persuasive surprises in Bakewell’s book is her suggestion that Heidegger’s prose sometimes resembles Gertrude Stein’s in its deliberate linguistic strangeness, a resemblance that goes deeper than style. Bakewell mentions Heidegger’s concept of the “ontological difference,” the distinction between (in her words) an “individual entity” and “the Being that such particular beings have.” (Ontology is the study of being in itself.) She then quotes a passage from Stein’s “The Making of Americans” that “foreshadows . . . the ontological difference” by making a distinction between what Stein calls “the being in” characters and the characters as people.
Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty are the only two thinkers who get chapters to themselves in Bakewell’s book. She portrays Merleau-Ponty as both intellectually admirable and personally appealing. Like all the philosophers in the book, ­Merleau-Ponty was concerned with the ways in which human beings are shaped by structures and forces outside themselves, but while many other philosophers thought of those outside forces as forms of imprisonment or compulsion, Merleau-Ponty saw them as the means of choosing freedom. “The aspects of our existence that limit us, Merleau-Ponty says, are the very same ones that bind us to the world and give us scope for action and perception.” Bakewell describes ­Merleau-Ponty’s kindness and his self-sacrificing sense of obligation and responsibility, and, despite her admiration for Beauvoir, refuses to endorse Beauvoir’s dismissal of these traits as bourgeois hypocrisy.
In contrast with Merleau-Ponty’s generosity — and Sartre’s extravagant generosity in the midst of his pugnaciousness — Bakewell records “the single documented example I have come across of Heidegger actually doing something nice.” Even in this example, however, Heidegger did something nice only by proxy, having asked a book-dealer friend, shortly before the poet Paul Celan gave a reading in Freiburg, to arrange for the city’s bookshops to display Celan’s poems in their ­windows.
Bakewell has a special affection for philosophers who stayed free of the academy, especially Sartre and Beauvoir. She writes of Sartre, “Of course, he was monstrous,” but she forgives him, convincingly, for having been “full of character. He bursts out on all sides with energy, peculiarity, generosity and communicativeness.” (On Heidegger she endorses what Sartre said about him: “Heidegger has no character.”) She treasures the Beauvoir of “The Second Sex” and her later philosophical autobiographies, books that focus on Beauvoir’s individual story, always with a rich sense of herself in the midst of what existentialists called their “situation,” an outer and inner reality that included the social reality of being perceived as a woman and the physical reality of living in a woman’s body.
Sarah Bakewell’s previous book was an engaging biography of Montaigne that was also a subtle exposition of Montaigne’s writings. Its audacious title was “How to Live,” and her new book deserves to be read as a further study in the same enlivening theme.