While other New York City institutions have succumbed to the insatiable appetite of a hungry real estate market, the 128-year-old Katz’s Delicatessen, with $19.95 pastrami sandwiches and a legion of fans, found a way to hang on.
The sale was part of a $75 million acquisition of 12 single-story commercial spaces that spared Katz’s, but sealed the fates of all of the other mom-and-pop businesses on East Houston Street between Orchard and Ludlow Streets. They were all displaced to make way for the new condo. Sales are set to start by the end of the month at 196 Orchard, with prices for the 94 apartments starting at $1.075 million for a 551-square-foot studio.
A rendering of 196 Orchard.
In the more than a century that Katz’s has been selling sandwiches and hot dogs on the Lower East Side, the neighborhood ushered in generations of immigrants who took refuge in the area’s tenements. In the 1970s and 1980s, like many parts of the city, it suffered through an era of disinvestment, marked by rising crime and drug use. At one point, “This was a place where you came to buy drugs, not pastrami,” said Mr. Dell, whose family hosted his bar mitzvah at the deli.
Now, paradoxically, small businesses that survived more trying times are succumbing to the era of feverish real estate development, with its influx of wealth. Many longtime Lower East Side residents worry that the deal Katz’s made means the deli will survive in a vacuum. With all the other neighboring businesses gone, it could become a mere relic in a neighborhood of walk-ups that are rapidly being replaced with glassy condos, expensive boutiques and national chains like Whole Foods.
On a block where a kebab could once be had at 2 a.m. from Bereket, the 24-hour Turkish restaurant that was forced to close in 2014, there will now be a 30,000-square-foot Equinox gym and spa with a lounge and juice bar; condo residents will be able to access the two-story gym through a private entrance. Gone too, are places like Ray’s Pizza and Empanada Mama. While such spots and the unmemorable single-story buildings that once housed them could not claim any historic significance, they were popular haunts that gave the area its character.
The developers of 196 Orchard insist that the changes have not obliterated the retail that existed in the area, only moved it, since some of the shops are now in new locations, like Karaoke Boho, which reopened nearby. Other businesses, including Bereket, are gone. “I’m sorry they went out of business, but it’s part of evolution,” said Ben H. Shaoul, the founder and principal of the Magnum Real Estate Group, which is developing 196 Orchard with the Real Estate Equities Corporation.
In fact, the condo’s ground floor will include 20,000 square feet of retail, with one storefront reserved for a locally owned business, likely a cafe or restaurant.
“You call it gentrification, I call it ‘cleaning it up,’ ” said Mr. Shaoul, who has been buying properties on the Lower East Side since 1998.
The condo’s marketing materials show a young woman gazing off into the distance, Katz’s neon sign behind her. The building, designed by Ismael Leyva Architects, will have a black and bronze brick facade with industrial casement windows and a 4,100-square-foot landscaped rooftop.
Apartments will feature concrete ceilings, wide-plank white oak floors and kitchens with charcoal lacquer cabinets, marble backsplashes and black quartz countertops. One-bedrooms start at $1.275 million for 657 square feet; two-bedrooms start at $2.285 million for 970 square feet; three bedrooms start at $4.2 million for 1,555 square feet; and four bedrooms start at $4.95 million for 1,770 square feet.
Katz’s is not the only historic institution cashing in on the Lower East Side’s soaring real estate values. Demolition of the Streit’s matzo factory could begin by the end of the month. A year ago, the family-owned business sold the Rivington Street factory to developers for $30.5 million, bringing 90 years of matzo production there to an end. It will be replaced with a seven-story glass condo, 150 Rivington Street, that will house 45 one- and two-bedroom apartments. Sales begin in May, with one-bedrooms starting at around $975,000.
For the Jewish community, the loss of Streit’s was profound, signifying the end of an institution that had been producing the unleavened bread for Passover for generations.
The condo’s design, with 13,000 square feet of retail, will be clad in glass, a modern break from the brick buildings that stood there before. Developers plan to decorate the lobby with memorabilia from the original building. Other salvaged objects will be housed in a museum at the new Streit’s factory, which is being built in Rockland County, N.Y.
On an unseasonably warm afternoon last month, about three dozen people, mostly employees of the development team, gathered on the factory’s rooftop for a ceremony to commemorate a place where matzo had been made since 1925. A feng shui expert, R. D. Chin, blessed the property with a bowl of vodka-soaked rice, orange peels and incense. “It’s very important to acknowledge the changing of the hands,” he said.
