ZIKA FOREST, Uganda — In the 1940s, colonial researchers slashing through tropical brush stumbled upon this forest near the lapping waters of Lake Victoria. With its cool, wet climate, the swampy area was a giant petri dish for virologists.
They decided to make it a field site for a research institute nearby in Entebbe, an outpost of what was then the Buganda Kingdom. There, samples of mosquitoes, birds, bats and other mammals were analyzed. Of prime interest was yellow fever, thought to originate in the area.
In the forest, scientists caged monkeys in wooden platforms high among the jackfruit and mango trees, where mosquitoes liked to breed. The researchers themselves could simply stick out their arms and wait for one to bite, reports from the time noted.
After a successful pilot program in another forest in the mid-1940s, the primate project was brought to Zika Forest, with six platforms of caged Asian sentinel monkeys.
“A filterable transmissible agent was isolated,” the report said, using the term in those pre-DNA days for filtering the blood serum from sick animals and screening it. If whatever was left was still able to transmit the symptoms to another animal, they knew it was a virus.
The scientists named it “Zika” — Ziika means “overgrown” in the local Luganda language, but the second “i” was dropped by colonialists who misheard its pronunciation.
Decades later, Zika Forest and the surrounding environs are overgrown once more. Like many semi-urban areas in Africa, it has suffered from human encroachment. In 1947, Uganda’s population was about 4.5 million; today, it is nearly 40 million.
From the top of a rusting 120-foot metal tower that was installed in the 1960s for scientists to study mosquitoes, Emma Mukisa, 19, points out nearby real estate developments and a Chinese construction project. Mr. Mukisa and his father help guard the forest for the government.
Tucked behind a soccer field, the little patch of forest — cropped nearly in half over the years to 15 acres, less than one-third the size of the Brooklyn Botanic Garden — is near the highway to Uganda’s national airport. The rusting tower and some surviving trees are all that remain from that era, when science and exploration overlapped in the discovery of numerous viruses.
“No one comes here” except for the occasional school class trip or scientist, Mr. Mukisa said.
That does not mean research into Zika has stopped, particularly in light of the sudden explosion of the virus, mostly in the Americas, but there are also other threats to scan for, scientists here say. Today, modern labs at the Uganda Virus Research Institute are a hive of science. Its campus is supported by the United States and other Western nations.
Mosquitoes captured from across the region — there are more than 200 species of mosquitoes in Uganda alone, lab technicians say — are crushed and scrutinized under microscopes; RNA is extracted, and sequence mapped.
The institute has been testing every human sample it receives from the East African region for the Zika virus, but currently it has recorded no human cases. Many people in the region may have, or have had, Zika, scientists here contend — it is traceable in antibodies found in the system — but symptoms may simply not be severe or unique enough to merit a visit to the doctor.
His office at the institute, overlooking Lake Victoria, is a stash of books, old photographs, and a world map pinned with the locations of mosquito-catching expeditions, from Alaska to Saudi Arabia. It was here in the 1930s that that the virus institute’s founders first sat.
He has seen and heard many things over the years from his hill, including the clatter of gunfire during the raid on Entebbe Airport in 1976, when Israeli troops freed dozens of hijacked hostages there.
And he witnessed the disappearance of colleagues during the reign of the brutal ruler Idi Amin in the 1970s. “Uganda, actually, is a wonderful place — apart from politics,” he said.
The tower was installed to study mosquitoes at varying elevations, and numerous viruses had been discovered and named by the institute.
As for its namesake pathogen, the Zika virus was never viewed as life-threatening, or much more than a curiosity.
When a young researcher in the forest fell ill, he diligently recorded his fate.
“The illness began with a slight frontal headache,” the researcher, D.I.H. Simpson, wrote in 1964. “Day 2 there was a diffuse pink maculopapular rash which covered the face, neck, trunk and upper arms.” The rash spread before gradually receding.
Over time, the project faded too, and in the late 1970s scientists stopped visiting Zika Forest for more than a decade. Research activity there has never been the same since, Dr. Mukwaya said.
Here is a look at the most prominent rumors and theories about Zika virus, along with responses from scientists.
The institute in Entebbe also came under threat of being used as a military barracks, he said, yet it continued operating. Other research priorities, including malaria, H.I.V. and Ebola, emerged. It also became easier to capture insects and animals from all corners of Uganda.
In 2015, when babies in Brazil were born with microencephaly from mothers who had tested positive for the Zika virus, scientists struggled to connect the dots.
The mosquitoes biting people in the crammed favelas of Rio de Janeiro were not the Aedes africanus, linked to the Zika virus in Africa, but Aedes aegypti; and they preyed on humans aggressively. Furthermore, the aegypti in the Americas and the aegypti in Africa behave differently, scientists say. And Rhesus 766, the monkey first found with Zika, was an Asian, not African, species of primate.
In the end, the current scourge of Zika in the Americas might better inform the virus’s future in Uganda than the other way around. The mosquitoes here commonly linked to Zika have tended to remain in forested areas, but as those areas get developed, scientists worry the danger to humans can only grow.
