CHICAGO — “It’s pretty fragile.” Those words, spoken by the title character in “Mary Page Marlowe,” the exquisite new play by Tracy Letts having its premiere at the Steppenwolf Theater here, refer to a quilt in need of some delicate dry cleaning. But they resonate with many meanings in Mr. Letts’s haunting, elliptical drama about the evolutions, reversals and resurrections in a woman’s life.
A quilt is a clever symbol for the unusual structure of the play itself. As he charts the course of Mary Page’s life, Mr. Letts, a Tony-winning actor and author of the Pulitzer Prize-winning “August: Osage County,” hopscotches back and forth through time. Six actors portray the title character as she moves from age 12 to 69. Just as a family quilt is assembled piecemeal over time, “Mary Page Marlowe” is stitched together haphazardly as the story unfolds, leaving us to fill in the gaps and to try to ferret out connections that Mr. Letts intends us to infer.
The play plops us into Mary Page’s life at a moment of crisis. She is 40, portrayed by Rebecca Spence, and having the painful conversation with her children — 12-year-old Louis (Jack Edwards) and 16-year-old Wendy (Madeline Weinstein) — that innumerable parents have had, discussing the unwelcome news that Mom and Dad are divorcing.
Mary Page is also setting forth the parameters of the children’s new lives. They will temporarily live part-time with their father in Dayton, Ohio, where they grew up, and part-time with Mary Page, who has found a new job in Kentucky, where soon she will bring the kids permanently.
We then move to a more hopeful moment in Mary Page’s life, when, in 1965, she and her college pals are contemplating their future with the help of tarot cards. Her friends speak of Mary Page in glowing terms, expecting that she will do great things. And Mary Page makes clear that, despite an ardent suitor wanting to settle down soon, she doesn’t want to marry now, or perhaps ever.
“I’m interested in other things,” she says. “It’s not like that’s my only choice in life.” According to the cards, Mary Page will forge her own path by her own lights.
Of course, we already know that Mary Page did marry, unhappily. And, while it would be unfair to detail too much of what happens to Mary Page, I can say that one fond desire she expresses in this scene, to visit Paris, never comes to pass.
Moving back and forth in time, “Mary Page Marlowe” shows the heroine in moments of crisis or repose: hopping into bed with a boss, despite their both being married; thrashing with anguish over the path Louis’s life takes; later contentedly watching television, in her 60s, with her third husband. It illuminates, movingly, how youthful ideals wither, how little of life can truly be foreseen, how provisional all our plans are in a world where choice and chance are always in tension.
It also engages the idea that some things may be hard-wired into our blood, echoing Hamlet’s phrase about how there’s a “divinity that shapes our ends, rough-hew them how we will.” In Mary Page’s case, it might be more accurate to say that it is heredity — or the culture of family that we cannot control — that shapes our ends.
Under the sensitive direction of Anna D. Shapiro, the actors (including the men who fill the smaller roles) are all excellent: Caroline Heffernan as the 12-year-old Mary Page, troubled at the news that her mother is leaving to chase down her father, a war veteran who has abandoned them; Annie Munch as that dreaming, confident college student; Carrie Coon as Mary Page in her late 20s and mid-30s, still in search of a satisfying emotional life; Ms. Spence, bringing a sense of wary fortitude and later anguish in Mary Page’s scenes with her children; and a superb Laura T. Fisher, who appears in a single scene, as the title character at age 50, battered (literally) by life and facing the harsh consequences of a wrong turn taken.
Rounding out the Mary Pages is Blair Brown, who renders the character in her later, emotionally tranquil years with lovely grace. Ms. Brown touchingly intimates that Mary Page has at last come to terms with the woman she has become and the selves she has shed, but can also recall with equanimity the ghosts of the women she might have been.
The choice to have so many actors portray Mary Page is more deliberate than necessary; a central theme is the fluidity of identity. Ms. Shapiro’s staging, on a handsome set designed by Todd Rosenthal, reinforces the idea. At times we see, through scrims, the various Mary Pages standing like sentinels looking on at the scene being played before us. Their faces are barely visible, but their expressions appear to be blank, as if the woman they are watching were not another version of themselves, but a stranger whose mysteries they could never hope to fathom.