Emails released on Friday show prosecutors carefully constructing their statement on why the actor Jussie Smollett would no longer face charges of staging a hate crime.
Documents released on Friday showed that the day before they dropped all charges against the actor Jussie Smollett, who had been accused of staging a hate crime, prosecutors deliberated over the precise wording of their explanation, cognizant of how the public might perceive their sudden withdrawal from the case.
According to correspondence released by the Cook County State’s Attorney’s Office, prosecutors had been discussing the resolution of the case with Mr. Smollett’s lawyer in the days leading up to March 26, when the office dropped all 16 felony counts against him. Mr. Smollett, 36, had been accused of paying two acquaintances to stage a racist and homophobic attack against him, during which they shouted slurs and placed a noose around his neck.
On March 25, Mr. Smollett’s lawyer, Patricia Holmes, emailed proposed language for the state’s attorney’s office to use when announcing in court that it would be dropping the case. Ms. Holmes suggested that prosecutors say that Mr. Smollett is a “dedicated citizen of Chicago who volunteers and contributes regularly in the Chicago area community.” Mr. Smollett had agreed to forfeit the $10,000 bond paid to release him from jail, and Ms. Holmes suggested prosecutors mention that, too.
In emails spanning from around 4 p.m. to 10 p.m. on March 25, staff at the state’s attorney’s office parsed the language from the defense lawyer and edited the statement so that it would not indicate that Mr. Smollett was either guilty or innocent of staging the attack. They also sought to tone down language praising him for his community service work.
“Off the top of my head, this could be construed as the defendant being able to buy his way out of the case because he is a good guy,” Joseph Magats, the top deputy to State’s Attorney Kim Foxx, wrote in an email to his colleagues about the defense lawyer’s proposal.
Risa Lanier, another top prosecutor, wrote that she objected to including the language suggested by Ms. Holmes that said Mr. Smollett should be presumed innocent unless proven guilty. Ms. Lanier suggested a new statement that cut out the defense lawyer’s complimentary tone, but that also would avoid any appearance that Mr. Smollett had, in effect, pleaded guilty.
In the final statement, prosecutors did cite his volunteer work and bond forfeiture as a reason for withdrawing the case. Mr. Smollett has long been involved in the Black AIDS Institute, whose founder vouched for him in a letter that the defense lawyer passed along to the prosecutors.
Many details from Mr. Smollett’s case had been concealed until last week, when a judge in Chicago ordered that Ms. Smollett’s case file be unsealed. The first portion of documents released by the Chicago Police Department on Thursday showed that just days after he was indicted on Feb. 28, prosecutors told detectives that they were thinking of settling the charges.
However, the documents released this week did not provide any answers about why the prosecutors so quickly decided to drop the case. The State’s Attorney’s Office has declined to release numerous pieces of internal correspondence, citing an Illinois law that protects their deliberations from public disclosure.
Ms. Foxx, the office’s top official, had removed herself from the case, and in some text messages released on Friday, her rationale for doing so differed from her office’s earlier explanation: that she had contact with representatives for the actor.
“She said it was pervasive among CPD and that I should recuse,” Ms. Foxx said, referring to the Chicago Police Department.
A Chicago police spokesman, Anthony Guglielmi, said that he was personally unaware of comments within the department of that nature.
Previously released files showed that the day after the grand jury indictment, Ms. Foxx texted a colleague saying that she thought the office was treating Mr. Smollett too harshly, even though she was supposed to keep her distance from the case. There has been no evidence that she interceded to make prosecutors in her office end the case.
The more than 2,000 pages of records released on Friday also showed that based on the accounts of the two men who attacked Mr. Smollett, who told the police that Mr. Smollett had paid them to do so, the police investigated whether one of Mr. Smollet’s managers may have played a role in planning the incident. The manager was never charged, and when the authorities charged Mr. Smollett, they did not mention the manager having any involvement in a crime.