Asia Pacific|Pakistan to Accept $6 Billion Bailout From I.M.F.
Pakistan to Accept $6 Billion Bailout From I.M.F.
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — Pakistan and the International Monetary Fund announced Sunday that they had reached a preliminary agreement on a $6 billion bailout for the country’s emaciated, debt-ridden economy, a rescue that Prime Minister Imran Khan had opposed before taking office but has since reluctantly embraced.
Officials have described Pakistan’s soaring current account deficit — a measure of the imbalance between imports and exports — as an existential crisis. The country is deep in debt to China, and its slowing economy is expected to contract even further this year.
Negotiations with the I.M.F. on a bailout package had been underway since October. Pakistan has had an uneasy relationship with the lending body, and nationalist politicians often characterize it as a tool of American dominance.
Pakistan already owes the institution $5.8 billion from past bailouts, and has only once completed its past programs.
He added that the agreement was subject to approval by the I.M.F.’s executive board.
Under the bailout package, Pakistan will have a market-determined exchange rate, which means that the Pakistani rupee is likely to undergo further devaluation. The interest rate will also be hiked up.
Mr. Khan, who took office last August, was a vociferous critic of the I.M.F. as an opposition politician, and during last year’s election campaign he vowed not to turn to it for assistance. But he has been forced to break that pledge — even while promising a sweeping expansion of social welfare programs that would contradict the global body’s insistence on austerity.
Among other belt-tightening moves, the bailout package is expected to lead to cuts in fuel subsidies, putting more burdens on a struggling population. The government has already cut some subsidies and taken other measures the I.M.F. was expected to demand, like depreciating the currency and tightening fiscal and monetary policy. Such moves are likely to be a further drag on growth.
Mr. Khan’s rivals have seized the chance to tie him to the pain that the bailout is likely to bring, referring to his government as P.T.I.M.F. — a play on P.T.I., the initials of Mr. Khan’s political party, and a reference to the fact that top members of his current economic team have worked for the I.M.F. in the past.
In the last stages of the bailout talks, Mr. Khan replaced almost all the top members of that team, most notably Asad Umar, a popular politician with a populist bent who was removed as finance minister last month. Mr. Umar, who was involved in the I.M.F. talks, has said that he was not prepared to inflict pain on the Pakistani people to meet the fund’s requirements. He also opposes the privatization of state-run enterprises, something that the I.M.F. often demands of countries that receive bailouts.
The new adviser to the prime minister on finance, Abdul Hafeez Shaikh, who has the powers of finance minister, has worked for both the I.M.F. and the World Bank. Mr. Khan also recently appointed a former I.M.F. employee, Dr. Reza Baqir, as head of Pakistan’s central bank.