It’s become something of a recent tradition at “Saturday Night Live” for the annual pre-Mother’s Day broadcast to feature a tribute of sorts from current cast members to their real-life moms. That custom was upheld in this weekend’s episode, hosted by Emma Thompson and featuring the Jonas Brothers as musical guests. But for her opening monologue, Thompson (who said her daughter, Gaia Wise, was in the audience) was joined by two other moms with long histories at “S.N.L.” — former cast members Tina Fey and Amy Poehler, who offered “a little language lesson” to help children decode what their mothers might be saying to them.
The bipartisan, politics-free tone that buoyed last week’s Adam Sandler-hosted episode of “S.N.L.” lasted exactly zero seconds into this week, which began with a “Meet the Press” parody featuring Senators Mitch McConnell (Beck Bennett), Susan Collins (Cecily Strong) and Lindsey Graham (Kate McKinnon) fielding questions from the moderator, Chuck Todd (Kyle Mooney), asking what it would take at this point for President Trump to lose their support.
And what if the president were to adopt an even more rigid stance against abortion?
A special shout-out to the enduring “Saturday Night Live” M.V.P. Kenan Thompson, who made the most of his role as an oblivious PBS host named Reese De’What.
At the “Weekend Update” desk, anchors Colin Jost and Michael Che riffed on a recent investigation in The New York Times that showed the staggering financial losses of President Trump’s businesses in the 1980s and ’90s.
President Trump’s tax documents also showed that his airline — which I didn’t know anything about — launched in 1989 and lost $7 million a month, until it shut down in 1992. And just to give you an idea of how bad his airline was, it lasted 33 years less than Spirit.
Like just about everyone with a Twitter account, “Saturday Night Live” sought to spin comedy from a recent “Game of Thrones” episode in which a modern-day coffee cup made an accidental appearance on the HBO fantasy series.
The result on “S.N.L.” was a fictional Turner Classic Movies program called “Wait a Second, That Shouldn’t Be There!”, in which the host (Kyle Mooney) led us through other would-be anachronisms in TV shows and movies: a scene from the 2016 remake of “Roots” performed by Kenan Thompson (standing near a case of White Castle hamburgers) and Ego Nwodim (drinking a 7-Eleven Big Gulp); or a clip from “Shakespeare in Love” in which McKinnon disrobes to reveal a Tasmanian Devil “Thug Life” tattoo on her back.