A popular show gives “defector beauties” a chance to tell stories from the North. It’s loud and gaudy — and changing the conversation about reunification.
Shin is no acolyte of Kim or his Workers’ Party. She is a talbukja — a defector to South Korea from the North — and what she longs for is to see her hometown again and to be able to occasionally cross the Demilitarized Zone. This vision of a comparatively open border and some freedom of travel is increasingly what is meant on the Korean Peninsula by “reunification.” There has been talk of normalized relations and corporate exchange, and Seoul has even floated the notion of a European Union-style confederation. Literal reunification, defined as the abrupt political merger of the two Koreas, has mostly passed into a prelapsarian dream of peace activists.
When it had its premiere in 2011, “Now on My Way to Meet You” was a tear-jerking reunion program featuring families separated by the Korean War, but before the show had a chance to reunite anyone, it underwent a transformation. The way the producers tell it, in their scramble to recruit separated families, they kept running into a new generation of defectors. So they made the rather canny decision to reorient their show around appealing young women, whom they took to calling “defector beauties.” The show’s on-location backdrops of humble homes and noodle restaurants gave way to a glitzy game-show-type set, and estranged septuagenarians were replaced with girlish defectors. Pretty soon, the only thing left of the original program was its name and the desire for reunion. A typical 90-minute episode might veer wildly from a report on rice shortages to a joke about face cream. The aesthetic is loud and frenetic, featuring sound effects and cartoon thought bubbles. At center stage sit a dozen guests, many of them women in short, colorful dresses, their legs all canted in the same direction. The two hosts engage the group in rapid-fire patter, while an all-male panel of B-list celebrities called the South 4 tosses out oohs, aahs and sexual innuendo.
Since its reinvention, “Now on My Way” has attracted a loyal audience, and in the process has become a mass-market vehicle for notions of reunification and North Korean identity, as understood by South Koreans. The show was the first to approach North Korea not as news or documentary but through comedic skits and tearful testimonies by young talbukja. The marriage of silly themes and personal stories produced an aptly incoherent vision of the North: depending on the segment, a hell that must be escaped at all costs or a place of neighborly warmth. In media coverage, “Now on My Way” has been portrayed as a gaudy curiosity, but it’s better understood as a lowbrow show with good intentions. Reunification is a constant sub- and supertext, endorsed by everyone on set.
Twelve minutes later, the Hanoi footage wrapped, and “Now on My Way” was back where it usually is, on its elaborate studio set in Seoul. The pretaped remainder of the episode made no mention of diplomacy. One of the South 4 had been swapped out this week for Hooni Kim, the Korean-American chef behind Hanjan and Danji, upscale Korean restaurants in Manhattan. Kim discussed his love of North Korean naengmyun (cold buckwheat noodles) and taste-tested a seafood stew cooked by one of the defectors. We may season things differently, the unsubtle message seemed to be, but we are one.
I went to see “Now on My Way to Meet You” in person on a humid summer morning. It airs on Channel A, a cable network started in 2011 by the conservative Dong A Ilbo newspaper, which has its studios in Digital Media City, a cluster of shiny high-rises on what was once a giant landfill. I’d been emailing with the show’s executive producer, Kong Hyosoon, for more than six months, and not without hiccups. She was immensely protective of “Now on My Way” and its cast of defectors. The terrifying back and forth between Trump and Kim Jong-un throughout 2017 — followed, confusingly, by the scheduling of a first-ever summit meeting between the countries’ leaders — had put talbukja on edge. The North Korean government was clamping down on the flow of remittances that many defectors send home via Chinese middlemen. Kong worried that I would interrogate the talbukja and write off the show as drivel.
On set, though, the mood was relaxed, and Kong let down her guard. The defectors, the hosts and the South 4 milled around, cracking jokes and catching up like old friends. Many defectors had told me how much they miss the intimacy of their neighborhoods in the North, a stark contrast to Seoul’s cool, atomistic consumerism; but here, a tenderness prevailed. The set was a cartoony village beneath a starry sky: cottages and townhouses, planter boxes, a cobblestone path. Most striking was an old-fashioned telephone booth (calling to mind the fact that the Koreas had just re-established a diplomatic hotline) and a bus stop indicating transit between Pyongyang and Seoul. The props seemed designed to map an imminent reunification.
The theme of this episode was North Korean pop culture. The hosts, Nam and the actress Park Eun-hye, asked the younger defectors on set about North Korean millennials’ growing obsession with South Korean fashion, slang and music. This, a South 4 member explained, represented the third wave of defection. First was the kotjebi era of migrants fleeing the famine; second was the jangmadang era of protocapitalists seeking opportunity; and now came the gangnam era of young people “crossing the river to go South,” in search of fulfillment and cool. Everyone onstage nodded.
Defections were relatively rare until the late 1990s: a few high-level desertions of diplomatic posts and the occasional cinematic escape from a prison camp. But the widespread famine of the 1990s drove hundreds, then thousands of North Koreans to risk their lives by crossing the Tumen or Yalu Rivers into China and hoping to find passage to the South. The term used for that first wave, kotjebi, translates literally as “flower swallow,” after the scavenging motions of homeless children in the North.
Before and after the taping, in a greenroom marked “VIP,” Kong supervised my interviews with the two hosts; with the head writer, Jang Hee-jung; and with the defectors Shin Eun-ha and Kim Ara, the show’s most popular and glamorous regulars. Kong warned me several times not to ask about politics. “Now on My Way” had been accused, especially early on, of demonizing the North. In a recurring segment called “Defection Story,” talbukja gave unverifiable accounts of the conditions they left behind. In articles, blogs and online forums, other defectors called the program “shameless” and “80 percent lies.” The criticisms were small and large — it wasn’t true that toothbrushes were rare in the North; it was irresponsible to say that 90 percent of defectors had been sexually trafficked. One defector I met in Seoul blasted the show for presenting an outdated view of North Korea, all abuse and starvation. “It makes it harder to achieve reunification with all the inaccuracies on the show and because it reflects an earlier reality,” he said.
Last May, in an episode following a summit meeting between the leaders of North and South Korea, the hosts asked the day’s cast of defector beauties and the South 4 not for policy prescriptions but for feelings and gut reactions. A defector in a scarlet dress spoke of her changed opinion of Kim Jong-un: “Before, I really disliked him, but seeing the way he spoke and acted at the summit, I was impressed by his sincerity.” Yoo Jae-hwan, a stocky pop singer on the South 4 panel, spoke next, over footage of the two Korean leaders smiling at each other along the Demilitarized Zone. “I got teary, watching them hold hands,” he said. “Even now, thinking about it again, I feel like I’m going to cry.” An animated balloon reading “almost cried” popped up, to the sound of a cartoony pow.
