An article on Friday about Israel’s position on Iran misstated the name of the port near which four oil tankers were reportedly sabotaged. It is Fujairah, not Jubairah.
An article on Wednesday about a man accused of killing one person and injuring another on the Appalachian Trail misspelled the name of a hiker who encountered the attacker on the trail. She is Madeline Gosse, not Madeline Gossee.
An article on Friday about House Democrats’ hope that Robert S. Mueller III will testify before the House Judiciary Committee misstated which version of the special counsel’s report was read aloud. The redacted version of Mr. Mueller’s report was read aloud, not the unredacted report, which has not been released. The error was repeated in a picture caption.
An article on May 4 about the loosening of regulations on offshore drilling equipment misidentified the petroleum industry group led by Barry Russell. He is chief executive of the Independent Petroleum Association of America, not the Independent Petroleum Producers of America.
An article on Friday about the record set by Brooks Koepka at Long Island’s Bethpage State Park Black Course misstated the timing of Mr. Koepka’s three major titles. He won them over the last eight major tournaments, not the last seven. The article also misstated the number of birdies Danny Lee had in the first round. He had eight, not seven.
An art review about the 2019 Whitney Biennial misstated the ancestry of the New York City Ballet dancer Jock Soto. He is of Navajo and Puerto Rican descent, not Apache and Puerto Rican descent.
An article on Page 37 about the choreographer Alexei Ratmansky misspells the given name of a pianist. It is Jacek Mysinski, not Yacek.
An article on Page 35 about the musician Kevin Parker misstates the given name of the A&R manager at Universal Music Australia who first signed Tame Impala. It is Glen Goetze, not Greg.
An article on Page 18 about Annette Bening refers incorrectly to the category for which Ms. Bening was nominated for a Tony Award this year. It is for best actress in a play, not featured actress in a play.
An article on Page 101 about sour foods misstates the nationality of the historian Herodotus; he was Greek, not Roman.
An article on Page 112 about site-specific art refers incorrectly to the location of the Cranbrook Art Museum; it is in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., not Detroit.
An obituary on Friday about the architect I. M. Pei misstated the current name of the firm originally known as I. M. Pei & Associates. It is Pei Cobb Freed & Partners — not Pei, Cobb and Freed. The obituary also misspelled the surname of the former president of France who invited Mr. Pei to update and expand the Louvre Museum. He was François Mitterrand, not Mitterand.
An obituary on Dec. 31 about Nancy Grace Roman, NASA’s first chief of astronomy, misstated the date of her death. It was Dec. 25, not Dec. 26. This correction was delayed because the error was brought to the attention of editors only recently.