Movies|Amazon Dropped Woody Allen’s Latest Film. Europe Has Picked It Up.
Amazon Dropped Woody Allen’s Latest Film. Europe Has Picked It Up.
Woody Allen’s latest movie, “A Rainy Day in New York,” a romantic comedy starring Timothée Chalamet and Elle Fanning, was dropped by Amazon last year. There is no sign it will be released in the United States.
In Europe, it’s another story.
The film will reach theaters in Italy on Oct. 3, Stefano Massenzi, head of acquisitions and business affairs at the Italian distributor Lucky Red, said in a telephone interview.
It will appear the following day in Spain, said Adolfo Blanco, chief executive of A Contracorriente Films, its distributor there.
It is also being released in Germany and Austria, a spokeswoman for the distributor Filmwelt/NFP said in a telephone interview. The firm would not comment further, but Christopher Ott, its managing director, told the left-leaning daily Süddeutsche Zeitung on Tuesday that he was pleased to be part of the family of distributors bringing the film to Europe, China, Japan, South Korea, Russia and South America. “He is one of the outstanding directors of our time,” Ott said.
In the wake of the #MeToo movement, there was renewed focus on allegations that Allen had molested his adopted daughter, Dylan Farrow, in 1992, allegations that Allen has consistently denied. He has since largely been shunned by Hollywood. Last year, Amazon, which was to release “A Rainy Day in New York,” ended a four-movie deal with the director, and he is now suing Amazon for at least $68 million, saying the company improperly backed out of the deal.
Allen also appears to have lost status in the American publishing industry. He tried to sell a memoir over the past year but had been rejected by multiple publishers, publishing executives recently told The Times.
However, in much of Europe, where there has been a muted response to the #MeToo movement in countries like Italy and France, Allen has long found an audience as well as locations for his films. Last year, Javier Bardem, the Spanish actor who starred in Allen’s romantic drama “Vicky Cristina Barcelona,” said he didn’t agree “with the public lynching” of Allen.
The job of the distributor was to ask if films were pieces of art and entertaining, he added.