Gleyber Torres hit three home runs during a doubleheader sweep Wednesday, and Domingo Germán became the majors’ first eight-game winner as the Yankees had their way with the Baltimore Orioles after consecutive rainouts.
Torres hit two of the Yankees four homers in a 5-3 victory in the first game. Gary Sánchez and Cameron Maybin also homered. The 22-year-old Torres joined Joe DiMaggio as the only Yankees under 23 years old with three homers in a day. DiMaggio had two three-homer days at 22 or younger — during a doubleheader in 1936 and a three-homer game in 1937.
“We got two days in a row off,” Torres said. “I think everyone was rested.” The time off helped Torres, whose right elbow was still in “a lot of pain” after he was hit by a pitch Friday.
New York has won 20 of 27 games to move a season-high 10 games over .500 at 26-16 despite currently having 13 players on the injured list.
Reinforcements arrived for the second game, which the Yankees won 3-1. A day after being acquired from Oakland, Kendrys Morales arrived in the Bronx during Game 1 and was put in the Game 2 lineup as designated hitter. He went 1 for 2 with two walks. Center fielder Aaron Hicks was also in the nightcap lineup, his first appearance of the season. He went 0 for 4 and struck out three times.
Aroldis Chapman closed out both games, giving him 11 saves in 12 chances. Zack Britton also pitched a scoreless inning in each game.
The highlight of the second game was Germán (8-1), who struck out eight over seven innings of one-run ball. He threw first-pitch strikes to 21 of his 27 batters and has a 2.41 E.R.A. The 26-year-old right-hander loaded the bases with two outs in the seventh but escaped on Joey Rickard’s groundout to preserve a one-run lead.
Germán is the first Yankee since Tommy John in 1979 to win eight of his first nine appearances to start a season, according to the Elias Sports Bureau.
“This doesn’t mean I take my foot off the pedal,” Germán said.
Luke Voit ended an 0-for-18 skid when he drilled an R.B.I. double off the wall in left-center in the third. He added two more hits, including an R.B.I. single in the eighth.
The Orioles have allowed 89 homers through 42 games, by far the most in the majors. That puts them on pace to give up 343 for the season, which would smash the record of 258 by the 2016 Cincinnati Reds.
In the first game, Yankees left-hander J.A. Happ (3-3) was pulled after 5⅓ innings and 64 pitches. He allowed three runs and five hits, including homers to Trey Mancini and Renato Nuñez. Happ wasn’t thrilled when Manager Aaron Boone pulled him.
