Damon Gulczynski hits my sweet spot.
TUESDAY PUZZLE — This puzzle by Damon Gulczynski spoke to me. Well, not really — we’re not doing audio clues just yet — but the theme made me smile. Not only was this a fun puzzle to solve with no junky fill, but it included some very crunchy long entries and one of my favorite books.
For a Tuesday, that’s more than enough entertainment for me. And we haven’t even talked about the cluing yet.
23A: “Life lines?” aren’t just the lines on your hand that a fortune teller might read. A Bio consists of lines about one’s life.
26A: Yes, spreading out is SPLAYING, but if you are a dog or cat and you lie down with your back legs outstretched, you are splooting.
32A: I wasn’t sure the answer to “Common bar mixer” was going to be COLA, simply because the only mixed drink I know of that includes it is rum and Coke.
54A: Clues sometimes use the word “line” to indicate a SEAM or a hem, especially when the clue refers to clothing.
62A: Tricky! I wanted this to be a specific AISLE or section, like “produce” or “deli,” but AISLE is technically a section of a supermarket as well.
2D: I did not know the T-shirt slogan, “ITHACA is Gorges” — it’s probably not as popular as “Virginia is for lovers” — but I was able to get it through the crossings.
14D: On first read, “Rock band?” sounds as if we’re talking about a musical group, but watch those question mark clues. There are other kinds of rocks and other kinds of bands. The answer to this clue is ORE, because it can take the form of bands in rocks.
37D: The entry JOHN has been clued any number of ways over the years, including as a lavatory, but it was hilarious to me that it has finally been clued as one of our deepest, darkest secrets: That some of us solve on the commode. And TMI isn’t even in the puzzle today.
54D: Yes, STAN is a relatively new term for being an obsessive fan. It is both a noun and a verb, and a perfect example of someone being “stanned” would be the actress Natasha Lyonne, who has a very intense group of followers. They are both STANs and they also STAN her and her work. Thank you for coming to my TED Talk.
The theme of Mr. Gulczynski’s puzzle is quite easy and, if you look carefully, it’s hiding in plain sight. In fact, the constructor and editors have drawn an arrow right to the revealer.
You don’t see it? (You have to look at the clues carefully, and it is possible that the arrow does not appear in all formats). There is a left-facing arrow at 42A with the clue “What this is for this puzzle,” and the answer is THEME. That’s kind of vague (Is the answer NUMBER? ACROSS?), so let’s look at the theme entries and figure this out.
This is as good a point as any to say that I honestly thought that when the phrase THE MEANING OF LIFE debuted, it would be clued to the Monty Python movie. Since Douglas Adams’s “The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy” happens to be one of my favorite books, however, I’m satisfied.
All three theme entries have the answer to that arrow in common, and that answer is 42, which happens to be what the computer Deep Thought was programmed to figure out in "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy” (18A); it was JACKIE ROBINSON’s now retired number (37A); and it refers to PRESIDENT CLINTON’s number in the order of United States presidents (56A).
In nontheme news, I liked the two Long Downs, SEE YOU LATER and IT COULDN’T BE.
I came up with THE MEANING OF LIFE and JACKIE ROBINSON straight away, but I needed to think a bit for one more iconic 42.
Initially I had DAMON J. GULCZYNSKI as my last theme answer (“Crossword legend born in 1977”), but I thought he might be too niche. Once I noticed PRESIDENT CLINTON was also 16 letters, I figured he was the more mainstream option.
