We’re covering why U.S.-China trade talks fell apart, a new immigration proposal from President Trump and the last voting in India’s huge election.
Twice this week, President Trump has made clear that he does not want to go to war with Iran, pushing back against two of his most hawkish aides — the national security adviser, John Bolton, and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo — who have been at the vanguard of rising tensions.
On Wednesday, during a morning meeting in the White House Situation Room, Mr. Trump told his acting defense secretary, Patrick Shanahan, he did not want war, according to several administration officials. Mr. Trump repeated the sentiment on Thursday, during a visit by the Swiss president, Ueli Maurer.
U.S. intelligence: Three officials told our reporters that it was photos of missiles on small boats in the Persian Gulf that raised U.S. concerns about rising threats from Iran. The idea is that Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps could fire the missiles at U.S. ships.
Reaction: The White House, the Pentagon, the C.I.A. and America’s allies are divided over how seriously to take the intelligence. Those in the Middle East are watching with “a mixture of disdain and weary exasperation,” our correspondent in Cairo writes.
Catch up: Our explainer covers where we are and how we got here.
Weeks ago, China’s leader, Xi Jinping, seemed confident the trade war with the U.S. would subside. He suggested China would honor American demands to protect intellectual property, encourage foreign investment, and buy more goods and services from abroad.
But then Chinese negotiators sent a rewritten draft agreement, a move that prompted President Trump to accuse Beijing of reneging on the terms of the deal.
Now Mr. Xi, after apparently misjudging how far he could push the U.S. side, risks being backed into a corner, unable to compromise between his own positions and Mr. Trump’s.
How we know: Our reporters interviewed more than a dozen people, including current and former officials, researchers, lawyers, and trade experts familiar with the deal and how it fell apart.
What’s next: Mr. Trump said he would meet Mr. Xi during a Group of 20 leaders meeting in Japan next month, which would at best pave the way for more talks.
Related: Mr. Trump’s latest move to restrict the Chinese technology giant’s ability to buy American components takes a straight shot at Huawei’s global business.
President Trump announced a new proposal in a speech in the Rose Garden that would scale back family-based immigration.
The new focus would be a merit-based proposal, which he said would rely on a points system that would reward immigrants with skills and education.
A new study found that a chain of islands near Australia was covered with mountains of plastic — some 414 million pieces that added up roughly to the weight of a blue whale.
The ocean’s plastic problem is twofold: There’s a lot of it — the study’s authors estimate that there are more pieces of plastic in the ocean than there are stars in the Milky Way — and it kills marine life.
Shortly after voting in India comes to a close on Sunday, the curtain will inch up the last act of the largest election in history.
The official results won’t be announced until next Thursday, but local news media will immediately begin to talk about the exit polls conducted over the weeks of voting.
“Interestingly, there is not one bellwether constituency among the southern states of India,” write the co-authors, Prannoy Roy and Dorab Sopariwala. That exemplifies the south’s political difference from the rest of the country.
Britain: After months of shrugging off parliamentary defeats, negotiating failures and calls from her own lawmakers to resign, Prime Minister Theresa May promised to set a date to step down as the country’s leader.
Australia: Bill Shorten, Labor’s front-runner to become prime minister after Saturday’s elections, sees trade with China as crucial to fulfilling his economic promises. Critics fear he could make concessions that increase China’s sway.
Hong Kong: An appeals court ruling sends the pro-democracy activist Joshua Wong to prison for two months, rather than three, for his role in the 2014 protests known as the Umbrella Movement.
China: The authorities brought spying charges against two Canadian men detained since December, a move that is likely to increase tensions with Canada.
The Philippines: President Rodrigo Duterte recalled his country’s ambassador to Canada after Ottawa missed a deadline to take back containers of trash that had been mislabeled as recyclables.
U.S. presidential race: Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York announced his candidacy, becoming the 23rd Democrat to enter the race. He faces major deficits in polls and fund-raising, and the daunting fact that the country has never lifted a sitting mayor to the presidency.
I.M. Pei: The Chinese-born American architect, best known for designing the National Gallery of Art in Washington D.C and the glass pyramid that serves as an entry for the Louvre in Paris, has died. He was 102.
No joke: A China dog breeder was arrested after posting on social media that he had named his lazy, thieving animals after local police officials — City Officer and Traffic Warden.
Watch: Season 2 of Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s horribly funny show “Fleabag” returns on Amazon Prime Video on Friday. Here’s where we left off.
Go: Merciless comedy shades to delicate tragedy in the Off Broadway show “BLKS,” by the poet and performer Aziza Barnes.
That was the style Britain dubbed the penny-farthing, because it looked like a giant penny paired with the much smaller farthing coin. It offered a thrilling but forbiddingly dangerous ride.
To Mark Josephson, Eleanor Stanford, Chris Harcum and Kenneth R. Rosen for the break from the news. You can reach the team at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| • Here’s our Mini Crossword, and a clue: Color of honey (5 letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
