Watching is The New York Times’s TV and film recommendation website. Sign up for our twice-weekly newsletter here.
Rachel Lears’s award-winning documentary follows four female congressional candidates going up against established male incumbents in the 2018 midterm elections, each of them refusing to accept corporate PAC donations in order to mount grassroots campaigns. The result is an intimate, fly-on-the-wall look at these uphill battles, and an appreciation of how being underestimated can sometimes work in an underdog’s favor. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez’s opponent, for example, doesn’t even bother showing up for their first debate, sending an inarticulate proxy instead — and demonstrating the possibility that his youthful challenger might be more dedicated in representing voters’ interests. Regardless of one’s politics, this is a fascinating watch.
Jen (Christina Applegate), a widow, and Judy (Linda Cardellini), who has recently lost her fiancé, meet in a grief support group. The two women form a fast friendship, which soon becomes really weird for them but quite entertaining for the viewer. This dark comedy digs deep into the different ways people process traumatic loss; Jen, for instance, needs a friend who won’t be driven away by her sudden fits of rage. There are also unexpected layers of intrigue and mystery, in which secrets are revealed, evidence is destroyed and oddly-concocted sympathy casseroles are eaten. Red wine and Entenmann’s cookies would pair nicely for this one.
Wanda Sykes takes angry aim at many cultural targets in her new stand-up special — the president, “The Bachelor,” menopause — but she’s at her sharpest on the subject of race. Her takes on topics such as the centering of white communities in the opioid crisis narratives and rampant police shootings are especially incisive, and she deploys wicked humor in telling stories about herself, her white wife and their two white children. Is a balloon kicked in her face something to be outraged about, or is it just playtime?  Sykes has a lot of fun teasing these and other thoughts out.
In 1989 a female jogger was brutally raped and beaten in Central Park; five teenagers of color were arrested and convicted of the crime, only to be exonerated several years later. Ava DuVernay’s dramatization of the Central Park Five case delves into all of the official blunders made along the way — the police-coerced confessions, the conflicting witness accounts and physical evidence, the ensuing media frenzy. DuVernay doesn’t simply demonize the authorities (who include the esteemed Linda Fairstein, then the head of Manhattan’s sex crimes unit, played here by Felicity Huffman); more usefully, she explores the systemic racism that led them to desperately seek someone — anyone — to blame for the atrocity. (“It’s no longer about justice,” admits a prosecutor played by Vera Farmiga. “It’s about politics.”) In a story of many sorrows, Michael K. Williams is heartbreaking as the conflicted parent of one of the accused teens, who bears some of the guilt for his son’s predicament.
Also arriving: “Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery” (May 1), “The Dark Crystal” (May 1), “Gosford Park” (May 1), “Gremlins” (May 1), “Hairspray” (May 1), “Hoosiers” (May 1), “The Matrix” (May 1), “Revolutionary Road” (May 1), “Scarface” (May 1), “Scream” (May 1), “Snowpiercer” (May 1), “Wedding Crashers” (May 1), “Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?” (May 1), “Zombieland” (May 1), “Mr. Mom” (May 3), “Tuca & Bertie” Season 1 (May 3), “Lucifer” Season 4 (May 8), “Insidious” (May 9), “Pose” Season 1 (May 10), “Wine Country (May 10), “Patriot Act with Hasan Minhaj” Volume 3 (May 12), “Moonlight” (May 21), “Riverdale” Season 3 (May 23), “She’s Gotta Have It” Season 2 (May 24), “The Perfection” (May 24), “Historical Roasts” (May 27), “Outlander” Seasons 1-2 (May 27) and “My Week with Marilyn” (May 30).
In Season 2 of this hilarious meta-comedy, the frazzled Londoner Fleabag (played by the show’s creator Phoebe Waller-Bridge) is still a mess. She flails her way through a life that seems to consist of one bizarre disaster after another: Fleabag finds the perfect guy, but he’s a priest; she attends a family reunion where multiple bloody noses ensue. You probably didn’t need yet another peak-TV obsession, but here it is anyway.
An angel (Michael Sheen) and a demon (David Tennant) team up to fend off Armageddon — but it will require locating the Antichrist, who, in an unholy mix-up, was mistakenly given to an ordinary family at birth and is completely unaware of his own diabolical potential. This irreverent comedy is based on Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett’s 1990 fantasy novel (Gaiman serves as showrunner), and fun cameos abound (Benedict Cumberbatch as the voice of Satan, Frances McDormand as the voice of God). It’s wonderfully weird.
Also arriving: “The Yellow Handkerchief” (May 2), “Suspiria” (May 3), “Crash” (May 5), “Sneaky Pete” Season 3 (May 10), “Poldark” Season 4 (May 17), “Jesus’ Son” (May 20), “The Constant Gardener” (May 31), “The Doors” (May 31), “Friday Night Lights” (May 31), “Friday the 13th” (May 31), “I’m Gonna Git You Sucka” (May 31), “Mission Impossible” (May 31), “Patriot Games” (May 31), “Planes, Trains & Automobiles” (May 31), “The Puffy Chair” (May 31), “Reservoir Dogs” (May 31) and “The Secret of NIMH” (May 31).
“Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned,” said the U.S.A. Gymnastics team doctor Larry Nassar in a trial statement acknowledging the dozens of girls and women who accused him of sexual abuse enacted under the guise of medical treatment. In Erin Lee Carr’s documentary, the victims are seen in a very different light. Carr (whose father was David Carr, a New York Times columnist who died in 2015) details how the osteopath befriended the aspiring Olympians, enabled by a culture in which the girls were taught never to complain, to persist through pain and injury and to accept Nassar as one of their few allies. Seeing their testimony in both interviews and victim-impact statements in court is gut-wrenching; Carr goes even deeper, displaying the system of enablers who knew of this abuse and allowed it to continue anyway.
This powerful documentary, an inside look at the Los Angeles County Department of Children and Family Services as well as the children and parents attempting to navigate it, shines a harsh light on the vast imperfections of the foster care system. The writer and director Mark Jonathan Harris follows several children who have been in the system their whole lives, and reveals the unique difficulties they have in transitioning from adolescence into adulthood. “Foster” underscores a devastating social issue: There are too many children in need of help, and too few reliable adults and resources to provide it.
Fans of David Milch’s acclaimed TV western have wanted closure for years — the original series was canceled abruptly, allowing for no wrap-up finale. Now, at last, “Deadwood,” the movie, provides a bittersweet coda. The reliably vulgar Al Swearengen (Ian McShane) still holds court at the Gem Saloon, but his health and power are waning. (In what seems like a nod to Milch’s recently publicized diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease, Al is never sure what day it is.) George Hearst (Gerald McRaney), now a U.S. Senator, returns to town to commemorate South Dakota’s newly bestowed statehood — but no one’s very happy to see him (except for those with bloodletting in mind). As has always been the case, the scabrous palaver employed in this frontier town is likely to affect a viewer’s own vocabulary and civilized impulses. Welcome back.
Also arriving: “Amelie” (May 1), “Away From Her” (May 1), “Blinded by the Lights” Season 1 (May 1), “Bruno” (May 1), “Conan the Barbarian” (May 1), “The Danish Girl” (May 1), “Deadpool 2” (May 1), “In the Bedroom” (May 1), “The Jackal” (May 1), “Tupac: Resurrection” (May 1), “The Shop” (May 4), “Chernobyl” Limited Series Premiere (May 6), “Signs” (May 6), “Night School” (May 11), “What’s My Name: Muhammad Ali” Parts 1-2 (May 14), “Halloween” (May 25), “Game of Thrones: The Last Watch” (May 26) and “Running with Beto” (May 28).
George Clooney directs and co-stars in this adaptation of Joseph Heller’s classic 1961 novel, which follows the struggle of a World War II air force captain named Yossarian (Christopher Abbott) against his true enemy — the everyday surrealism of military bureaucracy. Yossarian desperately wants to stop flying so many combat missions; a guy could get killed. He tries to have himself declared insane, but there’s a catch (of course): Anyone who wants to avoid getting killed is demonstrably sane. The stellar cast includes Hugh Laurie and Kyle Chandler, but Clooney, playing the demented Colonel Scheisskopf, deserves most of the medals.
Also arriving: “The Birdcage” (May 1), “Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan” (May 1), “Cecil B. Demented” (May 1), “Chocolat” (May 1), “Clerks” (May 1), “Dazed and Confused” (May 1), “The English Patient” (May 1), “Fatal Attraction” (May 1), “Flashdance” (May 1), “The Green Mile” (May 1), “Happy-Go-Lucky” (May 1), “Julie & Julia” (May 1), “Mermaids” (May 1), “The Night We Never Met” (May 1), “Twelve Monkeys” (May 1), “Wargames” (May 1), “Zombieland” (May 1), “The Yellow Handkerchief” (May 3), “Crash” (May 6), “Claws” Season 2 (May 12), “Beautiful Girls” (May 15), “Iris” (May 15), “Knocked Up” (May 16), “Preacher” Season 3 (May 21), “Jesus’ Son” (May 21), “Broad City” Season 5 (May 27), “The Terror” Season 1 (May 29) and “Angie Tribeca” Season 4 (May 30).