Colter Shaw is no player, but he stumbles into this gamer sphere when he goes searching for a missing woman and discovers that someone is collecting people to star in staged scenes from a violent video game called “The Whispering Man.” Shaw, who grew up in a survivalist community and was the best tracker in the family, is rougher around the edges than Deaver’s more cerebral sleuths, but he likes shiny things: He writes with a Delta Titanio Galassia pen and drives a Yamaha YZ450FX bike. He’s also a good match for Maddie Poole, a gutsy professional gamer (“I kill zombies for a living”) who calls herself GrindrGirl88.
But the game’s the thing, and while the rules are murderous, they’re also fair. “There was always a way to escape if you could figure it out,” the terrified participants are advised when they find themselves in an abandoned factory in the middle of nowhere or hopelessly lost in a dense forest. And there are always five objects to help them.
Tara Beckley knows something, but it’s something she doesn’t know she knows; and even if she did, she couldn’t tell you because she’s a victim of locked-in syndrome — mind fully conscious and alert, but body completely paralyzed. That’s the nightmarish premise of IF SHE WAKES (Little, Brown, $28), an edgy suspense story by Michael Koryta that brilliantly plays on the primal fear of being buried alive.
The action is fierce, the characters are brutal, the dialogue is filthy and the writing is so good it brings hot tears to your eyes. We must be reading the new Brian Panowich novel, LIKE LIONS (Minotaur, $26.99), which is set in the Blue Ridge foothills of north Georgia and teems with the kind of mountain folk who sleep with their boots on, cradling their guns. Clayton Burroughs, the local sheriff, is no exception to that brand of machismo. He comes from a family of outlaws who made a mint in moonshine, meth and marijuana, and is himself too fond of some of those products. Oh, and he killed his own brother. But Burroughs has no interest in returning to the bad old days, and when a gang from Florida proposes an alliance to move drugs through the hills, the sheriff stands his ground — until he doesn’t.
An ex-con, a former Marine with PTSD and a pit bull named Lucy. Meet the damaged but deeply sympathetic characters in Owen Laukkanen’s DECEPTION COVE (Mulholland, $28), a tender if melancholy mystery set in a seaside town (“a rainy-day kind of place”) on the coast of Washington.
The Marine vet, a woman named Jess Winslow who adopted Lucy as a support animal, also tries to save this supposedly vicious beast. Since Jess is being hounded by her late husband’s violent criminal associates, she decides to team up with Burke on a rescue mission that quickly turns deadly. But Jess is determined, even desperate (“She felt the dog’s absence like concrete crushing down on her chest”), because she knows Lucy is one of those old souls who live to serve.