U.S.|Atmospheric Rivers Are Back. That’s Not a Bad Thing.
Atmospheric Rivers Are Back. That’s Not a Bad Thing.
In March, I wrote about how Mr. Swain and other experts predict that such storms are part of increasingly extreme, climate change-driven weather whiplash.
That’s where researchers at U.C. San Diego hope to come in with a universitywide initiative aimed at producing interdisciplinary environmental research with practical applications.
Mr. Ralph, who had been studying atmospheric rivers for years, said he realized that forecasters in California didn’t have very specific ways of describing storms.
“It was like a dark gray rainy symbol,” he said, when he happened to know a major atmospheric river was projected to hit in a few days. Nothing indicated how severe the storm could be.
With a better idea of how much water is actually on the way, Mr. Ralph said, water managers are better able to capture the rain for drier periods and prevent flooding in areas that are vulnerable.
Early this year, I talked to Samin Nosrat, the chef, New York Times Magazine columnist and creator of the Netflix series “Salt Fat Acid Heat,” about how living in California — as a kid in San Diego, then as a student in Berkeley — has informed her work.
She talked about loving California’s Mexican food and becoming immersed in the slow, sustainable food community at Chez Panisse.
This week, she put together a list of 10 essential Persian recipes, culled in part from her memories and from interviews with her mother, as well as other Iranian and Iranian-American cooks.
The result is a delicious tribute to a childhood spent as what she described as an “Iranian eater,” where tastes of her parents’ homeland were available in the Southland — if you knew where to look.
California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here.
Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, went to school at U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.
