Theater|What Does It Take for a Woman to Be Labeled Mad? Onstage, Not Much.
What Does It Take for a Woman to Be Labeled Mad? Onstage, Not Much.
PARIS — What does it take for a woman to be labeled mad? Onstage, not much at all.
The trope of female hysteria might seem like a hang-up from different times, but it still pervades our cultural landscape — and often resists reinvention, as a string of new theater productions suggest in Paris.
In a matter of weeks, audiences here have been treated to classic examples of women teetering on the edge. “Opening Night,” at the Théâtre des Bouffes du Nord, gives us Isabelle Adjani as an actress on the verge of a nervous breakdown, lost between fiction and reality. In Marie Rémond’s “Cataract Valley,” sisters grapple with the social constraints felt by mid-20th-century American women.
The characters in both productions are a type of role actors dream about, at once multifaceted and unsettling. In the director Cyril Teste’s “Opening Night,” an adaptation of John Cassevetes’s 1977 film, Ms. Adjani takes over the role of Myrtle, a middle-age performer who goes into an alcohol-fueled tailspin. Unable to connect with her role in a play, she’s haunted by the death of a teenage fan in a car accident just outside the theater where she works.
That doesn’t account for mixed feelings, which are apt for “Opening Night.” Its gender dynamics, which closely mirror those of the film’s era, are hardly appealing. Myrtle is frequently patronized or dismissed, and the director even kisses her on the lips in a pre-#MeToo attempt, it seems, to calm her down. While Mr. Cassavetes’s conception is a product of its time, it’s unclear what Mr. Teste hoped it would mean for current audiences.
In some ways, the same question hovers over “Cataract Valley,” staged at the Ateliers Berthier, the second venue of the Théâtre de l’Odéon. Its source material is “Camp Cataract,” a 1949 short story by the 20th-century American author Jane Bowles.
Much is left unsaid in Ms. Bowles’s taut psychological tale, and the co-directors, Ms. Rémond and Thomas Quillardet, have resisted the temptation to fill in the blanks, focusing instead on channeling its atmosphere. Evocative of the woods of Camp Cataract, vegetation dominates the stage. At the beginning and again at the end, water pours from the ceiling to suggest nearby waterfalls.
Ms. Rémond herself plays Harriet with a mix of resolve and fragility that rings increasingly true as the story unfolds. As Sadie, Caroline Arrouas is captivatingly restrained, moving as if in a daze, too numbed by life to listen to her own desires.
It would be unfair to burden artists with the responsibility of setting every cliché straight. “Opening Night” and especially “Cataract Valley” take their time with characters that are anything but one-note. That’s already an improvement over Wajdi Mouawad’s overwrought new play, “Fauves,” which recently opened at the Théâtre de la Colline.
One scene grates above all else in this four-hour saga. Decades after World War II, a character informs a woman who was part of the French Resistance that she was, in fact, too vacuous to realize that she had betrayed her own companions to the enemy, and that her partner has protected her from knowing this ever since. It’s gaslighting as a coup de théâtre, breathtakingly implausible, yet presented as truth.
Never mind fiction: Walking out of the theater that night, for a second, I doubted my own sanity.