Walk the red carpet with the New York Times Crossword’s most popular actors in this latest list.
Crossword puzzles expect solvers to have a good grasp of general knowledge, but sometimes certain facts just aren’t in our personal wheelhouses.
That’s O.K. We’re here to help you solve … and to help you expand those wheelhouses.
For our latest list of terms to know to become a better solver, we’ll be watching the first segment of this year’s “Griddy Awards,” which we would like to present to women in acting who frequently show up in puzzles.
We’ll also show you ways these names might be clued, so you’ll be able to recognize them the next time they come up. The clues that involve wordplay are bold, to make them easier to spot and so you can learn to think like the puzzle makers.
If you’re a subscriber and would like to try a puzzle with the guarantee of that answer being right, click on the highlighted clue under each description.
Part Two of the Griddy Awards will run in August, and will focus on male actors who are helpful to know. For now, let’s get this camera rolling!
In the New York Times Crossword, EDIE is usually clued as Edie Falco, the actress who played Carmela Soprano on TV’s “The Sopranos” (1999-2007). Ms. Falco won three Emmy Awards for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series for her portrayal of the strong-willed wife of the mob boss Tony Soprano.
Ms. Falco is also well-known for playing the title role on the comedy show “Nurse Jackie” (2009-15), which earned her another Lead Actress Emmy in 2010. She is the first woman ever to be awarded Lead Actress Emmys in both comedy and drama.
Ms. Falco was also nominated for a Tony Award after appearing in Broadway’s “The House of Blue Leaves” (2011).
Ms. Sommer also co-starred in the 1964 Pink Panther film, “A Shot in the Dark,” where she portrayed the main suspect opposite Peter Sellers as Inspector Clouseau.
GENA Rowlands was recently recognized for her lifetime achievement in film, earning an honorary Academy Award in 2015. Previously, she had co-starred in 1974’s “A Woman Under the Influence” and played the title role in 1980’s “Gloria.” Both films earned her Best Leading Actress Oscar nominations, and were directed by her late husband, John Cassavetes.
GENA has appeared more than 50 times in the New York Times Crossword. Occasionally, the clue may reference Gena Lee Nolin, who played Neely Capshaw on TV’s “Baywatch” from 1995-98.
MIRA Sorvino is probably best known in film for playing the supporting role of Linda Ash in “Mighty Aphrodite” (1995). She earned both an Oscar and Golden Globe for the performance. She was also nominated for an Emmy for her portrayal of Marilyn Monroe in the 1996 TV movie “Norma Jean & Marilyn,” opposite Ashley Judd as Norma Jean Dougherty.
Ms. Sorvino was a powerful voice in the #MeToo movement, discussing her sexual harassment by Harvey Weinstein. She wrote an open letter of apology in HuffPost to Dylan Farrow, who accused the “Mighty Aphrodite” director Woody Allen, Ms. Farrow’s father, of sexual molestation.
a. Nia Long (pictured above), known for her roles in “Big Momma’s House” (2000) and “Alfie” (2004).
b. Nia Peeples, seen on the TV series “Fame” (1982-87) and the soap opera “The Young and the Restless” from 2007-09.
If you stroll down the Hollywood Walk of Fame, you’ll see a star dedicated to POLA Negri, an accomplished actress in the silent and early sound eras.
Ms. Negri grew up in Poland, where she attended a ballet school in Warsaw before relocating to Germany for acting. She had roles in many German silent films in the early 1920s, sometimes co-starring alongside Emil Jannings (another crossword grid regular!), and eventually became a Hollywood success.
Ms. Negri’s final film before retiring was 1943’s “Hi Diddle Diddle,” though she returned once in 1964 to play a role in “The Moon-Spinners,” which starred Hayley Mills and Eli Wallach.
All four letters of SELA are extremely common, and thus easier for puzzle makers to encounter in their grids, which is why SELA Ward has inspired more than 75 crossword clues under Mr. Shortz’s editorship.
Ms. Ward won two Outstanding Lead Actress Emmys for her roles on “Sisters” (1991-96) and “Once and Again” (1999-2002). Other notable appearances include the final three seasons of “CSI: NY” (2004-13) as well as the films “Gone Girl” (2014) and “Independence Day: Resurgence” (2016).
b. Teri Hatcher, the Bond girl in “Tomorrow Never Dies” (1997) and one of the housewives on “Desperate Housewives” (2004-12).
c. Teri Polo (pictured above), who co-starred alongside Ben Stiller in 2000’s “Meet the Parents” and its sequels.
Ms. Thurman also emerged as a prominent figure in the #MeToo movement after detailing her experiences of sexual harassment and assault by Harvey Weinstein.
In 2015, the modern rock band Fall Out Boy released the song “Uma Thurman,” which charted as a top 25 Billboard hit.
UTA Hagen, an acclaimed Broadway actress, starred in the 1950 Clifford Odets play “The Country Girl,” as well as the 1962 premiere of “Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?” by Edward Albee. She received Tony Awards for both performances. Ms. Hagen won an additional Tony for Lifetime Achievement in 1999.
UTA has appeared in more than 200 puzzles for The New York Times, and the full name UTA HAGEN has appeared 10 times. Occasionally, the former will be clued with respect to the Utah Jazz: UTA is the team’s scoreboard abbreviation.
