Book Review|The Art Market Is Exploding. Meet the Dealers Who Lit the Fuse.
The Art Market Is Exploding. Meet the Dealers Who Lit the Fuse.
In her memoirs, published in 1960, Peggy Guggenheim deplored the state of the art market in America. Guggenheim was one of the great collectors of the 20th century, living in palatial exile in Venice, where you can still visit her collection — at her home, now a museum — but on a return to New York the previous year, she was dispirited by what she saw.
By the end of the century, that faith would harden into creed. Guggenheim died in 1979, narrowly missing a stratospheric rise in the stocklike sale of art, and, with it, that of the man who would become its most exceptional stockbroker: Larry Gagosian, a gallerist whose dominion would come to span the earth. Gagosian is the grandest and, apparently, the highest earning, of the mega-dealers who gate-keep the grounds of contemporary art, deciding which museum, collection or egregiously wealthy client can get what and at what price. With more than a dozen galleries scattered across America, Europe and Asia to entice artists with dreams of global conquest — like Damien Hirst, who was so taken with the idea that he ran a competition, offering a signed print to any with the means or mettle to visit his concurrent shows at every Gagosian outpost in 2012 — Gagosian, together with a small number of fellow mega-dealers, has presided over an art market in a fantastically lucrative boom.
“Boom” is the title Michael Shnayerson, a contributing editor at Vanity Fair, has taken for his history of the postwar art market, which is to say, a story of untrammeled growth and undreamed-of excess. “Dealers tell us that the day of the $10 million painting is at hand,” the critic Robert Hughes wrote in 1984. “Never before have the visual arts been the subject — beneficiary or victim, depending on your view of the matter — of such extreme inflation and fetishization.” In the decades since, the $10 million painting no sooner arrived at hand than flew out of it, headed for higher, much higher. Now records, itchy even in their impossibility, wait impatiently to be smashed. “Rabbit,” a 1986 stainless steel sculpture of a child’s inflatable bunny by Jeff Koons, a Gagosian artist, sold for $91.1 million with fees at Christie’s on May 15, setting a new record for work by a living artist at auction. It seized the title from a David Hockney painting, which went for $90.3 million last year.
Gagosian is the art world’s billion-dollar man — this is the generally accepted figure for his annual gross sales, outpacing all his competitors — and “Boom” sets about explaining how. When art becomes a commodity and an investment, premised on “the exciting if not always reliable notion of art as an alternative asset,” it is price, as much as merit, that begets price.
But what Shnayerson is less able, or willing, to wrangle with is why. In “Boom,” quantity speaks. Gagosian and his collector-clients snap up more, more, more, weathering crashes (in 1990, in 2008) and hiccups with bullish confidence. But there is barely a nod at art’s most ineffable aspect: quality. Shnayerson does note that Gagosian tends to pounce on artists other gallerists have nurtured and developed rather than to discover new ones (“strictly a retail guy,” in the words of the critic and curator Robert Storr), but in almost no case does he suggest why the multimillion-dollar men (they are indeed mostly men) of contemporary art earn their prices.
Maybe it’s folly to try. There may be no earthly or irreducible reason work by Christopher Wool, whose word paintings are given an excruciating capsule exegesis (“Wool was standing on a city street when he saw a white truck go by — a white truck with the words ‘sex’ and ‘luv’ spray-painted on it. Words! That was the epiphany”), should fetch $5 million in 2010, or $29.9 million just five years later. And Shnayerson writes as a witness, not a specialist or ethicist. But even if he believes that rising prices are a sign of rampant mania, “Boom” is oddly uninterested in the actual artistry of art, what — besides the attentions of gallerists goosing the market — separates the good from the dross. As any struggling artist can tell you, it’s not all on the block for $5 million a canvas.
