Cher! Rodgers & Hammerstein! The Temptations! Plus a giddy prom-goer and a very anxious actress — and only here.
The nominees will be at Radio City Music Hall on Sunday, June 9, for the Tony Awards. But we couldn’t wait that long. So on May 6, Times Events (#timesevents) gathered representatives of nominated shows at the Times Center to sing songs and tell stories. We hope you enjoy the performances as much as we did.
“The Way of Love.” Song written by Jaccques Dieval, Al Stillman, Mariano Ruiz. Used by permission of Chappell-Co. Inc. (ASCAP), Music Sales Corp. (ASCAP).
[piano] When you meet a boy that you like a lot, and you fall in love, but he loves you not, if a flame should start as you hold him near better keep your heart out of danger, dear. For the way of love is a way of woe and the day may come when you’ll see him go. Then what will you do when he sets you free, just the way that you said goodbye to me? When you meet a boy that you like a lot and you fall in love, but he loves you not if a flame should start as you hold him near, you better keep your heart, keep it out of danger, dear. For the way of love is a way of woe, and the day may come when you’ll see him go. Then what will you do when he sets you free, just the way that you said goodbye to me — that’s the way of love, the way of love!
Stephanie J. Block, a popular Broadway veteran, has been nominated for her performance as Star, the eldest of three versions of Cher portrayed in “The Cher Show.” Ms. Block was previously nominated for “Falsettos,” in 2017, and for “The Mystery of Edwin Drood,” in 2013.
“Our Lady of the Underground.” Music and lyrics by Anaïs Mitchell.
I don’t know about you boys ... but if you’re like me, then hanging around this old manhole is bringing you down. Six feet under getting under your skin, cabin fever is a-setting in. You’re stir crazy! Stuck in a rut! You could use a little pick-me-up. I can give you what it is you crave, a little something from the good old days. I got the wind right here in a jar, I got the rain on tap at the bar. I got sunshine up on the shelf. Allow me to introduce myself. Brother, what’s my name? My name is ... Our Lady of the Underground! Brother, what’s my name? Our Lady of Ways! Our Lady of Means! Brother, what’s my name? My name is ... Our Lady of the Upside Down! Wanna know my name? I’ll tell you my name: Persephone! Come here, brother, let me guess it’s the little things you miss. Spring flowers, autumn leaves. Ask me, brother, and you shall receive. Or maybe these just ain’t enough. Maybe you’re looking for some stronger stuff. I got a sight for the sorest eye When was the last time you saw the sky? Wipe away your tears, brother. Brother, I know how you feel. I can see you’re blinded by the sadness of it all. But look a little closer and everything will be revealed. Look a little closer and there’s a crack in the wall! Ladies and gentlemen, Ben Perowsky on the drums! Robinson Morse on the bass! And Cody Owen Stine on the keys! You want stars? I got a skyful. Put a quarter in the slot, you’ll get an eyeful. You want the moon? I got her too. She’s right here waiting in my pay-per-view. Ooh, how long’s it been? A little moonshine ain’t no sin. Tell my husband to take his time. 
“Hadestown,” a new musical retelling of the Orpheus and Eurydice myth, is nominated for 14 Tony Awards — the most of any show this season. Amber Gray, a downtown theater artist who has been with the show since 2014, is nominated for playing Persephone, the Greek goddess who spends half of each year above ground, and half down below with her husband, Hades.
“Barry Is Going to Prom.” Accompanied by composer Matthew Sklar. Music by Matthew Sklar; lyrics by Chad Beguelin.
“What’s Gonna Happen.” Music and lyrics by David Yazbek.
“Out of My Dreams.” Music by Richard Rodgers; Lyrics by Oscar Hammerstein II.
“If You Don’t Know Me By Now” by Kenneth Gamble and Leon Huff © 1972 (Renewed) Warner-Tamerlane Publishing Corp. (BMI) and Mijac Music (BMI). Rashidra Scott is joined on vocals by Esther Antoine, Jeremy Cohen, Taylor Symone Jackson, Jahi Kearse, Nasia Thomas, Christian Thompson and Candice Marie Woods.
The jukebox musical “Ain’t Too Proud: The Life and Times of the Temptations” tells the story of one of Motown’s most successful groups, and has been nominated for 12 Tony Awards, including best new musical. Rashidra Scott has a small part in the show as Josephine, the neglected wife of Otis Williams, but she makes the most of it, singing a small portion of this song. For our concert, we asked her to deliver the full number; she is accompanied by much of the show’s ensemble.
“Michael in the Bathroom.” Accompanied by composer Joe Iconis. Music and lyrics by Joe Iconis.
[piano] “I am hanging in a bathroom at the biggest party of the fall. I could stay right here or disappear, and nobody’d even notice at all. I’m a creeper in a bathroom, ’cause my buddy kind of left me alone. But I’d rather fake pee than stand awkwardly, or pretend to check a text on my phone. Everything felt fine when I was half of a pair. Now through no fault of mine, there’s no other half there. Now I’m just Michael in the bathroom, Michael in the bathroom at a party. Forget how long it’s been, I’m just Michael in the bathroom, Michael in the bathroom at a party. No, you can’t come in. I’m waiting it out till it’s time to leave, and picking at grout as I softly grieve. I’m just Michael who you don’t know, Michael flying solo, Michael in the bathroom by himself. All by himself. I am hiding but he’s out there, just ignoring all our history. Memories get erased, I’ll get replaced with a newer, cooler version of me. And I hear a drunk girl sing along to Whitney through the door. “I wanna dance with somebody!” And my feelings sink, ’cause it makes me think now there’s no one to make fun of drunk girls with anymore. Now it’s just Michael in the bathroom, Michael in the bathroom at a party. I half regret the beers. Michael in the bathroom, Michael in the bathroom at a party. As I choke back the tears, I’ll wait as long as I need till my face is dry, or I’ll just blame it on weed or something in my eye. I’m just Michael who you don’t know, Michael flying solo, Michael in the bathroom by himself. Knock, knock, knock, knock, they’re going to start to shout soon. Knock, knock, knock, knock.  Knock, knock, knock, knock.  Knock, knock, knock, knock. Here in this teenage battle zone. Clang, clang, clang, clang. I feel the pressure blowing up. Bang, bang, bang, bang. My big mistake was showing up. Splash, splash, splash, splash. I throw some water in my face, and I am in a better place. I go to open up the door. But I can’t hear knocking anymore. And I can’t help but yearn for a different time. And then I look in the mirror, and the present is clearer. And there’s no denying I’m just — — at a party. Is there a sadder sight than Michael in the bathroom at a party? This is a heinous night. I wish I stayed at home in bed, watching cable porn, or wish I offed myself instead. Wish I was never born. I’m just Michael, who’s a loner, so he must be a stoner.  Michael flying solo, who you think that you know. Michael in the bathroom by himself. All by himself. All by himself. When all you know about me is my name. Awesome party, I’m so glad I came. [cheering] Jerry Conniff!
“Be More Chill,” a sci-fi musical adapted from a young adult novel, is the first show propelled to Broadway by the intensity of its online fan base, and much of that was fueled by this poignant number sung by George Salazar portraying a teenager who feels so isolated at a Halloween party that he shuts himself in a bathroom. Joe Iconis, who wrote the music and lyrics, is nominated for a Tony for best original score.
Videos produced by Ben Cawiezell and Dave Horn. The concert was produced by Elizabeth Weinstein of New York Times Subscriber Events, introduced by Scott Heller, and hosted by Michael Paulson. You can watch the full event here.