HOUSTON — Occidental Petroleum fortified its bid for Anadarko Petroleum on Sunday night with more cash in its latest effort to outbid Chevron and win the support of Anadarko’s shareholders who may well make the final decision on a merger.
In a letter to Anadarko’s board of directors, Occidental’s cash-and-stock proposal remained at $76 per share, or $38 billion. But the cash portion was raised to 78 percent from 50 percent.
Chevron may now raise its bid, but it did not have an immediate comment on Occidental’s new move.
Vicki Hollub, Occidental’s chief executive, said her company’s proposal represented a 23.3 percent premium over Chevron’s bid.
The proposal came only hours after Occidental announced that if it does acquire Anadarko it will sell off a slew of Anadarko investments across Africa in a move that would allow it to focus its efforts on dominating the oil field straddling Texas and New Mexico that is the biggest and most productive in the United States.
Occidental, based in Houston, said it had reached a binding agreement with the French oil giant Total to sell Anadarko’s assets in Algeria, Ghana, Mozambique and South Africa. The announcement came only days after Berkshire Hathaway committed $10 billion to help Occidental’s uphill bidding war against Chevron, a company four times its size.
Occidental said the deal with Total, contingent on its successful acquisition of Anadarko, would be valued at $8.8 billion. That money would go toward financing the Anadarko acquisition, and would be part of a total of up to $15 billion in previously announced but unspecified Occidental asset sales.
The moves are the latest turn in the biggest and most contentious takeover battle for a large oil company in at least 15 years.
Occidental’s announcement on the sale appears to be part of its effort to convince Anadarko’s shareholders that its takeover bid, which is already higher than Chevron’s, would immediately be more profitable to them.
The sale would also negate the argument by Chevron that its experience in exporting liquified natural gas would make it a better manager of Anadarko’s large effort in Mozambique to produce and export liquified natural gas, better known as LNG.
“Total has extensive experience working in Africa and is well-positioned to maximize value from these assets,” Ms. Hollub noted in a statement announcing the deal with Total.
Chevron has consistently said that it expects Anadarko will abide by the definitive agreement its board entered into with Chevron on April 12. But less than two weeks later, Anadarko said it would review Occidental’s counteroffer.
If Chevron’s bid loses out to Occidental’s, Anadarko would be obliged to pay a $1 billion breakup fee under the terms of its agreement with Chevron.
The heart of Occidental’s proposed acquisition is Anadarko’s sprawling oil fields in West Texas’ huge Permian Basin, which recently surpassed Saudi Arabia’s Ghawar field as the world’s most productive oil field. Anadarko has identified 10,000 drilling locations on its land.
Skeptics of Occidental’s effort to acquire Anadarko have consistently noted that Occidental does not have the deep pockets that Chevron has. But over the last week, Occidental has aggressively sought to answer that criticism with its deals with Total and Warren E. Buffett’s company, Berkshire.
Mr. Buffett would receive an 8 percent annual dividend on Berkshire’s $10 billion investment in new preferred shares. That deal is also contingent on Occidental’s successful acquisition of Anadarko.
There is the potential for more twists in the takeover battle in the days ahead. Carl Icahn has acquired a position in Occidental in recent days, while Chevron is expected by some Wall Street analysts to sweeten its offer to counteract Occidental’s recent moves.