Politics|Joe Biden Has Support From Older Black Voters. Is It Enough?
Joe Biden Has Support From Older Black Voters. Is It Enough?
But when the benediction was completed, the rush of congregants to the front pew signaled that this Sunday was unique: The honored guest was former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., and everyone wanted a photo.
Nearly every Democrat in South Carolina agrees that Mr. Biden is the early pacesetter in the state’s critically important primary, buoyed by his longstanding relationships with elected officials here and support from black voters, who make up almost 60 percent of the Democratic electorate.
But black leaders and strategists are divided over whether that backing will endure over the next year. One camp believes his experience and appeal to older voters will make him an electoral juggernaut among the black community, while another sees him as a paper tiger whose appeal is generational and who may be overly reliant on his ties to Mr. Obama.
Black voters will represent a crucial segment of the primary electorate in many states, and Mr. Biden’s ability to build lasting support among them will be essential to determining the strength of his candidacy. He has emerged as the pacesetter in a crowded field in large part because of sky-high polling numbers among black voters, support he never enjoyed during two previous presidential runs.
Those more bullish on his chances cite his slew of early endorsements in South Carolina (more than 20 announced Monday, including pastors, state legislators and school board members), the association with Mr. Obama, and the hiring of Kendall Corley, a prized Democratic organizer who specializes in field operations and turned down several other campaigns to serve as Mr. Biden’s South Carolina state director.
In states like South Carolina, Mr. Biden’s advantage with black voters not only helps him amass delegates ahead of the Democratic convention, but helps counter the widespread perception that he is a candidate running on a bygone appeal to the white working class.
“He has a message that’s not just for black people, but for everyone,” said Terry Davenport, 52, who attended Mr. Biden’s rally in South Carolina over the weekend. He and several other attendees made a similar point — Mr. Biden is the person with the longest relationship with black communities but can also win white votes.
Others, like, Jarrod Loadholt, a Democratic political strategist in the state, are skeptical of Mr. Biden’s ability to maintain his lead with black voters. Mr. Loadholt cites the 2007 primary, when the Democratic front-runner, Hillary Clinton, also enjoyed robust support among black Americans in several polls. Mr. Obama overtook her in a shift that swung the primary.
Mr. Loadholt also questioned Mr. Biden’s ability to get beyond the obvious campaign stops in the state and do the hard work needed to reach more rural black voters.
Mr. Biden has structured the early weeks of his campaign almost singularly around President Trump, casting himself as a racial unifier in a time of division. He stressed that over the weekend in South Carolina.
But Mr. Biden, who served for years as a Senator from Delaware before becoming vice president, has a legislative record littered with divisive stances on issues relating to black people. He was an early opponent of busing programs aimed at school desegregation, and he played an integral role in the punitive crime reduction efforts of the late 1980s and early 1990s, which helped lead to the explosion of incarceration rates among black Americans.
Mr. Biden has expressed some remorse for the crime legislation, and for his treatment of Anita Hill when she appeared before the Senate Judiciary Committee during Justice Clarence Thomas’s confirmation hearings. But surrogates, and many voters, have repeatedly downplayed both incidents, and said they believe voters will judge him through his most recent actions in Mr. Obama’s administration.
“I’m not saying the others aren’t qualified, I’m just saying I’ve been there,” he said.
Several of Mr. Biden’s primary opponents have also tried to make outreach to black communities in the early months of their presidential campaigns, a testament to the importance of this reliable Democratic voting bloc, and the desire among 2020 candidates to recreate Mr. Obama’s winning coalitions from 2008 and 2012.
However, each of those candidates has their own struggles. Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts earned rave reviews at the She The People forum on women of color, but the crowd was largely activists and political operatives, not the rank-and-file Democrats where she has yet to break through.
The race’s two black senators, Cory Booker of New Jersey and Kamala Harris of California, are still relatively new to the national stage, and must contend with the perception among even some black voters that several of the white candidates are better suited to defeat Mr. Trump.
Bakari Sellers, the former state legislator who has endorsed Ms. Harris, said the race is in the early stages right now, but “when school starts” in the fall, Mr. Biden will be under more intense scrutiny.
Research from other liberal groups also suggests that Mr. Biden’s relationship with black voters may be generational. Data For Progress, the progressive group aligned with more left-leaning candidates, conducted several focus groups about Mr. Biden’s “electability,” and tracked how different populations responded to negative statements about Mr. Biden’s past, including his positions on crime and law enforcement. Among black Americans, millennials were almost twice as likely to back away from Mr. Biden than black voters overall, which indicates his support with older black Americans is more fixed.
Mr. Biden’s candidacy is in some ways a test of which candidate has the measure of the black electorate in South Carolina and nationwide. Younger black Democrats driven by grass-roots ideology want to rally around issues like inequality and criminal justice, and they see Mr. Biden as emblematic of an old guard that has mistreated black communities.
But many state elected officials and political operatives, pointing to early polling, believe the former vice president’s “return to normalcy” message will resonate more than any rigid ideological framework.
At Brookland Baptist on Sunday morning, Ms. Cain Seabrook, the church member, said there was nothing more Mr. Biden needed to do to earn her vote — not a policy agenda, or a campaign visit, or good performances in the Democratic debates.
She repeated her earlier points: She planned to vote for Mr. Biden because he served with Mr. Obama. And, in a bonus, she said, he seemed to clap on beat to the music.