OAKLAND, Calif. — The Greatest Second Round in N.B.A. Playoff History, as one know-it-all scribe had the temerity to describe it last week, did not get off to the greatest start.
Yet things thankfully picked up on Tuesday night, when two of the game’s biggest stars — Stephen Curry and James Harden — injected some much-needed nobility into the proceedings by playing through their gnarly injuries in the Golden State Warriors’ 115-109 Game 2 triumph over the Houston Rockets.
It was Curry and especially the under-fire Harden, more than anyone, who helped nudge the league’s marquee series away from a suffocating, dispiriting debate about how the game is officiated when the Warriors and the Rockets meet.
Curry shrugged off a nasty-looking dislocated middle finger on his nonshooting hand, which he sustained in the opening quarter, and finished with 20 points despite his 3-for-13 struggles from 3-point range. Harden, meanwhile, was left with a scary laceration on his left eyelid and two bloodshot eyes after taking an inadvertent rake to the face from Draymond Green — but he amassed a team-high 29 points through blurry vision despite squinting and wincing for the rest of the evening.
The new and more serious issue in this second-round showdown between the Warriors, the two-time defending champions, and the Houston team that took Golden State to seven games in last season’s Western Conference finals is that the Rockets, trailing by 2-0, are already running out of time to make this a series.
The Warriors’ so-called Hamptons Five lineup became the first starting unit in Kerr’s five seasons in charge to have every member score at least 15 points in a playoff game.
Andre Iguodala and a slimmed-down Green, in particular, are wreaking so much additional havoc that Houston has to make sure it wins Games 3 and 4 at home — against a team that has won a road game in 20 consecutive playoff series — before it can even dream about how to win four of the next five games over all.
“They’re a really good team, man,” Austin Rivers said in a somber Houston locker room after the Rockets whittled Golden State’s 15-point lead to 3 but never got closer.
Rivers, who had 14 points, came back from a stomach virus that sidelined him for Sunday’s contentious Game 1 and helped keep Houston in the game while Harden was receiving treatment for his eye injury. Harden, the league’s reigning most valuable player, then did everything he could possibly do to hush the noise surrounding his 9-for-28 shooting in Game 1 — as well as what Green termed an “embarrassing” 24-hour news cycle. Game 1’s aftermath had been filled with inflammatory quotations, articles and leaks detailing more than a year of mounting frustration within the Rockets’ organization about what they perceive as favorable treatment from the league’s referees toward Golden State.
In this Game 2, Harden eventually overcame the eye issues and the presence of his least-favorite referee, Scott Foster, to ring up 13 points in the fourth quarter after entering the final period with five turnovers and a 4-for-12 shooting line. It simply wasn’t enough to offset the Rockets’ 18 turnovers and Golden State’s 18 offensive rebounds, with Houston also wasting its 17-for-40 shooting from the 3-point line.
The Rockets had not seen Foster since February, when Harden proclaimed him “rude and arrogant.” This loss dropped Houston’s record to 0-7 over the past three postseasons in games refereed by Foster, compared with 21-7 when he is not there, but no one on either side was blaming the whistles after Tuesday’s game.
Despite Foster’s presence — which, for the record, was arranged before the series began, when the league, as is customary, assigns three-person referee teams for the first four games in any playoff matchup — Houston had cause to feel fortunate entering Game 2. Guard Chris Paul made contact with the referee Josh Tiven when he was ejected late in Game 1, but he incurred only a $35,000 fine instead of a suspension.
Paul’s penalty, furthermore, was the only fine Houston absorbed amid a stream of reports from The Athletic and ESPN about the Rockets’ claims that, according to their calculations, more than 80 missed calls in Game 7 of last season’s series with Golden State had cost Houston nearly 20 points in that game and thus a championship — since the Warriors went on to sweep the Cleveland Cavaliers in the N.B.A. finals.
”One of the things we have to do with our work is own the work that could have been better,” Monty McCutchen, the league’s vice president for referee development and training, said in a telephone interview after the contentious series opener.
That is the Rockets’ challenge now. They head home with two deflating losses by a combined 10 points and have to fear that the stink they made over multiple noncalls for Harden on apparent fouls on 3-point attempts in Game 1 galvanized the Warriors even more than Golden State’s two home losses to the Los Angeles Clippers did in the previous round of the playoffs.
Iguodala, Green and Curry, whose dislocated finger had to be popped back in and taped up before he could return, should all benefit from the three full off days they will get before the series resumes this weekend.
The extended break can only help Harden, too, given that he said he “could barely see” after the injury and while fielding questions in his postgame interview session. But the Warriors are rolling again after their scare against the Clippers; they never trailed in Game 2 despite Durant’s scoring a comparatively pedestrian 29 points after averaging 40.2 points over his previous five games.
All the drama, in what looked on paper like a second round for the ages, is in the Eastern Conference at the moment. Both series in the East, Milwaukee-Boston and Toronto-Philadelphia, are on a seven-game pace after 1-1 splits in the first two games.
Out West, when Iguodala (16 points, 5 rebounds and 4 assists in 32 minutes) and Green (15 points, 12 rebounds and 7 assists in nearly 39 minutes) are playing with this much force, Golden State simply has too much for Houston — or anyone else.