Female track athletes with naturally elevated levels of testosterone must decrease the hormone to participate in certain races at major competitions like the Olympics, the highest court in international sports said Wednesday in a landmark ruling amid the pitched debate over who can compete in women’s events.
The decision was a defeat for Caster Semenya, a two-time Olympic champion at 800 meters from South Africa, who had challenged proposed limits placed on female athletes with naturally elevated levels of the muscle-building hormone testosterone.
At a time when the broader culture is moving toward an acceptance of gender fluidity, the ruling affirmed the sports world’s need for distinct gender lines, saying they were essential for the outcome of women’s events to be fair.
Semenya’s biology has been under scrutiny for a decade, ever since she burst on the scene at the 2009 world track and field championships and was subjected to sex tests following her victory. In South Africa, leaders complained of racism. The issue of whether a rare biological trait was causing an unfair advantage for Semenya and a small subset of women quickly morphed into a battle about privacy and human rights, and Semenya became its symbol. She has said little publicly about her specific biology other than stating that God made her the way she is.
In issuing its ruling the Swiss-based Court of Arbitration for Sport addressed the complicated, highly charged question involving fair play, gender identity, biology and human rights that track and field has been grappling with for decades: Since competition is divided into male and female categories, what is the most equitable way to decide who can compete in women’s events?
In a 2-to-1 decision, the court ruled that restrictions on permitted levels of naturally occurring testosterone were discriminatory but that such discrimination was a “necessary, reasonable and proportionate means” of achieving track and field’s goal of preserving the integrity of female competition.
It was a victory, though not a complete one, for track and field’s world governing body, the International Association of Athletics Federations. The federation said it was “grateful” for Wednesday’s ruling.
The I.A.A.F. had argued that athletes classified with “differences of sexual development,” also known as intersex athletes — particularly women who possess testes and natural testosterone levels in the male range — gain an unfair advantage in women’s events ranging from 400 meters to one mile because they have additional muscle mass, strength and oxygen-carrying capacity.
But the sports court expressed some “serious concerns” on Wednesday about the fairness and practical application of testosterone limits. These concerns include the potential inability of athletes to remain within permitted limits even with hormonal treatment and the “practical impossibility” of compliance some athletes may face because of the treatment’s side effects.
Her lawyers said they might appeal Wednesday’s decision, arguing that “her unique genetic gift should be celebrated, not regulated.” Semenya can appeal to the Swiss Supreme Court on narrow grounds.
If Semenya wants to keep participating in her specialty, the 800 meters, at major international competitions, she faces some hard choices: take hormone-suppressing drugs and reduce her testosterone levels below five nanomoles per liter for six months before competing, and maintain those lowered levels; compete against men; or enter competitions for intersex athletes, if any are offered. Otherwise, she would not be allowed to run the 800 at prestigious competitions like the Olympics.
Most women, including elite female athletes, have natural testosterone levels of 0.12 to 1.79 nanomoles per liter, the I.A.A.F. said, while the normal male range after puberty is much higher, at 7.7 to 29.4 nanomoles per liter. No female athlete would have natural testosterone levels of five nanomoles per liter or higher without differences in sex development or tumors, the I.A.A.F. has said.
But Semenya and her supporters challenge the notion that biological sex is so neat and binary. Semenya has called the I.A.A.F. rule, which was introduced a year ago, medically unnecessary as well as “discriminatory, irrational, unjustifiable” and a violation of the rules of sport and universally recognized human rights.
Madeleine Pape, a former Olympian from Australia who has raced against Semenya, said she had changed her thinking that Semenya should be prohibited from competing in certain women’s events.
Francine Niyonsaba of Burundi, who finished second to Semenya in the 800 meters at the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, publicly confirmed last month that she also had naturally elevated levels of testosterone. She called the I.A.A.F.’s proposed rule to restrict hormone levels discriminatory.
A group of scientists has charged that the I.A.A.F. relied on faulty data in trying to establish the precise advantages of athletes with elevated testosterone levels. Semenya’s lawyers and other supporters have argued that science has not conclusively shown that elevated testosterone provides women with more of a significant competitive edge than factors like nutrition, access to coaching and training facilities, and other genetic and biological variations.
The ruling by the arbitration court was also watched closely by transgender athletes and by officials of the International Olympic Committee as they prepared to set guidelines for participants in the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo.
Transgender athletes are no longer required to have reassignment surgery to participate in the Olympics, and those transitioning from female to male can compete without restriction.
Athletes transitioning from male to female must declare that their gender identity is female and, for sporting purposes, cannot rescind that declaration for four years. The athletes must also suppress their testosterone level below 10 nanomoles per liter for a year before becoming eligible for the Olympics.
Wednesday’s ruling in the Semenya case, though, could prompt the I.O.C. to recommend that Olympic sports adopt the more restrictive cutoff of five nanomoles per liter.
