Unparalleled journalism on the screen every Sunday. See our new trailer.
I’m really going to try to figure out what happened on the ground. A lot of the medallion owners have filed for bankruptcy. Have you thought about doing that? Yeah. I know so many drivers they killed themselves. Hi, it’s Matt Apuzzo at The New York Times. What’s going on here? What’s the real story? Write whatever you want to write about us. I’ll go to war every day for our students. They biked from Morocco to Spain, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and then Tajikistan. I want to start with the biggest picture you can give.
A new TV series from The New York Times, bringing unparalleled journalism to the screen.
One thousand, six hundred journalists reporting from 160 countries power The New York Times. “The Weekly,” a new TV show from The Times, plugs into this unrivaled news machine to bring our journalism to an entirely new platform.
“The Weekly” will delve into one story each week — with the Times journalists who have reported on an issue for months or, in many cases, years — to produce authoritative news documentaries on the most important issues of our time.
That means Rukmini Callimachi, who covers global terrorism for The Times, traveling to the world’s most hostile states.
It means Caitlin Dickerson, whose reporting on immigration has set the national agenda and influenced federal policy decisions.
It’s Nicholas Casey, the Andes bureau chief who covers South America and beyond. Matt Apuzzo, a European investigative correspondent who spent years breaking stories as a national security reporter. Brian Rosenthal and Emma Fitzsimmons, who cover transportation in New York. And many more.
More than 30 reporters will appear in the first season of “The Weekly,” covering stories in the United States and around the world that you will not see elsewhere.
One story a week gives us the time to tell it right, to show our reporters piecing together the facts, connecting the details, asking the tough questions — all in pursuit of the truth. It gives us time to get to know each other, too. You will see our journalists in the muck of the reporting journey, which can be exhilarating, messy and backbreakingly frustrating, all at once.
Television is exciting, and (relatively) new to us, but it was not the novelty of trying something different that attracted us. Quality journalism, a bedrock of our democracy, is under attack like never before. We hope television is a powerful weapon in this fight.
We are fiercely proud of this work and could not be more excited to share it with you. Thanks for watching.
