On a car trip, when 12-year-old Joan waves flirtatiously at a trucker, her dad chides her for “acting falsely” and engaging in “self-deception.” At age 8, when she looks up at the night sky and asks if God and heaven exist, he answers with a scientific no. Her father makes her feel “safe,” but his answers leave her “uneasy.” She continues to seem caught in those contradictions.
Wheelis’s memoir, with glimpses of her father’s writings, is a layered tribute to a paradoxical man, a caring parent who couldn’t say “I love you” to her until she was 20. Her success is in letting enigmas endure beyond the couch, questing on for “the known, the secret, the forgotten.” “I look in the mirror and I see both of my parents,” she writes. “I look into my son’s face and I see myself.” (p. 158).
159 pp. Norton. $25.95.
242 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $26.
With its map of the family farm, its photograph of the Whetsone River and its portrait gallery, Scoblic’s memoir is both a microhistory of her tiny corner of South Dakota and an oral-history-toned chronicle of the Hoffbeck family from the 1920s onward.
But charm has its limits. The story moves pell-mell through the sagas of the author’s siblings, including, with little exploration of the emotions involved, one sister’s “heavy bitterness” toward their father and Scoblic’s own attempt “to heal” old wounds with him. Tracking her Peace Corps stint in Thailand, writing and editing career in Manhattan, trip with a brother to Alaska and anguished returns to South Dakota, the memoir’s narrative tends to drift.
Scoblic hopes this book “will encourage the younger generations to write the next chapter of our family’s history.” She has given her descendants a gift. Those who aren’t kin might feel they’ve already stayed too long at the reunion.
273 pp. She Writes Press. Paper, $16.95.
Subjectivity, thankfully, takes over as she recounts her “agonistic relationship” with Rita, confessing that “I was Daddy’s little girl, and he was the parent I loved best.” Whether factual or mythological, it’s a story, driven by passion, tension and an engaging voice, that ultimately renders the Donigers vivid on the page.
172 pp. Brandeis University. Cloth, $35; paper, $19.95.