Alfred A. Knopf has fired a longtime editor who worked with such literary stars as Raymond Carver, Annie Dillard and Cormac McCarthy in what it called a breach of company policy.
On Friday, a spokesman for the New York-based publisher confirmed that the editor, Gary Fisketjon, had been suspended and then dismissed after an investigation, though he declined to specify details of the policy breach. Mr. Fisketjon’s firing was reported earlier by Publishers Lunch, a publishing industry website.
Mr. Fisketjon, an editor at large and vice president at Knopf, did not immediately respond to email and phone messages seeking comment.
In a career spanning around four decades, Mr. Fisketjon helped to shape contemporary American literature. Tobias Wolff, Patricia Highsmith, Donna Tartt, Haruki Murakami, Bret Easton Ellis, Richard Russo, Kent Haruf and Julian Barnes are among the authors whose work he discovered and elevated.
Mr. Fisketjon gravitated toward the literary world shortly after he graduated from Williams College in 1976. He enrolled in the Radcliffe Publishing Course at Harvard University and went on to work at Random House, Vintage, Atlantic Monthly Press and Knopf.
In 1984, he founded Vintage Contemporaries, the influential imprint that published younger fiction writers and others in trade paperback format instead of hardcover. His successes for that imprint included Jay McInerney’s “Bright Lights, Big City,” Mr. Carver’s “What We Talk About When We Talk About Love” and Richard Ford’s “The Sportswriter.” Mr. Fisketjon worked with Mr. Ford on the rest of the author’s books, up until 2008, when the author left Knopf and moved to Ecco, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers. Mr. Ford praised Mr. Fisketjon’s “truly profound editorial genius” when he presented him with the Maxwell E. Perkins award for editing in 2006.
In interviews over the years, Mr. Fisketjon sometimes played down the idea that he had a particularly sharp eye for groundbreaking writing.
“Editors who think they know what good fiction has to be are a real danger, since only writers can figure out and then execute that, and then only one at the time,” he said in a 2005 interview with the literary website Slushpile.