At Easter, thousands of people converted to Catholicism even as sex abuse allegations have rocked the church.
The Easter vigil service is when the church welcomes newcomers. There were thousands of people in the New York area going through the same rites of initiation as the group gathered that night in the Cathedral Basilica of the Sacred Heart in Newark.
The Archdiocese of Newark alone saw more than 1,000 people receiving the sacraments this Easter, roughly the same number of people as have been welcomed fully into the church each year over the past decade. The Diocese of Brooklyn, where just over 1,000 people received sacraments for the first time this Easter, also said its numbers were on par with prior years.
Her daughters had pushed her to be baptized, telling her, “You’re more Catholic than a lot of Catholics we see.” Yet when she casually inquired about the conversion process roughly a year ago, she did not expect that she would be standing at the front of St. Rose of Lima as this year's only catechumen, her daughters serving as her godmothers as she was baptized.
She figured it must be part of a plan.
He met with an imam. He met with a rabbi. He met with a priest.
The man, a 20-year-old college student in New Jersey, was raised by Pakistani-American parents who are Muslim. As a teenager, he abandoned his faith in God, becoming an atheist. He believed for a time that following the golden rule — treating others the way you want to be treated — was sufficient.
But his beliefs shifted. “You need some authority that is higher than a human,” he said.
In classes, he soaked in conversations exploring notions of heaven and hell, and what a Christian marriage looks like. “What does it really mean when two bodies become one when you make a covenant with your spouse?” he asked.
After months of preparation, he was ready.
Yet the situation with his family weighed on him. He was carefully planning how to tell them. He worried about upsetting his grandparents and fraying his bond to the rest of his family.
For months, the group had assembled for Monday night classes at St. Bridget of Sweden, a parish in Cheshire, Conn.
Some were there because they were marrying Catholics. Michelle Madeux had been married to a Catholic for years, and she was raising her children in the church.
Days before Easter, Ms. Madeux said she had gone through the process unsure if she would follow through and convert.
Christopher Jones, a 35-year-old grocery store clerk, had grown up in the church, but he had never finished the series of sacraments that young Catholics typically receive.
Mr. Jones said he was thrilled that much of his family was planning to come to see his full initiation into the church. He had an uncle flying in from out of state.
“I might cry when I see you,” Ms. Madeux told him.
In the end, she watched him from the pews. This was not her Easter for conversion.
So that those who inherit the earth know of a true creator of all things who gives us the privilege of spirituality and life, we praise him.
We praise him, the catechumens replied.
Among them was Elizabeth Velasquez. She knew well the turmoil that had shaken the church, drawing criticism and rattling some Catholics’ faith in the institution. She was not discouraged. The allegations were from long ago, she said, and the sins of others had little bearing on her faith.
What was important to her was sharing the same faith as her husband and children. Becoming Catholic, she said, would unify them. “I have my family together,” she said. Her son was preparing to receive his first holy communion just a few weeks after she took part in the sacrament.
Her parish, anchored in an old and enormous basilica in the Sunset Park neighborhood of Brooklyn, reflects the church’s evolution. The afternoon Mass in Spanish follows one celebrated in Chinese, and just before another in Vietnamese. And the Masses are often quite full.
Ms. Velasquez, who left Guatemala when she was 16, had been raised in an evangelical church, the kind that has surged in popularity in that country and elsewhere in Latin America.
Still, her family has embraced her conversion. “If you want to be Catholic, it’s O.K.,” her father told her. And her brother figured they worshiped the same God.
A bed of Easter lilies and carnations blanketed the marble in front of the altar at Sacred Heart Cathedral, and row after row of pews were full.
The night the catechumens had waited for had arrived. Yet they still had to wait some more, through readings in English and then readings in Spanish, and a litany of prayers.
Eventually, though, the cardinal ladled holy water onto their heads and anointed them with oil. Then, they received communion for the first time.
The first several rows of pews were packed with men and women draped in white robes. They were neocatechumens; they were initiated in the church earlier in their lives only to drift away. Some had detoured through addiction, infidelity and jobs that consumed their lives.
The vigil marked their return to the church, like prodigal children.
Patricia Cottman spent part of her childhood in the church, but her mother died when she was 10 and her father when she was 14. She was one of six children, and they all, for their own reasons, turned away from Catholicism.
Yet, she said, God had summoned her. She had spent years doing missionary work overseas, and now, she was ready to return to Catholicism.
She hurried over to the others near the altar for a picture with Cardinal Tobin. It was nearly midnight, and the cathedral was empty except for them. They cheered. They hugged. And together, they burst into song: He rose from the dead! Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Hallelujah! He rose from the dead!