YOUNGSTOWN, Ohio — In May 2016, David Betras, a Democratic Party leader in the heart of industrial northeast Ohio, sent a memo warning Hillary Clinton’s campaign that it was on the verge of losing Ohio, Pennsylvania and Michigan because she was not connecting with blue-collar voters. These states “should be easy wins for us,’’ he wrote.
He said he got no answer. As he sees it now, Democrats are still just as out of touch.
Mr. Betras, who recently stepped down as Democratic chairman of populous Mahoning County, said that while Democrats in Washington harp on President Trump’s unfitness for office, his taxes and possible impeachment, the president is solidifying blue-collar support through an aggressive trade war with China, even if his tariffs mean economic pain in the short term.
In the 10th year of a national recovery, which has brought record low unemployment and rising wages to many parts of the country, northeast Ohio is still among the walking wounded, the result of decades of deindustrialization driven by free trade deals. The loss of 1,600 jobs in March at a General Motors plant in nearby Lordstown, despite Mr. Trump’s visible efforts to save them, was the latest blow.
But even though stresses on families and communities are already acute, Mr. Trump appears to have lost little of his blue-collar support here.
It is a sign of how tight a bond he has with voters who were once staunch Democrats, in an allegiance as much cultural as economic. But it also undermines the argument of the Democrats’ leading 2020 candidate, Joseph R. Biden Jr., that he would be the best nominee to win back Midwest states because of his own appeal to working-class voters.
Democrats in Youngstown said that is exactly the wrong message.
The Biden campaign declined to respond. In New Hampshire last week, Mr. Biden said a better approach than Mr. Trump’s go-it-alone trade war, which he said hurts working people and farmers, was to enlist American allies in a joint effort.
Mr. Ryan, who is not well known beyond Ohio, criticized Mr. Trump for lacking a plan to rebuild American industry. But he agreed with the president that China is the No. 1 threat and that a new type of Cold War over trade may be looming.
Whatever benefits decades of globalization brought to some parts of the country, there was no effort to reinvest in regions like northeast Ohio, where steel mills once lined 22 miles of the Mahoning River, and which has bled tens of thousands of jobs.
“The communities were cut loose and ignored and then they voted for Trump because at least he’s punching somebody in the face, and no one else is,” Mr. Ryan said.
One of those voters is Darrell Franks, a retired tool and die maker, who was once a Democrat but now votes Republican.
Vienna — pronounced “vye-anna” locally — is in Trumbull County, 15 miles north of Youngstown.
Blue-collar voters who had not voted Republican for president since 1972 flipped Trumbull County for Mr. Trump by 30 percentage points in 2016.
The Brookings Institution reported this month that in counties that voted for Mr. Trump — mostly rural and exurban — new jobs have been added at a faster pace than in counties that voted for Mrs. Clinton, although Clinton counties represent the bulk of the United States economy.
The president’s re-election campaign is marshaling such economic news to solidify his base of white working-class voters. Democrats are on the defensive, parsing economic data to argue that many people have jobs, but some must juggle two to make ends meet.
While Democrats made gains in the midterm elections in many places around the country that Mr. Trump had carried, the Mahoning Valley was an exception.
The only two seats in the Ohio Statehouse that flipped from blue to red were in the region.
Senator Sherrod Brown of Ohio, a Democrat with working-class appeal, won re-election by a bigger margin than in his 2012 race, but his support slipped in Mahoning County and other counties on the Pennsylvania border.
About 40 percent of the union autoworkers at the General Motors plant in Lordstown, Ohio, voted for Mr. Trump, which was twice the support for Republican presidential candidates in the past, said Tim O’Hara, vice president of United Auto Workers Local 1112, which represents the factory.
Mr. O’Hara advised Democratic presidential candidates not to waste breath trying to win back union voters who supported Mr. Trump.
Stanley Greenberg, a Democratic pollster, said Democrats have not yet lost the economic argument, and in places like Macomb County, Mich., and western Wisconsin, white voters without a college degree swung back in 2018 — choosing Democrats after embracing Mr. Trump in 2016.
In a region like northeast Ohio, it is difficult to untangle the president’s appeal on economics from his tapping of resentment toward demographic and cultural change.
Even though the Mahoning Valley was settled by immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe drawn to the steel mills in the 1920s — there are a dozen Eastern Orthodox churches in Youngstown — a palpable hostility toward newer waves of immigrants is routine.
“There’s an underbelly of America that America doesn’t want to accept about itself, and he speaks to it,” he said.
But on immigration today, his customers tend to echo Mr. Trump’s depiction of an emergency on the Southwest border.
In a county that is 89 percent white and less than 2 percent Hispanic, they spoke of undocumented immigrants bankrupting Sun Belt hospitals, dragging down wages and burdening taxpayers.
Amy Giovannone, 51, an oil and gas consultant and an Army veteran, said Mr. Trump’s habitual false statements did not bother her (“all politicians are pathological liars”), and she rejected the idea that the president won because of demeaning insults he directed at Mexicans and Muslims.
“That is ridiculous to think he was voted in because he used that kind of language; I am the furthest person from prejudiced,” she said.
