The abortion-rights debate raises questions about women’s rights that remain unresolved 46 years after Roe v. Wade.
Mr. Edsall contributes a weekly column from Washington on politics, demographics and inequality.
Why is the debate so bitter, so emotional? Part of the answer is very simple: the two sides share almost no common premises and very little common language.
Those who oppose abortion usually begin by stipulating that since the embryo is an unborn child, abortion is morally equivalent to murder. But for those who accept abortion, this initial stipulation is exactly what is problematic; from their point of view, the embryo has the capacity to become a child but it is not a child yet, and therefore belongs to a very different moral category.
Over the years, the abortion debate has become a linchpin in the political battle between Democrats and Republicans, mobilizing Christian evangelicals on the right and supporters of the women’s movement on the left.
Why has the abortion issue had such staying power, compared, for example, with the steady liberalization of views on homosexuality and interracial marriage?
Part of the reason for this is that the abortion issue taps into competing, deep-rooted views on the role of men and women in society. The sexual revolution and the radical transformation of the work and personal lives of women after the introduction of the contraceptive pill in the early 1960s — and the guarantee of women’s reproductive rights by the Supreme Court decisions Griswold v. Connecticut in 1965 and Roe v. Wade in 1973 — brought these antithetical beliefs about abortion to the fore.
President Trump’s appointment of two conservative justices to the Supreme Court, Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh, opened the anti-abortion floodgates this year. Republican legislatures in eight states — Alabama, Mississippi, Missouri, Ohio, Georgia, Arkansas, Kentucky and Utah — have enacted stringent anti-abortion legislation, gambling that the five-member conservative bloc on the court will weaken or overturn Roe — or, if that strategy fails, that anti-abortion supporters will be galvanized for the 2020 election.
Over the 46 years since Roe was decided, the constituencies on both sides of this issue have changed radically, and the debate has become increasingly complex and increasingly politicized.
In the last decade, support for unrestricted abortion rights has grown from 21 percent to 29 percent, while the percentage backing a complete ban has fallen from 21 percent to 18 percent, according to Gallup.
Contemporary polling shows that there are a number of contradictions in the public view of abortion. In some respects, majority opinion is supportive of abortion rights, in others it is opposed.
For example, on the abortion rights side, last year Gallup found that a clear majority — 64-28 — opposed overturning Roe v Wade. By 60-34, the public believed abortion should be legal during the first three months of pregnancy.
In further support of abortion rights, overwhelming majorities in 2018 supported abortion during the first trimester if the mother’s life was endangered (83-15); when the pregnancy was the result of rape or incest (77-21); and by slightly smaller majorities when “the child would be born mentally disabled” (56-41) or “with a life-threatening illness” (67-31).
On the anti-abortion side, Gallup found that majorities opposed abortion in the second trimester (65-28) and by a larger margin in the third trimester (81-13). The public continued to support abortion in the third trimester when the life of the mother was in danger (72-22), but was much more lukewarm toward third-trimester abortions when the pregnancy resulted from incest or rape, supporting the procedure 52-42.
In addition, in 2018, the public opposed third-trimester abortions when the child would be born with a mental disability (61-35) and split (48-49) on third-trimester abortions if the child would be born with a life-threatening illness.
The states in the process of restricting abortion are either seeking to prohibit it after a set number of weeks, ranging from six to 20 depending on the state; or to prohibit abortion after a heartbeat can be detected (roughly six weeks); or, in the case of Alabama, to ban all abortions except those to save the life of the mother.
honor the rich and valuable contributions of full-time wives and mothers who through their service and self-sacrifice have strengthened their families, enriched our nation and pleased our God by honoring his purposes in their lives each day.
Leaders of the anti-abortion movement are explicit in placing blame on the sexual revolution for what they see as the larger corruption of the social order, the demand for women’s autonomy and for abortion.
The abortion license is inextricably bound up with the mores of the sexual revolution. Promotion of the pro-life cause also requires us to support and work with those who are seeking to re-establish the moral linkage between sexual expression and marriage, and between marriage and procreation. We believe that a renewal of American democracy as a virtuous society requires us to honor and promote an ethic of self-command and mutual responsibility, and to resist the siren song of the false ethic of unbridled self-expression.
From limiting birth control to banning comprehensive sex ed, U.S. religious fundamentalists are working hard to outlaw sex that falls outside their theology.
people who are in long-term committed relationships are threatened by extramarital relationships and they in fact want to impose this cost on others.
those who want to control their reproduction carefully while still having sex, who stand to benefit from the availability of abortion and related services. They want to avoid this cost; abortion restrictions make their lifestyle more difficult.
“morality” — judgments about which acts are wrong and which are not — is best understood strategically, a means by which one can try to prevent others from doing things that are (often in aggregate) bad for oneself.
Nature provides myriad examples of species where males attempt to control who females mate with and when. Among primates, male coercion of females has evolved many times and is expressed in many different ways.
some of these ancient impulses have become enshrined in patriarchal ideologies. This helps explain why the most extreme efforts to curtail female reproductive autonomy today are primarily funded by groups linked to Catholic, Orthodox Jewish, Islamic and other belief systems with deep patriarchal roots.
From Ancient Greece, Ching dynasty China, Victorian England to the American South, the trick has been to convince women that conforming to patriarchal ideals, being chaste, or modest, veiling one’s face, whatever, are in her interests in terms of her security, marriageability, and especially in the interest of her children, particularly sons. When the social status of their families and especially that of their offspring, depends on their “virtue,” women have an obvious stake in complying as well as in advertising their compliance. Supporting the “right” political candidates can be just one more way of doing that.
According to many of the scholars whose views I solicited, the sexual revolution and the simultaneous entry of women into the work force have prompted two conflicting reactions.
the people who are most likely to oppose abortion are those that 1) believe that abortion promotes promiscuity, and 2) pursue a more restrictive mating strategy. These results show that self-interest, when construed in evolutionary psychological terms, plays a powerful role in predicting people’s attitudes toward abortion.
laws that would seem to permit or endorse promiscuity are a fundamental threat. For example, one could invest decades of effort in reproducing within a committed family structure to have it undermined by a single promiscuous interloper: Men could be deceived into investing in another man’s offspring; women could be abandoned with multiple children and limited resources.
become less willing to commit to one woman to the degree that there exist women in the mating pool who are willing to engage in casual sex with them. So allowing women to have abortions may be viewed by women and men alike as tantamount to endorsing a promiscuous mating strategy.
Restricting abortion is an example of men’s restrictions on women’s reproductive capacity, which has taken many forms in various cultures and historical periods: chaperones, veils, wigs, burqas, niqabs, chadors, segregation by sex, confinement, foot-binding, genital mutilation, chastity belts, restrictions on birth control, double standards for adultery, violent sexual jealousy and laws and customs that make a woman the property of her husband.
a father who invests in his children will have more successful children, which favors any genes that tilt a man toward investing in his children. But of course that only works if they are his children. Evolutionarily speaking, cuckoldry is the worst thing that can happen to a man, because his investment would be wasted in protecting another man’s genes.
seek to control the sexuality, and more generally, the reproductive capacity, of their wives and girlfriends (and for that matter their unmarried daughters, preserving their value in the arranged marriage market). Contraception and abortion, even though they are modern inventions, may press these emotional buttons.
the actual thoughts and emotions running through people’s brains are not about babies, cuckoldry, genes, investment or any of the concepts that enter into the ultimate, long-term, evolutionary explanation of people’s motives.
The men who are pressing to make abortion illegal, some of whom would ban contraception as well, are not only, as Pinker says, unaware of the evolutionary forces motivating them, they appear to be in many respects ignorant of the havoc they would create if they are successful in their efforts.
In a sign of the hypocrisy that surrounds this issue, this would be an inconvenience to many Southern Baptist preachers and church volunteers, 380 of whom have been “accused of sexual abuse and misconduct over the past 20 years,” according to investigations by The Houston Chronicle and The San Antonio Express-News.
the dramatic decline in the expected cost of premarital sex, due to technological improvement in contraceptives and their increased availability.
relates the erosion of the custom of shotgun marriage to the legalization of abortion and the increased availability of contraception to unmarried women in the United States. The decline in shotgun marriage accounts for a significant fraction of the increase in out-of-wedlock first births.
an America that is open, hospitable and caring, a community of civic friendship in which neighbors reach out to assist neighbors in distress.
A problem with conservative thinking on this issue is that once the sexual and women’s rights revolutions were unleashed, there was no way women (or men, for that matter) were going to peacefully relinquish the sexual and other freedoms they had gained.
Abortion and contraception also perform a crucial safety-net function, preventing the “rocket-like” increase in sexual activity from producing even more unwanted children. If the social conservative agenda were to win out, the most likely outcome would be a surge in unwanted children — along with the costs those children bear — according to David A. Grimes, a former chief of the abortion surveillance branch at the Centers for Disease Control. The Turnaway Study at the University of California, San Francisco, confirms the likelihood of this outcome: The numbers of hard-pressed single mothers would grow, and there would be a revival of the illegal abortion industry.
 What they would achieve instead is a world where these revolutions continued to dominate, but without the tools to limit the costs in unwed motherhood, absent fathers and the spread of female poverty.
This is hardly an America that is open, hospitable and caring.
