Our public lands have a diversity problem. But grassroot initiatives and outdoor-gear companies hope to change that.
Jenny Bruso is a 37-year-old, plus-size, queer hiker living in Portland, Ore.
She went on her first hike seven years ago after a person she was dating asked her to join. On the 5.8 mile loop trail she felt self-conscious, walking slowly and sweating because she wasn’t used to working out.
Ms. Bruso became obsessed with hiking. But the more she hiked, the more she saw that the people on the trails did not resemble her. In 2016, she created an Instagram account, Unlikely Hikers, posting photographs of African-American, gay, transgender and disabled hikers. Within a year she had 8,000 followers and now she has more than 59,000. She also began to organize group hikes several times a month.
Ms. Bruso is one of many hikers turning to social media to try to make the outdoors more welcoming and diverse. While Ms. Bruso targets all minorities, other hikers and outdoors groups try to inspire people from specific nationalities, identities or with physical challenges. Many organize real-life events to push their members outside. Outdoor-equipment companies including REI and Merrell are helping to fund or promote these new groups and leaders.
Our public lands have a diversity problem. A report released in 2017 by the National Park Service showed that 78 percent of visitors were white. African-Americans, by contrast, represented 7 percent of visitors. In the same year, the Outdoor Industry Foundation found that while 34 percent of African-Americans participated in outdoor activities, among white people the percentage is 51 percent.
“Come 2040, our country will have more people of color than white people,” said Ambreen Tariq, 36, who runs the Instagram account and website, Brown People Camping.
In August 2016 Ms. Tariq, a Muslim who works in a policy and communications role for the federal government, went on a camping trip in Shenandoah National Park in Virginia’s Blue Ridge Mountains.
She immediately started Brown People Camping to show Muslims hiking, climbing and camping. She also works with hiking experts to arrange group outings.
Are efforts like these working? There are other positive signs besides the attention on Instagram. A recent study by Kampgrounds of America reported that of the 1.4 million households that camped for the first time in 2018, 51 percent of them are from non-white groups. And last year, an Outdoor Industry Association report concluded that outdoor participation among Hispanics has increased by an average 1.0 percent over the past five years and among Asians by 0.9 percent over the same time period.
Her group hikes are as inclusive as possible. If someone needs to take a break, everybody takes a break. The slowest hiker sets the pace. She gets weekly requests from Instagram followers to organize hikes in their cities, and some have started informally organizing their own.
Disabled Hikers was founded last year by Syren Nagakyrie, a 37-year-old disabled freelance writer and consultant based in Forks, Wash. She was tired of spending hours scouring guidebooks and online resources to find accessible trails. Now on her website, disabledhikers.com, she publishes trail reports and writes guide trails. She recently explored Olympic National Park in Port Angeles, Wash., to find trails sturdy enough for a wheelchair. She too also leads group hikes.
Large corporations are trying to bolster these grassroots initiatives.
Ms. Bruso’s Instgram account became so influential that REI recruited her as a brand ambassador. She speaks at company events and shares positive brand messages to her audience, while the outdoor-gear company helps sponsor her events and posts her work to their social-media followers.
REI works with groups like Outdoor Afro, Brown Girls Climb and Latino Outdoors that organize climbing expeditions and activities for people of color. Pattie Gonia, a drag queen, is another brand ambassador, as is Mikah Meyer, an openly gay man who in April became the first person to visit in one continuous journey all 419 national parks in the United States. It took him 3 years.
An influential way Ms. Bruso has advocated for women like her is to help convince REI to expand its plus-size clothing offerings. Last year she attended and spoke at trunk shows on the company’s behalf to get feedback from hikers about what they needed and wanted.
“Sixty-five percent of women in the United States are over the size of 16, and the industry doesn’t design for them,” Ms. Swapp said.
Reading about group hikes online led Bisa Myles, 45, to Tanzania and up Mount Kilimanjaro in March.
Even though the plus-size, African-American woman loved the outdoors, she had never hiked before; none of her friends were ever interested. She signed up for the group climb — named the Curvy Kili Crew — after seeing a post from another plus-size woman about her hike up Kilimanjaro.
Ms. Myles described the hike as “challenging, tiring, beautiful and the most rewarding thing I’ve ever done.
She now leads hikes herself several times a year.