LONDON — Google’s decision to cut off support to Huawei, the Chinese telecommunications giant blacklisted by the Trump administration, is rippling across the globe as companies suspend ties to the handset maker.
In Britain, where Huawei is one of the most popular cellphone brands, two of the country’s biggest mobile networks, EE and Vodafone, announced that they would stop offering Huawei phones to 5G customers as a result of Google’s decision.
The issue of support for the Android system meant that EE did not have the “surety of service” it needed to offer the long-term contracts under which it sold 5G handsets, Marc Allera, EE’s chief executive, said on Wednesday.
“We’re working with Huawei and Google to make sure we can carry out the right level of testing and quality assurance so our customers have a great experience with any smartphones range in the future,” EE said in an emailed statement.
The company had planned to allow customers to preorder the Huawei phone this summer to run on the 5G network starting in July.
Huawei responded to actions by EE and Vodafone by saying: “We value our close relationships with our partners, but recognize the pressure some of them are under, as a result of politically motivated decisions.
In Japan, KDDI and Softbank’s low-cost carrier Yahoo Mobile announced that they would delay their plans to introduce the budget version of Huawei’s P30 line of phones, originally slated to go on sale in Japan at the end of May.
A third company, NTT DoCoMo, said it was suspending preorders of a different version of the phone, the P30 Pro.
The decisions by the British networks indicate that Huawei could feel the effects of the battle with the United States in the region that brings it the most revenue outside China. Just over half of Huawei’s revenue comes from China, while 28.4 percent comes from Europe, the Middle East and Africa.
Huawei is a small player in Japan, which is dominated by Apple’s iPhone and Japanese manufacturers like Sony and Sharp. Counterpoint, an analysis firm, said one Huawei model, the P20 Lite, held a 4 percent market share as of the end of last year.