The evolution of Elizabeth Gilbert.
It is a story line that has long been dear to Ms. Gilbert, an avatar of among other things female pleasure, since the success of her 2006 blockbuster memoir, “Eat Pray Love,” and the wan movie adaptation, starring Julia Roberts, that followed it in 2010.
Recounting her adventures in Italy, India and Bali, the book turned Ms. Gilbert, a well-regarded magazine writer and author who had made her bones as one of the boys, sometimes literally (she once spent a week living as a man for GQ, sporting a tiny goatee and packing a condom filled with birdseed), into a goddess of chick lit: a self-help guru anointed by Oprah and TED. The movie made her a wealthy woman.
It was the sort of success that can hobble a literary reputation. “Wickedly well-written,” James Gorman of The New York Times decreed in his review of “The Last American Man,” Ms. Gilbert’s 2002 biography of a charismatic buckskin-wearing, woods-dwelling utopian named Eustace Conway, one of her many chronicles of ur-maleness, and a finalist for the National Book Award.
But for years after “Eat Pray Love” was published, critics gnashed their teeth over her privilege and silky prose, and questioned the depths of her suffering and the extent of her faith, all the while calculating the exact value of her very good fortune. She faced this with typical moxie and humor.
On a recent bright morning, Ms. Gilbert strode into D’Amico Coffee on Court Street in Brooklyn, open since 1948, like a regular, greeting the proprietor, Joan D’Amico, whose shock of purple hair matched her purple tunic, like an old friend.
She had chosen to meet here, instead of the apartment near Gramercy Park where she has lived for the last few years. In her new novel, her ninth book and fourth work of fiction, this part of Carroll Gardens is where one of her characters grew up, and she had spent a day or two in the coffee shop taking notes when she was researching the book, hence the warmth of Ms. D’Amico’s welcome.
Ms. Gilbert’s Facebook account, which has more than 1.6 million followers, is billboard, bulletin board and chat room for the author and her audience, whom she addresses as “dear ones” and responds to with diligence. These are relationships she takes seriously, she said.
In 2016, when Ms. Gilbert and her second husband, José Nunes (the Brazilian importer known as Felipe in “Eat Pray Love”), separated, she reported their split on Facebook. When her best friend, Rayya Elias, a Syrian-American former punk rocker, former heroin addict, filmmaker and indie hairstylist, learned she had late-stage pancreatic and liver cancer, Ms. Gilbert delivered the news on Facebook, too, along with a declaration that her love for her old friend had blossomed into a romance.
After Ms. Elias died, on Jan. 4, 2018, Ms. Gilbert’s readers mourned with her, following the announcement of her death on Instagram (746,000 followers) and Twitter (243,000 followers). And when Ms. Gilbert fell in love again, with an English photographer named Simon MacArthur, an old friend of Ms. Elias’s, she again announced this on social media.
Like many of her posts, it was covered as news by People, Oprah and “Today,” among other old-fashioned media outlets.
Vivian Morris, the central character of “City of Girls,” is a 19-year-old Vassar dropout and sensualist who is sent by her disapproving parents to live with her Aunt Peg in Manhattan. Peg, who has a weakness for the bottle and for her estranged husband, a playboy actor and playwright, runs a down-on-its-luck theater that doubles as a boardinghouse for showgirls and others involved in its productions, all of which is overseen by a stern British aide-de-camp named Olive who turns out to be more than just Peg’s secretary.
A storied British actress named Edna Parker Watson and her doltish husband flee London when the Blitz destroys their house. They, too, are taken in by Peg, and the fulcrum of the book is the musical that’s created as a vehicle for Edna, which ends up saving the playhouse from financial ruin, though Vivian transgresses in a spectacular fashion.
The protagonist’s sex scenes are pretty good too, from the afternoon of Vivian’s deflowering, a hilarious scheduled encounter with a middle-age married veterinarian, to a lusty first-crush affair with the play’s leading man. Sex is mostly sport to Vivian, who pursues it cheerfully through late middle age, while staying resolutely single.
“She was using drugs by the time she was 12, slipping out of the house to go see Led Zeppelin when was 13 and cutting punks’ hair with hedge clippers,” Ms. Gilbert said. “She was traumatized and caused trauma. She gave as good as she got. She ended up being a speedball junkie on the Lower East Side, she was at Rikers, at Bellevue, in God knows how many rehabs.
It was a stark contrast to Ms. Gilbert’s upbringing on a Christmas tree farm in Litchfield, Conn., where she and her older sister, Catherine Gilbert Murdock, a young adult book author, were required from childhood to pitch in.
The family grew their own food, raised bees, chickens and goats, and heated their falling down house with a wood stove. The Gilbert girls’ chores were numerous, and grew with each year. They stacked wood, milked goats, fertilized the trees. Birthdays came with not just a gift, but a new responsibility.
Ms. Gilbert and Ms. Elias collided in Ms. Elias’s post-addict days, when she was cutting hair out of her apartment on Avenue C. “I was her client, then her friend and then her patron,” Ms. Gilbert said.
Ms. Elias was also an author, of “Harley Loco: A Memoir of Hard Living, Hair, and Post-Punk, From the Middle East to the Lower East Side” (2014). She wrote it in a church in Alexandria Township, N.J., that Ms. Gilbert bought with her movie money and has long lent to friends who needed a place to work. In 2007, Ms. Gilbert and Mr. Nunes had settled in nearby Frenchtown, selling Indonesian Buddhas and other treasures out of an old warehouse there, a business they shut down in 2015.
They had 18 months together, mostly in an East Village rental. Palliative morphine was particularly challenging for a former drug addict.
Reviewing “The Signature of All Things,” Ms. Gilbert’s 2013 novel about the devices and desires of a female botanist in the 19th century, Barbara Kingsolver wrote that “the narrative stretches but the center holds,” which is a pretty good description of Ms. Gilbert’s life to date.
The author’s multiple coups de foudre may be as noteworthy as her written output. So too her energy for the most glancing relationships, like those with the thousands of readers who have waited hours for her to sign a book when she is on tour.
Emboldened by her own conversational, confessional style, they have brought her their heartaches — their divorces and depressions and love affairs gone awry — and she has listened, comfortingly, to every one.
But she still shows up for speaking gigs, giving her all — karaoke, dancing! — to interlocutors like Rob Bell, the author, spiritual teacher and former megachurch pastor. They met in 2014, on “Oprah’s Life You Want Weekend,” a two-day self-help extravaganza and arena tour led by Ms. Winfrey.
The epigraph of “Eat Pray Love” is “Tell the truth, tell the truth, tell the truth!” — an exhortation to Ms. Gilbert delivered by Sheryl Louise Moller, an actress and old friend, when Ms. Gilbert, pre-“Eat,” had embarked on the affair that would end her first marriage.
At 13 years and counting, how tiresome is it for Ms. Gilbert to keep answering questions about “Eat Pray Love”?
