The Caribbean nation of St. Lucia quarantined a cruise ship on the island for several days after identifying a confirmed case of measles on board, a health official said.
Passengers and crew members aboard the large ship were not permitted to leave, Dr. Merlene Fredericks-James, the nation’s chief medical officer, said on Tuesday. The ship remained moored at St. Lucia until around midnight Thursday, when it departed to the west of the island.
The highly infectious disease, which can be mostly prevented by a common vaccination, is in the midst of its largest outbreak in a quarter-century in the United States, with more than 700 cases reported.
“Because of the risk of potential infection, not just from the confirmed measles case but from other persons who may be on the boat at the time, we thought it prudent to make a decision not to allow anyone to disembark,” she said in a statement.
The ship’s doctor requested and received 100 doses of the measles vaccine from the St. Lucia Department of Health and Wellness, the department said in a statement on Thursday. It said all crew members and passengers were stable.
Dr. Fredericks-James did not name the ship. But Victor Theodore, a St. Lucia Coast Guard sergeant, told NBC News that it was identified as Freewinds, which is reportedly owned and operated by the Church of Scientology. A ship by the same name was moored in St. Lucia on Thursday morning, according to online records.
The church describes the 440-foot ship online as “a religious retreat ministering the most advanced level of spiritual counseling” that can carry several hundred passengers. The Church of Scientology did not respond to requests for comment on Thursday.
Mapping where every case has been reported.
Records show that the ship moored in St. Lucia changed its name to Freewinds from Boheme in 1986. The Freewinds took its maiden voyage as a Scientology retreat in 1988, according to the church.
Despite the church’s outspoken opposition to psychiatry and psychiatric drugs, Scientologists use prescription drugs and are treated by medical doctors, according to the church’s website.
But the church has not expressed a specific position on vaccinations. In a statement to The Hollywood Reporter in 2016, the church said it “takes no position one way or the other on this issue,” despite several high-profile celebrities in the church speaking out against vaccines.
Scientology advertises the Freewinds, which is based in Curaçao, off the coast of Venezuela, as “the pinnacle of a deeply spiritual journey.” It is used to carry out “humanitarian missions” across the world, the church said.
In 2011, an Australian woman said she was held against her will on the ship for years, which the church denied.
