Mr. Greene is a writer.
In August our son, Harrison, will celebrate his third birthday. He is our second child, but we have never parented a 3-year-old before.
As parents, my wife and I are beginners again. Four years ago, a brick fell from an eighth-story windowsill on the Upper West Side and hit our daughter, Greta, in the head, killing her. She was 2.
Before Harrison turned 2, we had a reference point for his every move — when they each first walked, when they spoke their first words, when they started throwing tantrums. We compared their sleep, their behavior on the playground. Neither was physically adventurous; both started walking around 13 months, with the same floppy-limbed uncertainty. Both of them had a habit of swatting nervously at other children who got too close. We delighted in the ways they were similar to and different from each other.
And then Harrison turned 2 years and 18 days old, and we entered uncharted territory.
It is a bittersweet thing, watching Harrison learn to make connections Greta did not. Every week now, he reaches new milestones. He has curly hair and full lips and a stare that goes dark when he is hurt. He is highly attuned to the feelings of others — “That guy looks sad,” he informed me once in a Fairway, well within earshot of said grim-faced stranger. He laughs easily, grins wider and cries louder than any other child in the neighborhood.
Watching him grow, I am occasionally reminded of how little we will ever know about Greta. Harrison’s personality is a public fact, but Greta’s own little tendencies remain only in her parents’ memories. Once, she was a person, imposing her will on the world. Now she is our lonely, private fact.
Many of my superstitions surrounding Greta's accident have died down. I no longer cross the street to avoid passing under construction sites with Harrison. And when Harrison first smacked his face on the jungle gym, filling his mouth with blood, I remained calm — when my son reached for me, screaming, he saw no fear in his father's eyes.
I don’t celebrate these small triumphs so much as note them with a kind of grim satisfaction before sprinting to keep Harrison from toppling face-first over his Big Wheel. Parenthood is a merciless second-by-second referendum on the person you’ve already become, and one of its biggest gifts to me has been its relentless grounding in the present. The essential truth of parenting is that there is no time for you: You are now a busy stagehand for someone else’s play.
In some fundamental way, I've never been happier. My son is full of precise observations now. He will point to a flower and mention that it is just like the one in his book. Recently he pointed to a picture of Greta on the refrigerator. “That’s Harrison!” he said. I corrected him gently. “That’s Greta, buddy,” I said. He repeated her name in his little voice, which is still losing its toddler static.
The moment reminded me, again, of a truth I am resisting. Some day — I don’t know when, only that it is drawing sooner — I will have to sit down and explain to him that he has a sister and why she is not here.
When he was a baby, we would tell him about Greta, lightly and casually: Your sister loved bananas too. Your sister was a real pain about sleep. But he is older now, and I feel his keen, parsing intelligence observing my every word. I have learned something from my growing reticence to say her name: I am keeping her from him.
It is not her life I want to keep secret, but the circumstances of her death. We wish to protect our children. I was unable to protect Greta. Now, having seen the brick destroy my first child, I must deliver the knowledge of the brick to my second. We will have to choose the moment in Harrison's life to introduce this crack into his foundation, and I will have no way of controlling where it goes inside him afterward.
The accident will teach Harrison lessons I never want him to learn. It represents everything that is meaningless, malevolent and terrifying about the universe.
I do not know how to tell him any of this, and so I stall for time, bargaining: Not yet. I watch Harrison run on the playground, chasing his two best friends up a slide and flopping down on his belly, laughing with his whole body. His hands are filthy and he runs over to me, demanding that I wipe them clean before running away again. Not yet.
I waited a moment to measure the impact of these words. “Yeah,” he said, his voice thoughtful. He asked me, moments later, a question about Lightning McQueen.
I don’t know how to do this — how to cultivate Harrison’s relationship to an absence, how to parent him next to someone invisible to him. I wait for signs from Greta. In moments of serenity I put myself back in the big open field in New Mexico where my wife and I retreated to prepare for Harrison's birth. There, the stars stretch endlessly, looming above like prehistoric creatures. The longer I stare at them, the more I hear the voices of both of my children. Harrison at my left, Greta at my right. In this place, I can say to them what needs saying.
But I don’t live in that field; I live here. And here, Harrison is tugging at me, hard. He wants to play with dinosaurs; he badly needs me to sit right here — no, over here. It is important that I hold this dinosaur. I get down on my hands and knees and together we make dinosaurs roam the earth.
Above our heads, on the wall, there is a painted portrait of our daughter, done by a friend. Harrison knows that this painting is called “Greta” and can point to it and say her name joyfully. He doesn’t know what it means yet, but then again, neither do I.
