All of the weddings right here on one handy page for you.
A little bit of cabin fever led both Ashley Chioma Emerole and Madison Ray Head to leave their apartments to meet up with friends in Manhattan after a big snowstorm in January 2016. Both were heading home around the same time from the Upper East Side. Both ordered an online ride share.
Ms. Emerole was the first one in the car, and was on her cellphone chatting when the vehicle made an unanticipated stop and Ms. Head got into the car.
Ms. Emerole hung up on her call and the two immediately started chatting about architecture, Indiana (Ms. Head’s home state) and New York (where Ms. Emerole grew up).
“We had the best 19-minute conversation I’d ever had,” Ms. Emerole said.
When the vehicle arrived at Ms. Emerole’s stop, she asked Ms. Head for her number. Over the course of the next couple of months, the two went out several times and found much to admire about each other.
Ms. Emerole said that she admired how close Ms. Head was with her family, and also her willingness to throw herself into a challenge, such as the New York City Marathon.
Ms. Salz had a good feeling about him. She even told her paternal grandmother about the upcoming date just before going out on the Friday of Labor Day weekend. They met at the Manhattan Cricket Club, a cocktail lounge on the Upper West Side.
“You get a range of different reactions,” said Mr. Rosenhand, regarding his medical marijuana business.
“This is never going to work,’’ Ms. Salz recalled thinking.
Although she made up her mind to let their friend know just that, she kept her poker face the entire evening.
“She’s a very cool customer,’’ said Mr. Rosenhand, who had no clue, and was taken with her.
He enthusiastically texted her the next evening about a second date, before she got in touch with their friend, who was traveling. She decided to give him a second chance, focusing on what they had in common.
Two days later they went to a restaurant in Manhattan’s Union Square area, and then played a few games of pool at Amsterdam Billiards nearby. He gave her a quick kiss good night, and a few days later they played basketball and went rock climbing in his building’s gym. A few weeks later he took her sailing.
Erin Nicole Chapman and Kathryn Campos met in 2016, after months of effort by Ms. Campos’s neighbors, who were friends of Dr. Chapman, to set them up. Dr. Chapman said that she was one of the only single friends in their group, and so the mutual friends were eager to see her find a match.
The two women finally were introduced at a holiday party, though Dr. Chapman said she remembers talking only briefly to Ms. Campos. Ms. Campos recalls that Dr. Chapman didn’t speak to her at all.
Ultimately, she sent Ms. Campos a Facebook message. “At our age, it was like passing her a note,” she said.
In early December, the two met at a bar in downtown Buffalo, argued over matters serious and absurd, and both agree that they immediately hit it off. “Erin is fiercely intelligent and with really strongly opinions, but is also an anthropologist with an engaging personality. She’s silly and funny, but also open and curious, and has strong convictions,” Ms. Campos said.
The couple met in 2015 at a bar in New York, where Mr. Harman was living.
“I walked in looking for a 5-foot-10-inch Australian girl and there she was,” Mr. Harman said jokingly.
Ms. Evans, who was born and raised in Australia, had lived in England and was now in Hoboken, N.J., immediately fell for Mr. Harman’s sense of humor, though she was saddened to learn that he was seeking a second kidney donor at that time.
“Trust me, I didn’t open with that,” Mr. Harman said.
Within a few weeks they were dating, and enjoying “a shared love of animals, dirty jokes, classic rock and anything wrapped in bacon,” as Mr. Harman put it.
They were living together in June 2017, when a five-alarm fire tore through their co-op building in Greenwich Village, forcing them to move elsewhere for six months along with three pets: their dog, Dexter (who has since died); and two cats, Smokey and Bandit.
At the same time, Mr. Harman was on a desperate search to find a willing kidney donor. He had received his first kidney transplant in 1993, made possible by his father, who was the donor.
Dr. Manisha Bahl and Ashish Indrachand Sahu are to be married May 26 at the Palms, an events space in Chico, Calif. Pandit Ramgopal Sharma, a Hindu priest, is to officiate.
The bride, 35, is an assistant professor of radiology at Harvard Medical School and a radiologist at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, where she specializes in breast imaging. She graduated from Stanford and received a master’s degree in public health from Harvard. She received a medical degree from the University of California, San Francisco.
She is the daughter of Neelam Bahl and Harish C. Bahl of Chico. Her father is a professor of business at California State University, Chico, where her mother works as an information technology consultant.
The groom, 36, is a senior product manager at Cisco Systems, a company that offers information technology, networking and security solutions based in San Jose, Calif. He graduated from the University of Pune, which is now called Savitribai Phule Pune University in Pune, India, and received an M.B.A. from Northwestern.
He is the son of Uma I. Sahu and Indrachand N. Sahu of Pune. The groom’s mother is a former partner in ChemoSys, which provided maintenance services for biopharmaceutical firms in Pune. His father is the founder and executive director of Biosol, a consulting and engineering services firm providing solutions in the field of biopharmaceuticals in Pune.
The couple met in 2018 through a dating site.
Sarah Marie Cline and Timothy Beaumont Parker are to be married May 26 in the events space at Kitchen Chicago, a shared-use kitchen in Chicago. Harry T. R. Parker, the groom’s brother, is to officiate, having become a Universal Life minister for the occasion.
The bride and groom met at the University of Mississippi, from which each graduated.
The bride, 24, is the operations director at Big Shoulders Coffee, a roaster that also operates six coffee shops in Chicago.
She is the daughter of Deborah M. Cline of Newhall, Calif., and Wade J. Cline of Reno, Nev. The bride’s father, a mechanical engineer, is an instructor in the physics department at the University of Nevada, Reno. Her mother is a clinical nurse specialist at Valley Presbyterian Hospital in Los Angeles.
The groom, also 24, is known as Beau. He is an analyst for special projects at the CME Group, a derivatives exchange in Chicago. He is also a founder of Next Chapter Campaigns, a political campaign consultancy in Jackson, Miss.
He is a son of Eileen M. Parker and Perry E. Parker of Seminary, Miss. His parents both retired from One River Asset Management in Greenwich, Conn., his mother as the chief compliance officer and his father as the head of market risk. In 2018, his father was a Republican candidate for the congressional seat representing Jackson, Miss., and the surrounding area.
Dr. Virginia Katherine Workman and Dr. Shobhit Singla are to be married May 26. The Rev. Lynne T. Clements, a Presbyterian minister, is to officiate at Mount Ida Farm and Vineyard in Scottsville, Va. On May 25, Pandit Maha Visnu, a Hindu priest and Vaisnava scholar, led the couple in a ceremony at the University of Virginia’s Alumni Hall.
The couple met while at Columbia, from which each received a medical degree and from which Dr. Singla also received a doctoral degree in neuroscience. Both are now in medical training at Yale-New Haven Hospital in New Haven, Dr. Workman as a fellow in cardiovascular medicine and Dr. Singla as an intern. In July, she is to to begin a fellowship in cardiac electrophysiology and he will begin a neurology residency, also at Yale-New Haven.
The bride, 31, graduated from Duke.
She is the daughter of Martha A. Greene-Workman and Marcus O. Workman of Poquoson, Va. The bride’s father retired as a chemistry professor at Thomas Nelson Community College in Newport News, Va. Her mother is a clinical psychologist at the Riverside Behavioral Center in Hampton, Va.
The groom, also 31, graduated with distinction from Cornell.
He is a son of Vidushi Singla and Dr. Sudershan Singla of Southborough, Mass. The groom’s mother is the site administrator for the Milford, Mass., clinic of the Reliant Medical Group. His father is an associate professor of anesthesiology at the University of Massachusetts Medical School in Worcester, Mass.
The couple met not in a classroom, but rather during a medical-school production of the Sondheim musical “Into the Woods,” for which Dr. Workman played the role of Cinderella, while Dr. Singla was a gnome.
Dr. Jessica Sargent Kempner and Peter Harris Ginsberg are to married May 26 at the home of the groom’s parents in Stowe, Vt. Joel A. Pinsky, a grandfather of the groom who received permission from Vermont to solemnize the marriage, is to officiate.
The couple met at Yale, from which they graduated.
In July, the bride, 26, is to begin her residency in obstetrics and gynecology at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan. She recently received a medical degree from the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. She serves on the board of Edible Schoolyard NYC, a nonprofit organization based in Brooklyn.
She is the daughter of Katheryn C. Patterson and Thomas L. Kempner Jr. of Manhattan. The bride’s father is a founder of and a managing partner in Davidson Kempner Capital Management, an investment firm in Manhattan. He is chairman of the Central Park Conservancy, and a board member of the Harvard Management Company and the Harlem Village Academies. Her mother, who is retired, was a partner in the Manhattan law firm Coudert Brothers. She is a vice chair of the boards of the Juilliard School and Roundabout Theater, and a trustee of the American Museum of Natural History.
The bride is a granddaughter of the late Nan Kempner, the New York socialite.
Until 2018, the groom, 27, worked in both the Seattle and New York offices of Starbucks as a project manager, where he helped create the Siren Ideas innovation arm, an initiative that brought new partnerships into the company. He is currently working on a start-up that aims to motivate and retain employees in the retail industry.
He is a son of Janet R. Ginsberg and Alan J. Ginsberg of Manhattan. The groom’s mother is a trustee of the Jewish Board of Family and Children’s Services and an advisory board member of the Yale Sustainable Food Program. The groom’s father is a managing director and co-head of the banks and specialty finance group at Barclays. He is also an independent director of the StoneCastle Financial Corporation in Manhattan and an advisory board member of the Yale Peabody Museum.
Claire Marie Blaustein and Roberto Seamus Peña were married May 25 at St. Aloysius Church at Gonzaga College High School in Washington. The Rev. Gasper LoBiondo, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.
Ms. Blaustein, 36, works in Arlington, Va., as a senior experience designer at Publicis Sapient, a digital transformation company based in Boston, where she works on the cancer.gov team at the National Cancer Institute in Rockville, Md. She graduated from Indiana University Bloomington, and received a master’s degree in music criticism from McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario. She plays the fiddle with the Bluegrass band By & By. She also serves as the communications director for the board of the Washington chapter of American Institute of Graphic Arts.
She is the daughter of Joan S. Blaustein and Mark A. Blaustein of Philadelphia. The bride’s father is a woodworker and furniture designer in Philadelphia. Her mother, who is retired, was the director of urban forestry and ecosystem management for Philadelphia Parks and Recreation.
Mr. Peña, 37, who is known as Tito, is the coffee director for the Wydown, a coffee bar in Washington, where he selects coffee from different roasters and trains the staff. He graduated from Tufts and completed professional chef training at L’Academie de Cuisine in Gaithersburg, Md.
He is the son of Lynn S. Moran of Bristol, R.I., and Roberto J. Peña of Arlington. The groom’s mother works in Bristol as a consultant and executive recruiter at Association Strategies, an employment agency in Alexandria, Va. His father works in Arlington as the owner of Home Building Concepts, a residential design and construction company in Falls Church, Va. He is the stepson of Thomas Moran.
They couple met in 2011 through OkCupid.
Dr. Grace Yun Choe and Dr. Stephen William Yu were married May 25 at the Hyatt Lodge at McDonald Campus, a hotel in Oak Brook, Ill. The Rev. Rich Rubietta, a United Methodist minister, officiated.
The couple met in 2010 in Detroit at Wayne State University, from which each received a medical degree.
The bride, 31, is an internal medicine physician at NYU Langone Hospital in New York. She graduated from the University of Illinois.
She is a daughter of Wonha Choe and Jaeyun Choe of Algonquin, Ill.
The groom, 33, is an orthopedic surgery resident physician at NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital in New York. He graduated from the University of Michigan.
He is a son of Ellen G. Yu and B. Yu of Garden City, Mich.
Anne Franklin Wenk and Jackson Freeman Cashion were married May 25 at Liberty Warehouse in Brooklyn. The Rev. Gregory Bruce Johnston, an Episcopal minister and friend of the couple, officiated.
The couple met at Harvard, from which both graduated, the bride magna cum laude.
The bride, 26, works in Manhattan as a management consultant for Bain & Company, the global consulting firm.
She is the daughter of Franklin H. Stone and David H. Wenk of Brooklyn. The bride’s father is the president and chief executive of Cushman & Wakefield Securities in Manhattan. Her mother, who currently serves as chairwoman of the New York State Committee on Open Government, retired as a partner in the New York office of Hunton & Williams, a law firm based in Richmond, Va. The bride’s mother was also an assistant United States attorney for the Southern District of New York.
The groom, 28, is partnerships lead at the FreeWill Company an estate planning start-up company in New York.
He is a son of Carol Jackson Cashion and Robert B. Cashion of Brooklyn. The groom’s father is the senior vice president for university development and alumni relations at N.Y.U. His mother is a Brooklyn-based educational program consultant specializing in South African educational affairs.
Julia Lee Cardwell Duncan and John Joseph McDonough are to be married May 26 in Portola Valley, Calif. The Rev. Jennifer L. Warner is to perform the ceremony at Valley Presbyterian Church, where she is the pastor, with the Rev. Martin J. Mager, a Roman Catholic priest, taking part.
Ms. Duncan, 31, is a change-management consultant in Washington in the federal services unit of Accenture, the management consultancy. She is also the chief of operations for One Journey Festival, an organization in Washington that helps refugees and works to connect them with the communities in which they live. She graduated from the University of Virginia and received a master’s degree in public management from Johns Hopkins University.
She is a daughter of Carol Cardwell Duncan and Andrew T. Duncan of Menlo Park, Calif. The bride’s father is the president and chief executive of the Boardwalktech Software Corporation, a digital ledger platform and enterprise software solutions company in Cupertino, Calif. Her mother retired from Duncan Insurance in Palo Alto, Calif., where she was an owner and the vice president.
Mr. McDonough, 35, is a political officer in Washington at the State Department’s East Asian and Pacific affairs bureau. He graduated from Villanova and received a law degree from Catholic University.
He is a son of Deborah A. McDonough of Rockville, Md., and the late James C. McDonough. The groom’s mother, a health care administrator, is the patient safety chief at the Walter Reed National Military Medical Center in Bethesda, Md. His father retired as a commander in the United States Navy, and was a medical service corps commander at Bethesda Naval Hospital.
The couple met in the State Department cafeteria in November 2015, while waiting to pay for their meals. At the time, she was a political appointee in the Office of Global Food Security. He said that he had noticed her previously, and seized the moment the ask her out. “I managed to finagle my way into a conversation with her in the checkout line,” he said.
Kathleen Kelly Daughety and Mathias Brendan Weiden were married May 25. Jackson B. Dunlap, a friend of the couple who became a Universal Life minister for the event, officiated at the governor’s mansion in Topeka, Kan.
The bride and groom both received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Pennsylvania, where they met.
Ms. Daughety, 34, is a senior manager in the food delivery unit, in New York, of Uber, the ride-service company. She graduated from the University of Kansas.
She is a daughter of Gov. Laura J. Kelly and Dr. Ted W. Daughety of Topeka. The bride’s father, a pulmonologist and sleep specialist, is in private practice in Topeka. Her mother, a Democrat, is the governor of Kansas.
Mr. Weiden, 33, is a senior operations director in New York for HelloFresh, the meal-delivery service. He graduated from the College of the Holy Cross in Worcester, Mass.
He is a son of Kathleen McCarrick Weiden and Brendan P. Weiden of Bronxville, N.Y. The groom’s mother, a certified public accountant, is the senior managing director for tax at the LeFrak Organization, the real estate company in New York. His father, a professional engineer, is a senior partner at Jaros Baum & Bolles, an engineering company, also in New York.
Dr. Cynthia Omoge Akagbosu and Nathan Putney Swire were married May 25 at the Cathedral of Christ the Light in Oakland, Calif. The Rev. Raymond Ogbemure, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony. On May 24, the couple took part in a traditional Edo Nigerian ceremony at the Jack London Aquatic Center, also in Oakland.
The couple met at Dartmouth, from which they graduated.
She is the daughter of Dr. Fidelis T. Akagbosu of Richmond, Calif., and the late Dr. Lilian C. Akagbosu, who lived in Tampa. The bride’s father is an obstetrician and gynecologist at the Kaiser Permanente Center for Reproductive Health in Fremont, Calif. He is also a former consultant obstetrician and gynecologist, and a infertility specialist, at Bourn Hall Clinic in Cambridge, England. Her mother was a doctor of occupational medicine in Tampa.
On May 30, the groom, 30, is to receive a law degree from Harvard. In November, he is to become a law clerk for William Young, a judge on the United States District Court of Massachusetts, with chambers in Boston. The groom is a former infantry captain who served in the Army from March 2012 to July 2016.
He is a son of Anne Scott-Putney of Sandwich, Mass., and Peter P. Swire of Atlanta. The groom’s mother is the chief executive of the Heritage Museum and Gardens in Sandwich. His father is the Holder Chair of Law and Ethics at the Georgia Tech Scheller College of Business in Atlanta. He is also the former chief counselor for privacy during the Clinton administration, as well as a former member of President Obama’s Review Group on Intelligence and Communications Technologies.
Dr. Lindsey Elizabeth Citron and Bradley Andrew Herbig were married May 25 in a self-uniting ceremony at the Ballroom at the Ben, an events space in Philadelphia.
Dr. Citron, 29, recently received a veterinary doctorate from the University of Pennsylvania. In June, she is to begin an internship at Friendship Hospital for Animals in Washington. She graduated from Tufts.
She is the daughter of Stephanie J. Citron and David M. Citron of Longboat Key, Fla. The bride’s father is the founding partner of WMS Partners, a financial planning company based in Towson, Md. 
Dr. Herbig, also 29, is a management consultant in Philadelphia for McKinsey & Company, a management consultancy based in New York. He graduated from Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology in Terre Haute, Ind., from which he also received a master’s degree in chemical engineering. He received a Ph.D. in chemical and biomolecular engineering from the University of Pennsylvania.
He is a son of Ava M. Herbig and Rick J. Herbig of Cincinnati. The groom’s mother was a stay-at-home parent. His father is the manager of information technology operations and networking at the City of Cincinnati Health Department.
The couple met in 2016 through the dating website Coffee Meets Bagel, while they both were attending graduate school at Penn.
Lisbeth Swinney Kaufman and James Ranta George were married May 25 at the W Loft in Brooklyn. Virginia L. Allen, the groom’s sister, officiated, having become a Universal Life minister for this event.
The bride, 33, will continue to use her name professionally. She is a founder and the chief executive of KitSplit, an online rental company in Brooklyn for cameras and other film and video production equipment. She graduated from Yale and received an M.B.A. from N.Y.U.
She is a daughter of Patricia Swinney Kaufman and S. Lloyd Kaufman Jr. of Manhattan. The bride’s father is a founder and the president of Troma Entertainment, an independent film studio in Long Island City, Queens. He is also a director of the Independent Film and Television Alliance, which is based in Los Angeles. Her mother retired as the executive director of the New York State Governor’s Office for Motion Picture and Television Development in Manhattan, and was also the deputy commissioner of Empire State Development. She is now a director of the Hamptons International Film Festival in East Hampton, N.Y.
Mr. George, also 33, is a founder and the chief executive of Scatter, a company in Brooklyn that provides original virtual reality content as well as software that helps film and video makers produce their own virtual-reality content. In 2018, the company received an Emmy for “Zero Days VR.” The groom is also an adjunct professor in the graduate interactive-telecommunications program at N.Y.U.’s Tisch School of the Arts. He graduated from the University of Washington.
He is the son of Mary Wissink George and Archie A. George of Moscow, Idaho. The groom’s parents both retired from the University of Idaho in Moscow, his mother as a research support scientist in the plant science laboratory and his father as the director for institutional research and assessment. The groom’s father is now is a member of the advisory board of the Palouse Land Trust, a regional conservation organization in Moscow.
The couple met in 2014 at the Tribeca Film Festival, when Ms. Kaufman, turned to the person sitting next to her to share her enthusiasm for the interactive documentary, “Clouds,” that she had just seen. That person was Mr. George, and it was his film.
Alexandra Sarah Ignatius and Thomas James Weishan were married May 25 in Washington. The Rev. Brooks F. Hundley, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Little Sanctuary, the chapel at St. Albans School, where he is a chaplain.
Ms. Ignatius, 31, is a senior account supervisor for corporate affairs and crisis communications at Edelman, the Chicago public relations firm. She graduated cum laude from Columbia, and is to begin in August an M.B.A. program at the Olin School of Business at Washington University in St. Louis.
She is a daughter of Eve Thornberg Ignatius and David R. Ignatius of Washington. The bride’s father is a foreign-affairs columnist for The Washington Post and is the author of “The Quantum Spy” (W.W. Norton & Company, 2017) and other novels. Her mother is a principal software developer in Arlington, Va., for BAE Systems, the British defense, security and aerospace company.
Mr. Weishan, 32, is to begin work, in June, as a strategic planning manager at Emerson Electric, an industrial components and equipment manufacturer in Ferguson, Mo. He graduated cum laude from Carleton College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Wisconsin.
He is a son of Deborah A. Weishan and James J. Weishan of Stevens Point, Wis. The groom’s mother worked as an audiologist in Kalamazoo, Mich., before becoming a stay-at-home parent. His father retired as an executive vice president and the chief investment officer of the Sentry Insurance Group in Stevens Point.
The couple met in 2014 in Shanghai at a bar popular with expats, which both then were. He was working on an educational start-up company and she was with an advertising, marketing and public relations firm. “I thought he was cute and went up and started talking with him,” she said. It was chilly that evening, and Mr. Weishan lent Ms. Ignatius a sweatshirt to wear home. “That means I’ll have to see you again to return it,” Ms. Ignatius recalls having said.
The couple met for sushi the next day (and she returned the sweatshirt).
Shruti Sehgal and Dr. Julian Kravtin Horwitz were married May 25 at the Stein Eriksen Lodge in Park City, Utah. Rabbi David Levinsky officiated. Earlier in the day, Pandit Vineet Chander led a ceremony with Hindu influences.
Ms. Sehgal, 30, is a vice president for technology and innovation clients at BerlinRosen, a public relations firm in New York. She graduated from Barnard College.
She is a daughter of Neeta Sehgal and Sunil Sehgal of Oakton, Va. The bride’s father is the chief executive of Ascend Therapeutics, a specialty pharmaceutical company in Herndon, Va. Her mother is an independent makeup artist and jewelry designer.
Dr. Horwitz, 31, is a fifth-year general surgery resident at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York. He graduated from Emory University and received a medical degree from N.Y.U.
He is the son of Patricia D. Kravtin and Jonathan S. Horwitz of Boston. The groom’s father is the principal executive officer at Putnam Mutual Funds, a financial services company in Boston. The groom’s mother provides expert-witness testimony on economic issues in law suits involving the telecommunications industry.
Samantha Erin Blumenthal and Jeremy Sanford von Halle were married May 25 at the Standard Club in Chicago. Rabbi Seth M. Limmer officiated.
Mrs. von Halle, 28, is a project manager at BenchPrep, an online learning and assessment company in Chicago. She graduated from the University of Illinois.
She is the daughter of Linda Feldgreber Blumenthal and Mark J. Blumenthal of Riverwoods, Ill. The bride’s father, a certified public accountant, is a partner in the Chicago office of Plante Moran, an accounting, auditing and business advisory firm. Her mother was a stay-at-home parent.
Mr. von Halle, 30, is the vice president for revenue operations at Jellyvision, a benefits-communication software company in Chicago. He graduated from Duke, and is a volunteer mentor for TechStars, an incubator for technology start-ups.
He is a son of Robin Wohl von Halle and Robert von Halle of Chicago. The groom’s mother is the founder and chief executive of Alternative Reproductive Resources, an egg-donor and gestational surrogacy company in Chicago. His father is an independent stock options and index futures trader, also in Chicago.
A mutual friend of the couple who thought they would make a good match introduced the two in 2013 at a birthday party in Chicago.
Mariko Mae Ashley and Michael Ye Han were married May 24 by Paula Brownhill, a judge at the Clatsop County Circuit Courthouse in Astoria, Ore.
The bride, 30, works in San Francisco as a labor and employment lawyer for Jackson Lewis a law firm based in White Plains. She graduated from Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Mass., and received a law degree from Cornell.
She is the daughter of Kathryn L. Chan of Portland, Ore. The bride’s mother, who is retired, was an elementary schoolteacher at Elmonica Elementary School in Beaverton, Ore.
The groom, 32, works in San Francisco as an algorithms research scientist at FutureAdvisor, a division of BlackRock, the investment firm based in New York. He graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master’s degree in computational finance from Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh.
He is the son of Linda X. Cheng and Bo Han of Westland, Mich. The groom’s mother, who is retired, was an associate chief editor of Teaching and Research, an academic journal from Renmin University of China in Beijing. She was also a software engineer for American Blinds in Livonia, Mich. The groom’s father is a mechanical engineer for Chery Automobile Company in Wuhu, China.
The couple met in 2013 through a mutual friend in New York.
Lorraine Michelle Cink and Brian Robert Greene are to be married May 26 at the Lighthouse at Chelsea Piers. Bettina Yiannakourou, who was ordained by the Celebrant Foundation and Institute, is to officiate.
The bride, 39, is a senior creative producer for Marvel.com in New York and a host of various Marvel programs and Marvel Studios red carpet events. She is also the author of “Marvel Powers of a Girl” (Disney Publishing, 2019). She graduated with honors from the University of the Arts in Philadelphia.
She is the daughter of Patricia A. Cink and Duane E. Cink of Bakersfield, Calif. The bride’s mother is an antiques dealer in Bakersfield. Her father, who worked in Bakersfield, retired as a supervising accountant for Texaco.
The groom, also 39, is a New York-based television writer and producer who has written for shows such as “Cash Cab,” “Total Request Live,” “Late Night With Jimmy Fallon,” “Pawn Stars,” “Impractical Jokers” and “Vice Live.” He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
He is the son of Barry S. Greene of Boca Raton, Fla., and the late Carolyn R. Greene. The groom’s father retired as a lawyer for Chris-Craft Industries, a New York-based media company and manufacturer of luxury boats. His mother was a graphic designer and artist based in Boca Raton.
The couple met in April 2017 on Tinder.
Johanna Delaney Jetton and Philip Howard Narodick are to be married May 26 at Camp Navarro in Navarro, Calif. Ilyse Iris Magy, a friend of the couple who became a Universal Life minister for the event, is to officiate.
The bride, 30, is a certified nurse midwife at Kaiser Permanente in Santa Rosa, Calif. She graduated from Brown, and received a master’s degree in nursing with a specialty in midwifery from the University of California, San Francisco.
She is a daughter of Janet C. Delaney and William D. Jetton of Berkeley, Calif. The bride’s father is the founder and owner of Jetton Construction, a custom home builder in Berkeley. Her mother is a fine art photographer who has exhibited internationally and has recently published two books with MACK Books of London: “South of Market” and “Public Matters.” She retired from the University of California, Berkeley, where she taught visual studies in the College of Environmental Design.
The groom, 33, is a director of product management at Solar Mosaic, a company in Oakland, Calif., that specializes in financing residential solar systems and other home- improvement projects. He graduated from Stanford, from which he also received a master’s degree in management science and engineering.
He is the son of Sally G. Narodick and Kit G. Narodick of Seattle. The groom’s mother retired as the chief executive of the Edmark Corporation, a publicly held educational software company in Redmond, Wash. She currently serves on the board of Cray, a company based in Seattle that make super computers. His father retired as the chairman of the aviation practice group and a partner in Lane Powell, a law firm in Seattle.
The couple met in San Francisco on OkCupid in December 2013.
Alexandra Meredith Thompson and John Cameron Holden were married May 25 at Barberry Hill Farm in Madison, Conn. Elizabeth Kalina, a friend of the couple who became a Universal Life Minister for the event, officiated.
The couple met at Yale, from which each received a master’s degree in architecture. They also graduated from Yale, the bride cum laude.
Mrs. Holden, 29, is an architectural designer at Michael Green Architecture, a firm based in Vancouver, British Columbia, that specializes in mass timber architecture. The bride is a daughter of Megan M. Thompson and William M. Thompson of Guilford, Conn. Her father, who is also an architect, runs his own practice in Guilford. Her mother is a physician’s associate at Yale New Haven Medical Center.
Mr. Holden, 28, is also an architectural designer, at Patkau Architects in Vancouver. He is a son of Anne M. Cameron and George W. Holden of Dallas. The groom’s mother is a Dallas-based fiber artist who sells handwoven textiles under the name Tisse Handwovens. His father is the chairman of the psychology department at Southern Methodist University, where he is also a psychology professor.
Jacqueline Suzanne Klimas and Kyle Robert Feldscher are to be married May 26 at the Westin Georgetown in Washington. Jason Russell, a friend of the couple, is to officiate, having received permission from the Superior Court for the District of Columbia.
Ms. Klimas, 30, will be taking her husband’s name. She is a national security and space reporter in Washington for Politico. She graduated from Boston University and received a master’s degree in journalism from Northwestern.
She is the daughter of Suzette Hubbard of East Haven, Conn. The bride’s mother retired as a staff manager at AT&T in New Haven.
Mr. Feldscher, 31, is a breaking news editor in Washington for CNN. He graduated from Michigan State.
He is the son of Valerie Feldscher of Canton, Mich., and Robert H. Feldscher of San Ramon, Calif. The groom’s mother is a teacher at Dodson Elementary School in Canton. His father is a computer software salesman in San Ramon.
The couple met in 2016 when they sat across from each other in the newsroom of The Washington Examiner, where they were both reporters, she covering national security and he energy and environment policy at that time.
Harvey Martin Rosenstein and David Anthony Rubeo are to be married May 26 at Congregation Beit Simchat Torah, a synagogue in New York for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender Jews. Rabbi Yael Rapport, the assistant rabbi there, is to officiate.
Mr. Rosenstein (left), 60, is a performing arts consultant in New York. Until 2017, he was the director of promotional activities at the Kurt Weill Foundation for Music in New York. He graduated from Rutgers.
He is a son of the late Elizabeth E. Rosenstein and the late Werner Rosenstein, who lived in Hackensack, N.J. His mother was a stay-at-home parent. His father worked in New York as a sales manager focusing on leather for bookbinders at Permalin Products, a supplier of specialty papers, cloths, and leather that was acquired by FiberMark in West Springfield, Mass.
Mr. Rubeo, 51, is the executive director of the American Lyric Theater in New York, an opera company that mentors new composers and librettists. He graduated magna cum laude from Fordham.
He is a son of Gloria S. Rubeo of Wappingers Falls, N.Y., and the late Thomas P. Rubeo. His mother was a stay-at-home parent. His father was an independent draftsman in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., who did detailing for iron works, including stairs and bridges.
The grooms noticed each other in December 2000 in the lobby of the Metropolitan Opera during a daytime rehearsal of Lehar’s “The Merry Widow.” Mr. Rubeo, an assistant to the Met’s artistic administrator, went out for a smoke, while Mr. Rosenstein, a member of the audience at the rehearsal, sat in the lobby munching on baby carrots. When Mr. Rubeo came back inside, Mr. Rosenstein offered him a carrot, and three hours later they went out for coffee at a nearby Starbucks.
Joelle Lara Lichtman and Robert Seth Margolies were married May 25 at the Heritage Club at Bethpage in Farmingdale, N.Y. Rabbi Todd Chizner officiated.
Mrs. Margolies, 31, is an associate staff analyst working for New York City Transit in New York. She graduated from Cornell, from which she also received a master’s degree in design and environmental analysis.
She is a daughter of Gwen R. Lichtman and Dr. Stuart M. Lichtman of Melville, N.Y. The bride’s father is a medical oncologist at the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and has served as a board member and president of the International Society of Geriatric Oncology. Her mother is the president of the South Huntington Jewish Center, also in Melville.
Mr. Margolies, 30, is a software engineer working in New York for Google. He graduated summa cum laude from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and also received both a master’s degree and a Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Columbia. His research on wireless communication for the internet of things was awarded the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship.
He is the son of Beverly B. Margolies and Mitchell T. Margolies of Wayne, N.J. The groom’s mother is a web designer at Bergen Community College in Paramus, N.J. His father retired as a financial analyst at Broadridge Financial Solutions in Jersey City.
The couple met in September 2016 through the dating app Coffee Meets Bagel.
Emily Claire Cumbie-Drake and Zachary James Hennessee were married May 20 at the E. Barrett Prettyman United States Courthouse in Washington. Judge Cornelia T. L. Pillard, of the United States Court of Appeals in Washington, officiated in her chambers. On May 26, the couple is to have a Quaker ceremony, led by Alison Hennessee, the groom’s sister, at Sugarboo Farms, an events space in Blairsville, Ga.
The couple met at Emory, from which each graduated, the bride with highest honors.
Mrs. Hennessee, 31, completed a master’s degree in public health at Johns Hopkins on May 21.
She is the daughter of M. Claire Cumbie-Drake and Dr. David E. Drake of Des Moines and Bayfield, Colo. The bride’s father, a psychiatrist, is the director of psychiatry in Pagosa Springs, Colo., for Axis Health System, a health care network. He is also a director of Physicians for Social Responsibility. Her mother is a partner in Harrison & Dietz-Kilen, a law practice in Des Moines.
Mr. Hennessee, 30, is a law clerk for Judge Pillard. In September, he is to begin a clerkship for Judge Amit P. Mehta of the United States District Court in Washington. The groom received a law degree from Duke.
He is a son of Ellen M. Fenoglio and Philip H. Hennessee of Sandy Springs, Ga., and Pittsburg, Kan. The groom’s mother is an assistant librarian at Spalding Drive Elementary School in Sandy Springs. She is also the chairwoman of the Fulton County Schools Employee Charitable Fund and is a director of Friends of Lost Corner, which supports a Sandy Springs nature preserve. His father is the design and quality director in the information technology department at the Watco Companies, an owner and operator in Pittsburg of short-line railroads.
Amy Ruth Marsh and Seth Michael Freedland are to be married May 26 at the Sentinel Hotel in Portland, Ore. Rabbi Elizabeth Dunsker is to officiate.
Mrs. Freedland, 33, is a senior interactive producer at Wieden & Kennedy, an advertising agency in Portland. She graduated magna cum laude from Brandeis.
She is a daughter of Susan M. Marsh of South Bend, Ind., and the late Kimball Marsh, who lived in Los Angeles. The bride’s mother is a paralegal at Rosenfeld & Morgan, a disability law practice in South Bend. The bride’s father was a social worker at Madison Center, a mental health clinic in South Bend.
Mr. Freedland, 36, is a speechwriter and global communications director at Nike in Beaverton, Ore. Until 2013 he was a speechwriter for Commerce Department secretaries under President Barack Obama. He graduated with a degree in journalism and political science from Northwestern, and received a master’s degree in government focusing on political communication from Johns Hopkins.
He is a son of Nanette Adams Freedland and Richard J. Freedland of Mountain View, Calif. The groom’s mother is a psychotherapist in private practice in Los Altos, Calif. His father is the founder and chief executive officer at Gramedical in Mountain View, which offers an internet-connected pill dispensing system.
About six months after Ms. Marsh moved to Portland from Manhattan in 2015, she was introduced to Mr. Freedland through the dating app OkCupid. After they met for drinks she told him she just wanted to be friends. But over the next few months she could not stop thinking about him, and six months later she figured out a way to ask for a second date.