The Trump administration seeks to use the Espionage Act to redefine what journalists can and cannot publish.
Mr. Assange shared much of the material at issue with The New York Times and other news organizations. The resulting stories demonstrated why the protections afforded the press have served the American public so well; they shed important light on the American war effort in Iraq, revealing how the United States turned a blind eye to the torture of prisoners by Iraqi forces and how extensively Iran had meddled in the conflict. The Times treated Mr. Assange as a source, not a partner, and the relationship was not an easy one; his indifference to the risks of exposing intelligence sources was a particular source of friction.
The Times does not condone breaking into government computers or irresponsibly publishing the identities of sources. While Mr. Assange may not be the figure one would choose as the tribune of free speech, this is the case the government has brought.
Mr. Assange, who was arrested in London last month after years of being given sanctuary in the Ecuadorean Embassy since 2012, is currently in jail and fighting an extradition request from the United States.
Invoking the Espionage Act in this case threatens to blur the distinction between a journalist exposing government malfeasance — something that news organizations do with regularity — and foreign spies seeking to undermine the nation’s security.
The Obama administration considered charging Mr. Assange with violations of the Espionage Act, a step that might have recalibrated for the digital age who is a cybercriminal and who is a whistle-blower. But Barack Obama’s Justice Department refrained, worried that such a prosecution could ultimately threaten the robust exercise of the First Amendment.
With this indictment, the Trump administration has chosen to go well beyond the question of hacking to directly challenge the boundaries of the First Amendment. Mr. Assange is no hero. But this case now represents a threat to freedom of expression and, with it, the resilience of American democracy itself.