TOKYO — It looked a little lonely up there.
During the short, solemn ceremony on Wednesday in which the new emperor of Japan, Naruhito, 59, accepted the sacred sword, jewels and seals that signify his right to sit on the throne, he was flanked by just two people. Standing ramrod straight to his right was his younger brother, Prince Akishino. To his left was his aging uncle, Prince Hitachi, who sat in a wheelchair.
It was striking visual evidence of the imperial family’s looming existential crisis: It has precious few heirs left.
Like Japan itself, the imperial family has a demographic problem. Just as Japan’s population is shrinking and aging, so is the royal family’s. The line of succession, which is limited to men, is only three people long.
Besides the emperor’s 53-year-old brother and 83-year-old uncle, there is only one other eligible heir: Prince Hisahito, the emperor’s nephew. Because he is only 12, he was too young to attend Wednesday’s ceremony. Under rules set by a government committee, only adult male members of the royal family were permitted to witness the rites.
Thirty minutes after the ascension ceremony, the women of the imperial family filed into the state room in the Imperial Palace, where the new emperor delivered a brief address before a group of politicians, judges, prefectural leaders and their spouses.
This time, Naruhito was flanked by 13 family members, 11 of whom were women.
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has pushed a platform of elevating women in the often patriarchal Japanese workplace, hoping to supplement the country’s dwindling labor force and energize its economy.
Similarly, the imperial family may have to consider permitting women to join the line of succession.
Under current law, women are not allowed to ascend to the throne, and women born into the royal family must renounce their imperial titles and officially leave the family once they marry. Their children — even males — cannot succeed to the throne.
When Japan’s Parliament passed a one-time law in 2017 to allow Naruhito’s father, Emperor Akihito, to abdicate, it attached an addendum that encouraged the government to study the possibility of allowing women born into the royal family to remain within the imperial household after marrying.
Such a move would expand the pool of available heirs if the women were granted the right to head legitimate lines of succession, even if they could not sit on the throne themselves.
Emperor Naruhito and his wife, Masako, have just one child, a daughter, Princess Aiko, 17. After she was born, the government briefly considered changing the law to allow women to join the line of succession. But once Prince Hisahito was born, such discussions were shelved.
In fact, rules barring women from heading lines of succession date back only to the 19th century, in the Meiji Era. And over the 126 generations of recorded emperors in Japan, eight women ruled when no adult men were eligible at the time.
The emperor and other members of the imperial family are extremely circumspect in their public comments, so it is impossible to know for sure what they think about the succession problem.
But even if he wanted to, it would be difficult for the new emperor to change the rules.
“It’s not as if we can expect him to take radical action,” said Kristi Govella, an assistant professor of Asian studies at the University of Hawaii, Manoa. “There are many actors who would be involved, particularly in actually changing the rules of succession.” Any changes to imperial law must be approved by Parliament.
Outside the Imperial Palace following the ascension rites on Wednesday, well-wishers gathered in hopes of getting a glimpse of the new emperor, with some saying they wished that the imperial family could change how it treats women.
“What’s wrong with a female emperor, I wonder?” said Yukiko Minegishi, 41, who works at a uniform maker in Tokyo and had come to the palace with her mother.
She added that the prohibition against women in the line of succession was, like other gender-related traditions in Japan, out of step with the times.
Ms. Minegishi noted that women are not allowed in sumo rings, another practice that has come under scrutiny, after a referee last year shooed women out of a ring when they rushed to offer lifesaving measures to a politician who had collapsed while delivering a speech.
Although any overhaul of imperial rules may take time, some analysts wondered if the new empress might subtly serve as a role model for women in society.
A former diplomat, Empress Masako could be enlisted as a cultural ambassador for Japan. Shortly after her marriage, she impressed observers when she sat between President Bill Clinton and the Russian leader, Boris N. Yeltsin, at a state dinner and conversed easily with both of them in their own languages.
She could soon have the opportunity to flex her diplomatic skills: President Trump will be the first foreign leader to meet the new emperor and empress, arriving in Tokyo later this month.