Health|A.I. Took a Test to Detect Lung Cancer. It Got an A.
Artificial intelligence may help doctors make more accurate readings of CT scans used to screen for lung cancer.
By feeding huge amounts of data from medical imaging into systems called artificial neural networks, researchers can train computers to recognize patterns linked to a specific condition, like pneumonia, cancer or a wrist fracture that would be hard for a person to see. The system follows an algorithm, or set of instructions, and learns as it goes. The more data it receives, the better it becomes at interpretation.
The process, known as deep learning, is already being used in many applications, like enabling computers to understand speech and identify objects so that a self-driving car will recognize a stop sign and distinguish a pedestrian from a telephone pole. In medicine, Google has already created systems to help pathologists read microscope slides to diagnose cancer, and to help ophthalmologists detect eye disease in people with diabetes.
In the new study, the researchers applied artificial intelligence to CT scans used to screen people for lung cancer, which caused 160,000 deaths in the United States last year, and 1.7 million worldwide. The scans are recommended for people at high risk because of a long history of smoking.
Studies have found that screening can reduce the risk of dying from lung cancer. In addition to finding definite cancers, the scans can also identify spots that might later become cancer, so that radiologists can sort patients into risk groups and decide whether they need biopsies or more frequent follow-up scans to keep track of the suspect regions.
But the test has pitfalls: It can miss tumors, or mistake benign spots for malignancies and push patients into invasive, risky procedures like lung biopsies or surgery. And radiologists looking at the same scan may have different opinions about it.
The researchers thought computers might do better. They created a neural network, with multiple layers of processing, and trained it by giving it many CT scans from patients whose diagnoses were known: Some had lung cancer, some did not and some had nodules that later turned cancerous.
Then, they began to test its diagnostic skill.
Tested against 6,716 cases with known diagnoses, the system was 94 percent accurate. Pitted against six expert radiologists, when no prior scan was available, the deep learning model beat the doctors: It had fewer false positives and false negatives. When an earlier scan was available, the system and the doctors were neck and neck.
The ability to process vast amounts of data may make it possible for artificial intelligence to recognize subtle patterns that humans simply cannot see.
“It may start out as something we can’t see, but that may open up new lines of inquiry,” said Dr. Mozziyar Etemadi, a research assistant professor of anesthesiology at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, and an author of the study.
Dr. Eric Topol, director of the Scripps Research Translational Institute in La Jolla, Calif., who has written extensively about artificial intelligence in medicine, said, “I’m pretty confident that what they’ve found is going to be useful, but it’s got to be proven.” Dr. Topol was not involved in the study.
The idea is to help doctors, not replace them.
There are potential hazards, though. A radiologist who misreads a scan may harm one patient, but a flawed A.I. system in widespread use could injure many, Dr. Topol warned. Before they are unleashed on the public, he said, the systems should be studied rigorously, with the results published in peer-reviewed journals, and tested in the real world to make sure they work as well there as they did in the lab.
And even if they pass those tests, they still have to be monitored to detect hacking or software glitches, he said.
Another issue is: If an A.I. system is approved by the F.D.A., and then, as expected, keeps changing with experience and the processing of more data, will its maker need to apply for approval again? If so, how often?
The lung-screening neural network is not ready for the clinic yet.
