Readers call for stronger F.D.A. efforts to safeguard medications, especially when they are manufactured abroad.
The answer is a qualified “yes,” because guarantees of safety, effectiveness and quality are only as sound as both regulator and manufacturer can ensure. When factory owners cheat on crucial quality measures (whether those facilities are in India, China or the United States), all bets are off.
Absent robust quality control, therapeutic outcomes suffer and the public’s trust in the Food and Drug Administration’s oversight of generic medicines wanes. Generic drugs help reduce costs, but the most expensive drug is the one that doesn’t work.
The spread of subquality generic drugs must also serve as a warning as we enter into the era of biosimilars (F.D.A.-approved copies of biologic medicines) that are also being manufactured around the world. F.D.A. inspections must have a heavier global footprint, and that means an appropriate budget for overseas staffing.
The writer, a former F.D.A. associate commissioner, is president of the Center for Medicine in the Public Interest.
I thank the writer for the in-depth coverage of generic drugs. However, we cannot give brand-name drugmakers a free pass. We need a strong and well-funded F.D.A. to keep all drugs safe for patients. Often, pharmaceutical ingredients are manufactured in the same location for brand-name and generic drugmakers. Brand-name drugs have the same quality problems and lax oversight.
As a family doctor, I know that patients depend on low-cost options for medications. Generic drugs are currently the main low-cost option and must be kept safe. We should not push patients to go broke on overpriced brand-name drugs with false promises of safety.
Patients deserve safe and effective medications at a fair price. This will happen only with a strong F.D.A. curbing abuses by both brand-name and generic drugmakers.
The writer is a former board chairman of the National Physicians Alliance and a clinical assistant professor in family and social medicine at Albert Einstein College of Medicine.