Mayor Bill de Blasio rose to power by depicting New York as a “tale of two cities” riven by income inequality, and then built his biggest successes like universal prekindergarten around that theme. Now he will test whether his platform can resonate on a national stage.
Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, announced on Thursday that he was running for president, seeking to show that his brand of urban progressive leadership can be a model for the country, and that his familiarity with President Trump, a fellow New Yorker, made him best suited to defeat the president.
No sitting mayor has been elected to the presidency, and if Mr. de Blasio, 58, is to be the first, he must overcome daunting deficits in polls and fund-raising.
The video began with what has become the mayor’s tagline this year, as he has flirted with declaring his candidacy. “There’s plenty of money in this country, it’s just in the wrong hands,” he said, before highlighting his accomplishments as mayor — most of them tied to reducing income inequality, like raising the minimum wage or paid sick leave — and said that those successes could be replicated nationwide.
The mayor also gave examples of how he has confronted Mr. Trump, on issues like immigration and climate change.
Mr. de Blasio then appeared on ABC’s “Good Morning America” with his wife, Chirlane McCray, seemingly intent on drawing the attention of Mr. Trump right out of the box, calling him “Con Don” — using Mr. Trump’s tactic of coining demeaning nicknames for rivals.
He is fond of citing his “pre-K for all” program as a prime example; it was one of Mr. de Blasio’s earliest initiatives, and it remains his largest success. He has also highlighted his role in ending the policing practice of stop-question-and-frisk, which a federal judge ruled discriminated against black and Latino men.
Raised in Massachusetts, Mr. de Blasio attended New York University and became a leftist activist who admired Nicaragua’s ruling Sandinista party. He later ran campaigns for Hillary Clinton and Charles B. Rangel, and then ran for office himself, winning elections to become a New York City councilman, public advocate and mayor.
He and Ms. McCray, who has spearheaded ThriveNYC, the city’s mental health initiative, have two children. Their biracial family’s prominence played a large role in his 2013 bid for mayor; a pivotal campaign ad featured his son, Dante, whose giant Afro gained its own following.
Some of Mr. de Blasio’s colleagues have scoffed at the idea of him becoming president and have urged him to abandon his exploration of occupying the White House and instead focus on a bevy of nagging issues in New York City such as crumbling public housing, high levels of homelessness and problem-plagued subways. Mr. de Blasio said that many of the answers for what ails the city actually lie 200 miles beyond its borders in the nation’s capital.
The field of Democratic presidential candidates has been historically large, but all have dropped out except Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic nominee to challenge President Trump.
Nonetheless, being mayor of America’s largest city does offer built-in visibility and stature, and Mr. de Blasio has used his platform to try to push the Democratic Party toward embracing his vision as it looks to dislodge Mr. Trump from the White House in 2020.
