WASHINGTON — Abortion rights are at risk at the Supreme Court, but the short-term threat may not come from extreme measures like the one passed by Alabama lawmakers.
As soon as Monday, the court could announce whether it will hear challenges to three provisions of Indiana abortion laws on issues like the disposal of fetal remains and an 18-hour waiting period after state-mandated ultrasound examinations. The court will in the coming months almost certainly agree to hear a challenge to a Louisiana law that could reduce the number of abortion clinics in the state to one.
The Alabama bill, signed into law on Wednesday, is a different kind of measure, one that squarely conflicts with Roe. It would ban almost all abortions in the state, without exceptions for rape and incest, and subject abortion providers to harsh criminal penalties. Because the Roberts court tends toward incrementalism, it is not likely to want to take on a direct confrontation with that precedent.
Nor in all likelihood will it have to.
To be sure, recent changes on the court have given opponents of abortion rights new hope for a wholesale reconsideration of Roe. Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, who retired last year, had been a cautious supporter of abortion rights and was an author of the key opinion in 1992 in Planned Parenthood v. Casey, which both reaffirmed and modified the core of Roe, announcing that states may not impose “undue burdens” on abortion rights.
Justice Kennedy has been replaced by Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh, whose limited record as an appeals court judge suggests that he will be more skeptical about the right to abortion.
Melissa Murray, a law professor at New York University, said much would turn on Chief Justice Roberts, who might have conflicting impulses.
Chief Justice Roberts is a product of the conservative legal movement, and his general inclination is to lean right. But he is also an institutionalist and a guardian of his court’s authority, meaning he generally makes modest and deliberate moves.
In February, for instance, he joined the court’s four liberal members to block enforcement of the Louisiana law, which requires doctors performing abortions to have admitting privileges at nearby hospitals. The court’s four other conservatives would have let the law go into effect.
Will a Supreme Court with two Trump-appointed justices overrule the right to an abortion? It’s possible, but not the most likely outcome. Adam Liptak, The Times’s Supreme Court reporter, explains.
There’s a lot of talk that the new Supreme Court, one with two Trump justices on it, might overturn Roe v. Wade. So the court can’t just wake up one morning and say, we’re overruling Roe v. Wade. I think supporters of abortion rights are right to be nervous, but they’re maybe not exactly right about how to be nervous, what to be nervous about. It’s a shorthand, sure, to say Roe v. Wade can be overruled, but that’s not the only, or even the most likely, outcome. Let me take you through the possible scenarios. Let’s call the first category the nuclear options. These are the most extreme and, therefore, least likely scenarios. The first one would flip Roe on its head. Roe says there’s a constitutional right to abortion. The court could say the Constitution prohibits abortion in the interest of protecting fetal life. That would suggest that fetal life is like any other life, so that taking it away would be murder. So if the court were to go in that very unlikely direction, abortion would be outlawed across the nation, and women could not get abortions in the United States legally. A second nuclear option would be for the court to do away with the right to privacy established in a case called Griswold in 1965. “The individual is entitled to some private sector.” That right to privacy is the foundation for Roe v. Wade. If the right to privacy goes, it would do away with the basis for Roe v. Wade and, therefore, Roe v. Wade itself and flip the issue back to the states and allow states to regulate abortion as they wish. The right to privacy has been, and could be, the foundation of many rights, so I don’t think it’s likely the court will go after the right to privacy. A second possibility, and the one everyone’s talking about, is the court could overrule Roe v. Wade. Protesters: “Ho, ho, Roe v. Wade has got to go. Hey, hey, ho, ho.” So in a post-Roe world, you still have a right to privacy. But that right to privacy does not include a constitutional right to abortion. States would be free to do what they wanted. And some advocacy groups say perhaps 22 states could make abortion illegal entirely. That’s probably not going to happen anytime soon. Protesters: “Hey, hey, Roe v. Wade is here to stay.” Chief Justice John Roberts is an incrementalist. He takes things step by step, and I don’t think his first impulse is going to be, let’s overrule Roe v. Wade when there are other ways to get from here to most of the way there. The last scenario, and the most likely one, is for the court to chip away at Roe v. Wade. The court has already upheld some restrictions on abortion. “The 5 to 4 majority upheld a ban on performing abortions in public facilities.” “The U.S. Supreme Court today upheld the nationwide ban on partial-birth abortion.” “Medication abortion is now effectively blocked in Arkansas.” Much more severe restrictions on abortion rights are a perfectly imaginable scenario when we have a new Supreme Court. Here’s how that could happen. States cannot impose an undue burden on women’s right to abortion. That’s a fairly malleable standard, and it wouldn’t be hard for the Supreme Court to keep it in place, but interpret it slightly differently and say states can impose such restrictions. A couple of years ago, the court heard a case from Texas. And had the court sustained the Texas law, the number of clinics in Texas would have dropped from about 40 to about 10. And that could rapidly diminish the ability of women to get abortions because the nearest abortion clinic, at a minimum, could be hundreds of miles away. It’s a little hard to answer exactly what life will look like in a given state because we’ll have a patchwork of laws. But what’s for sure is that women in red states, and particularly poor women in red states, will have a much harder time getting abortions as each successive abortion restriction is sustained by a court that now has a solidly conservative majority.
Chief Justice Roberts’s vote was something of a surprise, as he had dissented in 2016 from the court’s decision to strike down a Texas admitting-privileges law essentially identical to the one from Louisiana.
Still, the court’s liberal justices seem nervous. On Monday, in a case overruling a precedent in a different area of the law, Justice Stephen G. Breyer’s dissent chastised the majority for acting rashly. Repeatedly citing the Casey decision, Justice Breyer said he feared for the future.
“Today’s decision can only cause one to wonder which cases the court will overrule next,” he wrote.
Chief Justice Roberts was in the majority in Monday’s decision, and he has voted to overrule important precedents on campaign finance and public unions.
At other times, he has called for restraint. During his 2005 confirmation hearings, he said the Supreme Court should be wary of overturning decisions, in part because doing so threatens the court’s legitimacy.
Chief Justice Roberts elaborated on the power of precedent in a concurring opinion in 2010 in the Citizens United decision, which overruled two rulings. Departures from precedent, he wrote, require very good reasons.
But he added, quoting from earlier decisions, that the Supreme Court remained free to correct its worst errors.
Richard W. Garnett, a law professor at Notre Dame, said the constitutional confrontation over the right to abortion sought by the sponsors of the Alabama law was unlikely to come to pass.
