WASHINGTON — Michael D. Cohen, President Trump’s onetime personal lawyer and fixer, told congressional investigators this year that his discussions with the president’s legal team about a potential pardon continued longer than previously known, newly released transcripts show.
In a pair of private interviews in February and March, Mr. Cohen told the House Intelligence Committee that he had conversations about pardons with Jay Sekulow, a lawyer for Mr. Trump, until his decision in July 2018 to withdraw from a joint defense agreement with the president and his allies and begin cooperating with the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III.
Mr. Cohen’s explosive claims about possible pardons in exchange for loyalty comport with earlier revelations that lawyers for Mr. Trump raised the prospect of pardons in 2017 with lawyers of two other former advisers tied up in the case. But despite prosecutors’ reliance on him, Mr. Cohen has also faced persistent questions about the extent of his truthfulness.
The details of his testimony also hand House Democrats investigating Mr. Trump yet another thorny mound of evidence to try to untangle as they weigh whether to begin impeachment proceedings or otherwise hold the president accountable.
Mr. Cohen’s assertion about pardons was not the only prominent mention of Mr. Sekulow in his hours of testimony before the committee. Mr. Cohen also told lawmakers that “to the best of my recollection,” Mr. Sekulow suggested he falsely state in his 2017 statement to Congress that negotiations around a possible Trump project in Moscow had ended in January 2016 — when in fact the talks carried on until that June.
Mr. Cohen said his lies — and the edits to the statement — were meant to play down overlap between the proposed project and the 2016 Trump presidential campaign.
Mr. Sekulow’s lawyers vigorously disputed Mr. Cohen’s accounts, which more broadly suggested lawyers tied to the president had dangled pardons to try to secure his cooperation and helped shape his initial false statement to Congress.
“That this or any committee would rely on the word of Michael Cohen for any purpose — much less to try and pierce the attorney-client privilege and discover confidential communications of four respected lawyers — defies logic, well-established law and common sense,” said the lawyers, Jane Serene Raskin and Patrick Strawbridge.
Lanny J. Davis, a lawyer for Mr. Cohen, hit back, saying that Mr. Cohen had changed his ways after his initial 2017 false statement to Congress.
The purported conversations between Mr. Cohen and Mr. Sekulow were included among hundreds of pages of transcripts and background materials from interview sessions in February and March that the committee voted 12 to 7 along party lines to disclose on Monday.
It was unclear how much their release would affect the public’s view of Mr. Trump after a monthslong drip-drip of revelations about what Mr. Cohen told federal investigators and his blockbuster public testimony before Congress in February. Mr. Cohen also cooperated with prosecutors working for Mr. Mueller and for the Southern District of New York and is now serving a federal prison sentence, in part for lying to Congress in his 2017 false statement.
Democrats on the Intelligence Committee appear to be particularly interested in testimony Mr. Cohen gave about the false statement he delivered to Congress in 2017 and discussion of possible pardons with Trump lawyers. Committee members have begun investigating whether those lawyers helped obstruct the committee’s own investigation of Russian election interference.
The transcripts were not the first time there have been assertions either directly from Mr. Cohen or from news reports about possible pardons. The Mueller report referred to conversations between Mr. Cohen and an unnamed member of Mr. Trump’s legal team who appears to be Mr. Sekulow, though investigators never spoke directly with Mr. Sekulow. The report’s description — “Cohen also recalled speaking with the president’s personal counsel about pardons after the searches of his home and office had occurred” by the F.B.I. — comports with Mr. Cohen’s description to the Intelligence Committee.
Mr. Cohen told investigators other lawyers were involved in similar discussions after the raids, in April 2018.
But the lawyers involved, including Mr. Giuliani and Robert J. Costello, have denied this account. They say that Mr. Giuliani himself had told those involved at the time that the president was unwilling to discuss pardons.
The two private interviews with the Intelligence Committee followed closely on the public session with the House Oversight and Reform Committee in late February in which Mr. Cohen accused Mr. Trump on live television of a pattern of lies, crimes and deception.
Democrats took elements of the testimony, and the material Mr. Cohen produced, as impetus for new investigations into the president and his businesses. Republicans, including Mr. Trump’s lawyers, have insisted Mr. Cohen is a liar whose statements cannot be trusted.
The transcripts show that Mr. Cohen repeated behind closed doors many of the stories he told publicly just days before to the House oversight panel. He said he had suspicions that the Trump campaign had conspired with the Russians, but no evidence. He said he believed that Donald Trump Jr. had apprised his father of a June 2016 meeting with a Russian lawyer promising dirt on Hillary Clinton, despite claims by the president that he knew nothing of it.
And he said that in July 2016, he witnessed a call between Donald J. Trump and Roger J. Stone Jr., a longtime adviser to Mr. Trump, who claimed to have been on a phone call with Julian Assange of WikiLeaks indicating that the campaign had prior knowledge of the organization’s publication of stolen Democratic communications. Mr. Stone, Mr. Cohen said, told the candidate “in a couple of days there was going to be a massive dump that’s going to affect Hillary Clinton’s campaign.” Mr. Trump replied that that would be great, according to Mr. Cohen. Mr. Stone and Mr. Trump have denied the claim.
Mr. Cohen pleaded guilty to lying to Congress for the false 2017 statement, and began serving a three-year prison sentence this month. He also pleaded guilty last year to campaign finance charges connected to hush money payments made during the 2016 campaign to a pornographic film actress who said she had an affair with Mr. Trump.