I made police officers teammates in reform, not the targets of it.
Mr. Emanuel is the mayor of Chicago.
CHICAGO — Two cities, following different road maps, have shown the possibilities and potential pitfalls of police reform. The challenges facing Baltimore and Chicago were seen as synonymous three years ago. Both cities embarked on reforms around the same time, which are still in the early stages.
In both cities, a police-involved citizen death brought long-simmering frustrations to the surface. In Baltimore, it was the death of Freddie Gray in the back of a police van. In Chicago, it was the killing of Laquan McDonald, shot by a police officer 16 times.
Baltimore’s effort is lagging, with violent crime rising to levels not seen in a quarter-century. As a big-city mayor, I know firsthand how difficult these challenges are to overcome. Chicago is still a long way from the level of public safety we want for every neighborhood. Since 2016, however, homicides are down 27 percent and shootings are down 32 percent.
It is too soon to draw a straight line from Chicago’s police reform efforts to the progress in crime reduction our city has made. But an effective and focused police department, along with increased after school activities, more summer jobs and greater local economic opportunities all contribute to safer neighborhoods.
The question for the two cities has not been whether to reform the police departments. It’s whether the police are the sole targets of reform or teammates in that effort.
From the beginning, I contended that, without buy-in from police officers, it would be impossible to make progress in creating safer streets and a more accountable police force.
I wasn’t new to this debate or to this view. I advocated this perspective in October 2015, when Attorney General Loretta Lynch convened a meeting on police reform in Washington which I attended, along with 60 other mayors, police chiefs and federal prosecutors.
At the meeting, I was clear that police officers would “go fetal” if they weren’t included in the reform.
Leadership instability and missteps in engaging rank-and-file officers in the reform effort may be sources of the problem in Baltimore, where a recent survey found three out of four police officers feel that a consent decree negotiated with the Justice Department keeps them from doing their job.
In Chicago, we negotiated a consent decree with the Illinois attorney general and deliberately gave police officers a seat at the table. Early on, we asked them to participate by identifying areas they knew to be in need of reform.
They published a blueprint for change called “Next Steps for Reform,” which informed our work. So did the recommendations put forth by the city’s Police Accountability Task Force. Likewise, when the department modernized its use-of-force policy, it consulted both community residents and its own officers.
Chicago did not wait for a consent decree to carry out reforms. We equipped every patrol officer with a body camera a year ahead of schedule and with a Taser; allowed sergeants to exert more direct leadership; and required training in de-escalation techniques and in handling incidents involving people with mental illness.
The preliminary results have been promising. In 2017, there were 116 fewer murders than in the previous year, a 17 percent decrease. In 2018, they fell by 100 more. Reported burglaries, robberies and auto thefts are at a 20-year low. And since 2015, we have experienced a 53 percent reduction in excessive-force complaints. Reform isn’t hindering the fight against crime in Chicago; it’s helping.
The process for finalizing the consent decree was markedly different in Chicago than it was in Baltimore and other cities. Focus groups of police officers were convened during negotiations to consider their input on critical reforms. In addition, community meetings were held, and the draft of the agreement was posted for comment by the public and police officers. Only then was the final consent decree negotiated. The federal judge overseeing the process held a two-day “fairness” hearing allowing for even more public input. The consent decree went into effect in March.
This inclusive process and Chicago’s progress reflect a reform philosophy I share with Eddie Johnson, the Chicago police superintendent. He and the department leadership have proved to be champions of reform and strong and consistent voices for improving police-community relations.
In contrast, Baltimore’s police force has had five police commissioners, some of them interim, during the past four years. That kind of instability cannot be helpful to reform goals, police morale or public safety.
Superintendent Johnson and I refused to buy into the narrative around police reform that pitted the Manhattan Institute and police union leadership on one side against the Obama administration’s Justice Department and the A.C.L.U. on the other.
It has only gotten worse in Washington. President Trump told police officers at a law enforcement convention in 2017 not to be “too nice” during arrests and to purposely hit suspects’ heads on police cars; some activists are calling for abolishing police departments altogether.
Clearly, fighting crime and strengthening public safety also depend on sensible gun laws, equitable educational opportunities, robust violence-prevention efforts and community investments in neighborhoods that have been left behind.
It is time to move past the false choice of being anti-reform or anti-police, as if those are the only options. By listening to rank-and-file officers and residents, Chicago has embraced an alternative path with promising results.
Rahm Emanuel is the mayor of Chicago.