The NBC dance competition crowns its world champion. And “The Spanish Princess” offers a fresh take on Catherine of Aragon’s life story.
WORLD OF DANCE 8 p.m. on NBC. On the Season 3 finale of this dance competition, judged by Jennifer Lopez, Derek Hough and Ne-Yo, five remaining dancers and groups will face off for the championship title and $1 million grand prize. The finals will feature performances from VPeepz, a hip-hop group from the Philippines; the Kings, athletic choreographers from India; the Canadian dancer and actress Briar Nolet; the sister duo Ellie and Ava; and a wild-card team or contestant (to be announced). The two-hour finale will also welcome back contestants from past seasons to perform with some of the judges.
THE SPANISH PRINCESS at 8 p.m. on Starz. Charlotte Hope plays the young, headstrong Catherine of Aragon in this historical drama series, which chronicles the princess’s early years before she marries Henry VIII. Starring alongside Hope is Harriet Walter (“The Crown”) as Lady Margaret Beaufort (Henry’s grandmother), and Laura Carmichael (“Downton Abbey”) as Margaret Pole. While Showtime’s “Tudors” offered a look at Henry VIII’s rule largely from the main character’s point of view, this limited series is told from the perspective of the women and people of color in Catherine’s orbit.
THE REAL HOUSEWIVES OF POTOMAC 9 p.m. on Bravo. Gizelle Bryant, Karen Huger, Ashley Darby, Robyn Dixon, Monique Samuels and Candiace Dillard Bassett return to this Maryland offshoot of the reality show, complete with all the gossip, drama and scandal you’ve come to expect from the series. While Samuels and Darby look forward to growing their families, Bryant and Huger prepare to embark on business ventures and Dillard Bassett runs into trouble trying to plan her dream wedding.
THE MATRIX (1999) Stream on Netflix; Rent on YouTube, Amazon, iTunes, Google Play and Vudu. If you need something to tide you over until Keanu Reeves reprises his superassassin role in “John Wick: Chapter 3 — Parabellum” later this month, why not revisit another trilogy — one that solidified him as the lovable action star he is today? In “The Matrix,” Reeves stars as a sleek, sunglass-sporting hacker who wages an all-out war against a computer system that has enslaved the human race. And while you won’t find him hanging out with cute puppies or riding a horse through New York City in the Wachowskis’ sci-fi epic, the film is brimming with slow-motion action sequences. When the movie came out 20 years ago, it was lauded for its special effects and nods to sci-fi culture. In her film review, the Times critic Janet Maslin wrote that “The Matrix” echoes “Terminator,” the “Alien” films, “The X-Files,” “Men in Black” and “2001: A Space Odyssey,” though the directors still gave it “a strong identity of its own.” The film went on to win four Oscars and inspired two sequels, all of which you can stream or rent online now.