It was meant to be part of a social media tribute on Memorial Day weekend. On Saturday afternoon, the United States Army posted a video on Twitter featuring a scout in fatigues who said his service gave him the opportunity to fight for something greater than himself, making him a better man.
The post was shared widely and received thousands of responses. But many were probably not what the Army was looking for.
Instead, the call-out provided what some felt was a rare platform to spotlight the darker consequences of military service for soldiers and their families, as tweet after tweet described lifelong health complications, grief over loved ones lost, sexual assaults gone unpunished and struggles with post-traumatic stress disorder and depression.
In one tweet replying to the Army, a man who said he was a Navy veteran described how he had suicidal thoughts everyday.
The Army said in a statement that it appreciated people sharing their personal stories.
Like many, Ms. Kazy posted not about her personal experience, but about someone close to her: a co-worker and friend who has PTSD after serving in the Army in Iraq. She declined to identify her friend.
She said he was working a 12-hour shift at a Tex-Mex restaurant in Cleveland, Tenn., where the two were cooks, on July 4, 2015. The daytime was mostly fine, she said. Then came fireworks from a nearby mall at night.
To Mr. Neely, these types of stories are commonly shared among former service members. He said he served five years in the Army, joining in August 2000, seeking to break out of an irresponsible and party-minded lifestyle.
He said he served in the military police and was deployed to Egypt in 2001, to Guantánamo Bay in 2002 and Iraq in 2003. He said he was discharged in 2005 with the rank of specialist. He has been a vocal critic of military operations at Guantánamo Bay.
He said he has worked in law enforcement in Houston since he returned, but his life is far from settled.
He said the federal government does not do enough to take care of soldiers who return from their service.
He said he hopes the attention to the responses to the Army’s tweet prompts reform.
“Hopefully, these politicians can do something to fix the system that’s broken,” he said.