Stanley Newman pays tribute to the least amused woman ever.
FRIDAY PUZZLE — We last saw Stanley Newman in The New York Times in 2016, and I, for one, am happy to see him back. Mr. Newman, who is the editor of the Newsday puzzles (including the Saturday Stumper, purported to be one of the hardest crosswords in the business), is known for his pristine, sparkling fill and devious cluing, so it was a delight to see his byline on my Friday puzzle.
You do read the bylines, right? Even though all crossword puzzles pretty much look the same, each constructor has his or her own style, and starting a crossword puzzle without reading the byline is like randomly buying music without looking to see who made it. If I could wish anything for solvers, it would be that they solve all the puzzles, but develop a taste for certain constructors, much like we have bands and singers that we prefer.
You don’t have to examine a puzzle before solving it, but recognizing a constructor’s byline and savoring the puzzle you are about to solve (“Yay! It’s a Newman!”) increases your enjoyment. And when you look closely at each constructor’s work, you will eventually be able to hear their voice in the puzzle, making the connection between puzzle maker and puzzle solver that much stronger. When you get really good, you might be able to recognize the editors’s hands in the puzzle as well.
I wouldn’t go as far as saying that Mr. Newman’s puzzle has a theme, but it does have a central entry that is a tribute to someone who is turning 200 today. And she doesn’t look a day over 199.
QUEEN VICTORIA was born, as the clue says, on May 24, 1819. Happy birthday, Your Majesty. I hope this amused you as much as it amused me.
1A: SLAPDASH! What a great way to open a puzzle.
17A: You can piece this together even if Charles Lindbergh’s trans-Atlantic flight seems shrouded by the mists of time. Who else was flying solo across the Atlantic in 1927? It can’t be “Amelia” for Amelia Earhart, because her name has six letters and she didn’t puddle jump until the following year. For the news to get that kind of headline, it had to be the first person to pilot across the ocean, and that was Lucky LINDY. I also had the “I” in ODIE at 10D, which confirmed my guess.
20A: I had DEVIL and DEMON before The DEUCE. Hadn’t heard that nickname for Satan before.
26A: TIL that “HOUSE, M.D.” was inspired by the Sherlock Holmes character. Makes sense, as House was always unraveling medical mysteries.
40A: “Reached out with one’s hands?” is talking about making contact, which a person can do by TEXTING.
63A: Evil, Mr. Newman. I could have read the clue “Opening of an account” hundreds of times and I still would have landed on my original thought: that it has something to do with bank accounts or another type of account one might open.
2D: In the world of horse-drawn, four-wheeled carriages, the LANDAU is the one you are most likely to see in the New York Times Crossword. Get to know it.
11D: “Mass movement” is a great example of a veiled capital clue. On the surface, it reads as if the clue is asking for a synonym for a great deal of movement, but it’s trickier than that. The Mass in this clue is a liturgical service in the Church, and it is hidden at the beginning of the clue for a reason. The Mass service uses a capital M, but if it was anywhere else in the clue, that capital M would stand out like a … well, like a capital M for Mass, and that would give it away. At the beginning of a clue, readers expect to see a capital letter and don’t stop to think that the word might be a proper noun.
In this puzzle, the clue “Mass movement” refers to a section of the liturgy that is sung or chanted called the AGNUS DEI.
47D: If you are confused because you have never head of a flavor of jelly called ROYAL, walk into your local health food store and ask about it. ROYAL jelly is excreted by nurse bees to feed larvae and adult queens, and if that sounds appetizing to you, it supposedly has some health benefits for humans.
This is my 24th New York Times crossword. It has been 983 days since my 23rd (9/13/16). My first was 35 years and 19 days ago. You see, I can’t help counting things, and looking for chronological milestones. So you ought to be able to deduce how today’s puzzle came about.
Early this year, I discovered that the bicentennial of Queen Victoria’s birth was coming up, and that it would fall on a Friday. That cried out to me for a Times themeless with QUEEN VICTORIA in the center. So with Will’s approval, and a couple of revisions, both to “lively it up” and remove the unfortunate dupe of MEXICANS and TEX-MEX (now TEXTED at 40 Across), today’s grid was born.
In the memorable words of the eminent American philosopher Forrest Gump, that’s all I have to say about that.
But wait, one more thing. My snooping around 1819 a few months ago turned up another very famous person born exactly one week after the Grandmother of Europe. I think it rather unlikely that next Friday’s Times puzzle will mention him, but whether it does or not, you’ll be able to find him quickly enough with a Web search.
Almost finished solving but need a bit more help? We’ve got you covered.
Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.
