The representative from New York inspired a comic book anthology that arrives in stores on Wednesday.
Is Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York the biggest comic book character of 2019? Her story has all the twists of a comic book origin: She’s a former bartender and activist turned congresswoman; she’s a confident public speaker and a social-media whiz (where she once quoted from the “Watchmen” graphic novel); and she’s a champion for progressive issues and the environment.
Readers will be able to decide for themselves where she ranks among their comic book favorites on Wednesday when Issue No. 1 of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and the Freshman Force arrives in stores.
The project, from Devil’s Due Comics, received a lot of media attention when it was announced in February. In his foreword, Josh Blaylock, the founder of the company, said he created the comic because he was inspired by Ocasio-Cortez and other newly elected members of Congress. The result is a 52-page book, priced at $5.99, which has pinups, games and stories. The common theme is the potential of the new members of Congress and their “finally bringing diversity to the legislative body that reflects us as a whole,” Blaylock wrote.
Comic books and politics have a colorful past. President Ronald Reagan was the subject of a 2007 graphic-novel biography. The next year, Prime Minister Gordon Brown of Britain made an appearance in a Marvel comic, and IDW Publishing presented biographical comics about Senators John McCain and Barack Obama a month before Election Day. TidalWave Productions has a regular “Female Force” series of comics that tell the life stories of Hillary Clinton, Sarah Palin, Michelle Obama, Condoleezza Rice and others. The company also released “Donald Trump: The Graphic Novel” as part of its “Political Power” series and is publishing a biographical comic on Ocasio-Cortez in August.
In February, when a reporter for TMZ asked Ocasio-Cortez about her comic book debut, she said she was appreciative that a portion of all sales will go to RaicesTexas.org, which provides free and low-cost legal services to immigrant children, families and refugees. The reporter also asked Ocasio-Cortez what it felt like to be depicted as a superhero. "I’m just a normal person, doing her best,” she said. She added that her comic-book character might inspire young girls, showing them that "we all have a superhero inside of us."