No president in modern memory has done more to aid the publishing industry than Donald Trump. The surge in political book sales since 2016 is largely his doing — the hottest entries for the most part scathingly critical. The landscape is such that a recent book about the president’s penchant for cheating at golf became an instant best seller: a kind of Mueller Report detailing how a 72-year-old man, weighing 240 pounds and with bone spurs, can shoot such suspiciously low scores.
Among the more popular subgenres has been the insider exposé. For those who served in Trump’s revolving-door administration, and are still central to its continuing story, a tell-all book serves the twin purposes of being profitable as well as cathartic. One can offer a civics lesson while also settling scores. Enter Andrew McCabe, the ill-fated former deputy director of the F.B.I. who briefly ran the bureau following the dismissal of James Comey, before himself departing under even uglier circumstances.
Perhaps the greatest fanfare surrounding any book about the current administration has been reserved for “The Threat: How the F.B.I. Protects America in the Age of Terror and Trump.” McCabe, after all, was a key figure in the investigation of Hillary Clinton’s private email server and Russia’s interference in the 2016 presidential election. He knew the key players: Comey, the special counsel Robert Mueller, Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein, Attorney General Jeff Sessions and the president himself. Published as the Mueller Report was nearing completion, “The Threat” zoomed to No. 1 on Amazon, bumping Michelle Obama’s mega-memoir from the top slot.
McCabe’s relationship with Comey, his friend and mentor, is more complex, as the Clinton email crisis made clear. The news that Clinton had used a private server as secretary of state would remain a dominant if not decisive story of the presidential race. When asked to supply these emails to a congressional committee, Clinton’s staff revealed that it had “kept back” and subsequently deleted those it deemed “personal,” about 30,000 in all. The resulting furor reached the bureau, where a special team began tracking the missing emails — a herculean task that led Comey to conclude that while Clinton had been “grossly negligent,” no security breaches had occurred.
Former F.B.I. deputy director Andrew McCabe recounts his tenure in the Trump administration.
Where does “The Threat” rank among these? The best comparison may be to Comey’s “A Higher Loyalty,” which covers much of the same ground. Comey’s reading is polished and confident; his personality is more expansive than McCabe’s, and the difference is striking. McCabe is a nuts-and-bolts narrator; he speaks in an earnest monotone, clear but unchanging. This works nicely in covering such things as the F.B.I.’s progression from the J. Edgar Hoover days of chasing bank robbers and suspected Communists to the more modern focus on organized crime and terrorism. Or, better still, when McCabe describes his role in tracking La Cosa Nostra, Russian mobsters and the Boston Marathon bombers. The stories he tells are strong enough to carry themselves.
The narration falters when energy and emotion are required. It’s clear from reading “The Threat” that McCabe would like to see Edward Snowden burn in hell for the incalculable damage he thinks Snowden did to America’s national security. Yet he speaks these words with much the same cadence as he uses to describe a low-level stakeout of Russian thugs in Brighton Beach. Even Trump’s Twitter attacks on McCabe’s wife, who ran unsuccessfully for state office in Virginia as a Democrat, and the events surrounding McCabe’s messy firing, are recounted in carefully measured tones. Anger and bitter sarcasm are left to the imagination.
So much has happened since the book’s publication, in February, that its impact may prove to be fleeting, indeed. When McCabe pressured Rosenstein to appoint a special counsel, he had every reason to think that the man eventually chosen for that post would see the events surrounding Trump’s election much as he did. Bob Mueller was one of McCabe’s true heroes. No one comes out better in the book. Did Mueller disappoint McCabe? Was the final result worth the painful sacrifices he made? It would be interesting to know.