Deep into Kathleen Alcott’s epic, multigenerational novel, “America Was Hard to Find,” a young man tells the story of how he landed on the cover of Life magazine. In the picture, he’s a 12-year-old boy dropping chrysanthemums down the barrels of rifles carried by National Guard troops at a Vietnam War protest. But the image conceals a more complicated truth: When the picture was taken, this child was high on mushrooms, provided to him by a friend of his mother’s.
This gulf — between the iconic photograph and the actual human experience, between the public’s imagination of history and the way it feels to the person living through it — is the focus of this sprawling but absorbing novel.
The story follows the lives of three vastly different people: the boy in the picture, his mother and his father. It opens in 1957 in the Mojave Desert, where we meet Vincent, the man who will become the boy’s father. He’s a married Air Force pilot who will soon begin training to be an astronaut. Enter Fay, a 21-year-old bartender who has recently rejected the conservatism (and the wealth) of her parents. Fay is smart, independent, adrift. Vincent is stoic to the point of near-total silence. Their affair is brief, and Fay never reveals the resulting pregnancy to Vincent.
The emotional heart of the book belongs to their son, Wright, whose childhood Alcott renders with supreme tenderness. A sensitive boy, shaped by an idealistic but somewhat neglectful mother who gradually vanishes into her cause, Wright thinks of himself as perhaps “the loneliest man in America.” That feeling lingers as he builds a life in San Francisco as a young gay man, his arrival there coinciding with the start of the AIDS crisis.
As Alcott’s ambitious (if slightly overstuffed) book ranges over three decades of American history, the era’s defining events drift in and out of the lens. The reader can almost imagine leafing through a pile of old Life magazines devoted to the Apollo program, Vietnam, Watergate and the oil crisis. Yet the real energy of the novel is not in Alcott’s rendering of these events, but rather in shimmering, knife-sharp descriptions of small and often devastating moments of individual experience within those larger histories.
Some of the book’s most memorable sections offer glimpses of the period through the narrow aperture of everyday human longing, like the way Alcott masterfully captures Wright’s humble wish for the kind of middle-class American childhood his mother rails against. So besotted with the idea is Wright — out of school and often on the run with his mother — that one day he sneaks into a public school, just to sit in for two happy hours on an ordinary English class.
In these moments, the reader experiences the era’s social upheavals and contests of values at their most intimate register.