If the arts in America ever produced an equivalent to the revolutionary French poet Arthur Rimbaud, it might have been the little-known but extremely influential filmmaker Barbara Rubin. The title of her magnum opus, the 1964 picture “Christmas on Earth,” comes from a passage in Rimbaud’s “A Season in Hell,” and the groundbreaking extremity of her work — and the actual trajectory of her life — can’t help but evoke the 19th-century poet. The comparison is made several times in “Barbara Rubin & the Exploding NY Underground,” an informative and overdue documentary directed by Chuck Smith.
The movie begins with the stark declaration that the most daring and uncompromising figure in the early ‘60s New York experimental film scene was “an 18-year-old-girl.” Rubin, whose family hailed from Cambria Heights in Queens, spent a portion of her teens in a psychiatric hospital. Her release entailed her getting a job; a relative arranged for her to intern with Jonas Mekas, the filmmaker, film archivist and writer who was the most significant instigator of underground film at the time.
Featuring reminiscences and observations from a wide range of friends and critics (one of these interviewees, Amy Taubin, is both), the documentary sketches Rubin’s alliances with the likes of Bob Dylan, Andy Warhol, the Velvet Underground and Allen Ginsberg. Because, frustratingly, there appears to be no extant footage of Rubin being interviewed, the talking heads serve as docents through a life that has many corners of obscurity.
There are also reproduced portions of “Christmas on Earth,” the work for which she is best known. It was made in two reels, one of which was to be projected full screen, the other to be projected as an inset of the larger frame. In the large frame are gigantic, probing close-ups of female genitalia; the action in the smaller frame depicts nude performers in stark body paint engaged in exploratory sexual activity. The movie’s provocation has nothing to do with titillation. It is something more simple: a demand to look, to see. That the demand, as blunt as it was, came from a young female artist in a milieu in which women were so frequently subjugated and discouraged is still startling; there’s a sense in which “Christmas on Earth” can be seen as not having had enough influence.
While the viewer never hears Rubin’s speaking voice in the film, excerpts from her letters, read by friends, put across her frustrations as her larger-scale ambitions fail to come to fruition. Like Rimbaud, she abdicated art at a young age, having five children before her death in 1980, at 35. Her children did not participate in the film, only adding to Rubin’s enigma. Nevertheless, in part because of the mysteries it encompasses, this story feels complete.