President Trump’s attention on trade has largely been focused on China in recent weeks. But there’s a growing sense that he could soon turn his fight to Europe.
• The European trade commissioner, Cecilia Malmstrom, reportedly warned E.U. trade ministers that they “should brace” for U.S. tariffs on billions of euros worth of European goods over a dispute about Airbus subsidies, Politico reports.
• A 180-day deadline that Mr. Trump had set for negotiations with the E.U. and Japan over car exports “holds to the president’s pattern of steadily increasing pressure on trading partners to cut a deal more to his liking,” Bloomberg argues.
Mr. Trump may have spotted an opportunity to take advantage of Europe while it’s in disarray.
• The results of the recent European Parliament elections show that the Continent is increasingly polarized and fragmented, and that Brexit continues to be a distraction.
• France and Germany — the bloc’s dominant powers — disagree on how to approach issues like agriculture and cars in trade talks, Bloomberg notes.
• The sides made little progress in talks in Washington and Paris this month, Bloomberg reports.
• That leaves more muddling through or a sharp escalation as the most likely paths.
• Escalating tariffs could damage both sides — but, as we’ve seen with China, that doesn’t mean they’re off the table.
More: China has reportedly paused purchases of U.S. soybeans. Speaker Nancy Pelosi is dragging out consideration of Mr. Trump’s updated North American trade deal. (Canada is moving to ratify it.) The rest of the world is worried about tariffs, but African nations are creating a free-trade zone. What happened when anchors from Fox and a Chinese state TV channel held a live debate on trade. And how other countries are trying to work around the power of the dollar.
Markets fell slightly yesterday as the trade war between the U.S. and China dragged on. Not a lot new, or particularly worrying, there, right? But one continued market phenomenon is beginning to cause concern, according to Neil Irwin of the Upshot: an inverted yield curve in the bond market.
• An inverted yield curve is when longer-term bond yields fall below those of shorter-term ones. For instance, the 10-year Treasury’s yield was 2.26 percent yesterday, while the 30-day Treasury’s was 2.35 percent.
• “The potential long-lasting consequences are harder to model,” he adds, which explains why bond investors are more pessimistic than recent economics and earnings data might suggest.
Would a Fiat-Renault merger deliver?
The two carmakers have promised that combining would create a company that is better equipped to survive the industry’s transition to electrification and autonomy. A merger might fix some problems, but it probably won’t solve all of them.
It would help with electric cars and global distribution. Fiat would provide profitable S.U.V. and high-end car models, and a beachhead in America. Renault would bring electric-vehicle technology and a stronger European presence.
And Nissan could help them become a global powerhouse. The Japanese carmaker is already in an alliance with Renault, and is warily studying the merger. Though worried about its independence, Nissan may have little choice but to link with Renault and Fiat in order to shore up its own declining operations. Such a move would give the new group a powerful reach.
But the cost savings appear dicey. Renault and Fiat say they can save $5.6 billion by combining supply chains and sharing R.&D. costs. But that would happen over six years, during which the companies have pledged not to lay off employees. So the benefits may be harder to extract in practice.
And auto mergers have a spotty record. Take Renault and Nissan: Despite teaming up in 1999, they use shared parts in only 35 percent of Nissan cars, far below an original target of 70 percent. Other alliances — Daimler and Chrysler, BMW and Rover — failed. That’s often partly because of clashes between management teams and cultures.
There’s still reason to be hopeful. Fiat bought Chrysler years ago, and it has proved to be one of the few auto mergers that has succeeded.
Facial recognition technology increasingly faces pushback around the world, most recently in San Francisco. But some companies are doubling down on sales across the United Arab Emirates, BuzzFeed News reports.
• IBM is marketing biometric surveillance systems in the region, as are the Chinese giants Hikvision and Huawei.
• “Police in Dubai have begun rolling out an ambitious program, dubbed Oyoon, the Arabic word for ‘eyes,’ that will implement facial recognition and analysis driven by artificial intelligence across the city,” though it isn’t clear what technology powers the tool.
Critics of facial recognition are dismayed. “In a place like Dubai, where there is not much freedom of expression and people are being jailed for what they say, when you introduce artificial intelligence, it’s used by systems of power to reinforce their control over the population,” Sarah Aoun, a digital rights technologist who works with rights activists, told BuzzFeed.
Have Trump’s tax cuts worked?
A new study by the Congressional Research Service throws cold water on the idea that the Trump administration’s 2017 tax cuts were a boon to U.S. economic growth.
The cuts had little effect on wages or investment in 2018. Economists calculated that they contributed perhaps 0.3 percent to overall economic gains, according to Jeff Cox of CNBC.
They didn’t pay for themselves, as President Trump claimed they would. To have done so, the economists write, the cuts would have had to cause a 6.7 percent increase in gross domestic product.
The biggest winners are corporations. The cuts contributed to a surge in stock buybacks, Michael Hiltzik of the LAT writes. Meanwhile, companies’ tax bills fell to 12 percent from 23 percent. That led to a $40 billion drop in revenue for the U.S. government.
What will happen to Huawei’s suppliers?
Most news coverage about the Trump administration’s block on sales of components and software to Huawei has focused on the Chinese company. But what does it mean for the suppliers?
The total impact is unknown. But Huawei spent about $11 billion last year buying components and services from U.S. companies.
Suppliers aren’t necessarily worried. “Even if we lose Huawei’s orders for base stations or smartphones, somebody else will have to make them and we’ll get that business,” Shoichi Tosaka, the C.E.O. of the Japanese electronics manufacturer Taiyo Yuden, told Bloomberg.
More: Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad of Malaysia said that his country tried to use Huawei technology “as much as possible.” The company opened a 5G lab in South Korea today, to little fanfare.
Silver Lake has hired Laura Anderson, who was most recently Intel’s head of global communications, for the same role.
Bed Bath & Beyond named four independent directors to settle a fight with activist investors: John Fleming, formerly of Uniqlo; Sue Gove, the president of a retail consultancy; Jeffrey Kirwan, previously the C.E.O. of Gap’s namesake retail division; and Joshua Schechter, a financier.
Two senior female partners at KPMG, Maggie Brereton and Ina Kjaer, resigned from the professional services company in February, reportedly over the firm’s handling of bullying accusations against a male colleague.
