Politics|On Politics With Lisa Lerer: To Fox or Not to Fox?
On Politics With Lisa Lerer: To Fox or Not to Fox?
Forget about a debate on Fox News. For Democrats in 2019, the debate is Fox News.
She was quickly joined by Senator Kamala Harris, who also said she would not participate in the events.
Their rejection of the network set them apart from some of their rivals for the Democratic presidential nomination, including Senator Bernie Sanders, who participated in a Fox News town hall in April, and Senator Amy Klobuchar, who was featured in one this month.
Whether to participate in a Fox News town hall, an hourlong session where voters and moderators ask the candidate questions, has become the newest flash point in the Democratic primary. The debate underscores a deeper split among Democrats: Is it better to ignore a media outlet that they believe skews its coverage to President Trump’s benefit, or embrace the opportunity to get their message through its filter?
Ms. Warren is making the case that Fox News is not a news network but something else — a propaganda outlet for the administration, promoting misinformation that only further divides Americans. It’s an idea that is shared by the Democratic National Committee, which barred the network from hosting a primary debate.
Town halls and debates on Fox News are typically moderated by anchors from the network’s news division, not its more partisan prime-time commentators. But Ms. Warren’s argument is that participating only helps Fox News as a whole — and by extension, Mr. Trump. Why should Democrats prop up a network that specializes in vilifying them, the theory goes, particularly at a time when some advertisers have distanced themselves from some of its shows?
The fact that Ms. Warren’s position offers an implicit critique of Mr. Sanders, her biggest rival for the party’s progressive wing, is certainly a plus for her campaign. By rejecting Fox News, she is doing what liberal activists have been urging Democrats to do for years.
But others in the party see Fox News as an opportunity, a chance to break through the filter bubble that divides red and blue America and reach Mr. Trump’s voters where they live. Deriding their viewing habits as “hateful” gives some Democrats flashbacks to Hillary Clinton’s infamous “deplorables” comment, particularly given that Fox dominates the cable ratings.
Mr. Sanders’s appearance drew more than 2.5 million viewers, the biggest television audience to date for a Democratic candidate in the 2020 field. In interviews since, he has drawn a distinction between Fox News, the network, and Fox News viewers. “I think it is important to talk to those people and say, ‘You know what, I know that many of you voted for Donald Trump, but he lied to you,’” he said.
But beyond seeing Mr. Sanders, it’s not clear that voters are all that interested in spending an hour listening to any of the 2020 candidates. CNN has hosted 20 town halls; nearly all have drawn fewer viewers than the channel’s prime-time lineup typically draws.
Are you one of the few, the proud, the lonely, who love town halls? Join our reporters on Sunday at 7 p.m. Eastern time, in the NYTimes app or on NYTimes.com, for live analysis of Mayor Pete Buttigieg’s appearance on Fox News.
Justice Department recommends withholding federal funds from three Democratic-led cities, despite lack of clear authority.
Here’s what early polls say about who should choose Ginsburg’s replacement.
Trump says he will wait until Friday or Saturday to announce his Supreme Court pick.
And then there were 23. There was a lot of 2020 news on the trail this week, and we’re here to catch you up.
• Gov. Steve Bullock of Montana is in! He plans to make the campaign finance system a centerpiece of his platform — and he raised $1 million in his first 24 hours as a candidate, his campaign said.
• Senator Cory Booker’s deputy campaign manager is trying to ensure that Senator Kirsten Gillibrand makes it onto the debate stage.
• Stacey Abrams, the Democrat who fell short in the Georgia governor’s race last year, says she’s not ruling out a 2020 bid. “I do believe I could enter the conversation as late as the fall and still have a chance to win,” she told MSNBC.
• He’s back at it: Beto O’Rourke live-streamed his haircut.
• Republicans reset the terms of the abortion debate. Here’s how they did it.
• The SAT is adding an “adversity score” to address scoring patterns that indicate socioeconomic inequalities.
• The Washington Post investigates where ambassadors like to eat to remind them of home. Taco Bell, Ikea: Ambassadors, they’re just like us!
No one makes it hurt quite like The New York Post.
Early voting for the presidential election starts in September in some states. Take a look at key dates where you live. If you’re voting by mail, it’s risky to procrastinate.
