Imagine if humans had never invented a written language. How would the world be different?
Would we have been able to develop advanced technology like computers or nuclear missiles? How would we remember our ancestors and our past? How would we communicate with one another? What would we learn in school?
First, take a few minutes to truly picture what the world and your life would look like.
Next, make a list of 10 ways your life and the world would be different without writing.
Afterward, find a partner and share your lists. How are they similar? How are they different? Would you want to live in the worlds you both imagined? What would be the advantages and disadvantages of the imagined life?
Last month, the British Library in London opened an exhibition, “Writing: Making Your Mark,” to celebrate one of humankind’s greatest achievements — written language. (You can watch a 30-second trailer for the exhibition here.) It’s a story 5,000 years in the making. But what is the future of this monumental invention? Will writing exist in another half millennium?
1. The article begins “The writing’s on the wall, we’re told.” Why have people throughout history worried that writing might be coming to an end?
2. The British Library exhibition tells the story of writing through 120 objects. Which three objects do you think are most important and why?
3. What exactly is writing? What definition does the article offer? How do the examples of John Milton and Jean-Dominique Bauby complicate the standard definition of writing?
4. Richard Watson, a futurist, says that “the vital signs aren’t good” for the future of writing. Why is he concerned about new technologies and their impact on writing?
5. Adrian Edwards, the curator of the exhibition, compares the use of emojis to hieroglyphics. Do you think sending emojis in a text counts as writing? Refer to the definition and arguments provided by the article to defend your position.
Do you agree that the decreasing role of handwriting is an important loss? How much do you write by hand? Which method of writing do you prefer and why?
— What did you learn about writing from the article? Does it make you more fully appreciate writing?
— Which historical object from the exhibition is most fascinating to you? If you had to curate the same exhibition but could only include five objects, what would they be and why?
— What are your experiences with writing? Are they mostly positive or negative? What do you like to write about, and why? Do you like to write in a journal, or a blog? Do you like to write poems, stories or songs? Do you think you are a good writer? Which of your own writing are you most proud of?
— Where would you rank writing on the list of human achievements? Look through these lists of human achievements (here and here), and then create your own “Top 10.” Justify your ranking for the invention of writing (whether it makes your top 10 or not).
Do you think the future of writing is in danger? Will we one day give up pencils, pens and keyboards for videos and voice messages? What would be lost for us as a society and as individuals if writing were to disappear?
— Imagine you are curating an exhibition on human communication in the year 7,019. Will writing still exist then? What do you think will be the primary mode of human communication?
I Didn’t Write This Column. I Spoke It.
Has the Electronic Image Supplanted the Written Word?
