1. An urgent warning about the natural world.
Farming, logging, poaching, fishing and mining, along with global warming, are speeding up extinctions and devastating ecosystems “at an unprecedented pace,” an exhaustive U.N. study concluded.
And that means damage to wetlands that purify drinking water, coral reefs that sustain fisheries and plants that medicines come from. Even with quick government action, the report says, it’s too late to do more than slow the decline of biodiversity. Above, an olive ridley sea turtle on a beach in India.
A separate study notes that the few hundred Bengal tigers left in India and Bangladesh will have no suitable habitat by 2070.
2. U.S. markets mostly recovered from the shock of President Trump’s threat of new tariffs on Chinese imports. Battered markets in China and Hong Kong will reopen shortly.
According to people familiar with the negotiations, Mr. Trump’s move came after China tried to reverse commitments to essentially codify an agreement to provide U.S. companies with more equal treatment.
Questions about the status of this week’s trade talks swirled. Chinese media was mostly silent on the threat, and it was unclear whether the negotiating team China is sending to Washington this week will include the country’s vice premier, pictured above right with Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin in Beijing last week.
3. Michael Cohen, President Trump’s former fixer and current antagonist, left his Manhattan home, above, and headed to the federal prison in Otisville, N.Y., to begin his three-year prison sentence.
Meanwhile, the confrontation between Congress and the administration rolled slowly on.
Barring a last-minute change by the Justice Department, the House Judiciary Committee plans to vote Wednesday to hold Attorney General William Barr in contempt of Congress, for not complying with a congressional subpoena for the full report of the special counsel, Robert Mueller, and its underlying evidence.
Congressional Democrats are also meeting resistance over gaining access to Mr. Trump’s tax returns, getting key documents from the former White House counsel Donald McGahn and hearing from Mr. Mueller himself.
4. The sudden deployment of a U.S. aircraft carrier strike group and Air Force bombers to the Persian Gulf was prompted by what senior administration officials said were threats by Iran against U.S. troops in Iraq.
Expect questions from Iraqi leaders about whether the Trump administration is trying to use its military presence to further its agenda against Tehran.
Elsewhere in the region, a tentative cease-fire between Israel and Palestinian militant groups in Gaza appeared to be holding, bringing a deadly bout of cross-border fighting to an end. At least 22 Palestinians and four Israelis died in the fighting.
5. Norah O’Donnell will become the third woman — following Katie Couric and Diane Sawyer — to anchor an evening network newscast on her own when she takes the chair at “CBS Evening News” this summer.
Her move off “CBS This Morning” leaves Gayle King as the centerpiece of the early show, which has undergone a series of lineup changes since Charlie Rose was fired in 2017 after multiple women accused him of sexual misconduct.
The shifts are part of a major reorganization underway by Susan Zirinsky, who took over as president of CBS News on March 1.
That was Prince Harry, who was with his wife, Meghan Markle, as she gave birth to a boy. Above, the notice being posted at Buckingham Palace.
We looked at 100 years of royal baby traditions, some of which are being upended by Harry and Meghan.
7. Add Alex Cora, the manager of the Boston Red Sox, to the list of sports figures who’ve declined to visit the White House under President Trump.
At least four Red Sox players also opted out.
8. The owner of Maximum Security, the disqualified Kentucky Derby winner, pulled the horse out of the next leg of the Triple Crown, the Preakness Stakes, and vowed an appeal of Saturday’s ruling.
But it’s unclear if the Kentucky Horse Racing Commission has the authority to overrule the derby decision. The owner, Gary West, stopped short of saying that he would file a court challenge.
9. We know it wasn’t a Dragon Drink, that pink concoction with sweet mango and dragon fruit flavors from Starbucks.
But there was some kind of disposable coffee cup in Sunday night’s episode of “Game of Thrones,” there amid the candlelit chandeliers and goblets of Dornish wine.
You won’t see it in HBO’s handout photo above, but, like many things in the final season of the series, fans shared screengrabs on social media, dissected its meaning, overanalyzed it and made it into memes.
Here’s our recap of the rest of Episode 4.
10. And finally: Red carpet spectaculars.
Hosted by Vogue, it is officially the opening of the yearly blockbuster show at the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s Costume Institute.
About 550 chosen ones get to go. Your briefing writer is not one of them.
We’ll be updating our coverage here.
Have a sparkling evening.
