The United States has already begun trying to extradite Mr. Assange, an effort that was expected to be prolonged and complex even before the announcement in Stockholm on Monday.
British officials will determine which case takes precedence, Swedish prosecutors said, adding that if Mr. Assange were eventually extradited to Sweden, he could not be sent to the United States without the consent of Britain.
The investigation stems from an accusation in August 2010 made by a Swedish woman who said Mr. Assange had sexually assaulted her.
Mr. Assange was removed from the Ecuadorean Embassy in London last month and promptly arrested, seven years after seeking refuge to avoid extradition in an earlier Swedish investigation into the same case. He was then sentenced to 50 weeks for jumping bail.
On Monday, Eva-Marie Persson, Sweden’s deputy director of public prosecutions, announced the decision to reopen the Swedish investigation at a news conference in Stockholm. She said the authorities there were acting because there was still probable cause to suspect that Mr. Assange had committed the crime.
“I take the view that there exists the possibility to take the case forward,” Ms. Persson said.
The decision to reopen the investigation is not equivalent to making a decision to indict Mr. Assange, she said, but a European arrest warrant will be issued so that the Swedish authorities can take him into custody and question him.
The Swedish authorities began investigating the WikiLeaks founder in 2010, after two women accused him of assaulting them during separate sexual encounters while he was visiting Stockholm.
Sweden dropped the initial investigation in May 2017, after concluding that there was no way to proceed with the case as long as Mr. Assange was holed up in the embassy. Prosecutors indicated at the time that they reserved the right to reopen their inquiry.
Last month, days after Mr. Assange was removed from the embassy, having worn out his welcome with his hosts, Sweden announced that a lawyer requested that the investigation be reopened into the accusation of rape brought by one of the women.
The prosecution still falls within the country’s 10-year statute of limitations; it has already passed for the sexual molestation and unlawful coercion accusations.
Ms. Persson, the Swedish prosecutor, said that because Mr. Assange has been convicted of a crime in Britain, he would serve at least 25 weeks of his sentence. The Swedish authorities hope to question Mr. Assange while he is still in British detention, Ms. Persson said, but that would require his consent.
Mr. Assange’s fate could ultimately lie with Sajid Javid, Britain’s home secretary. In the case of multiple extradition requests for one individual, the home secretary may defer proceedings on one of the requests until the other has been completed.
Assuming Sweden submits a European arrest warrant, its claim would most likely take precedence, said Michael O’Kane, a British extradition lawyer. “Arguably the rape allegation is more serious,” Mr. O’Kane said.
The arrest warrant and extradition requests will first proceed through the British court system, a process that could take six months to a year.
Mr. Assange and his supporters have long maintained that the accusations were attempts to discredit him and said that the efforts to extradite him to Sweden were a pretext to send him to the United States.
