San Francisco banned the use of facial recognition software by the police and other agencies on Tuesday. The city is one of the first to block this tool.
It’s psychologically unhealthy when people know they’re being watched in every aspect of the public realm, on the streets, in parks. That’s not the kind of city I want to live in. This is a technology that misidentified 28 members of the United States Congress. But really can be terribly misused by governments. So this legislation says we’re going to have use policies over existing and future technologies. But we want to put the facial recognition technology, we want to put that genie back in the bottle. There are many ways to make our society secure without living in a security state. And there, we have very good policing, but we don’t want to live in a police state. And this legislation tries to strike that balance.
Similar bans are under consideration in Oakland and in Somerville, Mass., outside of Boston. In Massachusetts, a bill in the State Legislature would put a moratorium on facial recognition and other remote biometric surveillance systems. On Capitol Hill, a bill introduced last month would ban users of commercial face recognition technology from collecting and sharing data for identifying or tracking consumers without their consent, although it does not address the government’s uses of the technology.
Still, the San Francisco Police Officers Association, an officers’ union, said the ban would hinder their members’ efforts to investigate crime.
Mr. Cagle and other experts said that it was difficult to know exactly how widespread the technology was in the United States. “Basically, governments and companies have been very secretive about where it’s being used, so the public is largely in the dark about the state of play,” he said.
Other users, Mr. Maass said, include the Colorado Department of Public Safety, the Pinellas County Sheriff’s Office in Florida, the California Department of Justice and the Virginia State Police.
But some experts fear the advances are outstripping government’s ability to set guardrails to protect privacy.
American civil liberties advocates warn that the ability of facial surveillance to identify people at a distance, or online, without their knowledge or consent presents unique risks — threatening Americans’ ability to freely attend political protests or simply go about their business anonymously in public. Last year, Bradford L. Smith, the president of Microsoft, warned that the technology was too risky for companies to police on their own and asked Congress to oversee its use.
The battle over the technology intensified last year after two researchers published a study showing bias in some of the most popular facial surveillance systems. Called Gender Shades, the study reported that systems from IBM and Microsoft were much better at identifying the gender of white men’s faces than they were at identifying the gender of darker-skinned or female faces.
Another study this year reported similar problems with Amazon’s technology, called Rekognition. Microsoft and IBM have since said they improved their systems, while Amazon has said it updated its system since the researchers tested it and had found no differences in accuracy.
Alvaro Bedoya, who directs Georgetown University’s Center on Privacy and Technology, said that more than 30 states allow local or state authorities, or the F.B.I., to search their driver’s license photos.
He also said that comprehensive regulation of the technology is sorely lacking. “This is the most pervasive and risky surveillance technology of the 21st century,” he said.
But proponents of the bans say they are an effort to hit the pause button and study the matter before harm is done. The proposed ban in Somerville, the Boston suburb, was sponsored by a councilor, Ben Ewen-Campen. “The government and the public don’t have a handle on what the technology is and what it will become,” he said on Tuesday.
Next door in Boston, Ed Davis, the former police commissioner, said it was “premature to be banning things.” Mr. Davis, who led the department during the Boston Marathon attack, said that no one in the United States wanted to follow the Chinese model.
