Politics|He’s One of the Biggest Backers of Trump’s Push to Protect American Steel. And He’s Canadian.
HARROW, Ontario — Barry Zekelman, a Canadian billionaire whose business is mostly in the United States, is not a guy who likes to lose — or go slow.
On days off, he likes to race his Ferrari 488 sports cars. Or he might climb aboard his Gulfstream IV jet to fly to the Bahamas to visit his 121-foot superyacht, which he named “Man of Steel” in a nod to his role as chief executive of Zekelman Industries, North America’s largest steel-tube manufacturer.
So when Mr. Zekelman saw a chance to address his greatest frustration — a flood of cheap steel tube imports into the United States that was undermining sales at his family-owned, Chicago-based company — he went all out to win in another intensely competitive arena: influencing policy in Washington.
And Zekelman Industries made political donations in the United States — skirting or possibly violating a ban on contributions by foreigners — including $1.75 million last year to a group supporting President Trump.
“He’s attacking the problems that should have been attacked for many years,” Mr. Zekelman, 52, said of Mr. Trump in an interview.
His status as a foreigner seeking to promote protectionist policies in the United States makes him unusual. But Mr. Zekelman’s effort amounts to a case study in how to gain and employ access in Mr. Trump’s Washington, where an ideological commitment to aiding business meets an open door to lobbyists, interest groups and donors — especially those from industries, like oil and gas, chemicals, casinos and steel, that are strong supporters of Mr. Trump.
The lobbying campaign has, at times, come close to the edge of the federal rules, including the law that prohibits foreigners from donating to election campaigns, an examination by The New York Times found. But it has also proved highly successful in encouraging actions that have benefited Mr. Zekelman’s company’s bottom line and his American employees.
The administration has ruled in favor of Zekelman Industries on a series of claims the company has made against foreign competitors. Sales and profits have surged at the privately held company, which has annual revenues of nearly $3 billion. Employment at the company’s 14 plants in the United States — in Illinois, Pennsylvania, California, Ohio and other states, which operate under names including Wheatland Tube, Sharon Tube and Atlas Tube — has increased by 600, and he hopes to add another 500 jobs this year.
“In the 33 years I have been in business, I have never been more encouraged,” said Mr. Zekelman, who took over the business at 19, when his father died.
Mr. Trump has won backing — and political donations — from a number of steel companies, including executives at Nucor, the nation’s largest steel producer, and AK Steel.
But Zekelman Industries now stands out as the biggest steel industry donor to Mr. Trump’s affiliated political committees, records show.
The $1.75 million in contributions were delivered in three chunks last year to America First Action SuperPAC, which was created in January 2017 by former Trump campaign aides to push Mr. Trump’s agenda.
Federal Election Commission rules prohibit any foreigner from “directing, dictating, controlling, or directly or indirectly participating in the decision-making process” related to any campaign contribution, including super PACs.
Mr. Zekelman, who does not have United States citizenship, said in an interview that he did not play a role in the decision to donate. But he added that he did discuss the matter with other company executives, after a representative from America First Action approached one of Zekelman Industries’ lawyers and asked for a contribution.
Mr. Zekelman said the donation was legal because the final decision was made by members of his board who are American citizens or legal residents of the United States, and the money was donated through Wheatland Tube, a United States-based subsidiary of Zekelman Industries, which he owns with his two brothers.
After The New York Times raised questions about the donation, Mickey McNamara, general counsel at Zekelman Industries and president of Wheatland Tube, said he did not recall discussing the matter with Mr. Zekelman. Mr. McNamara said he decided to make the donation without consulting with Mr. Zekelman.
In a statement, Brian O. Walsh, the president of America First Action, said the organization did not accept foreign contributions. “All contributors are expressly asked to affirm they are a U.S. citizen or permanent resident,” he said.
Adav Noti, a former associate general counsel at the Federal Election Commission, said that if Mr. Zekelman had discussed the matter with colleagues at work, he had most likely violated federal law, even if the formal decision to donate was made by others.
“This sounds pretty clearly unlawful to me,” said Mr. Noti, now chief of staff at Campaign Legal Center, which monitors election law compliance.
Mr. Zekelman’s drive to get help from the Trump administration started just 10 days after Mr. Trump took office in 2017, email records show, and more than a year before his company made its first donation to America First Action.
He reached out to Stephen P. Vaughn, then the acting United States trade representative, who had been a lawyer at King & Spalding, where his clients included Zekelman Industries.
Mr. Vaughn’s calendar is blacked out for the time of the meeting. But a log from the agency’s headquarters shows that Mr. Zekelman and Ms. Byers signed in shortly before the scheduled meeting.
But Mr. Zekelman said his business message to Mr. Vaughn during that visit was clear.
Mr. Vaughn, who until this month served as general counsel in the trade representative’s office, is far from the only contact that Mr. Zekelman has inside the administration.
Gilbert B. Kaplan, a lawyer who has filed more than a dozen lawsuits or complaints on behalf of Zekelman Industries, was named under secretary of commerce for international trade, a role in which he helps oversee trade negotiations related to the steel industry.
Agency records show the extensive access that Mr. Zekelman and his executives have had to top trade officials, including Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross; the White House trade adviser, Peter Navarro; Robert Lighthizer, the United States trade representative; and officials at the Customs and Border Protection agency, which enforces trade laws.
Some of those meetings, including one with Mr. Ross last week, were organized by a trade group called the Committee on Pipe and Tube Imports, led for the past year by Tony Frabotta, a vice president at Zekelman Industries. The group has also reached out to Capitol Hill for support — including visits to dozens of congressional offices this month — requests sometimes followed up with campaign contributions by the committee, records show.
Zekelman Industries also began its own influence campaign — television and radio spots with patriotic music and shots of Mr. Zekelman — about the need to protect American steel makers. “It’s time for US to show our support,” said one of the ads, a message that dovetails with Mr. Trump’s.
The most important step the administration has taken to help the industry is a 25 percent tariff on imports, which resulted in a surge in sales from Zekelman’s United States plants. This came in March 2018, weeks before Zekelman Industries wrote its first check to America First Action, for $1 million.
The tariff was followed by a cap on steel imports from three countries, including South Korea, which had been a major competitor for Mr. Zekelman.
The administration has also been moving aggressively on complaints that companies are trying to import goods from nations like Thailand, Turkey, Vietnam and the United Arab Emirates where manufacturing is government subsidized or gets other unfair benefits, said Roger B. Schagrin, a lawyer and lobbyist who represents Mr. Zekelman and other American-based steel tube makers.
“Whack-a-mole” is how Mr. Zekelman described his effort to head off subsidized imports, given that as soon as he managed to get punitive action against one competitor, another emerged.
Steel tube imports from Turkey have been a particular target.
One case involved a request to the administration by Borusan Mannesmann to import steel tube tariff free from Turkey while it completed the expansion of a steel pipe mill in Texas. Zekelman Industries objected, telling the Commerce Department that a Zekelman plant in Arkansas could make the steel Borusan needed.
The International Trade Administration, a part of the Commerce Department overseen by Mr. Kaplan, the former Zekelman lawyer and lobbyist, sided with Zekelman, recommending that Borusan’s request be denied, documents show. A spokeswoman said Mr. Kaplan had honored all ethics requirements, which would prohibit him from helping a recent client.
Mr. Trump announced last summer that he would double tariffs on steel from Turkey to 50 percent. Those imports — including steel tube — dropped 48 percent last year as a result, a drop so big that Mr. Trump moved last week to return the tariff to 25 percent.
Mr. Zekelman said he played no role in asking for the temporary doubling of the tariff on Turkey, but each of these moves helped his business. The company is also making structural steel pipe for use in the parts of the border wall Mr. Trump intends to build with emergency government funds.
On Friday, the administration reached a deal to eliminate the 25 percent tariffs on steel imports from Canada and Mexico, while leaving them in place for most of the rest of the world. The decision will benefit Mr. Zekelman, whose biggest manufacturing plant is in Harrow, Ontario, meaning the company will now be able to ship Canadian-made pipe into the United States tariff free, even as Mr. Zekelman advocates protection for his United States plants.
The success of his tactics has not gone unnoticed by competitors. The American-Turkish Council, whose sponsors include Borusan Mannesmann, moved its annual meeting from the Ritz-Carlton hotel to the Trump International Hotel in Washington. Among the guests at the event last month were Mr. Ross, the commerce secretary.
