Through June 15. Gladstone Gallery, 130 East 64th Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , gladstone64.com.
Some architects prefer their creations devoid of people — it photographs better that way — but Lina Bo Bardi built for life. The Italian-born Brazilian architect (1914-92) took a functionalist, anti-utopian approach to building that privileged social encounters and unexpected discoveries, and she is responsible for three of the greatest buildings in São Paulo: the city’s main art museum, known as MASP, where paintings hang on free-standing glass easels; her own cantilevered house, the Casa de Vidro; and the huge SESC Pompéia, a convivial community center that is her crowning work.
If you can’t get down to Brazil (and, alert, starting next month Americans no longer need a visa!) you can just head uptown, where Bo Bardi’s furniture has been installed in a swoon-inducing exhibition, “Studio d’Arte Palma,” at Gladstone’s uptown branch, in a townhouse designed by her fellow modernist Edward Durell Stone.
From 1948 to ’51, she and her fellow Italian immigrant Giancarlo Palanti (1906-77) created new Brazilian interior furnishings informed by vernacular styles and made from local woods, often darker and more lustrous than the ones the European avant-garde favored. A stackable folding chair she designed for MASP is fashioned from burled jacaranda and has its original leather seat, while Palanti’s armchairs, made of the same wood, have been reupholstered in soft mohair velvet. Here too are a covetable desk Bo Bardi made of caviuna wood, and a low-slung armchair Palanti crafted from darker cabreúva, both of which are supported by bold N-shaped legs. Even the gallery’s receptionist is seated at a dining table by Bo Bardi and Palanti, topped with a slab of the warm, dense paulista wood called pau marfim.
Through June 9. 47 Canal, 291 Grand Street, second floor, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , 47Canal.us.
While young people around the world are calling for action on climate change, artists imagine and simulate its effects, as Josh Kline does in “Climate Change: Part One” at 47 Canal.
This exhibition envisions a future somewhere from 2040 to 2060, unfolding over five dimly lit funhouse rooms (without the fun). Tables and display cases hold melting blocks of ice that cause water to rise around dollhouse-size legislative buildings molded in mud gathered from the Potomac River. Water from the melting ice collects in buckets beneath the tables and cases and will be refrozen and put back in the sculptures throughout the show.
Elsewhere are sculptures of buildings created in wax, also melting. (They will be recast and reinstalled.) In the final room, giant vitrines with eerie orange and purple light contain round vessels encasing miniature scenes of work or leisure: tiny computers, office equipment and beach chairs. It’s like staring into a flooded version of our already memorialized future.
Through June 15. Lehmann Maupin, 501 West 24th Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , lehmannmaupin.com.
The final artworks do resemble skins, as if the objects and architecture they represent had shed them like snakes. Detached from their bodies, the skins take on colors — browns, pinks and purples that recall bruises and rust, while some have a white sheen that might suggest mold. Up close, the fascinating surfaces of pieces like “Untitled (Door to the Herrenzimmer)” (1978) morph into abstract paintings. Step back and their ghostly shapes return to view.
