And now for something completely different: A deep dive into a very fraught raisin situation.
Raisins. They sound like a pretty dry subject.
But as I was preparing for an interview with Sun-Maid’s chief executive, I found two fertile pieces of information: One was that most of the major figures in the raisin industry had been on the job for decades.
The other was that the young chief executive, Harry Overly, had in his first year on the job pulled out of something called the Raisin Bargaining Association, an organization the company had been a part of for decades. I wondered if there had been any repercussions.
When I asked about it, Mr. Overly hesitated. “There was definitely some intimidation stuff that went down,” he said.
What did that mean? When he was pushed, the whole story came out. It involves menacing notes, death threats and the potential burning of Sun-Maid’s raisins. You can read all about it here.
On the invitation of one of my sources, the private detective Rocky Pipkin, I flew to Fresno in late March. (Mr. Pipkin, who was an extraordinarily gracious and helpful host, ended up being cut from the finished story.) By this point, I had been hearing stories about the so-called raisin mafia for months. I’m a neurotic person to begin with, and I can’t say I landed in Fresno in a calm state of mind. I was sure I was in danger. Furthermore, I had a bad head cold.
I checked into my hotel somewhere around midnight. I got into the elevator. I must have looked awful.
The burly man who followed me into the elevator must have noticed. “Long day?” he asked.
“Good thing it’s almost over,” he said, calmly.
The elevator doors opened and I sprint-walked to my room and locked and bolted the door.
Of course, nothing bad happened to me in Fresno. Everyone I talked to was helpful and interesting, and I’m grateful for their generosity and hospitality.
Mr. Pipkin told me enough amazing stories to inform five years of reporting, and arranged for me to be flown in a tiny plane above the Central Valley so I could see Raisin Town from above, as well as citrus and wheat and alfalfa and mansions and airstrips and a traffic jam on Highway 99.
Also: Did you go to Stanford, or are you a student there now? What was the application process like and what did you do to prepare? And what was it like to go to school at one of the world’s most elite institutions? Let us know at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| I’ll be filling in for Tejal Rao today with your weekend recommendation. But it’s still inspired by her travels around the state.
This week, she wrote about how a Napa tomato grower, Brad Gates of Wild Boar Farms, completely rethought his work in light of a changing climate.
So, in addition to the fully grown tomatoes he once provided mostly to top restaurants like Chez Panisse in Berkeley, he started selling young plants and seeds. And he started breeding varieties not just for taste but also for hardiness.
Obviously, the recommendation here is tomatoes — colorful, “outrageous” ones, as Wild Boar describes its product. It’s almost summer, right?
