Duncan Henry Albert Goodwin and Anthony James Rotunno were married May 18 at the home of Mr. Goodwin’s parents, which was once part of the Clover Hill Iron Mine in Somers, N.Y. Denis J. Timone, a justice in the Town of Somers who is a friend of the Goodwin family, officiated.
Mr. Goodwin (left), 30, is the social media and reservations manager at the McNally Restaurant Group in New York, whose restaurants include Augustine, Balthazar, Lucky Strike, Minetta Tavern and Morandi. He graduated from Baruch College.
He is the son of Maconda Goodspeed Goodwin and Laurence Goodwin. Mr. Goodwin’s mother, who was a stay-at-home parent, is also an artist, who does pencil drawings and paintings. Her work has appeared at regional art shows, including one at the Muscoot Farm in Katonah, N.Y., in November 2018, and the Somers Art Circus at Bailey Park in April 2019. His father, who is retired, was responsible for client technical sales support at IBM in New York.
Mr. Goodwin is a maternal great-great grandson of the sculptor Bela Lyon Pratt who designed the Pratt coins for the United States Mint in the early 20th century and the sculptures personifying art and science outside the Boston Public Library.
Mr. Rotunno, 32, is a senior editor for the strategist section and website at New York magazine. He graduated summa cum laude from Boston University.
He is a son of Elizabeth A. Rotunno and John A. Rotunno of Morristown, N.J. Mr. Rotunno’s mother is the parish secretary at the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary Catholic Church in Morristown. His father is an associate director in the New York office at the Stan Johnson Company, a commercial real estate investment firm based in Tulsa, Okla., whose specialty is net lease transactions. He is on the board of the Teresa and Albert Rotunno Family Foundation in Millbrook, N.Y., which funds community projects and organizations in Dutchess County.
The grooms met in 2011 in New York when Mr. Rotunno went to the J. Crew Men’s Shop in SoHo where Mr. Goodwin worked as a sales associate.