Tiger Woods will be awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Trump on Monday, the White House said Thursday.
Mr. Woods, 43, won the Masters last month, his 15th major win, but his first in a decade.
At the time, Mr. Trump tweeted that he would present Mr. Woods with the award “because of his incredible Success & Comeback in Sports (Golf) and, more importantly, LIFE.” Mr. Trump had also provided encouragement and updates about Mr. Woods’s Masters performance during the event.
The announcement comes at a time when some athletes have shown a reluctance to be honored by the Trump administration. The Golden State Warriors of the N.B.A. declined a White House visit after their championship, and many of that team’s players have been openly critical of the president. The University of Virginia men’s basketball team cited scheduling conflicts in declining an invitation last month, though several players also criticized Mr. Trump.
The Baylor women’s basketball team attended a White House ceremony on Monday.
The Presidential Medal of Freedom is the nation’s highest civilian honor. First awarded in 1963, it has honored achievements in fields including art (Norman Rockwell), architecture (I. M. Pei), acting (Audrey Hepburn), writing (Tennessee Williams), music (Duke Ellington), economics (Milton Friedman), law (Felix Frankfurter), journalism (Walter Cronkite), medicine (Jonas Salk) and politics (Edward Kennedy).
Among the two dozen sports figures who have been honored are Jesse Owens, Ted Williams, Muhammad Ali and Michael Jordan. In golf, President George W. Bush honored Arnold Palmer and Jack Nicklaus, while President Barack Obama recognized the pioneering player Charlie Sifford.
In his time in office, Mr. Trump has honored, among others, quarterback Roger Staubach; Senator Orrin Hatch; and Miriam Adelson, a philanthropist and the wife of Sheldon Adelson, a billionaire donor to Mr. Trump. He also honored Babe Ruth and Elvis Presley posthumously.
A spokesman for Mr. Woods did not immediately return a request for comment.
Mr. Woods owns property near Mr. Trump in Florida, and the two men have played golf together. Mr. Woods is also designing a golf course on a Trump property in Dubai.
In 2014 he visited the Obama White House with members of the winning and losing Presidents Cup teams.
Mr. Woods has not played since the Masters and is skipping next week’s Wells Fargo Championship at Quail Hollow in Charlotte, N.C., an event he won in 2007.