WASHINGTON — Championship sports teams visiting the White House have historically been bathed in a benign, bipartisan glow. The athletes smile, the president salutes them and makes a joke or two, and a fine photo is had by all.
Not in the era of President Trump.
When the Boston Red Sox gathered on the South Lawn on Thursday afternoon to be honored by the president for winning last year’s World Series, the team picture was incomplete, with Manager Alex Cora and some of Boston’s biggest stars absent in protest of the way Mr. Trump handled the aftermath of Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico.
The players who joined him in boycotting the White House were either Latino or African-American, and included Mookie Betts, the reigning American League Most Valuable Player, and David Price, whose pitching during the World Series was central to Boston’s victory.
Mr. Trump’s hard-line immigration policies and his harsh comments about countries in Latin America have rankled a number of baseball players in a sport where an increasing number of players are Latino, with the most from the Dominican Republic or Venezuela.
“I made the choice not to go because, as we know, the president has said a lot of stuff about Mexico,” said Hector Velazquez, a pitcher who is Mexican.
Other players, including J.D. Martinez, who is of Cuban descent, attended the ceremony. Mr. Martinez handed the president a Red Sox jersey with his name on the back. The team’s owner, John Henry, was also there, and thanked the president for the honor. Mr. Henry has donated more than $1 million to mostly Democratic candidates, though he has not been an active contributor since 2004, according to Open Secrets.
The Red Sox were not the first championship team to raise questions about visiting the White House because of misgivings about its occupant. When the Golden State Warriors of the N.B.A. suggested that they were unsure about a visit, they had their invitation rescinded. So did the Philadelphia Eagles after they won the Super Bowl in 2018 and a sizable number of team members said they would not attend.
Two recent visits by athletes took place without protests. Tiger Woods was honored with the Presidential Medal of Freedom on Monday, and the Baylor women’s basketball team attended a White House ceremony last week.
As for the Red Sox, Mr. Trump did not seem deterred by the criticism. “I like the Red Sox,” he told reporters on Thursday before launching into a defense of the amount of money that has gone to the Puerto Rican recovery.
But Mr. Trump seems to genuinely enjoy welcoming athletes. “You ever seen such good-looking people behind me?” he asked the crowd as he issued a play-by-play of Boston’s path to victory. He then said he was taking the team on a tour of the Lincoln Bedroom.
On some occasions, the president has added his own touch. When Clemson University’s top-ranked football team turned up in January, it was treated to piles of burgers and fish sandwiches from McDonald’s, Wendy’s and Burger King, still in their boxes and wrappers, and served on trays in the candlelit dining room.
Sarah Huckabee Sanders, Mr. Trump’s press secretary, said the government shutdown necessitated the menu.
Since the time that President William Howard Taft threw out a ceremonial first pitch on opening day, presidents have tried to drape themselves in baseball nostalgia. And Mr. Trump, who played high school baseball at the New York Military Academy, indulged in a little nostalgia himself with the Red Sox.
But he rarely talks about baseball publicly and has not thrown out an opening day pitch, at least in part over concern that he might receive an unwelcome reception.
Hosting championship teams got its start with Ronald Reagan, according to Curt Smith, the author of “The Presidents and the Pastime: The History of Baseball and the White House,” and the celebrations have usually had a patriotic, bipartisan flavor. “This was an event where both parties could rally, players could rally,” he said.
Now, said Mr. Smith, a former speechwriter for President George Bush, the events are rived by “the extraordinary partisanship on both sides, the zealotry, the hatred” that has evolved.
