Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about the Shalimar Diner in Queens misstated the year that the Moondance Diner closed. It was 2007, not 2017.
The New York Panorama feature on Page 1 misidentifies the location of a picture that shows a tour guide photographing members of her group with the Statue of Liberty. It was Liberty Island, not Ellis Island.
A subheading in a review of the Frieze Art Fair on Friday misstated the name of a gallery in the Frame section of the fair. It is Various Small Fires, not Very Small Fires.
An article on Page 64 about the acquisition of Remington by Cerberus misstates the birthplace of Stephen Feinberg, a founder of Cerberus. He was born in the Bronx, not Spring Valley, N.Y., which is where he grew up.
An article on Page 54 about Meow Wolf, an art collective that creates immersive and interactive experiences, refers imprecisely to Creative Startups. It is a start-up accelerator, not a business incubator.
An obituary on Monday about the former United States senator Richard G. Lugar referred incorrectly in part to his service in the Navy. He enlisted in 1956, not 1957, and he was commissioned an ensign, not a second lieutenant. It also misstated when he married Charlene Smeltzer. It was after he studied at Oxford on a Rhodes scholarship, not before. In addition, the obituary referred incorrectly to the Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction Program, a program to help destroy surplus stocks of nuclear weapons. Congress passed it shortly after it was proposed by Mr. Lugar and Senator Sam Nunn in 1991; it did not take “almost a decade” to persuade Congress of the need for the program. The obituary also mistakenly included one item on a list of issues addressed by the Lugar Center, which Mr. Lugar established after leaving office. The center has not sponsored studies of education.
A picture caption with an obituary on Friday about the fashion designer Corinne Cobson misstated where she was in the photograph. She was in the center, not second from the right.
