Shakespeare takes the train, belting out Heart in the back of a cab and more reader tales of New York City in this week’s Metropolitan Diary.
I was standing on a crowded No. 6 train. I looked down to see that a woman sitting there was staring directly at me. More specifically, she was staring at my tie. It had a Shakespeare theme, with images of his face and quotations from his works.
“Where did you get that tie?” she asked.
“My mother,” I said sheepishly. Not surprisingly, there was a bit of laughter around me.
“Where can I get one?” the woman asked.
I quickly turned the tie around to show her the manufacturer’s name. She snapped a picture.
“Do you teach Shakespeare?” she asked.
“Only on the subway,” I said.
I was in Midtown, heading to my office on the East Side. It was summer, and I was in the back of a taxi with the windows down. We were idling in midday traffic, waiting for the light to turn.
The opening piano notes of “Alone” by Heart came on the radio. The cabdriver, a man in his 30s, nudged the volume knob ever so slightly. Not a lot, but enough that I took notice. Then he did it again, and the music got a little louder.
He did. And then, with no prompting whatsoever — and to the apparent delight of many pedestrians nearby — we belted the chorus out in unison at the top of our lungs.
We were having so much fun that we carried that tune together straight to the end of the song. The final notes coincided with the end of the ride.
The cabby pulled over to let me out. He turned around and said that the song was his favorite of all time and that the ride would be a favorite memory.
Years ago, as a summer intern, I was dispatched to Fordham University to repair the set of an outdoor musical theater production that had been damaged by heavy winds.
Unfortunately, the time available to make the repairs before the performance scheduled for that evening coincided with an orchestra rehearsal.
A few hours later, the repairs and the rehearsal were complete, and I had received a round of applause from the members of the orchestra after learning to hammer in time to the music.
I was reminded of that episode recently as a ventilation duct was being built in my building’s courtyard. I could hear the workers hammering sheet metal to the rhythms of Chinese opera.
In fall 1999, I was single and I decided to have a party where single men and women could meet. The caveat was that everyone I invited had to bring an equally unattached friend, presumably someone they were not romantically interested in.
The party was a great success, and at around 10 p.m. the doorbell rang. I opened the door to two men dressed in dark clothes. I introduced myself as the hostess.
The older of the two stepped forward.
I started to offer to turn the music down while apologizing for any inconvenience when the younger of the two officers stepped into the apartment. To my surprise, he took my hand and started dancing with me.
We danced until the song ended. The officer leaned toward me.
“I’m getting off at 11,” he said, before asking whether he could come back after his shift ended.
“Of course,” I said. The officers left.
Around 11:30, the younger officer returned. He ended up being one of the last guests to leave.
On a recent visit to my barber of more than 30 years, I had a special request.
After 20 minutes of meticulous snipping, he pointed to my image in the mirror.
