The National Rifle Association sued its most prominent contractor on Wednesday, even as the gun group declared that it was “now moving forward” from an ugly power struggle that had consumed its leadership at the highest levels.
In the lawsuit, the group accused Ackerman McQueen, its longtime advertising firm, of breaching its contract by orchestrating a smear campaign against the N.R.A. and its chief executive, Wayne LaPierre. The legal action came about a month after the N.R.A. filed a separate suit against Ackerman, asserting that the company had concealed details about how it spent the roughly $40 million that it and its affiliates receive annually from the association.
The previous suit touched off a power struggle that pitted Oliver L. North, an employee of Ackerman who also served as the N.R.A.’s president, against Mr. LaPierre. The dispute unfolded at the N.R.A.’s annual convention last month in Indianapolis — where President Trump addressed the group — and culminated in the ouster of Mr. North.
The schism has been a shock, given how close the two organizations have been. Ackerman, based in Oklahoma, continues to operate NRATV, the N.R.A.’s hard-edged online streaming service, and has defined the group’s voice, going back to the “I’m the N.R.A.” campaign in the 1980s. Mr. LaPierre’s wife, Susan, once worked for the company, and Tony Makris, Ackerman’s top executive in the Washington area, is a former business associate of Mr. LaPierre’s.
But the latest suit lays out how bitter the fallout has become.
The dispute is connected to an investigation into the N.R.A.’s tax-exempt status by Letitia James, the attorney general of New York. Last summer, threats of an investigation by Ms. James prompted the N.R.A. to audit its contractors. The N.R.A. has said Ackerman then refused to turn over key financial records, raising concerns about its billing practices. Ackerman has disputed those claims.
Last month, shortly before the N.R.A.’s convention, Mr. LaPierre said Mr. North threatened that Ackerman would release damaging information unless Mr. LaPierre resigned. In recent days, the kind of information that was the subject of the threat was anonymously leaked. Among the details: Mr. LaPierre billed $275,000 for purchases at the Zegna luxury men’s wear boutique in Beverly Hills, and $267,000 on personal expenses, including air and limousine travel to the Bahamas, Florida, Nevada, Budapest and an Italian lake resort.
The new suit seeks compensatory damages of $40 million as well as other damages and relief, claiming that Ackerman violated confidentiality clauses in its contract and its fiduciary duty.
The action came on the same day that the N.R.A.’s board expressed fresh confidence in Mr. LaPierre.
“Wayne has been standing shoulder-to-shoulder with all of us for most of his professional life,” said a letter written by Carolyn D. Meadows, who replaced Mr. North as president, and 11 other prominent board members.
