WASHINGTON — President Trump’s hard-line campaign to limit immigration has undercut his own tough-on-crime agenda, law enforcement officials said, by worsening major delays in a visa program that is intended to help the police pursue violent criminals.
After this article was published, a spokeswoman for United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, Jessica Collins, said the agency has issued as many U visas as it can annually since 2010.
The average time just to be placed on a wait-list was 11 months in fiscal year 2015, according to data provided by Citizenship and Immigration Services. In 2017, more than 61,600 people applied for the visa, adding to a backlog of 190,000 pending applications.
By fiscal year 2018, the backlog had grown by more than 20 percent, to more than 229,000 pending applications, creating a wait of at least three and a half years to get placed on the waiting list. Applications for the visa declined last year for the first time, falling by more than 3,000.
In 2014, an undocumented Mexican immigrant who asked to be identified by only her first name, Lucy, said she began to be verbally and physically abused by her domestic partner. The police eventually opened an investigation as a result of her claims, and in 2016 certified her application for a U visa in exchange for her witness testimony. But Lucy still hasn’t been placed on the waiting list and, as a result, has no protections. In an interview, Lucy said she has encouraged other undocumented immigrants to report crimes to the police. But she does not have a work permit or other protections that were promised to her as part of the visa application process, and has at least once been stalked by her abuser, who has since been released from jail.
Without a legal job, she said she was supported by another man who, over time, also began to abuse her. She no longer lives with that man.
The heightened vetting by Citizenship and Immigration Services aims to “ensure that the integrity of the U visa program remains strong so that it continues to be a valuable tool for law enforcement and provides meaningful protection to victims,” said Daniel Hetlage, an agency spokesman.
