Explore the team’s past and get a glimpse of their future in these comic book collections.
Experiencing Avengers withdrawal in the wake of “Endgame”? Then consider classic comic-book stories featuring Marvel’s mightiest heroes. These tales — from the team’s earliest days to more recent times — are chock-full of superheroes and adversaries that you may not yet know. Avengers epics assemble!
Marvel Masterworks: Avengers, Vol. 1.
The Avengers were founded by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby in 1963 when Ant-Man, the Hulk, Iron Man, Thor and the Wasp battled the evil Norse god Loki. This hardcover collected edition contains that story and the next nine issues of the original series as the team bounced from a close encounter with Namor, the Sub-Mariner, to the addition of Captain America and the formation of the Masters of Evil. In 2004, Joe Casey and Scott Kollins gave readers Avengers: Earth’s Mightiest Heroes, which took a closer look at this formative era by expanding on moments between adventures.
In this 1971 space saga, written by Roy Thomas with art by Neal Adams and the brothers John Buscema and Sal Buscema, the team must defend Earth in the battle between two alien races. A ton happens here, but one scene in particular has stuck with fans: The heroes are attacked by three cows (!) that are actually the shape-changing Skrulls (who also wreak havoc by pretending to be Avengers). The villainy of Skrulls will be a shock to those who know them only from the recent “Captain Marvel” film, which presented them as peaceful refugees seeking asylum.
Written by Roger Stern, drawn by John Buscema and published in 1986, this has the heroes attacked at home (a mansion on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan) by the Masters of Evil, led by Baron Zemo, a longtime adversary of Captain America. The baddies come incredibly close to winning — they brutalize Jarvis, the team’s faithful aide, and leave a hero in a coma — which makes the eventual victory bittersweet. One powerful moment amid the mansion’s post-battle wreckage finds Captain America in tears, but resolved to rebuild.
This collection, by Brian Michael Bendis and David Finch, ripped the team apart (sometimes literally, as a rampaging She-Hulk tore Vision in half), but there was a method to the carnage. Bendis rebuilt the Avengers, adding Wolverine and the normally solitary Spider-Man to the roster. He also raised the profile of Spider-Woman, Captain Marvel and Luke Cage, who ends up becoming a leader, a husband and a father. Bendis wrote the Avengers from 2004 to 2012 and made them Marvel’s No. 1 franchise, dethroning the X-Men after many years on top.
In 2005, the writer Allan Heinberg and the artist Jim Cheung introduced a charming cast of new heroes (including some with familial connections to senior Avengers) who band together in the wake of the events of Disassembled. The collection has sprightly dialogue and stunning visuals. The less said about the plot, the less spoiled. After this, read Avengers: The Children’s Crusade, in which two heroes search for their mother, and then the Young Avengers Omnibus, by Kieron Gillen and Jamie McKelvie, which further develops the team.