Years living as an undocumented immigrant taught me not to believe in the American dream.
Ms. Esquenazi is a filmmaker.
I believe all sentient beings should be free to roam. It’s our birthright. Both Karla, the Harvard-educated, formerly undocumented immigrant journalist and advocate featured in this film, and I share this view about the human migration, so we open this film with a radical declaration: “If you crossed, if you made the journey, if people did what it takes [to survive as an] immigrant in America, which is a lot, then you deserve to be here,” says Karla. She goes on to profess that recent desert crossings should be viewed as mythic and Homeric as any one of the “great journeys” of history. Yet in these tales our crossers confront all the ugly monsters without the help of any of the gods.
I love Karla’s thinking. I love her writing, her lyrical prose, the painful way she writes about the traumas of life as a formerly undocumented woman. She and I share a compulsion to dive into the horrible and the grotesque, themes that form the souls of our artworks; and these themes make up the teeth of this film thanks to Karla’s video and audio confessionals.
I intuited that using a nontraditional documentary approach might make Karla more comfortable, as she can be cagey with interlopers. Karla takes her own daily psychological dives to write her exquisite essays, so instead of setting up a “talking head” interview where I ask the questions, we used a confessional style: Karla, her partner, Talya, and I set up a private audio booth where Karla unraveled her feelings in stream of consciousness, mostly about the psychic toilings of undocumented life. She shared her fears and worries about herself, her parents and her dear friend Nelson Pinos, a 44-year-old father of three who has been living in a New Haven church for more than 500 days to evade a deportation order.
Aside from setting up an audio confessional, I shot the rest of the film on a cellphone and a second smallish camera no larger than an iPhone; my goal was to disappear from the room whenever possible. To deepen the confessional style, I distributed video cameras to the subjects: Karla set up a video confessional at her writer’s desk, while Nelson Pinos’s children — Kelly, 16, Arlly, 13, and Brandon, 6 — film their own insights into their dad’s life in sanctuary. It illuminates the heart-wrenching realities of how this trauma is affecting his children. I know that producers and distributors often dismiss the low production value of using home video cameras. But the rawest, most emotional bits I’ve ever caught on screen were captured by the subjects themselves when I wasn’t in the room.
Deborah S. Esquenazi is a screenwriter and film director whose debut documentary, “Southwest of Salem,” was nominated for an Emmy, and won a Critic's Choice Award for Best First Feature, a GLAAD Award for Best Doc and a Peabody. This film was produced by Concordia Studio for The New York Times Op-Docs and premiered at the 2019 Tribeca Film Festival.
