In an opportunistic move that could maximize its media revenue, the N.F.L. has begun its push for a new labor agreement with the N.F.L. Players Association even though the current deal does not expire for another year and a half.
Executives from the league and the players’ union initiated discussions last month, holding two bargaining sessions that had little of the rancor evident in the last labor dispute, in 2011, when the league tried to claw back roughly $1 billion in revenue from its players and locked them out for four months.
The current deal does not expire until after the 2020 season, but getting a new one would put the league in the strongest possible position to begin negotiations for new contracts with its media partners, who pay the league about $7 billion annually.
Most of the N.F.L.’s media agreements expire after the 2022 season, and the league has not yet opened negotiations for new contracts. But with the media landscape fracturing and shifting away from the broadcast and cable industries, which have proved so lucrative for the N.F.L., league executives are hoping labor certainty will help deliver another windfall.
So far, digital streaming companies have not shown an appetite to pay the billions of dollars necessary to win an exclusive package of games, and the N.F.L. has resisted selling exclusive rights to one.
Officials from the league and the players’ union, who asked not to be identified so as not to be seen as negotiating in public, cautioned that labor negotiations had just begun and could quickly sour.
The N.F.L., however, has shifted away from its combative approach of the last round of bargaining. People involved in the current discussions expect the league to agree to a modest increase in the players’ share of league revenue, and for there to be few major changes to an agreement that has led to significant gains in league revenue and player compensation for the past eight years.
According to five traditional and digital media executives, all of whom requested anonymity so as not to jeopardize their relationship with the league, the N.F.L. will be in a strong position when it begins media negotiations, and they expect the league to win large rights fee increases after a season in which ratings rebounded and a new generation of stars emerged. Most media executives said deals could be negotiated even without a firm collective bargaining agreement in place, but the certainty of a long-term labor deal would only strengthen the N.F.L.’s hand.
Brian McCarthy, an N.F.L. spokesman, said in a statement that the current agreement had produced growth in player compensation, improvements to player health and safety, state-of-the-art stadium and training facilities, and additional retirement benefits. “Our goal is a timely new labor agreement with the N.F.L.P.A. that extends our partnership and ensures ongoing investments in the game,” the statement said.
The owners have an incentive to avoid a lockout like the four month off-season work stoppage in 2011. Lockouts are bad for business, and the owners are, by and large, happy with the current labor agreement. Goodell is also personally motivated to avoid a lockout and sign hefty new television agreements: Nearly 90 percent of his compensation is based on meeting a variety of financial targets.
Also driving the early momentum for a quick deal is a unique moment in which the needs of both the league and the union coincide. Though the players accepted a lower share of overall revenue by certain measures in the last agreement, the salary cap has risen steadily, to $188.2 million in 2019 from $120 million in 2011.
The union’s leaders want to get a deal done while Eric Winston, its president, is still in office, and not risk a shift in leadership during negotiations. Winston, who won his third term last year, will be president through March 2021.
Helping smooth the talks is the relationship between Goodell and DeMaurice Smith, the executive director of the union. Despite their occasional posturing, Goodell and Smith have a decent relationship. It wasn’t the union that largely pushed the league on issues surrounding players kneeling during the national anthem, but individual players, and the league and union recently announced joint agreements on pain management and behavioral health.
Despite the continued decline of cable television — about 85 million homes get ESPN, 15 million fewer than in 2011, for example — and broadcast television to a lesser extent, live sports remain a bulwark. Sports accounted for 88 of the top 100 broadcasts last year, with the N.F.L. accounting for 63 of those. Major League Baseball and Ultimate Fighting Championship signed rights agreements with significant increases in the last year.
Television companies need sports even more than they did the last time the N.F.L. shopped its rights. Fox has sold its scripted programming studios but invested heavily in news and sports, and ESPN, under its president, Jimmy Pitaro, has made no secret of trying to improve its relationship with the N.F.L.
“We’re very bullish on the N.F.L.,” Robert A. Iger, chief executive of the Walt Disney Company, which owns ESPN, said on a recent earnings call.
Moving quickly to sign new media deals could backfire. If the N.F.L. held out until 2022, a digital streaming company could figure out how to profit off sports and be more likely to bid.
The most likely contender, according to several media executives, is Amazon, which spends about $65 million annually for digital rights to 11 “Thursday Night Football” games. That is a fraction of the roughly $660 million that Fox pays for a package that includes the same Thursday night games.
Certain broadcast packages could change hands — Disney is reportedly interested in showing Sunday afternoon games on ABC — and Goodell has acknowledged that DirecTV’s popular “N.F.L. Sunday Ticket” out-of-market package could be sold differently.