The prospect of a wider trade war between the United States and China sent global financial markets whipsawing on Monday and could force Beijing to make difficult decisions if it hopes to preserve its nascent economic recovery.
President Trump upended what appeared to be steady progress toward reaching a trade pact after he threatened on Sunday to impose still more tariffs on Chinese-made goods unless Beijing moved closer to a deal. Liu He, the Chinese vice premier overseeing economic policy and Beijing’s lead trade negotiator, had been set to travel to Washington for talks scheduled for Wednesday that were widely seen as the potential last round before reaching a trade deal.
....of additional goods sent to us by China remain untaxed, but will be shortly, at a rate of 25%. The Tariffs paid to the USA have had little impact on product cost, mostly borne by China. The Trade Deal with China continues, but too slowly, as they attempt to renegotiate. No!
Mr. Liu’s plans were unclear as of Monday. At a daily news conference on Monday, Geng Shuang, a spokesman for China’s Foreign Ministry, said a team of Chinese trade negotiators was still planning a trip to Washington. Still, Mr. Geng declined to say when the visit might take place or whether Mr. Liu would be on it.
Earlier on Monday in China, people familiar with the talks said officials were considering whether Mr. Liu should keep his plans to visit Washington. The people spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly.
The uncertainty sent global markets reeling on Monday. Chinese shares fell more than 6 percent before recovering a modest amount of ground, while Hong Kong’s stock market fell 2.9 percent. In the United States, the S&P 500 dropped by about half a percent. Major markets in Europe were also lower.
The threats pose a major problem for Xi Jinping, China’s top leader, who had been counting on a trade deal to keep China’s growth engine humming. Broad differences still separate the two sides on many issues, and Mr. Trump’s tweeted threat on Sunday indicated that the United States may be less willing to accept compromises than some of his senior aides had previously seemed to suggest.
China’s economic growth began to slow last year as Beijing tried to tame the country’s overreliance on lending. Mr. Trump’s initial tariffs last year hurt Chinese manufacturers and consumer confidence, worsening the slowdown. China’s economic slowdown limited Mr. Xi’s options to retaliate against American tariffs and put pressure on him to reach a deal.
In recent months, thanks in part to new lending, China’s slowdown appeared to stabilize. The prospect of a trade deal also increased consumer and investor confidence and led many economists to estimate China’s growth would improve.
New tariffs could derail that progress. Through Twitter, Mr. Trump warned on Sunday that he would increase tariffs on $200 billion in Chinese goods at the end of this week and “shortly” impose levies on $325 billion of additional imports.
“If tariffs are hiked this Friday and new tariffs come soon after that the biggest negative impact will likely occur in the next few months,” Tao Wang, an economist specializing in China at UBS, said in a research note.
She estimated that a full-blown trade war with the United States could cut China’s economic growth rate by 1.6 to two percentage points over the next 12 months. That would be a considerable cut: Last year, China’s economy grew 6.6 percent, according to official figures, and the government has sent an official target of 6 percent to 6.5 percent this year.
Illustrating the sensitivity of the problem for China’s leaders, Chinese media was mostly silent on Mr. Trump’s threat, in a sign of tight censorship. Still, pictures of graphs showing China’s stock market plunge and veiled references to Mr. Trump were rife on Chinese social media. One popular meme compared Mr. Trump to Thanos, the villain in the blockbuster “Avengers: Endgame” film, saying the American president could kill half of China’s investors with a snap of his fingers.
Mr. Xi will face internal difficulties in coping with Mr. Trump’s aggressive threat. He risks weakening his position if he is seen as giving in to American demands, especially in areas where many people in China feel the country has to make progress, such as in technology, if it wants to keep growing at a healthy pace.
In fact, Chinese internal politics may be at the root of the sudden hitch in the trade talks.
The Trump administration has reacted much more strongly than the Chinese government expected it to, an issue that came up in negotiations last week in Beijing between senior Chinese and American officials, the people familiar with the trade talks said. That was when Chinese negotiators said any concessions in the trade agreement would need to be done through regulatory and administrative actions by the Chinese government, and not cemented in place through actual changes in Chinese law through the country’s legislature.
Foreign critics have long derided China’s legislature, the National People’s Congress, as a rubber stamp for the Communist Party. Bills backed by top leaders are approved by overwhelming majorities, often with only a handful of votes against them. But top leaders also do a lot of back-room maneuvering before any bill is introduced. Sometimes the maneuvering goes on for years without a consensus being reached. The congress also meets only once a year, making it difficult to get legislation approved quickly.
The National People’s Congress has a body of top leaders, called the standing committee, that has fairly broad powers and meets roughly every two months through the rest of the year. Still, major bills are supposed to be approved by the entire legislature.
James Zimmerman, a partner in the Beijing office of the Perkins Coie law firm, said China’s State Council, its cabinet, could make the necessary changes on its own. However, handling legal changes quietly through the State Council would make them less visible to provincial and local officials in China. The United States has tried to force through changes in how all levels of government in China handle questions like forced technology transfers and export subsidies, not just the national government in Beijing.
Already, the National People’s Congress in March enacted a new foreign investment law that changed many rules for overseas companies doing business in the country. Doing legislative changes then, before the trade talks had ended, was widely seen as a face-saving move by China. But foreign business groups criticized the new law from the start as inadequate.
Outside the trade talks, Beijing has taken other steps to bolster the economy.
Premier Li Keqiang in March pushed through the legislature a tax cut for manufacturers that is likely to particularly help sectors that may be involved in exporting to the United States. Some Chinese companies have already been offering discounts to American corporate buyers to offset part or all of the cost of President Trump’s tariffs. China’s central bank announced on Monday morning that it was adjusting bank rules to make it easier for small and medium-size banks to lend more money to the country’s private sector.
There is little else that Beijing can do in the meantime to mollify its people and businesses or the broader markets.
