At least 134 pro-government forces and 47 civilians were killed in Afghanistan during the past week.
At least 134 pro-government forces and 47 civilians were killed in Afghanistan during the past seven days, in the deadliest week of fighting in 2019. Insurgent attacks intensified before and during a meeting between Afghan politicians and Taliban leaders in Moscow, a familiar Taliban tactic in which they intensify their attacks before high-profile talks on peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan.
The deadliest incident took place in Ghor Province, where the Taliban attacked a village in the provincial capital, killing 18 people and wounding 17 others. Three members of the Afghan special forces, two police officers and 13 civilians were among those killed. The Taliban attacked local residents when they stood in support of security forces who were defending the village. In the neighboring province of Badghis, Afghan commandos suffered some of their highest casualties of the year. At least 16 Afghan commandos were killed and 15 others were wounded when insurgents attacked the center of Bala Murghab District, capturing the district police headquarters and governor’s office.
Americans and Afghan Special Forces killed two farmers who were working in a wheat field in the village of Larkhabi in Gul Tepa District. Several other Taliban targets were bombed in the district.
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in the village of Jarqoduq in Qosh Tepa District, killing two local police officers. One civilian was killed and another was wounded in the crossfire. Local authorities claimed that four Taliban members were killed and two others were arrested by security forces.
The Taliban attacked three security outposts in Chardara District, killing one local police officer and wounding five others, including two local police officers and three soldiers.
The Taliban attacked the center of Kohistan District, where fighting continued for six hours. At least 13 soldiers and one pro-government militia member were killed, three were wounded and two others were taken prisoner. Three outposts collapsed to the Taliban.
The Taliban attacked the center of Qarqin District, killing four pro-government militia members. Local authorities claimed that eight Taliban fighters were also killed in the clashes and that they were pushed back by security forces.
The Taliban attacked the center of Bala Murghab District, as forces in the district police headquarters and governor office retreated to a nearby military base. At least 16 Afghan commandos were killed and 15 others were wounded in clashes with the Taliban. Fighting continued for the whole night and insurgents eventually captured the district center. Afghan forces had already suffered multiple casualties from previously defending the district center.
The Taliban attacked Dahshatan and Sorkh Gonbad villages in Dawlat Abad District, where fighting continued for several hours. Seven pro-government militia members were killed and eight others were wounded during the clashes. Local authorities claimed that 29 Taliban fighters were killed in the battle.
Six people were killed and six others were wounded in a suicide attack in Kabul. The attacker, who was on foot, was trying to enter Marshal Fahim Military University, but he was stopped by security forces at the first entrance, and he blew himself up. A breakdown of the casualties was not clear. Islamic State affiliated groups in Afghanistan claimed responsibility for the attack.
The Taliban attacked an army security outpost in Khwaja Qoshori village of Khwaja Sabz Posh District. During the clashes, a rocket fired by the army hit a house in the area. A 13-year-old girl was killed and three other civilians were wounded.
Unknown gunmen attacked a police outpost in Kabul’s Eighth Police District, killing one police officer.
Swat Gul, a tribal elder and former director of the Ministry of Refugees and Repatriation, was shot and killed by unknown gunmen in a mosque next to his home in the area of Habash Khail in Khost City, the provincial capital. The attackers escaped after the attack.
One civilian was killed and five others were wounded, including women and children, when a roadside bomb hit their vehicle in Cheghai village of Khost City, the provincial capital.
The Taliban attacked four military bases in Chashma-e-Shir area of Pul-i-Kumri City, the provincial capital, where fighting continued for three hours. Six soldiers were killed and four others were wounded during the clashes, but insurgent were eventually pushed back. Local authorities claimed that 10 Taliban fighters were killed in the battle.
The Taliban attack an outpost in Maidan Shahr, the provincial capital, where fighting continued for several hours. Nine police officers, all of Hazara ethnicity, were killed in an apparent insider attack by two other officers, who were Pashtun, and joined the insurgency after the attack. A bodyguard of the governor of Bamyan, who was traveling on the highway was killed by the Taliban during the same attack on the outpost.
The Taliban attacked a military base called Khosh Dara in Dara-i-Suf Payin District, killing five soldiers and one police officer. Three police officers were also wounded in the attack. The insurgents were eventually pushed by reinforcements.
The Taliban attacked a military outpost called Gorgori in Sabari District, killing 13 soldiers and wounding 10 others. The fighting continued for several hours around the outpost, which is on a hilltop providing security for the main highway in the province.
Four members of police special forces and one police officer were killed in a Taliban attack in Shahrak District. Earlier this month, flash floods damaged the Minaret of Jam, a Unesco world heritage site, so security forces were clearing the area of insurgents while workers tried to prevent further damage to the structure.
The Taliban attacked the village of Bara Khana in Firoz Koh, the provincial capital, killing 18 people and wounding 17 others. Three members of the special forces, two police officers and 13 civilians were among those killed. The Taliban attacked civilians when they showed support for security forces who were defending the village.
The Taliban kidnapped a military prosecutor and a Zabul government official in Ghazni Province, while they were traveling on the highway connecting Kabul to Kandahar. They were later killed by insurgents and their bodies were sent to Helmand Province.
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in Palakhman Tepa village of Sozma Qala District, killing one local police officer. Local authorities claimed that 10 Taliban fighters were killed during the clashes.
Noor Mohammad Arab, the adviser for Afghan Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah, was assassinated by unknown armed men in Kunduz City’s First Police District. A bodyguard of Mr. Arab was wounded in the attack.
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in Kotal-i-Robatak area of Aibak City, the provincial capital, killing one police officer and wounding another in two hours of fighting.
The Taliban attacked two security outposts in Chahar Tot area of Khan Abad District, killing three pro-government militia members and taking three militia members and three civilians prisoner. Insurgents captured the outpost after several hours of fighting. A Humvee of reinforcements was then hit by a rocket, killing two soldiers.
A roadside bomb hit a military vehicle in Dar-i-Yakh area of Arghankhwa District, killing one soldier and wounding two others.
The Taliban attacked security outposts in Quts area of Firoz Koh, the provincial capital, killing two pro-government militia members and wounding two others. Local authorities claimed that the Taliban also suffered casualties.
The Taliban attacked a military base called Qashqari and several security outposts in Sar-i-Pul City, the provincial capital, where fighting continued for nearly five hours. Eight members of the security forces were killed and 29 others were wounded. Three soldiers were taken prisoner by the Taliban. Insurgents captured the military base and a security outpost and burned it down. Insurgents captured three Humvees and set fire to two other Humvees. The provincial police chief who arrived as backup was also ambushed by insurgents.
Dost Mohammad Khan Seni, the commander of a pro-government militia, and three of his men were killed in a Taliban ambush in Laman area of Qala-e-Now, the provincial capital.
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in the village of Omaki in Zarih District, killing three pro-government militia members and wounding another in several hours of fighting. Insurgents eventually captured the outpost, but it was later retaken by security forces.
The Taliban attacked two security outposts in Kunduz City’s Third Police District, where clashes continued for several hours. Three local police officers were killed and four others were wounded in the battle, but the attackers were eventually pushed back.
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in Chardara District, killing one local police officer and wounding another. Insurgents then fired a rocket at arriving reinforcements, hitting a Humvee and killing one local police officer and wounding two others.
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in the village of Qala in Namak Ab District, killing two pro-government militia members and one police officer. Insurgents captured the outpost, but it was retaken later.
A roadside bomb hit a vehicle in Patan District, killing a tribal elder.
The Taliban attacked the center of Dawlat Abad District, where fighting continued for several hours. A 16-year-old boy who ran a grocery shop was killed by insurgents in a local market. Two other civilians were also killed during the fighting.
A parked motorcycle packed with explosives blew up in Spin Boldak District. The blast missed its target, a passing police vehicle, and killed one civilian. Three other civilians were wounded in the incident.
Two men were shot by unknown gunmen in the Second Police District of Kandahar City, the provincial capital. One of the victims died and another was critically wounded.
A building housing a nongovernmental organization was hit by a drone strike in Shib Koh District, killing two employees. The organization was providing humanitarian assistance for the people in the district. The office was completely destroyed in the strike. An investigation was launched about the incident.
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in the village of Palakhman Tepa in Sozma Qala District, killing two soldiers including Salim Andarabi, an army company commander, and wounding six others.
Five civilians were killed during a military operation by a C.I.A.-backed Afghan strike force in Sherzad District, according to local residents. Protesters brought the bodies of two men, two children and a woman to the provincial governor’s office. Local authorities confirmed the operation and civilians casualties, but didn’t provide exact figures.
Afghan and American forces carried out a military operation in the area of Perkote in Awrgon District. Ten civilians were killed during the operation, according to local officials. The operation was not coordinated with the local authorities.
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in the village of Sabzi Karha in Charbolak District, killing six local police officers and wounding nine others in two hours of battle.
A roadside bomb hit a military Humvee in the village of Shiwan in Balaboluk District, killing three soldiers and wounding seven others.
Samiullah Rayhan, a popular Afghan religious scholar who had voiced support for Afghanistan’s military and police, was killed in a bombing at a mosque in Kabul City. He was one of two people killed when an explosion ripped through Al-Taqwa mosque during Friday Prayer. Sixteen people were wounded, according to a spokesman for the Afghan Ministry of Interior Affairs.
Reporting was contributed by the following New York Times reporters: Fatima Faizi from Kabul, Najim Rahim from Mazar-e-Sharif, Mohammad Saber from Herat, Taimoor Shah from Kandahar, Farooq Jan Mangal from Khost and Zabihullah Ghazi from Jalalabad.