Mrs. May made the announcement in front of 10 Downing Street.
Ever since I first stepped through the door behind me as prime minister, I have striven to make the United Kingdom a country that works not just for a privileged few, but for everyone.
And to honor the result of the E.U. referendum.
I negotiated the terms of our exit and a new relationship with our closest neighbors that protects jobs, our security and our union.
I have done everything I can to convince M.P.s to back that deal.
But it is now clear to me that it is in the best interests of the country for a new prime minister to lead that effort.
So I am today announcing that I will resign as leader of the Conservative and Unionist Party on Friday, 7 June, so that a successor can be chosen.
I have agreed with the party chairman and with the chairman of the 1922 Committee that the process for electing a new leader should begin in the following week.
I have kept Her Majesty the Queen fully informed of my intentions, and I will continue to serve as her prime minister until the process has concluded.
For many years the great humanitarian Sir Nicholas Winton — who saved the lives of hundreds of children by arranging their evacuation from Nazi-occupied Czechoslovakia through the Kindertransport — was my constituent in Maidenhead.
As we strive to find the compromises we need in our politics — whether to deliver Brexit, or to restore devolved government in Northern Ireland — we must remember what brought us here.
Because the referendum was not just a call to leave the E.U. but for profound change in our country.
We have completed the work that David Cameron and George Osborne started: The deficit is almost eliminated, our national debt is falling and we are bringing an end to austerity.
My focus has been on ensuring that the good jobs of the future will be created in communities across the whole country, not just in London and the southeast, through our Modern Industrial Strategy.
We are building more homes and helping first-time buyers onto the housing ladder — so young people can enjoy the opportunities their parents did.
This is what a decent, moderate and patriotic Conservative government, on the common ground of British politics, can achieve, even as we tackle the biggest peacetime challenge any government has faced.
I know that the Conservative Party can renew itself in the years ahead, that we can deliver Brexit and serve the British people with policies inspired by our values: security, freedom and opportunity.
That is why I put proper funding for mental health at the heart of our N.H.S. long-term plan.
It is why I am ending the post code lottery for survivors of domestic abuse.
And it is why I set up the independent public inquiry into the tragedy at Grenfell Tower — to search for the truth, so nothing like it can ever happen again, and so the people who lost their lives that night are never forgotten.
But a union of people — all of us.
I will shortly leave the job that it has been the honor of my life to hold — the second female prime minister but certainly not the last.
