Opinion|De Blasio May Want to Be President. What Do His Donors Want?
De Blasio May Want to Be President. What Do His Donors Want?
His fund-raising for a possible White House bid raises ethical questions, again.
Mayor Bill de Blasio’s flirtation with a White House run has generated virtually no interest among voters. One national poll in March found that he was the only Democratic candidate with a net negative approval rating, though fewer than half of those polled had any opinion of him at all.
But his potential candidacy has caught the attention of people who do business with New York City. They’ve been donating to the mayor’s presidential political action committee, the federal Fairness PAC, his latest vehicle for raising money from powerful interests.
Mr. de Blasio’s lowly showing in the polls didn’t, for example, dissuade John F. Fish, the chief executive of Suffolk Construction, a Boston-based company, from hosting a fund-raiser last month for the mayor’s PAC. Mr. Fish’s company is clearly hoping to expand its business in New York — Suffolk recently hired Shola Olatoye, who led the city’s public housing authority until last year — and may see an opportunity to win favor with a current mayor and future presidential candidate.
What’s disconcerting, however, is why Mr. de Blasio would welcome such donations, given the risk of the appearance of impropriety, not to mention the fact that his fund-raising has raised ethical and legal questions since he first ran for mayor in 2013.
A donor to his first mayoral campaign pleaded guilty to bribing him to get favorable lease terms for a Queens restaurant. Federal prosecutors indicated that they didn’t charge Mr. de Blasio because the Supreme Court had recently narrowed the scope of what could be considered corruption.
A donor to one of the nonprofits the mayor has used to advance his liberal agenda and raise his profile pleaded guilty to charges involving bribery after receiving special access to Mr. de Blasio and city officials.
That’s not to mention the Manhattan district attorney’s announcement in 2017 that the mayor’s fund-raising for the Democratic campaign to win the State Senate in 2014 violated the “intent and spirit” of campaign finance laws by directing contributions meant for political committees toward specific candidates.
Fund-raising can taint City Hall by giving the appearance of pay-to-play, even if none is involved.
In 2015, the city lifted a deed restriction that allowed a Lower East Side nursing home that once served AIDS patients to be converted into condos. Among those who had pushed for the deed change was the lobbyist James Capalino, who steered $40,000 to Mr. de Blasio’s 2017 re-election campaign and $10,000 to the Campaign for One New York. Mr. Capalino has said that the client he worked for who sought the deed change fired him in 2014 after he was unsuccessful, and that he wasn’t involved in the issue afterward. City Comptroller Scott Stringer investigated the land deal and blamed mismanagement by city officials for it.
Mr. de Blasio, who is barred by term limits from seeking re-election, is using his federal Fairness PAC to pay for his travel to states like Iowa and Nevada, which will be important if he runs for president. Mr. de Blasio has said the PAC will not accept contributions from anyone in a database of those doing business with New York City, a stricter standard than federal rules require.
But that database, called “Doing Business,” doesn’t include every individual or group with business before the city. Frank Carone, for example, a lawyer representing two sellers of 21 buildings the city bought to provide affordable housing, is a longtime de Blasio supporter who has been helping to raise money for Fairness PAC. He donated $5,000 to the PAC in September as the deal was under negotiation.
A campaign spokesman for Mr. de Blasio says Mr. Carone wasn’t listed as a lobbyist in the “Doing Business” database when he made the $5,000 donation. Last month, the de Blasio administration agreed to pay the landlords $173 million for the 21 buildings — a price one half higher than the $115 million they were appraised for by an independent firm on the city’s behalf.
A de Blasio spokeswoman, Freddi Goldstein, disputed the idea that donors receive special favors at City Hall. “All official decisions are made based on merit,” Ms. Goldstein said.
But the ease with which the mayor continues to accept donations from people seeking business before the city is disquieting, even if the fund-raising breaks no laws.
The field of candidates seeking the Democratic nomination is already large. If Mr. de Blasio chooses to run, he will have to find a way to assure voters that he has their interests — not those of his big donors — at heart.