In Elise Forier Edie’s play, Alice Ripley plays a conservative Texas parent inspired to fight for the rights of her child’s gender identity.
Guild Hall at The Little Church Around the Corner, 1 E 29th St.
Activists come in many guises. Trisha Lee, the sole character in the show “The Pink Unicorn,” certainly never imagined that one day she would be fighting for equal rights, or that she would defy her minister and stand against so many in their small Texas town.
“Nothing in my life had prepared me for gender queer,” a bewildered Trisha says.
The conceit of Amy E. Jones’s staging for Out of the Box Theatrics is that Trisha is a speaking at a Diocese of Texas discovery retreat. The 40 or so audience members for the immersive show, which takes place at the theater of the Episcopal Actors’ Guild, can help themselves to cookies and iced tea, but the real treat for fans of Ms. Ripley, a Tony Award-winner for the musical “Next to Normal,” is seeing her in such intimate confines.
When Trisha gets Jo’s news, she reacts with perplexity instead of anger or hate; despite a few moments of doubt, her feelings for her child never waver. That baseline of love and protectiveness continues even when things become confrontational.
Jo decides to create a Gay Straight Alliance at her school and wants to pose for her class photo wearing a boys’ blazer. This doesn’t endear her to the authorities, who decide to shut down all the extracurricular clubs rather than authorize the G.S.A.
Equally unreceptive are Trisha’s church and her own judgmental mother.
“The Pink Unicorn” is based in part on Ms. Edie's personal experience, and she performed it across North America starting in 2013. Yet, oddly, Trisha and — even more so — Jo feel generic. They are described in quick broad strokes that don’t get much deeper than quirky anecdotes and folksy turns of phrase.
The other characters popping in and out make even less of an impression, some of them reduced to names telegraphing personality — Trisha’s minister goes by Pastor Dick, for instance, while the school principal is Cyril Makepeace, even though he most definitely does not.
Of course, it’s impossible not to root for Trisha. But while good intentions go a long way in real life, they are not enough to sustain this undernourished play.
Through June 2 at the Episcopal Actors’ Guild, Manhattan; ootbtheatrics.com.