Attempts by Mr. Trump’s two predecessors, George W. Bush and Barack Obama, to overcome those kinds of differences and achieve a bipartisan consensus on immigration policy ended in failure. Since then, the divisions between the parties have only worsened, and there is little chance the new proposal will change that. For different reasons, the broad outlines of the plan described on Wednesday are certain to be unpopular with lawmakers on both sides of the aisle.
It calls for construction of some of the border wall that is a preoccupation of Mr. Trump’s and vehemently opposed by Democrats, and upends family-based migration in ways that Democrats and immigrant advocates have long opposed. And it contains no provision for providing legal status to people brought to the United States as children, known as Dreamers, or other undocumented immigrants.
Mr. Trump’s proposal comes after he has made immigration the focus of his domestic agenda for more than two years, pursuing policies that have ignited protests around the world, such as banning travel from Muslim-majority countries, separating families at the border, closing the border to asylum seekers and building a wall along the southern border.
Officials said half of the plan dealt with the system of visas that allowed about one million people to enter the United States legally each year.
Mark Krikorian, the executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, hammered the president’s proposal in an article in National Review, saying it did not go far enough to shrink overall numbers and would be a disappointment to voters who thought that Mr. Trump would fight to keep out immigrants who compete with them for jobs.
The other half of Mr. Trump’s plan calls for cracking down on illegal immigration, mostly at the southern border. Officials did not disclose specifics but said it would deal with the huge influx of families at the border by enacting measures to make it harder to claim asylum and giving authorities the power to hold families in detention for longer periods.
It would also provide resources for the construction of “physical barriers” at 33 key places along the border that law enforcement officials say are known crossings for drug dealers and human traffickers. Mr. Kushner and other White House officials, including Mr. Miller, briefed Republican senators on the broad outlines of the plan on Tuesday.
But Mr. Cramer laughed when he was asked how Republicans would get Democrats on board with the plan. Previous efforts to confront the issue have tried to include provisions wanted by both parties. The president’s plan does not do that, officials said.
Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, said he recently sent Mr. Trump a copy of the 2013 immigration bill that passed the Senate with 68 votes after being developed by a group of Democratic and Republican senators.
Mr. Schumer added that any immigration bill that could pass in the Senate and the Democratic-controlled House would have to deal with the fate of the program known as Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, which protects young undocumented immigrants from deportation. Mr. Trump ended the Obama-era program in September 2017, though so far federal judges have kept it running.
Lisa Koop of the National Immigrant Justice Center said she had no reason to think that the Trump administration was operating in good faith to address the nation’s immigration problems.
Officials who briefed reporters on Wednesday said the White House had begun to convert its plan into a bill that could be introduced in Congress. But they declined to say whether Mr. Trump intended to pursue legislation in the weeks or months ahead.
One senior administration official said he hoped that parts of the plan would be “on the shelf” for lawmakers to use in the months ahead as they struggle to find a way to deal with the nation’s broken immigration system.
But it is unclear whether Republicans facing re-election in 2020 will want to embrace a divisive debate about changing immigration laws as they fight for their jobs. And Republicans who do want to talk about immigration are far more likely to follow Mr. Trump’s lead by stoking fear about migrant caravans, gang members and criminal border-crossers.