Our guide to film series and special screenings happening this weekend and in the week ahead. All our movie reviews are at nytimes.com/reviews/movies.
BLACK 90S: A TURNING POINT IN AMERICAN CINEMA at BAM Rose Cinemas (May 3-22). This retrospective showcases a wide range of African-American filmmakers who made enduring work in the 1990s, whether it was Julie Dash with the ethereal period piece “Daughters of the Dust” (on Saturday), Kasi Lemmons with the child’s-eye Southern-gothic melodrama “Eve’s Bayou” (on Sunday, with Lemmons in person, and on Tuesday) or F. Gary Gray with the raucous comedy “Friday” (on May 10). The decade also saw the emergence of John Singleton, who died on Monday. His debut feature, “Boyz N the Hood” (on May 12 and 13) — which made him the youngest and first African-American nominee for a directing Oscar — will screen, followed by “Poetic Justice” (on May 15).
ABEL FERRARA UNRATED at the Museum of Modern Art (through May 31). Gritty New York movies don’t get grittier than Ferrara’s: His films teem with seedy cops and introspective criminals, and his sense of detail makes most other directors who worked in the city in the 1980s and ’90s look like tourists. MoMA’s career-spanning retrospective, which makes room for TV and documentary work and several rarely screened dramatic features, reveals his obsessive interest in guilt and culpability, which runs from his early exploitation effort “Ms. 45” (on Tuesday and May 11) through his career-defining “Bad Lieutenant” (on May 17 and 21) to “Welcome to New York,” his uncompromising film à clef about the Dominique Strauss-Kahn affair, which will play in its original 2014 premiere cut on Friday and May 18. On Saturday, Ferrara, who will appear at several screenings, will be present for a post-movie discussion of “King of New York” (also showing on May 28) with the filmmakers Josh and Benny Safdie — perhaps his closest contemporary heirs when it comes to using the city as a seamy backdrop.
HANNAH FRANK’S ‘FRAME BY FRAME’ at Light Industry (May 7, 7 p.m.). This program of animation is tied to the posthumous publication of a book by the academic Hannah Frank (1984-2017). In the book, Frank proposes looking at film images not in succession but as individual frames; she applies that approach to studying 50 years’ worth of cartoons. This compilation, presented by Sam Frank, Hannah’s brother, will include Popeye, Bugs Bunny and works by the experimental filmmakers Robert Breer and Peter Kubelka.
PANORAMA EUROPE 2019 at various locations (May 3-19). This annual showcase of cinema from the Continent opens on Friday with “Mademoiselle Paradis (Licht),” an 18th-century costume drama from the Austrian director Barbara Albert. The Polish filmmaker Agnieszka Smoczynska follows her man-eating-mermaid fantasia “The Lure” with the amnesia drama “Fugue” (on May 11), and the festival will close with the Greek dark comedy “Pity,” from Babis Makridis, about a man who begins to take unusual satisfaction in the experience of grief. Most screenings take place at the Museum of the Moving Image, but see the museum’s website for full location details.
‘QUARTET’ at the Quad Cinema (opens on May 3). Based on a novel by Jean Rhys, this potentially overlooked 1981 curiosity from the Merchant-Ivory catalog is set in Paris of the 1920s. Marya (Isabelle Adjani), who is gossiped about for her ostensibly exotic origins in Martinique, falls on hard times after her husband (Anthony Higgins) is imprisoned on charges of dealing stolen art. With self-interested motives, an English couple (Alan Bates and Maggie Smith) offers her residence in their home. The director James Ivory will appear for a Q. and A. at Saturday’s 7 p.m. screening.
