A former couple hunt down a terrorist in a new heist series. And Wanda Sykes makes her thoughts on the president very clear in a Netflix special.
BLOOD & TREASURE 9 p.m. on CBS. Hints of James Bond and Indiana Jones are sprinkled throughout this fast-paced espionage series. The action begins when a terrorist, Karim Farouk (Oded Fehr), kidnaps an antiquities expert and blows up the tomb of Antony and Cleopatra. That sets off an international chase led by Danny McNamara (Matt Barr), a former F.B.I. agent who seeks out the help of an art thief, Lexi Vaziri (Sofia Pernas), who also happens to be his ex-lover. (While the show relies on the trope of a Middle Eastern terrorist, the creators try to balance that by having Lexi be Egyptian.) She’s quick to whip out her lethal gadgets; Danny’s the patient, mindful one. And the occasional sexual tension lends a bit of spice to an otherwise hackneyed plot. The show debuts with a two-hour episode, and will air at 10 starting May 28.
THE VOICE 9 p.m. on NBC. The final four contestants of this vocal competition — Gyth Rigdon, Maelyn Jarmon, Dexter Roberts and Andrew Sevener — had one last chance to showcase their talents yesterday, putting on three performances each. One of them goes home a winner after this two-hour season finale.
BLACK-ISH 9 p.m. on ABC. In the Season 5 finale of this family sitcom, Junior (Marcus Scribner) gets an offer to work for the hip-hop group Migos — his dream job. But there’s a fork in the road: His parents are less enthused and think he should return to college. The series has been renewed for a sixth season, and its franchise continues to grow. In addition to the spinoff “grown-ish” on Freeform, a prequel, “mixed-ish,” about Rainbow (Tracee Ellis Ross) growing up mixed-race in the 1980s, is in the works.
MOONLIGHT (2016) Stream on Netflix; Rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu or YouTube. Barry Jenkins’ poetic tale about the life of a young, black gay man in Miami, told in three stages, seems to have set the bar for his later films: The movie took home three Oscars, including best picture, and tugs at the heartstrings from beginning to end.