Watch: A founder of Facebook says it should be broken up.
I Co-Founded Facebook. It’s Time to Break It Up.
Chris Hughes, a co-founder of Facebook, says the company is so big and powerful that it threatens our democracy.
This is me back in my college days. And this is my roommate, Mark. Together, we founded Facebook in 2004. Now, 15 years later, I think Facebook has grown too big and too powerful. Every week brings new headlines about privacy violations, election interference or mental health concerns. I haven’t been at the company in over a decade, but I feel a sense of responsibility to account for the damage done. Americans have the power to right the ship through government action. We need new regulations. It’s time to break up Facebook. The early days of Facebook tell a classic American story of innovation and entrepreneurship. From our college dorm room, we started a little social network for our friends that exploded in popularity and connected the world. Mark’s hustle in those early years made it possible for Facebook to dominate our rivals like Friendster, MySpace, Tumblr and many others. These competitors made us better. And then we beat them out. This is how it’s supposed to work in America. Hard work leads to economic success. You start a small business and compete on the merits to provide a better product. Today, nearly three billion people use Facebook, Instagram, and WhatsApp, and they’re all owned and controlled by the same company. Of every dollar spent buying ads on social media, $0.84 goes to Facebook. It’s now worth over half a trillion dollars. That’s roughly the size of the G.D.P. of the bottom 65 countries in the world — combined. It’s not just that Facebook is a really big social network. It’s everything. When a single company dominates any market, they become susceptible to abusing their power. Social networking is like most other American industries. There used to be plenty of healthy competition. But now many industries are controlled by just one or two companies. Companies often create an illusion of choice. You think there are hundreds of beer brands out there, but they’re all made by one or two companies. Why is this a problem? Well, when companies get too big, they get sloppy and careless, and that leads to things like poor privacy practices, enabling foreign actors to meddle in elections, the spread of violent rhetoric, fake news and the unbounded drive to capture more of our data and attention. I often hear people say, “I’m shutting down my Facebook account. Thank God for Instagram,” not realizing that Instagram is owned by Facebook. People are powerless in this situation because there’s nowhere else to go. Monopolies stifle innovation.  Or, by copying their innovations. Despite all the money and hype being poured into new startups, there hasn’t been a single major social media platform launched since 2011. The harm goes beyond he economy though, it goes to democracy itself. When companies become empires, people are stripped of power. Facebook’s employees write complex rules called algorithms that decide what you see in your News Feed. Facebook can decide what messages get delivered and which don’t. And what exactly makes for violent or inappropriate content. Even Mark himself has said that he and the Facebook team have too much power over speech. Facebook does have a board of directors. But Mark owns the majority of the shares. Unlike the leader of a democracy there are no checks and balances on Facebook. Mark has no boss, and he cannot be fired. Listen, it’d be great if Mark can fix this himself. But this, ironically, is a problem he cannot solve. We need the government to intervene with two steps. First, the Facebook empire needs to be broken up. America’s regulated corporate empires before, and we can do it again. This isn’t unprecedented and surprisingly, it often boosts the value of these companies in the long run. The Federal Trade Commission can force Facebook to unwind its acquisitions of WhatsApp and Instagram. Then we’ll see real competition around social media and digital messaging. Breaking up Facebook isn’t a punishment for its economic success. It’s a way to guarantee that other new companies can compete. We also need a new government agency to protect Americans from the overreach of Facebook and other companies like it. Think about it. We don’t trust airlines or pharmaceutical companies to regulate themselves. We shouldn’t trust social media companies either. We need basic privacy protections and the ability for people to move their data around as they please. Right now Facebook makes free speech decisions on its own with little accountability. Instead, we need government to set guidelines, not Facebook employees in Menlo Park. I don’t think Mark’s a bad guy and I’ve made this decision to speak out because I feel a sense of responsibility for what Facebook has become. And to be honest, I’m angry that Mark’s obsession with growth led him to sacrifice security for clicks. I think we all want to live in a country where David can take on Goliath, where a kid with a smart idea in a dorm room can start a billion- dollar company. We’ve strayed from that ideal, and breaking up and regulating Facebook will help put us back on that path.
Mark’s influence is staggering, far beyond that of anyone else in the private sector or in government.
Journalists kept close watch as social media became big business.
From our earliest days, Mark used the word “domination” to describe our ambitions.
Facebook’s monopoly is also visible in its usage statistics. About 70 percent of American adults use social media, and a vast majority are on Facebook products. Over two-thirds use the core site, a third use Instagram, and a fifth use WhatsApp. By contrast, fewer than a third report using Pinterest, LinkedIn or Snapchat. What started out as lighthearted entertainment has become the primary way that people of all ages communicate online.
The total number of users across Facebook’s platforms far exceeds the number on any rival platform.
Note: These figures do not necessarily reflect unique users. They are based on monthly active users, active user accounts or unique monthly visitors, and are current as of April.
Would-be competitors can’t raise the money to take on Facebook.
I don’t blame Mark for his quest for domination. He has demonstrated nothing more nefarious than the virtuous hustle of a talented entrepreneur. Yet he has created a leviathan that crowds out entrepreneurship and restricts consumer choice. It’s on our government to ensure that we never lose the magic of the invisible hand. How did we allow this to happen?
We pay for Facebook with our data and our attention, and by either measure it doesn’t come cheap.
Mark knows that this is too much power and is pursuing a twofold strategy to mitigate it. He is pivoting Facebook’s focus toward encouraging more private, encrypted messaging that Facebook’s employees can’t see, let alone control. Second, he is hoping for friendly oversight from regulators and other industry executives.
Facebook isn’t afraid of a few more rules. It’s afraid of an antitrust case.
But the biggest winners would be the American people. Imagine a competitive market in which they could choose among one network that offered higher privacy standards, another that cost a fee to join but had little advertising and another that would allow users to customize and tweak their feeds as they saw fit. No one knows exactly what Facebook’s competitors would offer to differentiate themselves. That’s exactly the point.
If we don’t have public servants shaping these policies, corporations will.
Chris Hughes, a co-founder of Facebook, is a co-chairman of the Economic Security Project and a senior adviser at the Roosevelt Institute.