A child’s first 1,000 days are a time to be seized.
Mr. Polakow-Suransky is the president of the Bank Street College of Education.
A 2017 poll by the First Five Years Fund found that 89 percent of voters think making early education affordable for working families should be a priority. We need to take advantage of that public consensus and build a new system that supports families and nurtures learning from Day 1. If we care about equal opportunity in this country, we must provide more funding for infants and toddlers. Research shows that investing in early childhood yields a 13 percent annual return because quality care leads to success in school, increased earnings, improved health, stronger families and reduced crime rates.
Six months of paid parental leave is the first step. This support will help address the shortage of infant child care and allow critical family bonds to develop. Parents also need assistance during this time. Home-visiting programs designed to support healthy attachment between children and first-time parents should be accessible to all families.
The second step is improving compensation for early-childhood educators so that they earn the same as schoolteachers. Compensation is a key driver of quality, yet salaries for early educators have increased 1 percent in the past 25 years. A 2018 study found that 86 percent of infant and toddler teachers make less than $15 an hour. These meager salaries create enormous stress for teachers and, in turn, children. It makes attracting and retaining a qualified work force close to impossible. Not surprisingly, the turnover rate in child-care settings is more than four times higher than that in elementary schools.
While early-childhood educators need to be paid more, it’s important that families are not left shouldering that cost. The third step is an infusion of public funding for child care subsidies that makes a system of sliding-scale tuition possible, placing a cap on the percentage of income that families are required to pay for care as well as increasing access to quality care.
Step 4 is public financing of teacher training. Unlike other professions, early care is not supported by a system of preparation and ongoing training. Early educators need a deep knowledge of child development and the chance to receive feedback and coaching as they learn.
As a nation, we are slowly waking up to the fact that our priorities have been backward for some time. A child’s first 1,000 days are a time to be seized, a time to level the playing field. Quality early care and education is not a luxury. It is a fundamental right we must guarantee for every child and every family.
Shael Polakow-Suransky (@Shaelsuransky) is the president of the Bank Street College of Education.