Janette Sadik-Khan, the former commissioner of the New York City Department of Transportation who is now a principal at Bloomberg Associates, is in an urban policy-themed book club which is full of political operatives and former members of Democratic administrations. It has been graced by visits from speakers such as Jimmy Carter and the historian Robert Caro.
The mystery writer Harlan Coben loves how “old school” it feels when he joins up with fellow writers Lee Child, Nelson DeMille, Amor Towles, Dana Perino, John Stossel, Cristina Alger, Joseph Kanon and Douglas Brunt for their non-themed book club, which has read books like Jennifer Egan’s “Manhattan Beach,” Imbolo Mbue’s “Behold the Dreamers,” and collections of female-authored crime novels from the 1940s and 1950s.
The presence of insiders at a book club heralds both pleasures and challenges. On the pleasure front: O, the schmingling. Yahdon Israel, the former editor of Brooklyn magazine who now teaches at City College and the New School, said of his club Literaryswag, which is open to the public and held in the vintage clothing store The Brooklyn Circus, “My metric of success is not, ‘What did everyone think of the prose?’ ” Rather, he hopes club members will make friends with one another, or talk about the book later.
To up the ante, Israel selects books you don’t have to have read in order to join the conversation because the subject matter is so rich (a recent pick: Margo Jefferson’s book “On Michael Jackson”), and he anoints at each session the Swaggiest Member (best-dressed) and the Littest Person (most thoughtful).
Or imagine the clarity and depth that Proust scholar Marcelle Clements must bring to sessions of the Proust-themed club founded by the novelist Michael Cunningham, McNally Jackson bookstores owner Sarah McNally, and punk musician Billy Hough. Long, snakey sentences: parsed. The Vivonne river: more vivonné than ever.
For some hosts, the pressure to make the rosé happen is more plangent. The public policy-themed club attended by Sadik-Khan is always hosted by the group’s co-founder Gary Ginsberg, the senior vice president and head of communications at SoftBank. The group, about 15 in size, occasionally invites authors it is reading. Given that the first three books the club read were by Caro, Ginsberg was understandably nerve-racked when the author agreed to speak at one of the club’s meetings.
“It was terrifying,” Ginsberg said. “He’s the one historian we all hold in awe. You want to get it right. You want to make sure the quality of the conversation is up to his level of writing and investigation.” Caro stayed for three hours and was, Ginsberg said, “mesmerizing.” Carter, who came to discuss Lawrence Wright’s “13 Days in September,” did not stay as long, but wowed the group with his “incredible, almost minute-to-minute recall” of the 1978 meeting with Menachem Begin and Anwar Sadat.
Every age begets its era-specific book club. At the origins of the pastime — mid-18th-century England — women, shut out from most colleges and learned gatherings, opened their living rooms to male luminaries in an effort at intellectual autonomy. In the 1950s, the Great Books movement helped an economically robust postwar society flex its cultural and democratic muscles.
Inevitably, today’s book clubs mirror the everything-is-political ethos of our time: here is Martel and company discussing the AIDS-era memoir “Fairyland,” there is Ruhl discussing whether the well-made play is essentially a patriarchal structure. In an age in which public discourse has been sullied, and political lines have been drawn in the sand, it makes sense that people would want to bond with the like-minded.
Cassandra Lam is the chief executive of The Cosmos, a community of self-identifying Asian-American women. A proud daughter of Vietnamese boat refugee parents, Lam said that many of the women in their 20s and 30s who are drawn to the group’s book club meetings grew up without seeing people who look like them in books or on TV.
