U.S.|What’s All This About a Water Tax?
What’s All This About a Water Tax?
Gov. Gavin Newsom has made repairing hundreds of failing drinking-water systems in California a big priority since taking office, giving fresh momentum to an entrenched problem the state’s leaders have long struggled to resolve.
But his proposed solution — a $140 million yearly tax raised in part through fees on urban water districts — has raised eyebrows in a state where residents already feel overtaxed.
Toxic drinking water in California is a much larger problem than many people realize: From the coasts to the Central Valley, from Southern California to the northern reaches of the state, hundreds of public water systems regulated by the state do not meet safe drinking standards.
The tax, which officials call a “fee,” would bring in $110 million from water utilities and about $30 million from the agriculture industry. The governor also intends to allocate $168 million toward water infrastructure improvements, which is already paid for by a bond proposition passed last year.
Clean-water activists like the proposal because it establishes a source of sustained funding to improve water infrastructure and maintain healthy levels over time. They, and the governor’s people, say it amounts to $1 on everyone’s water bill.
But critics argue that a proposed tax of any kind could backfire.
“Californians are concerned about the cost of living, and a proposed water tax is just adding to the cost of something that you have to have to live. We think it doesn’t make sense to tax a resource that is essential,” said Cindy Tuck, deputy executive director for government relations at the Association of California Water Agencies.
The political dynamics in Sacramento around the issue are also fraught, even though virtually everyone agrees that access to drinking water is an important cause. Democrats have supermajorities in both chambers of the Legislature, but several of their gains came from traditionally Republican districts where a tax increase of any size could be deeply unpopular.
In the Senate, there have been efforts to use legislative budget actions to appropriate the funds without raising taxes. But it remains to be seen how the governor’s office and the Legislature will sort out their differences in the weeks to come as lawmakers take the blueprint and make their markups. Mr. Newsom must sign the final budget by July 1.
State Senator Melissa Hurtado, a freshman lawmaker from the Central Valley who represents dozens of communities affected by lack of access to clean water, said she was grateful for Mr. Newsom’s commitment to the issue.
But she has concerns. Like others, she is not sure a tax is politically viable. Most notably, she is also highly skeptical of proposed budget language that would potentially exempt the agriculture industry from liability for pollution in the long term. Chemicals from fertilizer and groundwater pumping on industrial farms are partly to blame for the tainted water.
Today’s dispatch comes from John Branch, a New York Times sports correspondent, who lives in the Bay Area.
They are called the Golden State Warriors, but for most of five decades, they have especially belonged to Oakland. Now the team is preparing to move into a new, $1.3 billion arena across the bay in San Francisco, and the Warriors are down to their final few games at Oakland’s Oracle Arena, their home for 47 seasons.
Does location matter, even if it’s just a few over-water miles away? The team wants to believe it does not.
But it does to Oakland.
“Ten miles, 20 miles — the bay might as well be 1,000 miles,” one longtime resident and historian said.
The Warriors, trying to win their third championship in a row and now moving on to the Western Conference Finals, feel like a franchise in flux. There are contract issues with Kevin Durant, for example, and worries over an aging roster of stars like Stephen Curry. The move to San Francisco is a move into a new era — and the only certainty is that Oakland will always be remembered for the good old days. It just works that way.
Can something move and remain the same? Can anything be replanted without changing the landscape?
California always leans toward reinvention. It is closer to the future than anywhere else. Nothing feels permanent, even without earthquakes and fires. So it is with the Warriors. All dynasties fade, even those — especially those, maybe — building new temples for themselves.
Click here to read John’s story about the team’s new stadium.
