The nation’s first presidential caucus is always important, but with more than 20 Democrats running this time, the need for a strong showing is far more urgent.
IOWA CITY — It may be nearly nine months until the first balloting of the 2020 primary, but candidates are already practically tripping over one another in Iowa.
Senators Amy Klobuchar and Bernie Sanders visited the same Des Moines farmers’ market on the same weekend this month. Mr. Sanders and Senator Elizabeth Warren hosted rallies in adjacent ballrooms in Ames on back-to-back days. And Ms. Warren and Beto O’Rourke stumped at the same brewery in Mason City.
The reason is clear: With 20-some Democrats running for president, there are far more candidates — especially ones counting on strong results in Iowa — than there are slots to realistically move forward in the 2020 competition after the caucuses. That means most of the contenders are bound to depart the Des Moines airport next February damaged, dispirited or disappointed, if not politically dead.
The list of Democrats staking their claim to the nomination here is long. Where can Ms. Warren’s brand of prairie populism catch fire if not in Iowa, where her staff of 50 people on the ground tops every other campaign’s? Where can Ms. Klobuchar achieve liftoff with her get-along Minnesotan approach if not in her neighboring state? And where can Mr. O’Rourke’s relentless focus on retail-level politics and recruiting a volunteer-powered field program work if not in the logistically complex caucuses?
The two leaders in the polls, Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Mr. Sanders, must also finish out front or risk failing to meet heightened expectations. And those polling closer to zero are wagering everything on an Iowa breakthrough. John Delaney, a former Maryland congressman, has opened eight Iowa field offices and has run television ads in the state — and had already visited all 99 counties by last August.
Across the field, Iowa offers a series of ideological, racial and generational sub-primaries: between Ms. Warren and Mr. Sanders for the mantle of progressive leader, between Senators Cory Booker and Kamala Harris to be the leading black candidate before the race pivots to more diverse states, and between Mayor Pete Buttigieg, Mr. O’Rourke and other fresh faces offering a turn-the-page-on-the-past candidacy.
“There is no escaping the fact that the stakes of Iowa are extremely high,” said Robby Mook, who was Hillary Clinton’s national campaign manager in 2016.
Just how important has Iowa been? The last Democratic nominee not to win it was Bill Clinton in 1992.
And those who stumble here often drop out quickly. In the large 2016 Republican field, three candidates quit within days. Another wave quit after also failing to gain traction in New Hampshire.
Iowa has already dashed Mr. Biden’s presidential dreams once, in 2008, when he finished in fifth place with less than 1 percent of the delegates and immediately dropped out. Now that he is running as a former vice president, his team knows he can ill afford anything but a strong showing to start the race in 2020.
On his first trip to the state after declaring his candidacy last month, Mr. Biden promised Iowans that they would “see a whole heck of a lot” of him. “Ninety-nine counties, here I come!” Mr. Biden shouted to a crowd in Iowa City.
Mr. Sanders, of Vermont, came from nowhere to virtually tie Mrs. Clinton here in 2016, but this time he is a favorite, not an insurgent. In private, his rivals like to raise the bar for him by noting that he should win in a landslide if everyone who caucused for him four years ago comes out again. There were approximately 171,000 Democratic caucusgoers in 2016.
Pete D’Alessandro, a senior Iowa adviser to Mr. Sanders, said the campaign had already built a list of 24,000 Iowans, mostly through the Sanders email list, who said they planned to support him in 2020. Such a sizable ledger of supporters this early in the race is a big advantage in a state where voters are notoriously fickle, often demanding to meet multiple candidates before committing.
Protests in the 1960s, a mimeograph machine and a long-shot candidate all contributed to Iowa’s unlikely role in the presidential election process.
This was Iowa caucus night back in the mid-1970s. And these are members of the national media covering the voting. It was so unusual to see national media in Iowa back then that people actually paid to watch them. “The Democratic Party charged $15 a head for people to watch the media watch the people.” See, in previous years, Iowa’s caucuses just hadn’t attracted national attention. “There are 3,000 frozen media members in downtown Des Moines …” Just over a decade later, Iowa is the place to be. “… It’s Iowa caucus night. Let’s party.” [shouting] The caucuses are now a key part of the presidential election cycle. “Bush, 57.” They’re the first chance to see what kind of support candidates have among voters. So how did we get here, from caucuses that only Iowans seem to care about to the national spectacle we see today? Turns out, a lot of it was accidental. For most of Iowa’s history, its caucuses were dominated by political insiders. There was little room for input from rank-and-file members. An historian writing in the 1940s put it like this: “The larger number of party voters were deprived of a voice.” But the old ways start coming to an end in 1968. The country’s in turmoil, and so is the Democratic Party, mostly over the Vietnam War and civil rights. Basically, the party establishment wants to handle things one way, and many rank-and-file members have other ideas. All this comes to a head as the Democrats hold their national convention. Protesters gather outside. So do police. Inside, the mood is also tense. All this division leads the Democratic Party to rethink the nomination rules to include the voices of all party members in the process. This is how we come to the moment when Iowa becomes key to electing a president, basically by accident. First up, how Iowa became first to hold a presidential contest. It starts with new rules to give everyday members more of a say. So by 1972, winning Iowa now involves four stages. Iowans choose their top candidates, first at the precinct level. These are the caucuses at the heart of this story. But technically, there’s further voting at the county, congressional district and state levels. The new rules make things a lot more inclusive, but this creates new delays. Committees need to be formed, and everyone needs to have up-to-date party materials. The problem is, the state party only has an old mimeograph machine to make copies of all this. It’s really slow. So because of an old machine and a bunch of new logistics, the party decides it needs at least a month between each step to do it all. The national convention is set for early July, so you’d think that the state-level convention would happen about a month before, in June. Except, the party can’t find a venue that’s available to hold everyone. That little detail helps push everything earlier in a chain reaction. See what’s going on here? The precinct caucuses now have to happen early in the year. The party chooses a date that makes Iowa’s the first presidential contest. The New Hampshire primary has been the first kickoff contest since the 1950s, but Iowa Democrats aren’t necessarily looking for national attention. They just think it’ll be fun to be first. Still, attention is what they get. The story begins with George McGovern. “People didn’t know much about the Iowa caucuses. As a matter of fact, there wasn’t a great deal of interest in them.” He’s the long-shot candidate. He’s been at the bottom of national polls. “He often walked the campaign trail alone, little known by the voters.” Most people think this guy, Edmund Muskie, is going to be the big winner in Iowa. “That challenge is great, but we can meet it.” Then comes caucus night. As the people vote, state party officials gather at their headquarters. Richard Bender is one of them. “And we had about 10 or 12 press people show up. These press people included one guy, Johnny Apple.” Johnny Apple, a 37-year-old political correspondent for The New York Times. Iowa’s Democrats aren’t ready to publicize the results right away. They hadn’t expected much demand. According to Bender, only Johnny Apple asked for them that night. “I happen to be fascinated with such things, so I made it my business, beforehand, to understand it.” Bender sets up a phone tree to gather results from across the state. He adds them up himself with a calculator. And the next day, Apple’s article helps swing the national spotlight onto the caucuses. He’s got quite the story to tell. Muskie’s won, but just barely. Not the runaway win people were expecting. And McGovern comes in a strong second. No one expected that, either. The reformed caucus rules helped a long-shot candidate rise to the top. And because this is happening so early in the election now, and because Apple’s article gives the results national coverage, something else happens. “That got picked up by some of the national news shows.” “The Democratic front-runner has been damaged in Iowa.” “And wow, all of a sudden, we were being paid attention to.” McGovern eventually wins the Democratic nomination. “I accept your nomination with a full and grateful heart.” He loses the presidential election, but some haven’t forgotten what those early caucuses did for McGovern, including Georgia’s former governor, Jimmy Carter. Three years later … “There was a major headline on the editorial page of the Atlanta Constitution that said, ‘Jimmy Carter’s running for what?’ [laughter] And the ‘What’ was about this big. [applause] I’m running for president.” … Carter heads to Iowa before any other Democratic candidate. He’s got no national profile. “He didn’t have hordes of press following him around. It was a very lonely campaign.” Washington pundits call his candidacy laughable. “I remember when we couldn’t find a microphone.” “Jimmy Who?” becomes a catchphrase. Carter’s own campaign film plays it up. “Jimmy who?” “I don’t know who he is.” But as long as Iowans come to know him and like him, Carter bets that the media will start paying attention, just like with McGovern four years earlier. Carter campaigns as locally as possible. One day, he learns that he’s been invited on a local TV show. “And I said, that is great. I can’t believe it. I said, ‘What are we going to do?’ He said, ‘Do you have any favorite recipes?’ And I said, ‘What do you mean, recipes?’ He said, ‘Well, this is a cooking show.’ Well, they put a white apron on me and a chef’s hat. That was my only access to TV when I first began to campaign in Iowa.” His opponents are in Iowa, too, but they spend far less time there. Carter wins. “Surprisingly top of the class after his win in a somewhat obscure race in Iowa against the others.” “You can’t tell until we go to the other 49 states, but it’s encouraging for us.” A year later … “I, Jimmy Carter, do solemnly swear —” … he becomes the 39th president. Now we need to head to 1980 because we haven’t talked about the Republicans yet. Here’s the state’s Republican chairman that year. He’s asked why Iowa’s caucuses have become so important. “I think because Jimmy Carter got his start in Iowa in 1976.” The Republicans in Iowa are keen to copy the Democrat’s success, and one candidate in particular gets inspired by Carter’s underdog win: George H.W. Bush. He’s running against Ronald Reagan, Bob Dole and others, and he’s near the bottom of the pack. “Your name isn’t really a household word, but Ronald Reagan can —” But Bush goes big in Iowa. He gets a surprise win. It’s a far cry from just months before. “I was an asterisk in those days. And my feelings got hurt. And now, I’m no longer an asterisk.” Bush is now the third underdog to get a boost from the caucuses. The next morning on CBS, he distills the essence of this new Iowa effect. “We will have forward, ‘Big Mo’ on our side, as they say in athletics.” “ ‘Big Mo?’ ” “Yeah. Mo — momentum.” Bush loses to Reagan, but becomes vice president. And the desire to capture the “Big Mo” from Iowa has only grown, thanks in large part to Iowa’s embrace of being first, and the media storm that descends every four years. That’s despite the fact that most candidates who win … “This is a job interview.” … don’t become president. Plus, many point out that the state’s overwhelmingly white population doesn’t reflect the country’s diversity. “I actually think that we can find places that represent that balance of urban and rural better.” But the race to get the “Big Mo” out of Iowa persists because it’s the first chance to upend expectations, and put political fates in the voters’ hands.
Numerous lower-tier contenders need Iowa to breathe life into their candidacies, even if they finish shy of an outright victory. The gap between expectations and outcomes has often been as important in Iowa as the results themselves.
Eric Swalwell, a California congressman and Iowa native, has already visited the state 19 times since 2017, according to a candidate calendar kept by The Des Moines Register. Julián Castro, the former federal housing secretary, installed a former Iowa Democratic Party chairman as his national deputy campaign manager.
The Supreme Court vacancy has not helped President Trump in Pennsylvania, a Times poll finds.
Joni Ernst and Theresa Greenfield prepare to debate in Iowa, where their tight race could help decide control of the Senate.
As a neighboring senator, Ms. Klobuchar is already known in some parts of northern Iowa that overlap with Minnesota media markets. (“I can see Iowa from my porch,” she likes to joke.) Her campaign headquarters in Minneapolis is only a two-hour drive to the Iowa border, making it possible to bus down volunteers as the caucuses near.
The rules of the Iowa caucuses have historically been inhospitable to all but the top finishers. Candidates who fail to get at least 15 percent in a caucus precinct cannot receive any delegates there, and their supporters then have a chance to migrate to viable competitors.
But a new wrinkle in 2020 is that Iowa will now deliver two sets of results.
In the past, the party tallied up only how many delegates each candidate won. That will still happen. But for the first time, the total number of caucusgoers for each candidate will be made public, too, providing a new way for campaigns to spin the outcome. “It certainly adds a new dynamic to the caucuses,” said Troy Price, the Iowa Democratic Party chairman.
The logistical heave of competing in 1,679 separate and simultaneous caucuses is significant — the best organized campaigns will recruit a precinct captain, if not a team, at every site. In total, the campaigns have more than 150 paid staff members on the ground in Iowa already, led by Ms. Warren.
Notably, both Mr. Booker, of New Jersey, and Ms. Warren have supplemented their growing field teams with a data expert based in Iowa to improve their targeting of potential supporters. And both have engaged in the kind of personal touches — endless selfies and one-on-one phone calls — that have traditionally won over the activist class.
Not long after Marcia Nichols, an influential former labor official, told Mr. Booker’s team that her elderly mother was a big Booker fan, he stopped by her mother’s house to chat. Ms. Nichols said that gesture “played in my decision” to support Mr. Booker. “He’s doing the right small-picture things,” she said.
On another recent trip, Mr. Booker stayed the night at the home of Kurt Meyer, chairman of the Tri-County Democrats in northern Iowa. Weather had delayed Mr. Booker’s arrival until after 1 in the morning, but they stayed up talking anyway. “Finally, one of his staff minions said, ‘Senator, it’s 3:15 a.m.!’” and dragged Mr. Booker to bed, Mr. Meyer recalled.
Ms. Harris’s efforts have been more low key. The California senator has visited Iowa only once since March, and some Iowans have grumbled that her absence is part of an effort to carefully manage expectations.
Mr. O’Rourke’s often frenetic approach to campaigning, which brought him national attention in his failed 2018 bid for Senate against Ted Cruz, better fits the classic mold of an Iowa-style campaign. Mr. O’Rourke, 46, has been barnstorming every corner of the state and just finished a five-day, 16-stop trip.
Some advisers to Mr. Cruz, who won the Iowa Republican caucuses in 2016, said they felt at times in the 2018 Texas race as if they were running against a mirror image of their own approach, with Mr. O’Rourke’s busy schedule and volunteer-heavy field operation.
The pace for Mr. O’Rourke builds upon his image as a younger face for the party, a lane now crowded by Mr. Buttigieg, the 37-year-old mayor of South Bend, Ind., who burst from obscurity this year and has recently begun expanding his footprint in Iowa.
Mr. Booker, who just turned 50, has pushed to be part of the next-generation discussion, too. He spent last weekend in New Hampshire and South Carolina, the states that follow Iowa on the primary calendar. But he made time for Iowa from afar, calling a columnist for The Des Moines Register to pitch his latest gun-safety proposal.
