Style|So What Does Rihanna’s First Fenty Collection Actually Look Like?
So What Does Rihanna’s First Fenty Collection Actually Look Like?
A host of editors got a sneak peek in Paris. So what if they had to wait awhile?
Looks from Rihanna’s debut collection for Fenty.
PARIS — The rollout continued in Paris on Wednesday afternoon, as an army of international fashion editors descended on a glossy shop in the Marais. There was a heavy security presence outside and crushed velvet couches within.
They were there for the first official viewing of the first collection from the first black female designer at the first new house introduced in decades by the luxury group LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton.
They were there, in other words, for Rihanna. But she was nowhere to be seen. She was, the gathering was quietly told, running a little late. Almost three hours, to be exact.
The woman in question did not appear any worse for wear when she finally appeared — towering in stilettos, practically glowing in a white corset dress, a glass of Champagne clutched in her hand and enthusiasm for the first collection — named Release 5-19 for the month and year it will become available — on her lips.
The Fenty Release 5-19 collection.
As to that magic? A consistently bold, oversize, tailored silhouette appeared to be the backbone of the collection, with corset construction and power shoulders emerging as another leading hallmark. See the series of Japanese denim jackets with cargo pockets and split flare pants, a coral pink blazer with structured feminine curves, and a signature corset blazer dress with exaggerated shoulders. Also fanny packs that doubled as waist-cinching sashes.
Crisp white poplin or striped shirts, some with mutton sleeves or with matching shorts and skirts, took a more relaxed line, as did several variations of big structured pants. Indeed, there was a grown-up practicality at the forefront of many designs, such as the new Fenty stilettos, with cutouts and a ferociously pointy toe but which came in a broad variety of heel heights.
That the sizes offered up by this debut collection, which go up to a French 46 (an American 14), cover a wider range than most traditional luxury houses was a priority, Rihanna said. Above her — above it all — loomed the new graphic silver Fenty logo, inspired by a Greek key design.
She praised LVMH for being flexible around her many commitments, as well as supporting a fully direct-to-consumer model.
When asked if she was concerned about the reception of her work from critics and fans, Rihanna shrugged.
