Jules Markey reveals another quirk in the English language.
WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — When we last saw Jules Markey, he was buttoning down his grid, and in this puzzle he is lecturing us on a completely different topic.
Over all, Mr. Markey’s puzzle isn’t very hard, but you’ll have to think literally to solve this one. Don’t say I didn’t tell you so.
By the way, if you’re wondering about the photo, I thought that someone with a megaphone would represent Mr. Markey’s theme well. Most of the photos with megaphones were of protests and other political events, which didn’t seem right. Then I found a familiar face: the musician Sxip Shirey, whom I first met when he led the band Luminescent Orchestrii. He is an insanely talented man who makes music with found objects, traditional instruments, computer and modified instruments. If you have a chance to see him perform, I highly recommend going. If you don’t mind nonstandards-friendly lyrics, find his “I Live in New York City” on YouTube and listen to what should be an anthem for every New Yorker.
You’ll be dancing on your seat. Which is really the best place to dance.
23A: The United Arab Republic, or U.A.R., was a political alliance between Egypt and Syria that was established in 1958. It ended in 1961, when Syria declared itself independent of Egypt following a military coup. Egypt retained the name U.A.R. until 1971, when it took the name Arab Republic of Egypt.
39A: I misread this clue as “Mom’s counterpart,” and put in DAD, followed by POP when DAD didn’t work. The clue actually reads “Morn’s counterpart,” and the poetic answer is E’EN.
44A: Nice misdirection. “Ring master” suggests a master of ceremonies at the circus, but on a Wednesday, not everything is as it seems. The ring in this clue is a boxing ring, and the master was Muhammad ALI.
46A: Hi, kids! Maybe you don’t remember the Soviet Socialist Republic or its naval base. That’s cool. You can still figure this out. What you need to do is fill in the crossings that you can until you are able to guess at a name that sounds vaguely Russian. For me, that came in the form of 47-, 48- and 49D. Once I had ____SSA, I could fill in ODESSA. I had no idea there was ever a naval base there, but educated guesses are everything with a clue like this. And now I know there once was a naval base in ODESSA.
61A: Keep your eyes peeled for clues with the word “sign” in them. Sure, it could mean a physical sign, or an omen as in the clue “First sign of spring,” but that’s not where this kind of clue is going. We’re supposed to be thinking about the first zodiac sign in the spring, and that would be ARIES.
5D: You can have a “fine meal” in a restaurant, or you can work with it to bake cakes and bread. The “fine meal” in this clue is FLOUR.
27D: “There’s a bridge at the top of it” is wonderful misdirection for a ubiquitous entry like NOSE.
30D: The 2010 hit “Forget You,” by the singer CEELO Green, went by an alternate name that is not printable here.
34A: Hi again, kids! TESS Trueheart was the paramour of the comic strip detective Dick Tracy.
Mr. Markey offers us a set of four two-word phrases, all of which have a synonym for the word “talk” as its first word. These phrases are clued in a punny way, which is not their more common meaning.
For example, the answer to the clue “Talk Trash?” at 19A is UTTER RUBBISH, which is usually used to describe complete poppycock, or something nonsensical or thought to be incorrect. But you can redefine both words — UTTER meaning “to talk” and RUBBISH meaning “trash” — and get a wackier synonym. If you are “talking trash,” you are, in a sense, UTTERing about RUBBISH.
Similarly, at 33A, the answer to the clue “Recite aphorisms?” doesn’t sound like something one might normally do except under duress, but the answer, STATE MOTTOES, can be reimagined to mean that you STATE (or “recite) MOTTOES (or “aphorisms).
This seems like a fresh find, as all four of the theme entries are debuts and, even in the singular, if any of them have been used, they have been clued straight.
In nontheme news, there’s not a lot that is new (aside from the actor BENICIO Del Toro), but there’s some good fill here, like SORE ARM, NO PULP, RUSTLES UP, SOFT PEDAL, NO LOSS and, of course, Marcel PROUST, who had a literary summarizing competition on Monty Python named for him, but the sketch is sadly not on YouTube.
The seed for this puzzle came to me while on a long drive to a good friend’s birthday party. My wife was driving and I was doing some daydreaming while looking out the car window.
The phrase “UTTER RUBBISH” popped up, and its dual meaning intrigued me. In one sense, it means to verbally communicate something; in another sense, its more common one, something else. So, I tried to come up with other examples. “SPEAK VOLUMES” was the only one I could come up with during the ride. Later that week, at home, I made a list of synonyms for “talk,” and the other entries fell into place, all conveniently the same length.
Thanks to Will and crew for their usual improvements in cluing. Thanks to my wife for driving that day, and to our friend Marian, whose birthday begot a puzzle.
I hope you enjoyed the solve and found this example of the extraordinary quirkiness of the English language interesting.
Almost finished solving but need a bit more help? We’ve got you covered.
Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.
Trying to get back to the puzzle page? Right here.