To help people understand a condition that frightened her at night, Ranita Roy used photography to visualize her experiences.
One rainy night in 2015, Ranita Roy was startled awake by the feeling that an intruder was in her bedroom. She tried yelling, but discovered she could not move a single muscle.
She was able to get up after a few terrifying minutes. There was no one in her room. When she told her mother what happened, they both assumed it was just a very vivid nightmare. But her lingering fear of this happening again left Ms. Roy too scared to fall asleep, which made it difficult for her to concentrate in school. When friends and relatives started doubting her, she felt compelled to photograph her experiences, using black and white photos, often of herself, to evoke the terror of sleep paralysis, a condition she learned about from a YouTube video.
Sleep paralysis is a fairly common disorder caused by a disconnect between mind and body during sleep, and studies suggest that as many as half of all people experience it at least once. It causes a feeling of being unable to move despite one’s senses still functioning, and may be accompanied by hallucinations and intense fear. Some experts say it might explain historical accounts of witchcraft, as well as modern-day reports of alien abductions.
Through further research Ms. Roy discovered that while Western psychology labeled these incidents sleep paralysis, other cultures considered them to be supernatural. Some Arabic cultures attributed these symptoms to encountering a Jinn, a mythological spirit. In Hindu culture, some believe it can be caused by a demon, Ms. Roy said.
Soon after she started making these photographs, the sleep paralysis incidents stopped completely. A coincidence? Perhaps. Either way, Ms. Roy will take the uninterrupted peaceful sleep.
Yet at times she misses the episodes, she said, despite the terror she felt.
Follow @nytimesphoto and @JamesEstrin on Twitter. You can also find us on Facebook and Instagram.