There was a discovery last year of wreckage that, after much excitement and international headlines, was determined a false alarm. Hopes were raised, then dashed, then raised again — not only among marine archaeologists, but also among the descendants of the ship’s human cargo, many of whom make their homes in a tiny South Alabama community called Africatown.
Then, on Wednesday, came an announcement from the Alabama Historical Commission: Another shipwreck, one of many marooned under a muddy stretch of the Mobile River, was almost certainly the Clotilda, a wooden vessel of horrors that carried 110 Africans to the United States in 1860, more than a half-century after the importation of slaves was declared illegal.
The find, historians said, revives a story of unspeakable cruelty, but also the story of a people who somehow survived this indignity and many others like it.
The last voyage of the Clotilda, from Benin, Africa, to Mobile Bay, Ala., “represented one of the darkest eras of modern history,” Lisa Demetropoulos Jones, the commission’s executive director, said in a statement.
The discovery was aided by input from the Smithsonian Institution, the National Park Service, the National Geographic Society and the Slave Wrecks Project, a multinational group researching the slave trade, and comes at a moment when civil rights museums have opened across the South. African-American history is also finding powerful new expression in the National Museum of African American History and Culture, which opened in Washington in 2016.
But the news is likely to resonate most forcefully in Africatown, a working-class community of about 2,000 people north of downtown Mobile. It was founded by people who had been transported to Alabama in the Clotilda’s hull, and it was a place where African languages were spoken for decades.
More recently, the area was hit hard by paper mill closings, but there is a plan to build a welcome center and a museum, largely funded by money from a settlement with the oil giant BP after the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010.
Although it was not clear whether any of the wreckage could be restored, Councilman Levon Manzie, who represents the area, said he hoped that the ship, or parts of it, would be prominently displayed in Africatown.
After the Clotilda’s arrival in the United States, its captain, William Foster, burned the ship in an effort to conceal evidence of the illegal smuggling trip. The Africans aboard were distributed to slave owners, according to the Alabama Historical Commission.
Stories of the ship and its survivors were passed down from generation to generation, although doubts also lingered given the lack of physical proof.
The younger Mr. Raines persisted, sure that he was on to something. He said he convinced researchers at the University of Southern Mississippi to bring a crew to the area to survey for more shipwrecks. They found many. One initially seemed like a big log pile.
Then Mr. Raines discovered a piece of lumber with square nails in it — a telltale sign, he said, of 19th-century construction.
The experts returned, led by James Delgado, an authority in maritime archaeology. A painstaking act of detective work followed, involving hunts for archived documents, more dives, X-ray fluorescence tests and comparisons of building materials, dimensions and stories.
“There is nothing definitive in terms of a name on a piece of wood or a bell, so what we had to rely on is a series of pieces of evidence that together would lead you to a conclusion,” Dr. Delgado said Wednesday.
The ship was listed as 86 feet long by 23 feet wide, with a 6-foot-11-inch depth of hold. Those, too, matched the dimensions of the wreck.
Many other leads checked out. And though confirmation with complete certainty is impossible, Dr. Delgado said he believes they have come close. His team wrote a report and sent it to six scientists for a peer review.
Now the focus will turn to protecting the ship, and deciding whether it can somehow be displayed. More archaeological work is also likely, potentially revealing additional elements of the long-submerged story.
For the moment, Mr. Raines said, he is feeling a good dose of vindication, and joy for Africatown.
