Opinion|What Does the Release of John Walker Lindh Mean?
What Does the Release of John Walker Lindh Mean?
If he becomes the terrorist we’ve always accused him of being, the fault will lie as much with us as with him.
Mr. Wray is a novelist who has traveled as a journalist in Afghanistan.
It’s hard to imagine now, after everything that’s happened in the brutal decades since, but there was a time when we were fairly cozy with the Taliban.
For much of the 1990s — when an earnest, bookish California teenager named John Walker Lindh first felt himself drawn to the study of Islam — the United States lent its support to plans by an American-led group of businesses to develop an oil pipeline that would run through Afghanistan. This would require negotiations with the Taliban, the world’s most oppressive Muslim regime. Government officials who had misgivings about human rights abuses in Afghanistan largely kept their reservations to themselves.
Not long before, in the Reagan era, the term “mujahedeen” had a heroic ring to it: These were fierce and noble Afghan warriors, our president assured us, fighting with limited resources to liberate their country from Soviet oppression. It was America’s privilege to supply these men with money and with weapons, and the Reagan administration spent millions of taxpayer dollars doing just that. The official stance on the mujahedeen would change radically, of course, in the wake of Al Qaeda’s attack on America — but the events of Sept. 11, 2001, were all but unimaginable in mid-2000, when Mr. Lindh, age 19, decided to travel to the Middle East to study the Quran.
The consequences of that decision are a matter of public record. On Nov. 25, 2001 — two months after the twin towers had fallen, six weeks after the United States dropped its first bomb on Afghanistan — a few hundred Taliban soldiers, held as prisoners of war in an ancient mud-and-brick fortress near Mazar-i-Sharif, staged an uprising. Over the next eight days, all but 86 of those prisoners would die, as well as a great number of their jailers and a man named Johnny Micheal Spann, who was serving as a C.I.A. adviser to America’s allies on the ground. In the aftermath of that bloody uprising, it was discovered that one of the few surviving prisoners was an American: Mr. Lindh. A media frenzy ensued.
Overnight, John Walker Lindh was transformed into a symbol — which may be the most dangerous thing that can happen to a person about to stand trial. The more Mr. Lindh’s fame grew, the less human he became to us. By the time of his sentencing, many Americans were in favor of his execution.
For the first 11 years of his term in prison, Mr. Lindh was prohibited from speaking Arabic, the language in which Muslims pray, or from interacting meaningfully with other Muslim prisoners. Regardless of his crime, in other words, Mr. Lindh was doing a terrorist’s time. America had captured a clear villain in the otherwise bewildering, morally muddy war on terror and — understandably, perhaps — we didn’t want to let him go.
Judging by this week’s headlines, we still don’t.
On Thursday, in accordance with the terms of his sentencing, Mr. Lindh was released from prison on probation three years early. But his case still hasn’t outlived its allure for politicians looking to score easy points with their constituencies.
Senators Richard C. Shelby, Republican of Alabama, and Maggie Hassan, Democrat of New Hampshire, joined hands across the partisan aisle last Friday to write a letter protesting Mr. Lindh’s release, describing him as one of a group of “terrorist offenders” who “openly call for extremist violence.” The case of a criminal as universally reviled as Mr. Lindh is an opportunity for a display of righteous indignation to which virtually no potential voter will object.
For precisely that reason, however, great caution is called for. We’re a society perpetually drunk on indignation — even more so now, in the age of the hourly Twitterstorm, than when Mr. Lindh entered prison. His release, and the controversy surrounding it, may prove a valuable test of our ability, as a nation, to keep our worst impulses in check.
Senators Shelby and Hassan are by no means alone in their views regarding Mr. Lindh. Over the past few months, many have argued that his early release would be unjustified or that it would pose a potential public threat. (“I don’t like it at all,” President Trump said on Thursday of Mr. Lindh’s release.) They may be right, of course. No one can foresee what any given human being will do after being held under such conditions for 17 years.
