KINSHASA, Congo — More than 1,000 people have died from Ebola in eastern Congo since August, the country’s health minister said on Friday, the second-worst outbreak of the disease in history behind the West African one in 2014-16 that killed more than 11,300.
Insecurity has become a “major impediment” to controlling the Ebola outbreak, Michael Ryan, the World Health Organization’s health emergencies chief, told reporters in Geneva on Friday.
He said 119 attacks had been recorded since January, 42 of them directed at health facilities, while 85 health workers had been wounded or killed. Dozens of rebel groups operate in the region, and political rivalries were one factor driving the community rejection of health personnel.
“Every time we have managed to regain control over the virus and contain its spread, we have suffered major, major security events,” Mr. Ryan said. His organization was “anticipating a scenario of continued intense transmission” of the disease, he added.
The organization has said that the most recent Ebola outbreak remained contained to eastern Congo even as the number of cases has risen in a dense, highly mobile population near the border with Uganda and Rwanda. Many people fear going to Ebola treatment centers, choosing instead to stay at home and risk transmitting the disease to caretakers and neighbors.
Residents of highly volatile Butembo believe Ebola was brought to the city on purpose. Amid rumors and misunderstandings, health workers have struggled to explain the importance of safe burials and other preventive measures. One out of four people interviewed in eastern Congo a month after the outbreak began wrongly believed Ebola was not real.
Residents were blocked from taking part in a presidential election in January, with Congo’s government citing safety concerns. Some wondered why money was being poured into fighting Ebola when many more people were dying each year of malaria and other preventable diseases.
Insecurity also has prevented vaccination teams from getting to some areas, further limiting the health response. Still, more than 109,000 people have received an experimental but effective Ebola vaccine. Mr. Ryan said the authorities were looking at introducing another one.
