Robert S. Mueller III’s statement on Wednesday, in which he reiterated the conclusions of his investigation and declined to clear President Trump, seemed to open a dam in the Democratic presidential field.
Before Mr. Mueller spoke, six of the 23 candidates had explicitly endorsed impeachment proceedings against Mr. Trump. By Thursday morning, 10 had done so, with others edging closer.
Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey, Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., Senator Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and former Gov. John Hickenlooper of Colorado came out in favor of impeachment proceedings for the first time.
They joined Senators Kamala Harris of California and Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, Representative Seth Moulton of Massachusetts, the former housing secretary Julián Castro, former Representative Beto O’Rourke of Texas and Mayor Wayne Messam of Miramar, Fla., who had previously voiced their support for impeachment proceedings.
But several leading candidates were more hesitant on Wednesday. A representative for former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. said in a statement that Mr. Biden “agrees with Speaker Pelosi that no one would relish what would certainly be a divisive impeachment process, but that it may be unavoidable if this administration continues on its path.” As he left a campaign event in Dallas on Wednesday, Mr. Biden did not stop to engage a sizable group of reporters who shouted questions about Mr. Mueller toward him.
The ground has shifted since the Justice Department released its redacted version of Mr. Mueller’s report. While a few candidates, including Ms. Warren, called for impeachment then, they were in the minority, and officials on other campaigns said there had been little pressure from voters.
But now, a majority of the Democratic field has expressed support, explicitly or implicitly, for impeachment.
Last month, Mr. Booker said he would reserve judgment until Congress received a full version of the report, telling voters in Nevada, “There’s a lot more investigation that should go on before Congress comes to any conclusions like that.” On Wednesday, however, he said on Twitter that legislators had “a legal and moral obligation” to pursue impeachment.
Several candidates seized on one line in Mr. Mueller’s statement, in which he said that under Justice Department policy, filing criminal charges against Mr. Trump was never an option — but that the Constitution provided another mechanism. It was a clear reference to impeachment, and Mr. Buttigieg, Ms. Harris, Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota and Ms. Warren all characterized it as, essentially, an impeachment referral.
As a sitting member of the House, Mr. Moulton is the only candidate so far who both favors impeachment proceedings and actually has the power to affect the decision.
The other sitting representatives in the race are Mr. Swalwell; Tulsi Gabbard of Hawaii, who has said she opposes impeachment; and Tim Ryan of Ohio, who did not call for it explicitly on Wednesday but edged about as close to the line as he could without stepping across.
