Parenting|Why Are We So Freaking Tired?
Why Are We So Freaking Tired?
 It might be fragmented sleep.
When my younger daughter was around 18 months old, I asked my mom when I would stop feeling so tired. Like me, my mother had two kids about three years apart, and when I was born she was a doctor who worked full time, with a doctor husband who also worked full time. Even though my dad did 50 percent of the child care before it was cool, it’s family lore that the biggest fights they ever had were over who got to take the first nap on the weekends.
 But, as blood tests soon revealed, I was not anemic. In fact, I was in perfect health. One of our new guides to getting better sleep as a new parent explains why I might have been feeling so broken, despite sleeping seven or eight hours most nights: Apparently “fragmented sleep can leave you as tired as insufficient sleep.” Those early-morning requests for blanket-fixing and glasses of water were really taking their toll.
Our experts suggest trying to get four to six hours of uninterrupted rest, because repeatedly waking during a single sleep cycle is bad for learning and memory. If you’ve got a newborn, and especially if you’re nursing, we know that four to six hours is a pipe dream. But sleep is really essential for postpartum mental health. So this is the piece of advice I give to all my friends right before they give birth: If you really feel like you’re on the brink, get an uninterrupted night of sleep by whatever means possible.
For some new moms, that means pumping breast milk and actually physically leaving the house, because they know that if they’re at home they will want to tend to the baby. If it’s financially feasible, I even suggest finding a last-minute deal on a hotel room, pumping before you go and then swan diving into a bed that you don’t have to make yourself for one night. Other options include going to a friend or relative’s house and passing out in a guest bedroom, or even barricading yourself in your own bedroom and keeping the baby in the living room for the night with your partner, or a relative or pal. This advice also works for parents of older kids who just won’t go to sleep.
We have another new guide this week that focuses on burnout. Before I started researching the topic, I thought burnout was all-encompassing — if you were burned out at home, you’d also be burned out at work outside the home. But parental burnout and work burnout are two separate phenomena with similar symptoms, which include persistent feelings of exhaustion.
For the burnout guide, I spoke to Dr. Inger Burnett-Zeigler, Ph.D., a clinical psychologist and assistant professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at Northwestern University, who recommends asking yourself this question if you feel like you’re at risk for parental burnout: “Do you actually have to do everything you think you have to do in this moment?” Sometimes taking 20 minutes to do something you find pleasurable, whether it’s watching trash TV, reading or talking to a friend, is a better use of your time than making something elaborate for preschool snack day.
P.S. Thank you to all the readers who submitted two-word birth stories after our call-out last week! We have a roundup of some of them here.
P.P.S. Sign up to receive NYT Parenting in your inbox every Wednesday, or forward it to a friend. Follow us on Instagram @NYTParenting. Join us on Facebook here. Find us on Twitter for the latest updates.
Want More on Sleep and Burnout?
Our friends at Smarter Living have tons of guidance for recognizing the signs of burnout at work and for remedying those issues. Recently, they also made the case for doing nothing, which is advice I can really get behind.
A new longitudinal study of more than 4,600 German men and women published in the academic journal Sleep concluded: “In both women and men, sleep satisfaction and duration did not fully recover for up to six years after the birth of their first child.” So my mom’s “seven years” prediction was not that far off!
The baby was finally down, and my husband and I had some time to talk about topics other than sleeping and pooping, but I also needed to shower. Instead of cutting the conversation short, we took the rest of our bottle of wine into the bathroom, where we talked and drank while I showered.
—Madeline Scheffler, Brooklyn, N.Y.