‘BLKS’ at the Newman Mills Theater at the Robert W. Wilson MCC Theater Space (in previews; opens on May 9). Same city. Same sex. Opposite sex, too. Aziza Barnes’s comedy looks at 24 hours in the sexual, professional and emotional lives of a group of black friends (Paige Gilbert, Alfie Fuller, Antoinette Crowe-Legacy) in New York City. Robert O’Hara directs the play for MCC.
‘CONTINUITY’ at City Center Stage II (previews start on May 8; opens on May 21). Bess Wohl’s last play — the delightful “Small Mouth Sounds” — listened in on a silent retreat. In this new and talkier one, a film crew on location in New Mexico’s desert hustles to finish a thriller about climate change. Rachel Chavkin, who has made a specialty of eco drama, directs.
‘FRANKIE AND JOHNNY IN THE CLAIR DE LUNE’ at the Broadhurst Theater (previews start on May 4; opens on May 30). A waitress and a short-order cook fall into bed. Can they fall into anything else? As two lost souls who just might have found each other, Audra McDonald and Michael Shannon star in the director Arin Arbus’s revival of Terrence McNally’s 1987 play.
‘HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN: TALES REAL AND IMAGINED’ at the Duke on 42nd Street (in previews; opens on May 5). A Danish children’s author with a taste for traumatic endings, Andersen returns courtesy of the Ensemble for the Romantic Century. The playwright Eve Wolf combines Andersen’s stories (“The Little Mermaid,” “The Snow Queen”) with his own personal narratives — and puppets. The production uses music by Benjamin Britten and Henry Purcell.
‘HIGH BUTTON SHOES’ at New York City Center (performances start on May 8). Encores! closes out its season trying to make a dollar. John Rando directs this revival of the Jule Styne and Sammy Cahn musical comedy about a lovable con man who makes New Jersey just a little more corrupt. Betsy Wolfe and Michael Urie lead the cast.
‘LUZIA’ at Citi Field (previews start on May 3; opens on May 7). An antidote to the threats to close the border, this new Cirque du Soleil show from the writer-director Daniele Finzi Pasca and the creative director Patricia Ruel brings Mexico to New York. In a field of marigolds, dancers dressed as monarch butterflies, cacti and the occasional iguana swirl, while acrobats twist, bend, fly and play soccer.
‘MAC BETH’ at the Lucille Lortel Theater (previews start on May 7; opens on May 19). Something wicked this way comes to Red Bull Theater. The company follows a bloody production of “The White Devil” with more blood. Adapted and directed by Erica Schmidt, this version of Shakespeare’s tragedy of power, horror and fate stars an all-female cast including Isabelle Fuhrman and Ismenia Mendes.
‘PASSAGE’ at Soho Rep (in previews; opens on May 5). Can the oppressors and the oppressed hang out? Christopher Chen, a form-breaking playwright, offers a dreamy anatomy of colonialism, imagining Country X, which is ruled by Country Y, and the citizens caught in the middle. Saheem Ali directs.
‘PROOF OF LOVE’ at the Minetta Lane Theater (previews start on May 7; opens on May 14). See it with your eyes before you hear it through your earbuds. In this Chisa Hutchinson play, produced by Audible and New York Theater Workshop, Brenda Pressley stars as a middle-class matriarch facing the devastation of her marriage, family and life. Jade King Carroll directs.
‘SOMETHING CLEAN’ at the Harold and Miriam Steinberg Center for Theater (previews start on May 4; opens on May 29). Kathryn Erbe, a longtime star of “Law & Order: Criminal Intent,” explores another side of crime and punishment.  Daniel Jenkins and Christopher Livingston also star. Margot Bordelon directs.
‘THE TEMPEST’ at the Public Theater (in previews; opens on May 3). The Public Theater’s Mobile Unit, which brings the Swan of Avon to shelters, correctional facilities and various community performance spaces, comes ashore at the Public Theater. Laurie Woolery directs a cast that includes Sam Morales as Miranda and the wonderful Myra Lucretia Taylor as Prospero.
