Throughout nearly all of the album’s 18 songs, Koenig and his main studio collaborator, the producer Ariel Rechtshaid (Haim, Adele, Charli XCX), enforce transparency and a light touch, though a quick-changing one. They draw from Van Morrison’s lilt in “Stranger” and “This Life,” pinging Afropop guitars in “Married in a Gold Rush,” folk-revival fingerpicking in “Hold You Now,” and the nimble interweave of the Grateful Dead in “Harmony Hall.” But nothing lasts; there’s no question that these songs were devised in the era of digital recording and short attention spans.
Almost as soon as Koenig and Rechtshaid fabricate the naturalistic sound of a band, they break the illusion with electronic effects or sudden edits that completely upend the arrangements. (The musicians who played on the album are coyly left uncredited, though guest singers — Danielle Haim and Steve Lacy — are named.) The tracks are playfully, restlessly inventive. “How Long,” with lyrics about attachment, materialism and resentment — “My life’s a joke, your life’s a gas” — starts out with just Koenig’s voice over a bass line and eases into fingersnapping pop-soul, but goes on to toy with bursts of guitar feedback, a distant piano, drums that switch between playing and programming, a pizzicato string arrangement and the comic, metallic boings of a flexatone.
Koenig also — slyly and obliquely — takes on some of the objections that have dogged Vampire Weekend since the band’s self-titled 2008 debut album. The band members were Columbia University alumni singing about affluent, pampered characters while using African-style guitar licks, in songs with blatant titles like “Cape Cod Kwassa Kwassa.” Vampire Weekend was tagged as a beneficiary — rather than an observer — of white privilege and cultural imperialism, though that didn’t stop its next two albums from reaching No. 1 in 2010 and 2013.
A pair of cryptic songs midway through “Father of the Bride” are both rejoinders and acknowledgments. “Unbearably White,” a ballad, lists daunting white things — a snow-capped peak, a blank page — and raises the question of who has the right to some narratives: “Sooner or later/The story gets told,” Koenig sings. “To tell it myself/Would be unbearably bold.” Next, in “Rich Man,” he sings, “One rich man in 10 has a satisfied mind/And I’m the one,” leaving it to listeners to judge the level of irony; he goes on to sing about love, money and ratios. The tune is nestled in a guitar pattern sampled from S.E. Rogie, a songwriter from Sierra Leone whose style was known as “palm wine” guitar; Koenig shares the songwriting credit (and thus publishing royalties) with him.
