The narrow margin of victory for the governing party showed that voters are sick of stagnation and corruption.
Cyril Ramaphosa, who retained South Africa's presidency in national elections last week, faces a serious quandary. His party, the African National Congress — the party of Nelson Mandela, which has governed the country since the end of apartheid — has become profoundly corrupt, as any party would after 25 years of unchallenged power. Yet because of that same corruption, voters denied Mr. Ramaphosa the strong mandate he may need to cleanse the party and put South Africa back on track.
In his victory speech, Mr. Ramaphosa pledged to end corruption “whether some people like it or not.” Whether he can is the big question hanging over South Africa after the election. That he must try is not in question, nor is that at this stage he is the only leader who stands a chance of routing the deeply entrenched kleptocrats in the A.N.C.
The election results were the worst for the A.N.C. since it came to power in the heady days of 1994, flush from its victory over white minority rule. The party dipped below a symbolically significant 60 percent of the vote and barely held on to the critical province of Gauteng, home of Johannesburg and Pretoria, the economic and political capitals, and of the biggest concentration of black middle-class citizens. Equally telling, voter turnout fell to 66 percent from 73 percent in the last election, in 2014.
These may not seem like terrible figures by the standards of established democracies, but given the exalted history of the A.N.C., the vote marked a growing disillusionment with South Africa’s political system, especially among the young and the middle class. One reason is an unemployment rate that has only grown since the end of apartheid and now stands at a crippling 27 percent, in part because of the harmful policies of the last president, the infamous Jacob Zuma.
But it was the epic level of corruption reached under Mr. Zuma’s presidency, which ended when he was compelled to step down in February 2018, that is the biggest blot on the country’s democracy and the major obstacle to tackling the economic problems. Many of Mr. Zuma’s cronies remain in prominent positions in the party, and they pose the greatest challenge to Mr. Ramaphosa.
The president, who was Mr. Mandela’s first choice to be his successor but instead demurred for a time to become a hugely successful businessman, has not been idle since he replaced Mr. Zuma 15 months ago. He has changed the leadership in some critical institutions, including the taxing authority and the national prosecutor’s office, and he has appointed a commission to investigate “state capture,” the term for Mr. Zuma’s collusion with a corrupt business cartel. Its hearings have riveted the nation and have identified many of the worst offenders.
But the big battle begins now. It is a daunting challenge, but not an impossible one. Mr. Ramaphosa knows the ropes — he was intimately involved in the negotiations to end apartheid and played an important role in drafting the post-apartheid constitution. And South Africa, for all its travails, has one of Africa’s biggest and most developed economies, a rich and diverse news media and democratic institutions that have been shaken but not destroyed.
The rot can still be stopped, and that means first and foremost a thorough cleansing of the A.N.C. Mr. Ramaphosa has vowed to “separate the wheat from the chaff” when he starts making appointments and naming ministers, and his every pick will be followed closely — by those ardently hoping for a turnaround in South Africa’s fortunes, and by those looking for a pretext to oust him.
