Can Democrats figure out how to get unions back into the equation in 2020?
Even as many Democrats appear to accept organized labor’s decline, Republicans recognize the crucial importance of unions and are determined to gut them further.
The conservative who may understand labor’s ongoing significance best is Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform.
Trump’s unexpected victory in 2016 did not lay the groundwork for Republican political dominance. But the March 2011 signing of ACT 10, a dramatic reform of public sector labor laws, by Wisconsin’s Scott Walker certainly did. To understate it: If Act 10 is enacted in a dozen more states, the modern Democratic Party will cease to be a competitive power in American politics. It’s that big a deal.
Act 10 reduced collective bargaining rights for most state and municipal employees, including K-12 teachers. The law also weakened unions by mandating annual recertification elections and prohibiting paycheck deductions for dues collection. It also eliminated teachers’ and other public employees’ rights to bargain over hours and conditions of employment, as well as their ability to bargain over any compensation beyond base pay. Act 10 further restricted this base-pay bargaining by limiting increases to annual inflation.
Norquist’s claim about the effectiveness of Act 10 is spot on.
The relentless Republican assault on unions in the industrial belt states during the first half of this decade was an unquestionable success, politically speaking. It resulted in decreased Democratic turnout, a crucial drop in the bankrolling of Democratic candidates and, more subtly but no less significantly, a debilitating sense of powerlessness among union members.
Long story short, union membership has stabilized, but the consequences have been severe. One of the things that is hard to capture — beyond the economics — is how much public employees now feel disempowered.
Shelton cited Bureau of Labor Statistics data showing the virtual collapse of organized labor in Wisconsin.
Members of unions as a percentage of employment in Wisconsin and nationally.
The success of the concerted attacks by right-wing groups on the labor movement, especially on public employee unions, reflects more than the failure of Democrats at the national level to take steps to protect the rights of unions.
First, the attacks exposed the union movement’s lack of preparedness for the battle, despite the clear warnings from conservative groups. Second, they revealed the long-term neglect, by Democratic and liberal donors, of politics at the state and local level, where key labor laws are enacted. Third, they showed the dangerously high level of public employee union dependence on favorable government treatment for survival. This dependency left these unions vulnerable when Republicans took over many state governments in the wave elections of 2010 and 2014.
There is some evidence that unions are regrouping. But they do so from a weakened position, with fewer members and diminished revenues.
On the political front, 2018 election exit polls show a modest reinvigoration of the labor movement as a result of the threat posed by the Trump administration.
The margin of support for Democratic House candidates among households with a union member was plus 22 (60-38) in 2014. That fell to plus 9 (53-44) in 2016. In 2018, the Democratic margin among union household voters was plus 18 (58-40).
In addition, voters in Missouri, a red state, decisively rejected a proposed right-to-work law — an anti-union law — in an August 2018 referendum, 67.3 to 32.7 percent.
Nationally, total contributions from labor political action committees rebounded slightly in 2018 from 2016 and 2014, but remained well below the 2010 level. According to OpenSecrets, labor PACs gave $58.2 million, mostly to Democrats, in 2018. In comparison, in 2010, labor PACs gave $74.2 million (in 2018 inflation-adjusted dollars).
Public employee unions representing government workers — like AFSCME and the teachers’ unions — saw a similar drop: In 2018, their PACs gave $15.6 million, compared with $20.6 million adjusted for inflation in 2010.
The damage inflicted on unions by enactment of right-to-work legislation is substantial and, in the case of the Wisconsin legislation, extremely difficult to reverse.
Three scholars have produced a detailed analysis of the political effects of right-to-work laws which have been enacted in 27 states — most recently in Michigan and Indiana (2012), Wisconsin (2015), West Virginia (2016) and Kentucky (2017) — all states with once-strong union movements.
In their February 2019 paper, “From the Bargaining Table to the Ballot Box: Political Effects of Right-to-Work Laws,” James Feigenbaum, an economist at Boston University, Alexander Hertel-Fernandez, a political scientist at Columbia, and Vanessa Williamson, a senior fellow at Brookings, compared adjoining counties in states with and without right-to-work laws.
The authors found “strong causal evidence” for the demobilizing “effects of right-to-work laws — examining state and federal elections from 1980 through 2016.” For Democrats, the demobilization after passage of such laws is devastating.
generally reduce Democratic vote share and turnout in U.S. Senate and House elections, as well as state gubernatorial races. Democratic seat shares in state legislatures also fall.
The accompanying graphic shows the decline in Democratic voting in counties within states that adopt right-to-work laws compared with those that do not.
A study of adjoining counties across state borders found that Democrats performed, in presidential elections, about the same on both sides — until one state adopted right-to-work laws. Then the county vote trends diverged.
Among eight large and politically important unions in Michigan — the UAW, SEIU, NEA, IUOE (Operating Engineers), CJA (Carpenters), IBT (Teamsters), AFT, and AFSCME — union revenue fell nearly 10 percent relative to 2011.
The Michigan branch of the Service Employees International Union representing home health care workers was riding high. It had 55,000 members, brought in $22 million annually and was able to spend nearly $3.5 million on politics. Then it all came crashing down. Five years later, the union is a shell of its former self. Membership plunged to under 10,000. Revenue is less than one-third what it was at its peak. Political spending bottomed out at less than 5 percent of what it once was.
The opening slide in a PowerPoint presentation to Democratic and liberal donors by Blue Compass Strategies, a pro-labor consulting group, has the headline “The Right Has A Greater Appreciation Of Labor’s Role Than We Do” over a picture of Scott Walker signing Act 10 in 2011.
While unions are taking a financial beating, the Blue Compass presentation documents the surge in contributions in the first half of this decade to state-level conservative groups — many of them linked to the conservative State Policy Network — that back right-to-work and other laws that constrain unions.
From 2010 to 2015, for example, Blue Compass found, revenues rising from $1.8 million in 2010 to $5.6 million 2015 at the Illinois Policy Center; from $818,355 to $1.7 million at the Buckeye Institute in Ohio; from $440,244 to $1.9 million at the Washington Policy Center in Seattle. Revenues at the Mackinac Center grew from $3.4 million to $6.3 million over this same period. Cash flow to the Wisconsin Institute for Law and Liberty grew from $511,939 in 2011 to $3 million in 2015.
One of the better things to happen for Democrats, organized labor and public employee unions in particular, is that Grover Norquist’s call for 10 states to follow Scott Walker’s lead in Wisconsin and enact a version of Act 10 has not materialized.
One of the key elements of Act 10 is that it uses the savings in reduced government employee pay and benefits to restructure the financing of state and local governments. As a result, repealing the Act would set in motion a chain reaction of politically damaging tax hikes.
Even if they went ahead with repealing the law, Democrats would have to deal with the effects of reversing the myriad proposals under Act 10’s umbrella. One of Walker’s primary initiatives was to require state and local employees to start paying towards their pension and health care benefits, which saved both levels of government money. This allowed him to reduce aid to local governments and school districts, knowing they would be able to replenish those funds by having to pay less for employee benefits.
If Democrats reinstate Wisconsin as a union utopia and teachers and local government employees once again start to collectively bargain, it will certainly increase the cost of providing services, and thus push property taxes significantly upward. That is, of course, unless the Democratic candidates want to move back to a system in which the state provides aid to local governments and school districts to subsidize these benefits. If that is the case, Democrats should be willing to provide examples of which state taxes they would raise to provide the billions of dollars it would take to restore this aid model.
Tony Evers, the newly elected Democratic governor of Wisconsin, included a series of pro-labor provisions in his first budget: a call for the repeal of right-to-work laws, a $15 minimum wage on government projects and restoration of the state prevailing wage law. He did not, however, include repeal of Act 10.
Marquette University Law School polled Wisconsin voters on Act 10 seven times between 2012 and 2018. In the first five, by small margins of 2 to 7 points, pluralities averaging 48.5 percent preferred to keep the law on the books, compared with 43 percent for repeal. In the two most recent surveys, however, a plurality, 44.5 percent, supported repeal while 43 percent backed retention.
In contrast to conservatives’ view of unions as being central to politics, mainstream Democrats have been much more reluctant to recognize just how important labor has been to their party. Support for labor rights is not unanimous among Democrats in the same way that opposition to unions is among Republicans.
there is no liberal version of state-level right-to-work laws that Democrats have consistently pursued over the years on a scale that matches conservative efforts to retrench labor power.
Even a cursory examination of the current jockeying for the Democratic presidential nomination shows, however, that labor law reform is nowhere near the top of the left’s order of business.
The Democratic Party became labor’s more congenial ally, but it was never really all in. When priorities had to be set, the Democratic Party’s willingness to prioritize labor was never quite there.
Most Democrats, 58 percent, have a favorable view of unions, according to Pew, but nearly a quarter, 23 percent, have a negative view.
Clearly, other important matters — gender rights, immigration and civil rights — have taken precedence over the trade union movement in the contemporary Democratic debate on core objectives. And even economic inequality — which is closely tied to the strength of unions — is rarely discussed now in the context of the role of union representation in reducing these disparities.
From 1983 to 2018, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the number of American workers who were union members fell by 16.9 percent, from 17.7 million to 14.7 million, even as the total population grew by 40.8 percent, from 233.8 million to 329.1 million.
As a result, organized labor is widely perceived as an institution in decline, when it needs, as Hertel Fernandez points out, a Democratic Party willing to invest political capital in turning the descent of labor around.
The problem in building support for a resurgent labor movement is that many liberals and Democrats do not appear to recognize the crucial role that unions continue to play not only in diminishing the effects of inequality, but in voter mobilization and campaign finance. Unfortunately for labor, and for the future of the Democratic Party, groups that are shrinking in numbers and in financial resources lose political leverage and influence, the two commodities unions are most in need of.
What too many on the left of the political spectrum also ignore (or fail to understand) is that labor unions are inextricably intertwined with the economic condition of women and minorities — and, for that matter, of white men. In other words, Democrats make a fundamental mistake if they engage in the politics of subtraction, downgrading the priority of battered but pivotal institutions like the labor movement. They would be wise to commit to the politics of addition instead — amplifying the power of labor to lift up the most loyal Democratic constituencies.
