Love|She Said Yes. Fourteen Times.
She Said Yes. Fourteen Times.
When it came to dating, Tanya Pushkine and Paul Luykx each had a strategy.
Mr. Luykx, a real estate investor, joined just four dating sites, but his goal was to make many connections. So, he created a spreadsheet to keep track of them all. “I didn’t want to make mistakes and say to someone, ‘How’s your brother?’ and have them say, ‘What brother?’” he said.
Ms. Pushkine, 60, and Mr. Luykx, 63, met through Bumble in July 2016. (He had previously rejected her on Match.) When she received Mr. Luykx’s “Where have you been all my life?’’ reply to her Bumble hello, she was charmed. “It was different than the rest,” Ms. Pushkine said.
Both had similar backgrounds. They had been married before — Ms. Pushkine once, and Mr. Luykx twice — and each have two children from previous relationships.
Ms. Pushkine was married for 14 years to a restaurant manager whom she had known for six months before separating in 2003. Her divorce was finalized five years later.
Mr. Luykx was 20 when he married his high school sweetheart. “We were good friends, but we hadn’t grown up yet,” he said. The marriage lasted 19 years. “I was married to my second wife for 14 years,” he added. They divorced in 2016.
Like Ms. Pushkine, Mr. Luykx craved being in a relationship. “At 60, I never expected to be in this situation again,” he said.
Along with a dating spreadsheet, Mr. Luykx had developed a routine. The line he used with Ms. Pushkine was standard. He met first dates at Center Bar in the Time Warner Center in Manhattan for drinks, which were sipped at the same reserved table. On his way to the bar, he would stop and buy a small box of gummy candy from Sugarfina on the first floor of the building.
On July 17, however, Mr. Luykx was running 20 minutes late to meet Ms. Pushkine, and so he arrived with apologies rather than candy.
Four hours passed quickly. Then they took a walk in Central Park. More talking, and some kissing, followed. Before they knew it, three hours had slid by. Neither wanted to leave, but Mr. Luykx got into an Uber and went to his home in Jersey City. Ms. Pushkine, who lived nearby, walked to hers.
“In the car I was thinking, ‘Oh my God, this is the girl. I’m done. Resistance is futile,’” he said.
Texts, calls, emojis of blowing kisses, and an additional date followed. Then it was a weekend stay at his apartment where the spreadsheet was revealed.
Mr. Luykx announced that weekend that the spreadsheet would be retired, and any future dates canceled. “When I met her the whole spreadsheet was instantly irrelevant,” he said.
Their relationship moved quickly. Soon after that weekend they closed their dating accounts. A few months later, Ms. Pushkine packed up 30 years of belongings, rented a storage unit, and moved into his home for the next seven months while she gutted her Upper West Side apartment in preparation for both to move there permanently. This happened in October 2017.
In May 2018, Mr. Luykx took Ms. Pushkine out to dinner, but on route, steered her to a park bench near the Museum of Natural History, got down on one knee and pulled out a box.
Ms. Pushkine said yes immediately. Over the next six months Mr. Luykx proposed again. And again. Fourteen times in total. Each proposal was spontaneous — in the kitchen, during dinner with friends, in front of their building — and each came with another engagement ring.
That Thanksgiving was spent in Paris. After landing there, Mr. Luykx insisted he, Ms. Pushkine and her daughter take a walk. 
This was indeed true on April 12, when 110 guests arrived at the Brooklyn Winery in Williamsburg for the couple’s wedding ceremony and reception.
Ms. Pushkine was escorted to a huppah by her son, Luca Rojas. Her daughter, Lara Rojas became a Universal Life minister for the ceremony, which incorporated Jewish traditions.
During their vows, Mr. Luykx promised to always ask her: What will make you happy? Ms. Pushkine promised to be the most dependable person in his life and to love him no matter what.
The couple exchanged rings under the huppah, then stepped on a glass to end the ceremony and signify their unity.
Dinner was served family style at elongated, wooden tables; guests sat in metal chairs. Industrial wine vats were the backdrop, while branches of pink cherry blossoms added a soft, special feel. Wine poured endlessly.
