In remarks after a meeting with the House Democratic caucus, Speaker Nancy Pelosi criticized President Trump for his refusal to comply with requests from lawmakers who are seeking more information about details in the Mueller report.
It was a very positive meeting of a respectful sharing of ideas. And I think a very impressive presentation by our chairs. We do believe that it’s important for us to follow the facts. We believe that no one is above the law, including the president of the United States. And we believe that the president of the United States is engaged in a cover-up — in a cover-up. And that was the nature of the meeting.
WASHINGTON — Speaker Nancy Pelosi hopped into her SUV on Wednesday for the short drive to the White House knowing full well that a presidential ambush awaited. President Trump was not “serious,” and needed a way out of negotiations over a $2 trillion infrastructure plan that he could not pay for, she told lawmakers at the Capitol an hour earlier.
But Mr. Trump’s offramp led to a topic Ms. Pelosi is trying to play down: impeachment.
If Mr. Trump’s preplanned Rose Garden explosion proved anything, it is that the president is willing to sacrifice his own stated policy agenda to keep “presidential harassment” front and center, and that the speaker, who wants to focus on policy, is leveraging decades of hard-won political capital to keep her party from pursuing an impeachment path that she believes could cost House Democrats their majority in 2020 and keep Mr. Trump in the White House.
The White House meeting, all three minutes of it, was only Ms. Pelosi’s second most important meeting on Wednesday morning. At 9 a.m., the speaker, seeking to head off a growing revolt by House Democrats calling for Mr. Trump’s impeachment, convened an all-hands meeting with her caucus to sell her members on her strategy of exhausting all legislative and legal avenues before taking up impeachment.
For now, she is guided by two political goals: protecting the 40 newly elected Democratic members, who largely come from moderate or conservative districts, and avoiding Mr. Trump’s traps. And Wednesday was a good day for her. A federal judge rejected Mr. Trump’s request to block congressional subpoenas for his banking records, the second such ruling this week and a boost to the speaker’s plea for patience as the House’s fight moves into the courts.
“Very excited, no surprise, two in one week,” Ms. Pelosi boasted.
And Mr. Trump’s public scuttling of infrastructure negotiations gave Democratic leaders the rare chance to change the subject back to policy fights: “Does Congressman Zeldin Agree With Trump on Blocking Infrastructure Bill?” read the headline of a House Democratic campaign arm blast email, one of several targeting a Republican House member, in this case Lee Zeldin of New York.
But even Ms. Pelosi’s closest allies wonder how long she can hold the line against impeachment if the president continues to ignore the House’s demands.
After Wednesday’s meeting, Ms. Pelosi told reporters it was not about “persuasion” but “exchanging information” and clearing up confusion about her strategy.
The findings from the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, are now available to the public. The redacted report details his two-year investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election.
“We do believe that it’s important to follow the facts. We believe that no one is above the law, including the president of the United States, and we believe that the president of the United States is engaged in a cover-up,” Ms. Pelosi said after emerging from the hourlong question-and-answer session.
That “cover-up” quip is what caught Mr. Trump’s attention — providing him with a proximal justification for scrapping the infrastructure meeting, though the preprinted placard hanging on a podium in the Rose Garden declaring “No Collusion, No Obstruction” gave away the forethought that preceded the presidential eruption.
Rhetoric aside, Ms. Pelosi’s session with her members, choreographed by the speaker’s team during the wee hours of Wednesday morning, was actually intended to stall the momentum for an impeachment inquiry. Late in the meeting, Representative Zoe Lofgren, a California Democrat who serves on the House Judiciary Committee, said that “having an impeachment inquiry doesn’t change a darn thing,” making the case for Ms. Pelosi’s go-slow approach.
“Nothing,” the speaker interjected in agreement.
Ms. Pelosi’s relish in confronting Mr. Trump with icy, condescending scorn — on Wednesday she suggested he canceled the meeting out of a “lack of confidence on his part” — has bought her good will among Democrats, even those who question her approach on impeachment.
But the speaker has been unwilling, thus far, to match Mr. Trump’s scorched-earth tactics in the fight over subpoenas issued in the wake of the Mueller report last month. Even as Mr. Trump says he will not negotiate an infrastructure plan until Democrats drop their “phony” investigations, Ms. Pelosi has categorically rejected suggestions, made by some members of her staff, to withhold support for initiatives that the president desperately wants — including approval of the renegotiated North American Free Trade Agreement — in exchange for cooperating with House subpoenas.
But Mr. Trump’s blanket refusal to comply with requests from six House committees and no-shows by the former White House counsel Donald F. McGahn II and Attorney General William P. Barr are making it harder for her to hold that higher ground.
Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a freshman Democrat from New York, reiterated her support for impeachment in a passionate address during the members’ question-and-answer session. The “only thing” that gives her pause is the fact that impeachment would “die in the Senate,” Ms. Ocasio-Cortez said, according to one of her colleagues.
About 25 of Ms. Pelosi’s 235-member caucus have publicly come out in favor of impeachment, said Representative Hakeem Jeffries of New York, the chairman of the House Democratic Caucus.
But Representative Jamie Raskin, a Maryland Democrat who sits on the Judiciary Committee, said a “greater number” of members would support using an impeachment inquiry as a means to extract information, as opposed to a broader effort aimed at ousting Mr. Trump.
Federal, state and congressional authorities are investigating Donald J. Trump’s businesses, campaign, inauguration and presidency.
Ms. Pelosi is on something of a roll. Beyond the court decisions this week supporting efforts to obtain financial documents on Mr. Trump, the Justice Department agreed on Wednesday to turn over some of the counterintelligence evidence requested by the House Intelligence Committee.
Those small victories seem to have bought the speaker more time to maneuver, at least in the short term, members said. Ms. Pelosi is playing for time — to secure more victories in court, to allow passions to cool and to let the 2020 Democratic primaries eclipse the House as the main arena for countering Mr. Trump.
But the president, by blocking one of the few areas of potential bipartisan cooperation — infrastructure — seems intent on forcing Democrats to focus their legislative attention on him, as opposed to his policies. House Democrats continue to churn through their policy agenda, passing health care bills, gun control measures and on Wednesday, a bill to fortify the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which the Trump administration has tried to defang.
But those bills are garnering little attention amid the impeachment chatter. Some veteran Pelosi allies said the president’s stance is pushing them toward impeachment.
Representative Emanuel Cleaver II of Missouri, who weeks ago warned against impeachment because it would tear apart the country, said on Wednesday that each new provocation from Mr. Trump had moved him “inch by inch, yard by yard” in that direction.
“I’m not there, but boy, I’m closer than I was,” he said, exiting Wednesday’s meeting.
The one thing that could quickly push Ms. Pelosi toward impeachment, people close to her said, would be a mass defection of new members. That has not happened yet, but several members of the class of 2018 said the speaker was mistaken if she assumed they would oppose impeachment to save their seats next year.
He said he would have more to say on impeachment in the coming days, but hinted he was close to supporting the effort to open a formal inquiry.
