Representative Justin Amash, Republican of Michigan, has made a political career of going it alone. But he has never been this alone.
On Saturday, Mr. Amash, a libertarian with a contrarian streak that earned him the nickname “Mr. No” when he served in the state legislature, became the first — and thus far only — Republican in Congress to publicly suggest President Trump committed offenses that rose to the level of impeachment.
For his efforts, Mr. Amash, who is regarded by fellow lawmakers as friendly but a bit intense, received a genial pat on the head from Senator Mitt Romney of Utah, a fellow Michigan native and Trump skeptic who said Mr. Amash was misguided about impeachment but personally “courageous.” Then came the stampede.
Ronna McDaniel, the senator’s niece and the chairwoman of the Republican National Committee, accused Mr. Amash of “parroting” Democratic talking points. Representative Kevin McCarthy of California, the House minority leader, called his comments “very disturbing.” Dinesh D’Souza, a right-wing provocateur pardoned by Mr. Trump, called Mr. Amash a “useful idiot” for the left.
And not to be outdone, the president labeled the congressman a “loser” and “lightweight,” suggesting that he made his stand simply to garner publicity — and social media soon flooded with less polite criticisms.
“It feels a little lonely, I can tell you,” said Jeff Flake, a former Republican senator from Arizona who has been sharply critical of Mr. Trump, when asked what it feels like to face the wrath of the party’s pro-Trump enforcers.
Mr. Amash, friends say, is shrugging it all off. He has never really been much of a party loyalist anyway — during the midterm elections in 2018, he angered officials from the House Republicans’ campaign arm by refusing to pay his annual dues, according to a Republican official.
He has weathered controversies before — so often, in fact, that he has mainly used his Facebook page to defend positions and statements that have rankled, roused and puzzled.
But this fight is different. Mr. Amash, who serves in a safe Republican district in the Grand Rapids area, has gone from a marginal gadfly to an insurgent leader in the eyes of Mr. Trump and his supporters. On Monday, State Representative Jim Lower announced that he would oppose the five-term incumbent in 2020, the first of at least two, and possibly more, Trump-friendly Republicans who are considering challenging him in a primary next year.
Even if Mr. Trump actively opposes him, as he did successfully last year against another critic, former Representative Mark Sanford of South Carolina, Mr. Amash still commands high name recognition in his district, has a strong fund-raising base and could survive if the pro-Trump vote is split between two or more challengers, according to Mr. Sellek.
If his statements on impeachment are off message to Mr. Trump, they are on brand for Mr. Amash.
His actions reflect his tenure as a Michigan state representative known for his proclivity for voting against many of the bills brought to the floor by the chamber’s Democratic majority, even bills that Republicans backed. His maverick streak resulted in unlikely alliances with Democrats, and he even teamed up with a left-leaning lawmaker from the Detroit area to ensure legal defense budgets for impoverished criminal defendants gave them a fair chance in court.
But this is taking nonpartisanship one step further, and critics, including the president, are accusing Mr. Amash of giving aid and comfort to the enemy — Mr. Trump’s, in this case.
Democrats see it differently. Representative Ruben Gallego, an Arizona Democrat who took to Twitter to applaud Mr. Amash’s move, said he had been approached by “many” other House Republicans in private claiming that Mr. Trump’s behavior rose to the level of high crimes and misdemeanors.
