Mr. Nadler, the House Judiciary Chairman, was seated inside a school gymnasium in Manhattan when his head slumped.
Representative Jerrold Nadler, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, was taken to a hospital after apparently fainting during a news conference on Friday in Manhattan.
Mr. Nadler, 71, was seated at a table in a gymnasium at Public School 199 on the Upper West Side, where Mayor Bill de Blasio was heralding the expansion of New York City’s speed camera program.
Thirty minutes after Mr. Nadler, a Democrat of Manhattan, made brief remarks, his head appeared to slump. A woman seated behind Mr. Nadler pointed at him, and then Mr. de Blasio attempted to revive him as spectators became alarmed.
“It looked like he had just taken a little nap for a moment, and then I put my hand on his shoulder and I said, ‘Jerry are you O.K.?’” Mr. de Blasio said afterward.
Three doctors from NYC Health & Hospitals attended to Mr. Nadler, and Mr. de Blasio helped Mr. Nadler to drink some Gatorade from the mayor’s metal water bottle. A fan was turned on, and the gymnasium was cleared.
Dr. Theodore G. Long, a vice president for NYC Health & Hospitals who moved to help Mr. Nadler, said the congressman was able to answer doctors’ questions quickly.
A spokesman for Mr. Nadler, Daniel Schwarz, said the congressman had not lost consciousness. “He is responsive, getting fluids and receiving a checkup,” Mr. Schwarz said.
Mr. Schwarz said Friday evening that the congressman was being held overnight for observation at the hospital as a precaution. “He is feeling much better, totally back to normal,” Mr. Schwarz said.
Mr. Nadler had no known health problems; he had struggled with obesity for decades until undergoing stomach-reduction surgery at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan in 2002.
Mr. Nadler has been the face of efforts in Congress to investigate President Trump for corruption, abuse of power and whether he obstructed justice by interfering with the investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III.
