They broke into cheers every time he referred to numbers or statistics. They chanted “PowerPoint! PowerPoint!” when he renewed a pledge to use the program to deliver the State of the Union.
And when the 2,500 rain-soaked supporters of Andrew Yang realized he was about to drop his biggest applause line, they screamed the words to help him finish his New York rally with a bang.
Though the scene at Washington Square Park last week might have seemed unusual to the uninitiated, it was emblematic of Mr. Yang’s long-shot campaign for the Democratic nomination for president. As the 44-year-old former tech executive has traveled across the country, running what he has called the “nerdiest presidential campaign in history,” he has unabashedly embraced his Taiwanese American background, as well as some of the stereotypes commonly associated with Asian-Americans.
Who Is Andrew Yang, the Internet’s Favorite Candidate?
Andrew Yang, a businessman from New York, is seeking the Democratic nomination for president. His focus on preventing mass unemployment caused by the automation of jobs has made him popular online, but will it be enough to propel him to the White House?
A former tech company executive who’s a political newcomer — “I am not a career politician, as most of you know. I’m an entrepreneur.” — with a devoted internet following. “Hello, I’m Andrew Yang.” And an army of memes. Andrew Yang is running for president. So, who is he? Yang is the son of Taiwanese immigrants and a lawyer by training. But he made his mark as an entrepreneur. He helped build a college test preparation business that was bought by a big company. And it made him a modest fortune. “Are you ready to build something?” After that, he started an organization that connects college graduates with startups. That job took him across the Midwest and eventually led him to politics. “We automated away four million manufacturing jobs in Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, and so I was like, why are we not talking about that? So, that’s where this all started.” So, what are his priorities? Well, he’s got a long list. But the one policy that’s turning heads: “Universal basic income —” “Universal basic income —” “He calls it the Freedom Dividend.” “Now if you’ve heard anything about me, you‘ve heard that there’s an Asian man running for president who wants to give everyone $1,000 a month. And all of those things are true.” Yang says this will ease the pain caused by the robot apocalypse, as more jobs become automated. His internet army, known as the Yang Gang — “Where’s the money? Where’s the money? We have the money.” — helped sell the policy with the #SecureTheBag hashtag. But opponents of the plan say its price tag makes it unrealistic. It could cost approximately $2 trillion, roughly half the current federal budget. Some of his other policy proposals? Medicare for all, gun safety and even free marriage counseling for all. The dilemma to Yang as an internet darling? Some of that support is coming from the internet’s far right, in places like 4chan, Gab and 8chan. Yang has spoken out against it. But there’s no doubt it’s helped him go viral. “You know, it’s been a point of confusion because I don’t look much like a white nationalist. So, I’ve completely disavowed any of that support.” What’s his relationship with President Trump? Well, Yang has positioned himself like this: “The opposite of Donald Trump is an Asian guy who likes math. And then there’s even an acronym we’re working with, which is Make America Think.” And he hasn’t held back. “As an entrepreneur, most entrepreneurs feel like Donald Trump gives us all a bad name and he’s more of a marketing charlatan than he is a real builder.” Yang doesn’t seem to be on Trump’s radar just yet. But Yang says he’s the candidate to beat Trump because he’s focused on the economy and boosting unemployment. He believes economic anxiety among some Americans is what got Trump into the White House. “We need to evolve to the next form of our economy in order for Americans to have a path forward.” So, what are his chances? Yang is still a fringe candidate by conventional standards and polling behind the leading Democratic contenders. “Yang Gang 2020. Yang Gang 2020.” But in an era where a so-called meme army helped President Trump win, being an online megastar could still count for something.
For the first time, there are three Asian-American and Pacific Islanders seeking a major party’s nomination for president: Mr. Yang, Senator Kamala Harris of California and Representative Tulsi Gabbard of Hawaii. As groundbreaking as that is, Mr. Yang in particular has embraced the largely untested strategy of using his Asian ethnicity and identity to appeal to voters nationwide.
Mr. Yang said he was proud of his background and that he hoped his blunt acknowledgment of his race — and his bold political ideas — would help him stand out, particularly in the early stages of a primary contest where the nearly two dozen Democratic hopefuls can blur together for many voters.
More than a year after he kicked off his bid for the presidency from a position of almost total obscurity, Mr. Yang’s approach to campaigning and pledge to provide a universal basic income to every American have netted him more than 100,000 donors and helped him qualify for the first Democratic debate. Though he remains something of a fringe candidate, he routinely draws thousands of people to his big-city rallies, and he has garnered support from a range of voters, including parts of the Democratic-leaning Asian-American community.
Scholars and community leaders who study Asian-American history say Mr. Yang’s emergence onto the national political scene is no accident. After decades of immigrant exclusion, second-generation Asian-Americans have come of age and grown up steeped in American politics. The 2018 midterms saw a record number of Asian-Americans run for Congress at a time when the racial group continues to expand at a faster rate than any other in the United States.
Before Bobby Jindal, the former governor of Louisiana who ran for president as a Republican during the 2016 cycle, the last viable Asian-American candidate for president was Representative Patsy Mink of Hawaii, who briefly ran for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1972.
More than four decades later, the candidates in the 2020 field have addressed their background in varying ways.
Ms. Gabbard, the first American Samoan and first Hindu elected to Congress, has formed deep ties with Indian Americans over the course of her career. As recently as January, she wrote an Op-Ed for Religion News Service decrying the “religious bigotry” and “anti-Hindu sentiment” she said was directed at her after she announced her run for president. But on the trail, Ms. Gabbard, who served two combat tours in the Middle East, has chosen to focus mostly on her foreign policy credentials.
The way Mr. Yang has chosen to lean into stereotypes about Asian-Americans, though, has led to tension among members of the community.
Another federal court rebukes DeJoy and orders the Postal Service to prioritize mail-in voting.
The Supreme Court opening quickly becomes a central issue in Maine’s Senate race.
Justice Ginsburg will lie in repose at the Supreme Court for two days this week.
That stereotype, which overgeneralizes Asians as diligent and high-achieving, traces back to a broader culture of anti-black racism in America that “helped to justify a kind of racial order,” said Ellen Wu, an associate history professor at Indiana University. In more contemporary times, she said, the stereotype is problematic because it flattens a massive group of people into a monolith.
Lily Jin, a 21-year-old senior at Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H., who went to see Mr. Yang speak there earlier this month, said she’s well aware of the stereotypes Asian-Americans encounter and thinks the concerns around Mr. Yang’s strategy are valid.
But to Ms. Jin, Mr. Yang is “addressing his identity head-on,” and also breaking the mold, by helping show young Asian-Americans that they can pursue something other than what she called the “preplanned paths” of medical or law school.
“Growing up in a household that never encouraged me to go into politics or really even vote, an important piece of this is encouraging more Asian-Americans to get involved,” she said.
Interest in Mr. Yang’s candidacy has been particularly high among younger, second-generation Asian-Americans, especially Chinese Americans like Ms. Jin. Many of his most fervent supporters are involved in the technology industry and actively promote him on social media. Some have even become enthusiastic members of the “Yang Gang,” the name given to Mr. Yang’s most devoted supporters.
Norman Qian, 20, of Flushing, Queens, said he had first become aware of Mr. Yang’s candidacy because of friends in his predominantly Asian-American neighborhood. When he looked harder at Mr. Yang’s website, he said, he found he appreciated that Mr. Yang appeared data-driven and policy-oriented.
Research has shown that having Asian-American candidates in a campaign increases voter turnout by and donations from members of the racial group. Asian turnout increased nationwide from 27 percent in 2014 to 41 percent in 2018, a year when dozens of Asian-American or Pacific Islander candidates ran for Congress, according to one analysis.
But while Asian-Americans are steadily gaining more political power, they have not reached the point where they can propel candidates to victory on their own. Only one congressional district in the mainland United States, in Northern California, is majority Asian-American. Any viable candidate for president will, of course, need to build broad coalitions across demographic groups, experts said.
Shekar Narasimhan, the chairman of AAPI Victory Fund, a super PAC focused on mobilizing voters, projected that the continued anti-immigration rhetoric by President Trump and Republicans in Congress could help drive 1 million new Asian-Americans and Pacific Islanders to vote next November.
