Recent state-imposed limits on abortion — from Georgia to Missouri, from Ohio to Mississippi — are rightly seen as a broadside aimed at women’s reproductive freedoms. But it is also worth examining a more particular, and potentially agonizing, consequence of these new restrictions. It is a hard one to talk about. It is, to some extent, taboo. But it must be discussed.
Namely: These new laws, should they survive judicial scrutiny, would ensure that a generation of women would be forced to carry pregnancies to term despite the detection of fetal anomalies — some of them cruel, painful and fatal.
Fetal anomalies are seldom discovered before week 12. In many cases, they remain undetectable until week 20 or beyond. But Ohio, Kentucky, Mississippi and Georgia have just banned abortion beyond six weeks. Missouri has done so beyond eight. Alabama has basically banned abortion entirely.
I recognize that to those who believe abortion is a sin or a moral wrong, a life is a life. Whether a fetus is healthy or ailing is beside the point. We are all God’s children, all deserving of life and love. On Tuesday, Justice Clarence Thomas suggested that pregnancy terminations on the basis of race, gender or disability “would constitutionalize the views of the 20th-century eugenics movement,” though he ultimately concurred with the Supreme Court’s decision not to reinstate an Indiana law banning abortions of fetuses diagnosed with disabilities.
But these children will have special needs, and special needs demand extra resources — both emotional and material. Only families, not states, can determine whether they are up to such a challenge; coping with an unplanned child is hard enough as it is. The women with the scantiest resources — the least money and education, the weakest ties to family and other forms of social capital — will be the most likely to have to follow through on these pregnancies, because they won’t have the means to seek abortions out of state.
These are just the social and material costs. The emotional toll that some of these anomalies exact on women — on entire families — can be debilitating. Consider Trisomy 13. Fifty percent of the babies born with this chromosomal condition do not live beyond two weeks. Or anencephaly, which can sometimes be seen on a 12-week ultrasound, but almost never before. The median survival rate is 24 hours. Or infantile Tay-Sachs, in which babies have a normal early infancy and then rapidly deteriorate, experiencing seizures, paralysis and sensory loss before dying in early childhood.
The new restrictions in Heuser’s state are not as draconian as some of the others. Utah, like Arkansas, passed an 18-week gestational limit on abortion in March. For now, a federal judge has issued an injunction against it, while Planned Parenthood takes the case to court.
But these later gestational limits, should they stick, could have unforeseen consequences of a different kind. Lisa Harris, an obstetrician-gynecologist in Ann Arbor, Mich., who has written with nuance about the ethical complexities of second-trimester abortion, said she worries that 18 weeks is so close to the time many women first hear about fetal anomalies that they might decide, under pressure, to choose an abortion, rather than carry to term, because they won’t have the time to consult with those who could help them decide: pastors, geneticists, specialists, extended family, parents with similar children.
In Harris’s view, even the six-week gestational limit could have the same hastening effect, driving some women to end their pregnancies rather than see them through, because they haven’t had a chance to digest the news.
Harris recognizes that these words could easily be weaponized by those who favor state-mandated waiting periods. But that’s not what she’s talking about. Those waiting periods are little more than roadblocks, filled with gratuitous logistical hassles, paperwork and government-authored pedagogical materials riddled with misinformation. (Cynthia Daniels at Rutgers has determined that 31 percent of the information these women receive about embryological development is medically inaccurate.) Harris is talking about meaningful consultation and rumination — women searching their hearts and then speaking to counselors, doctors, their families and their employers to determine whether a pregnancy makes sense in their human, untidy lives.
Another ugly outgrowth Harris fears: These time pressures will turn physicians and counselors into exactly the crass stereotypes their opponents have claimed them to be all along — providers of swift abortions on demand, rather than thoughtful family-planning specialists who see women through pivotal decisions.
It used to be that so many of the favored tactics in the abortion wars were about delay: parental notification, waiting periods, dutiful marches through literature so that women could give so-called informed consent. These recent laws have been all about hurrying women up.
Neither allows women to search, contemplate and reason on their own. And they are all designed to awaken fear.