The behind-the-scenes story of how the plaintiffs for Mr. Weinstein’s trial were determined — and why proving criminal culpability remains so complicated.
Yesterday, we heard the story of Lucia Evans, whose allegation against Harvey Weinstein helped launch the criminal trial that got underway this week in Manhattan. When prosecutors dropped her from the case, it raised questions about how a man accused of sexual misconduct by more than 80 women could end up facing so few of them in court. Today, in Part 2, my colleagues Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey on what happened next.
It’s Friday, January 10.
Jodi, when we left off, Lucia Evans’s criminal charge against Harvey Weinstein had just been dropped. Where does that leave the case against Weinstein?
O.K., so remember, we’re now in the Fall of 2018. Lucia’s out. So the prospect of Harvey Weinstein being held criminally accountable seems to now hinge on just two women. One woman has a story of sexual assault, the other woman has a story of rape.
So everything in this case pretty much revolves around these two women. So who exactly are they?
 She was added to the case right before Lucia Evans was dropped.
And what is her story?
So Mimi Haleyi works in the entertainment industry in the early 2000s. She’s pretty junior, and she ends up meeting Harvey Weinstein at the Cannes Film Festival in France. And it’s exciting. She is young, she wants opportunity, and they continue to keep in touch because she wants work. So they have a series of meetings in New York, and eventually he invites her to his home.
And as far as what happens next, she actually tells the story in a press conference with Gloria Allred.
It was not long, though, before he was all over me, making sexual advances. I told him no, no, no, but he insisted. And then I said, I’m on my period. There is no way this is going to happen. Please stop. He wouldn’t take no for an answer, and backed me into a room, which was not lit, but looked like a kid’s bedroom, with kids’ drawings on the walls. He held me down on the bed. I tried to get away, or tried to get him off of me, and kept asking him to stop, but it was impossible. He was extremely persistent and physically overpowering. He then orally forced himself on me while I was on my period.
He even pulled my tampon out. I was mortified. I was in disbelief and disgusted.
I remember Harvey afterwards rolling over onto his back saying, don’t you feel we’re so much closer to each other now? To which I replied, no.
And Jodi, what’s the story of the second accuser remaining in this case?
So the second woman is anonymous. She hasn’t talked to journalists, as far as we know. So we’ve got kind of a minimal account here, but her allegation is the more complicated story.
Well, as soon as it becomes clear that this case is going to be part of the criminal charges, Harvey Weinstein says to his attorneys, get me my old emails. Get me my old emails. And what the emails show is a kind of warm, friendly tone between these two people.
The accuser and Weinstein?
In another one that’s also from after the alleged attack, she talks about introducing Weinstein to her mother. There’s a lot of evidence that this is how Harvey Weinstein operated. There are a lot of stories in which, you know, for a long time after a terrible violation, he maintained kind of friendly relationships with these women. What the women say is that they were under a lot of work pressure to do so. This was the powerful producer. He had the ability to grant them roles, to make them producers, to give them job favors. Some of them say that they felt that their careers depended on kind of keeping up these friendly relationships with him afterwards, because he was in a position to give them work. In fact, there is a text message that Weinstein’s lawyers have produced that Mimi Haleyi, that first accuser, sent him months after her alleged attack. The message, which comes to him, I think, through an assistant, says, “Hi! Just wondering if u have any news on whether Harvey will have time to see me before he leaves? X Miriam,” which is her full name.
You know, as you’re saying this, I’m reminded of the reporting that you and Megan have done in which an offer of career help is just central to how Harvey Weinstein lures women into these situations.
That’s exactly right. I mean, our finding was that the most powerful common strand of all of these allegations is that they involve the use of work as a form of coercion. I’m a powerful guy. I can make this happen for you. I have a film role I can give you. Come look at a script. That’s the thing that so many of these stories have in common, but that’s what also makes some of these stories complicated, right? One of the many reasons why so many of those cases are not the basis for criminal charges is because there’s a kind of veneer of consensuality to them, and the risk for the prosecution is that these messages that were exchanged between Weinstein and his accusers, particularly the kind of “I love you” between him and the anonymous accuser, they could create that same sort of veneer of consensuality — that, essentially, they could make these cases also look like, hey, these don’t belong in the criminal arena. And that’s exactly what the defense is going to argue. Donna Rotunno, one of Harvey Weinstein’s defense attorneys, had this to say this week to Vanity Fair. She said, I look at Harvey Weinstein and I say, Harvey Weinstein was the guy who held the keys to the castle that everyone wanted to get into, and what people did is that they used him and used him and used him and used him. They didn’t look at Harvey and say, oh, god, he’s the most gorgeous guy I’ve ever seen and I want to go to his hotel room. They looked at Harvey and said, Harvey can do something for me. And so who was using who?
What she seems to be saying is, he wasn’t the predator. In some ways, she’s arguing they were a kind of predator.
Exactly. That’s what’s so remarkable about the quote. She’s basically saying the women were the predators, and they used Harvey Weinstein.
I’m struck that this case that’s moving forward feels less than we expected, when you think about the strength and the overwhelming power of the allegations that started to emerge from the reporting that you and Megan did two years ago. And I’m having a little bit of a “what is going on here?” kind of moment in this case. We end up with these three charges. Lucia Evans is dropped because of complications, and the remaining charges may end up asking the jury to grapple with some very thorny and nuanced questions around consent. So how did we end up in this place?
So let me tell you a story about an alleged Weinstein victim I’ve been speaking to for a long time. She wouldn’t come on “The Daily,” because she’s still anonymous. In legal documents, she’s referred to as Jane Doe.
All right. Here we are, ready to go.
Hi, Genie. It’s Jodi Kantor at The Times. How are you?
And Genie Harrison describes a client who, like Lucia Evans, had a very difficult decision to make about what to do with her Weinstein story.
Well, let’s just start. I want to ask you today to talk about your client, Jane Doe. Why was she coming to you?
Jane Doe was coming to me because she really felt she needed a lawyer who could help her navigate her involvement in the criminal investigations that were going on against Harvey, and help her understand her own rights.
 It begins in 2013.
At the time, she’s 22. She was an aspiring actress and working very hard to try to get her break in the industry. Harvey was the major player in the business.
He lures her to a hotel room in Park City, says it’s for work reasons, allegedly abuses her there. And then what she says is that Harvey Weinstein threatens her. 
She was very concerned about the negative impact that he told her he would have if she didn’t capitulate to his demands — if she didn’t act as his friend.
I want to ask you to read a couple of lines from the complaint you eventually filed on her behalf. Do you have the complaint in front of you?
Now, one of the worst instances she describes takes place in March 2013 in New York. What she says is that she goes to Weinstein’s office, and that he’s telling her that he’s going to give her a script.
So upon entering his office, Jane Doe sat on the couch while Harvey Weinstein claimed to be looking for the script. However, soon after she sat down, he came into the room and kneeled in front of her. She was wearing a skirt, and she became uncomfortable and frightened immediately. Harvey Weinstein started telling Jane Doe that he couldn’t find the script, but he’d have someone email it to her. And then, immediately, he’s telling her that she smells good, and he began touching her and moaning. She tried to scoot away, and she was begging him to stop, but he didn’t. Instead, he pulls at her knees, saying, we’ve been dating for weeks, which was not accurate. And, I have been good to you. Now you need to be good to me. Weinstein then held Jane Doe down, removed her underwear, and instructed her to relax, telling her, relax. He’s much larger and stronger than she is, and when she said no, he again pushes her down, scolding her by saying that he’s become irritated with her.  When Jane Doe began audibly sobbing, Weinstein told her, there is no reason to scream, and began berating her, saying things like, oh my god, you’re so difficult. He told her that she, quote, “was being stupid,” end quote, and he then began lecturing her about how he and his people were all trying to help her, and asked her, do you even want to be an actress? He expressly reminded her that he was the gatekeeper to her dream by claiming, I slept with Jennifer Lawrence, and look where she is. She’s just won an Oscar.
So I just want to say here, there’s no indication that Harvey Weinstein actually slept with Jennifer Lawrence, and she denies it. What we have a lot of evidence of is that woman after woman says that, in the course of pressuring women, he would say things like, I slept with Gwyneth Paltrow, or I slept with Jennifer Lawrence, or I slept with Charlize Theron, and that it was part of that work, as a form of coercion. It was a message that, hey, if you do this, you’re going to be successful.
So like Lucia Evans’s allegation, Jane Doe’s story seems like a pretty strong candidate for criminal prosecution, right? It sounds like it falls within the statute of limitations. It happened in New York, and it’s an allegation of a criminal act, right?
Based on what Jane Doe and her lawyer say, the case sounds potentially strong. She’s saved some communications with Weinstein. She told at least one other person afterwards, and also there’s some evidence that Weinstein tried to pressure her to stay silent.
Weinstein and his team were putting a lot of pressure on Jane Doe for her to mischaracterize what was happening between the two of them, and for her husband to confirm the mischaracterizations.
And it seems like also, as in the case of Lucia, prosecutors recognize the potential strength of Jane Doe’s case. And that’s how she came to be Harrison’s client, right? After prosecutors reached out to her.
So Jane Doe comes to me because she’s been interviewed a number of times by the police in New York in relation to Harvey and what he did to her, and she feels really between a rock and a hard place, because she is being asked to be one of the victims on behalf of whom charges could be filed against Harvey — criminal charges — and she’s terrified about what that would mean for her, and she’s trying to figure out what her rights are and what she should do.
So what does Harrison say about the conversation she has with Jane Doe once she agrees to take her on as a client?
She says she tried to be really frank and just lay all of the options out on the table. She said, if you pursue a criminal case against Harvey Weinstein, this is what you will face.
The defense attorneys defending Harvey Weinstein are going to hire private investigators, and they’re going to investigate you and everything they can find out about you, and try to find out anything they can use against you.
Every aspect of your life is going to be scrutinized.
The prosecutor is going to have to turn over evidence related to you — everything that they have in their file about you.

And she tells Jane Doe about the process of cross-examination.
It’s about, attack the victim, blame the victim, malign the victim, and try to convince the jury that the victim’s the bad person here.
And that if she wants to go forward, that is almost inevitably what’s going to happen to her, no matter how terrible this alleged crime is, no matter how strong the case is.
And does Harrison actually suggest to Jane Doe what she should do?
What I typically tell clients in a situation like this is that they need to make decisions based on what they think their priorities are, and what’s in their own personal best interest. They have to put themselves first, and so I encouraged her to do that. Typically, I proceed by having them outline what their immediate goals are and prioritize those so we can make a plan to achieve those goals.
How much thought did she give it?
A tremendous amount of thought. She really grappled with this. She had a lot of internal conflict.
So Jane Doe was left to wrestle with this really difficult decision of whether or not she should come forward. On the one hand, it would put her at great personal, and maybe professional, risk. But on the other hand, if women don’t come forward, there can be no trial, let alone a conviction, for Harvey Weinstein.
What does Jane Doe ultimately decide to do?
In the end, charges were not filed on her behalf, because she felt that she really could not take the risk.
She decides not to go through with it.
Not participate in the criminal case?
And look, this is part of the explanation for how we get from 80-plus Weinstein allegations to two who are at the basis of this criminal trial. And there are a lot of different reasons for that, right? We’ve talked about them. There are questions of time and place, and whether these are criminal acts, but there’s also the question of the willingness of the women.
I think probably the core issue that victims grapple with in sex abuse cases is whether or not to come forward. And if I come forward, how far do I go with this? And a sex abuse perpetrator, the sexual violence perpetrator, really benefits from what happens emotionally to the victims as a result of being victimized, which is the internal blame and shame and confusion and dissociation and repression that occurs inside of a victim. And so all of that is — it’s like a tornado or a hurricane inside of a victim, and having the clarity to somehow put that all aside and say, here are the specific actions I need to take and the deadlines by which I need to take them, it just doesn’t work that way emotionally for victims.
The kind of poll we heard from Lucia Evans, that determination to participate despite the obstacles — that same determination by Mimi Haleyi and this anonymous woman to remain as part of the process — I have to say, it’s pretty uncommon. Even after everything we’ve learned about the Weinstein story, even after all of these women coming forward, what criminal prosecution requires is the willingness of these female victims to participate, and there are so many reasons not to. It really demands so much of them, and what we’ve been seeing is that there just aren’t that many who are willing to do it.
So there may very well be more women like Jane Doe out there who might have a strong criminal case against Weinstein, who clear all of these logistical hurdles and are eligible, but they aren’t willing to do this.
There may be. We don’t know the full picture, but this certainly helps explain how, with just a few months to go until trial, the prosecution is in a tough spot.
But then, there’s a development.
Now, the prosecution are also aiming to and hoping to bring in other women who have made accusations, brought in as witnesses to sort of build a stronger case.
The prosecution has been very concerned with this paucity of women’s voices in the trial, and they’ve been seeking to address it through this very particular strategy.
They want more women to be able to testify, alleged Weinstein victims who can paint a portrait of his pattern of predation. In New York, these are called Molineux witnesses. You may also see them referred to as supporting witnesses, prior bad acts witnesses. If you know this concept, it may be from the Cosby trial.
Because remember, that was sort of a similar situation. There were dozens and dozens of women who had come forward against Cosby, and yet the criminal trial rested, basically, on one woman. So in the first Cosby trial in 2017, those additional witnesses are not allowed, and it ends in a mistrial.
In the second trial, the witnesses are allowed.
The five prior bad act witnesses, you know, really, really made a difference. I think the jury based it certainly upon the facts of the case, but I think the five accusers and the prior bad acts had a lot to do with his conviction.
And Cosby’s convicted. So the prosecution in the Weinstein trial really, really wants to include these kinds of witnesses, but for a long time, it’s not clear whether or not the judge is going to allow them. And then, he rules.
More women’s voices are going to be heard in the course of this trial.
This, Jodi, sounds like a very meaningful development for the prosecution.
It’s absolutely what the prosecution wants, but it cuts both ways, because remember, these witnesses can be cross-examined, and that’s exactly what the defense is going to try to do. They’re going to try to poke holes in these women’s stories, as well. So what this means going into trial this week is that we still have no idea which way this is going to go.
More than two years after sexual assault allegations against Harvey Weinstein ushered in the #MeToo movement, the disgraced movie mogul’s criminal trial is set to get underway in New York. Jury selection begins tomorrow.
Megan, welcome back.
So we have been talking to you, Megan, and you, Jodi, over these past two episodes about the lead-up to this trial — how we got to this point in the Harvey Weinstein case, and now the trial is actually underway. And both of you were at the courthouse on Monday when it started. What was that like?
Well, I was standing with some of Harvey Weinstein’s alleged victims. These are women who are not part of the criminal trial for all of the reasons we’ve discussed, but they kind of want their moment. They want to look at him in the eye as the proceedings are about to begin.
So they’ve gotten there very early in the morning. They’ve been waiting. They’re bundled up in the cold. The cars are coming by and they keep looking. Is that him? Is this him? And finally, this big, black S.U.V. pulls up, and Harvey Weinstein gets out of the car.
And it’s like, this is the moment. He’s here.
And one of the women tells me that she hasn’t seen Harvey Weinstein in years and years since her alleged encounter with him. But he gets down out of the car, and he’s using a walker. He’s sort of stooped. He’s recently had back surgery. He’s surrounded by his legal team, and he goes straight into the courthouse. He doesn’t glance at the women. It’s not clear if he knows that they’re there, and they sort of don’t get this moment that they’ve been waiting for.
So at this point, the women cross the street, and they give their own press conference.
I thank those testifying for standing not just for themselves, but for all of us who will never have even one day in court.
I stand in solidarity with the brave survivors who will take the stand against Harvey Weinstein in this trial.
Actress Rosanna Arquette says a few words. And basically, their message collectively is to say, look.
Even though we’re not part of this trial, our voices need to be heard.
And time’s up on the pervasive culture of silence that has enabled abusers like Weinstein.
And Megan, what’s actually happening inside the courtroom on this first day?
So the courthouse is packed. People have been lining up since the crack of dawn to go in, but it’s a pretty straightforward proceeding. The judge is spelling out how things are going to unfold in the coming days and weeks as they round the corner into jury selection. So Jodi and I, after a little while, determined that there is actually not that much to see, and we hop on the subway to head back to the newsroom.
Shortly after we get back to the office, I look at my email and there’s a new message coming in from one of our colleagues who’s saying that he’s hearing that there’s about to be news out of Los Angeles.
Good morning. I’m here today to announce that my office has charged Harvey Weinstein with sexually assaulting two women in Los Angeles County.
That the Los Angeles district attorney’s office is about to announce criminal charges against Weinstein in L.A.
Once the defendant’s case is completed in New York, we expect him to appear in a courtroom in Los Angeles County to face these charges.
There is a charge of rape stemming from what sounds like a very forcible and brutal encounter with a woman from Italy, and there is a charge of sexual assault stemming from an encounter that happened with another woman literally the day after the alleged rape.
Is this something that you had any idea might be coming?
Well, remember that while New York has clearly been the most aggressive, there have been other jurisdictions that have been criminally investigating Weinstein, specifically L.A. and London. And we had actually heard some rumblings that L.A. might be on the verge of bringing criminal charges, but we certainly had no idea that those charges were going to be announced on this particular day — the day that Weinstein’s criminal trial begins here in New York.
So what does this seem to mean for the criminal case in New York, and what does it mean for Harvey Weinstein?
Well, Harvey Weinstein is facing ongoing legal trouble no matter what. Whether he’s acquitted or convicted here in New York, he’s going to face another prosecution in L.A.
And big picture what this means is that sense of narrowness we talked about, that feeling that the allegations against Harvey Weinstein are so much bigger than what’s on the table in these criminal trials, is now being replaced by a sense of expansion. Take the Molineux witnesses that have now been admitted in New York, add the Los Angeles criminal charges, and it now feels like these criminal proceedings are going to represent the kind of pattern of Harvey Weinstein allegations. So imagine a juror coming in with a truly blank slate and sitting in this courtroom, and she’s listening to this anonymous accuser describe the story of rape. And the juror is trying to sort through the holes and the complications in the story. She’s trying to decide if this is really enough to send Harvey Weinstein to jail. But then she hears another witness tell a very similar story, and then another witness, and then another witness. That might matter.
Megan, Jodi, thank you.
The news will undoubtedly come as a further shock to the families who are already grieving in the face of this unspeakable tragedy.
American and Canadian officials have concluded that the Ukrainian passenger plane that crashed in Tehran on Wednesday night, killing all 176 onboard, was shot down by Iran.
The evidence indicates that the plane was shot down by an Iranian surface-to-air missile.
On Thursday, the House of Representatives voted to force President Trump to seek authorization from Congress before taking further military action against Iran. The vote reflects the growing skepticism within Congress over the president’s rationale for killing Iranian General Qassim Suleimani, and over the Trump administration’s claim, made in a series of briefings to lawmakers this week, that it does not need permission from Congress to launch such an operation.
What I found so distressing about that briefing was that one of the messages we received from the briefers was, do not debate, do not discuss the issue of the appropriateness of further military intervention against Iran, and that if you do, you’ll be emboldening Iran.
Lawmakers who sat through the administration’s briefings, including Republican Senator Mike Lee, describe them as highly disrespectful of Congress.
I find this insulting and demeaning, not personally, but to the office that each of the 100 senators in this building happens to hold. It’s un-American, it’s unconstitutional, and it’s wrong.
“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Alexandra Leigh Young, Jonathan Wolfe, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges, Luke Vander Ploeg, Adizah Eghan, Kelly Prime, Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, Jazmín Aguilera, M.J. Davis Lin, Austin Mitchell, Sayre Quevedo, Monika Evstatieva, Dave Shaw and Dan Powell. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Stella Tan, Lauren Jackson and Julia Simon. That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you on Monday.
Yesterday on “The Daily,” we heard the story of Lucia Evans, whose allegation of sexual violence against Harvey Weinstein helped launch his criminal trial in New York. After Ms. Evans was dropped from the case, questions were raised about how a man accused of sexual misconduct by more than 80 women could end up facing so few of them in court.
In the second half of this series, what happened next in the case against Harvey Weinstein.
More than 80 women have come forward with allegations of sexual misconduct against Harvey Weinstein, but as he goes on trial in New York, the criminal charges center on just two. The story of Lucia Evans helps explain why.
I was at a dinner in New York City one night with a bunch of friends, and I sat down at the table at an empty seat. And he came up behind me and said, I think you’re in my seat. And I recognized him immediately.
I was a very young actor new to Los Angeles.
It was my first job also out of college, and I was 24 years old. My passion all my life was to work in the film industry.
And he was completely — I mean, he’s really charming when he wants to be.
We had been in touch about an audition for a Quentin Tarantino film, and that’s when I met with him at the Peninsula.
He had his assistant call me at the last minute and say, Harvey can’t meet you in the lobby. Harvey can’t meet you in the cafe. Can you go up to his office, his hotel suite?
That’s when he said, well, come and see me at my hotel.
And he told me, O.K., we’re going to my room now.
I opened the door, and he just went straight into my bedroom.
He wanted to know if I was cool and if we were friends, and he just wanted to relax with me.
He said, how about you just give me a massage?
He asked me if I’d give him a massage.
He asked me to give him massage.
Which I declined.
And I thought it would end there, but that’s when he blocked the exit for me.
His whole affect changed, and he looked like a predator.
I just remember that feeling of having to fight off an invader.
If I would try to fight myself away from him, he would then move around to a place where he could block me in somewhere. And he’s a big individual.
He just is very dominant, persuasive.
He’s a very big guy.
He backed me into a dark room.
He led me to his bathroom.
He pushed me back against the bed.
Pleading that I just watch him masturbate.

And I was petrified and terrified.
I pulled my arm away, finally, and headed to the door. He started following me and telling me that I could get a three-picture deal and that he would greenlight my script. But I had to watch him masturbate.
A nightmare — literally a nightmare.
The story of Harvey Weinstein was a story of patterns. Dozens of women — more than 80 — all telling a very familiar and eerily similar story of abuse and harassment by the famed movie producer. But this week, two years after that pattern of allegations was first reported in The Times by my colleagues Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey, there are just two women at the center of the criminal case against him as his trial opens in Manhattan. Today, in Part 1, Megan Twohey on how we got from 80 to 2.
It’s Thursday, January 9.
Megan, help us understand how, after these dozens of allegations against Harvey Weinstein, the charges that he’s facing in this trial center on just two women.
Well, after we broke our first Harvey Weinstein story, and then Ronan Farrow published his first story in The New Yorker, there were these dozens of women who came forward with accusations.
The L.A. County district attorney’s office is determining if Weinstein should be charged.
And the BBC is reporting police in England are now investigating an allegation against him as well.
— that responded by launching criminal investigations. And that’s because the vast majority of allegations that were coming out were centered in those three jurisdictions. But even as they launched these criminal investigations, there were questions about whether or not they would be able to bring criminal charges.
And why would that be, given the overwhelming number of these allegations that are now surfacing?
Well, there are several reasons that explain that. First, a lot of these allegations were of inappropriate behavior, sexual harassment, which is illegal under civil law, but it’s not a sex crime. You’re never going to be prosecuted for it. Other allegations of actual sex crimes fell outside the statute of limitations for prosecution. And there were women who had really serious allegations who were reluctant to participate in a criminal investigation, let alone a prosecution. But from the beginning, New York, in particular, was very intent on bringing a prosecution.
Well, that’s because they had actually investigated Harvey Weinstein once before in 2015. That was the year that a model from Italy walked into a New York City police precinct and reported that Harvey Weinstein had groped her breast and tried to force his hand up her skirt during a work meeting at his office. And she worked closely with the police at that time. She actually wore a wire into a follow-up meeting with Weinstein that captured what sounded like a confession to at least some of what she had alleged.
Nothing. I’m going to take a shower. 
I don’t drink. Can I stay on the bar?
No, you must come here now.
I’m not doing anything with you, I promise.
Now you’re embarrassing me.
I’m sorry. I cannot.
No, come in here.
No, yesterday was kind of aggressive for me.
I know, but I don’t want to.
Please, I don’t want to do something I don’t want to.
Go to the bath — hey, come here. Listen to me.
I’m not embarrassing you.
It’s just that I don’t feel comfortable.
Honey, don’t have a fight with me in the hallway.
Please, I am not going to do anything. I swear on my children. Please, come in. On everything. I’m a famous guy.
I’m feeling very uncomfortable right now.
Please come in now. And one minute. And if you want to leave when the guy comes with my jacket, you can go.
You’re used to that?
No, but I’m not used to that.
I won’t do it again. Come on. Sit here. Sit here for a minute, please.
But in spite of that recording and the woman wanting them to prosecute, the district attorney’s office declined to bring charges against Weinstein at that time. They said that they felt like a shifting account that she had provided about an alleged sexual assault in Italy years earlier would make her seem not credible on the witness stand.
So then, in 2017, as the Harvey Weinstein story is exploding, this case comes back into public focus.
D.A. Cyrus Vance Jr. was mobbed by reporters, who asked whether Weinstein’s wealth and fame influenced his decision not to press charges.
There are so many questions about Cy Vance, the Manhattan district attorney, and why he didn’t prosecute Harvey Weinstein in 2015.
D.A. Vance, did you not have the evidence you need? Was this not a slam-dunk case?
If we had a case that we felt we could prosecute, and my experts felt we could prosecute, against Harvey Weinstein, we would have.
Critics say financial contributions by Weinstein’s lawyers to Vance’s campaign could have played a role in the D.A.‘s decision.
— and had allowed this alleged predator to slip through the cracks.
And so that is what left New York in a position, I guess, where, by 2017, they feel all this pressure to aggressively pursue these new allegations against Weinstein?
They’re feeling a lot of pressure. And so even with all of those challenges to bringing a sex crimes charge, they are on the hunt for an allegation that will allow them to make an arrest.
I’m going to put my headset on.
Oh, yeah. Megan, I just have some notes on my phone I’m just going to, like, keep open if I need them.
And so they quickly zoom in on this account of a sexual assault from 2004 that had been made in Ronan Farrow’s New Yorker article by a woman named Lucia Evans.
 She said that she said over and over she didn’t want to do this, to stop. And she said that Weinstein overpowered her.
I just sort of gave up.
So a clear allegation of a sex crime.
A clear allegation of a sex crime and also one that falls within the statute of limitations — exactly what New York is looking for. And so within hours of that story being published, New York detectives are trying to find Lucia.
So a lot of different things happened very quickly, and it was very overwhelming. The N.Y.P.D. showed up at my parents’ house. They live in upstate New York. And they said, Lucia has a prosecutable charge. And they were like, what are you talking about, you know? They were just kind of overwhelmed anyway, you know? And they said, we’re worried about her safety, and we — where does she live? We want to talk to her.
She says that they told her immediately that they wanted her to participate in the criminal investigation.
They immediately wanted me to go on the record, because they said I was the only one that could put him in jail.
And how are you feeling in this moment? Are you feeling scared? Are you feeling nervous? Are you feeling — what is it like when, you know, several detectives show up at your door and come into your living room?
Yeah, I mean, it was the most surreal thing. I never conceived of this happening. I was one of the few, or maybe the only, people in that article that wasn’t an actress, you know? And it was frightening to me, because I didn’t do this for the press, obviously. I didn’t do this for any kind of fame or fortune. And so I think I was scared for a few reasons. I was nervous about what it could do to my family, to — you know, I mean, I know what criminal proceedings can be like. I’ve seen a bunch of movies, and I’ve watched a lot of court TV. It’s like, I know how this could go. And I think that the narrative has always been that victims are torn apart on the stand. And why would you do that to yourself? Why would you put yourself or your family through that? And all these things are kind of just running through my mind. And they were positioning it as a very empowering thing — like, oh, you can change society forever. You can change the laws. And of course, that made me a little excited, too. I was like, wow, you know, I would absolutely love to influence the law, and to empower victims, and to put him in jail. Like, that would be an incredible feeling, but also tempering that with my more rational side. Like, are you serious? First of all, I can’t be the only one that can put him in jail. And also, you need to give me time to process this, you know?
So you finish your pot of coffee.
You finish this conversation with them. How does it end? How do you guys part after that?
So they told us — my husband, who was there, and myself — to get out of town for a few weeks.
They tell her that they think that she’s in danger and that Harvey Weinstein and any of his kind of associates could potentially come after her. So they really want to relocate her — officially relocate her to a safe location.
They didn’t think I was safe there, just because I was easily traceable. And they were worried about my safety at that point, since I was the only one that could put him in jail, quote, unquote, that we knew of.
And so she and her husband packed their bags and moved into this house for two weeks, closer to New York City, as they decided what they were going to do next.
Mm-hmm. And what did she do?
Well, she started weighing her options. She starts meeting with a variety of lawyers. And as she tells it, many of those lawyers are actually discouraging her from participating in the criminal case, telling her that she would be much better off just seeking to strike an out-of-court — like, basically a private out-of-court civil settlement with Weinstein in which she would receive money.
I met with lawyers who said, forget the criminal case. Just file a civil suit, you know what I mean? And that didn’t feel right to me. And I didn’t even know what that would entail at the time.
And why are the lawyers telling her that the civil route is better than this criminal prosecution?
They basically tell her that it’s going to play out the way that she’s seen it depicted on all those TV shows.
And that means it’s going to be really ugly.
Yeah, it’s going to be really ugly.
The narratives I heard the most often were, it’s going to be a long, drawn-out, painful process. They’re going to tear apart your background, your life. They’re going to talk to everyone you’ve ever worked with, everyone you’ve ever been in a relationship with, find anything they can to discredit you. And it’s hard on you. It’s hard on your family.  I just had this vision of myself just being left with nothing on the street. That’s the narrative that I think still exists, but also that I was hearing at the time. It’s really scary to hear over and over, and it starts to kind of become part of you.  How can you not feel like that?
So she’s put off by these lawyers. And as she tells it, they’re not the only people who are counseling her against participating in the criminal case. She says that she has friends and family members who are saying the same thing.
The narrative that I heard a lot was, you’ve already done enough — and in a good way, not a negative way at all. But you’ve already done so much. Look at — the movement was starting to pick up steam at that point. Like, look at what you helped to reignite?
You did your part. You participated in the journalism, some of these first stories that are helping to ignite the #MeToo movement. You’ve done enough. But as Lucia tells it, something keeps pulling at her.
The criminal case was really kind of calling my name in a way right from the beginning, and I wanted to understand what that would be like. And I just wanted to be able to have the option to pursue it without having a lawyer say, it’s not right for you. Don’t do it.
And when you say that the criminal case was calling to you from the beginning, what do you mean?
I wanted this to continue to mean something to me and to mean something for other people. And it always kind of felt right to me deep down. And even though I struggled with it for so many months, and it was so hard to decide what to do, I just felt like it was the right thing to do, ultimately.
So she decides to meet with the prosecutor’s office, which is a significant step, because the prosecutors are ultimately the ones who will decide whether or not to bring charges. And the lead prosecutor on the Weinstein case at the time was a woman named Maxine Rosenthal. And as Lucia tells it, she did not have a good experience with her.
I didn’t feel comfortable talking to her, and I didn’t have a lot of confidence in it.
it doesn’t even need an explanation about why that’s so horrifying to say.
So listen, I can’t speak to this particular prosecutor’s conduct. What I can tell you is that she’s a veteran sex crimes prosecutor who’s known for being very hard-nosed and that Lucia wasn’t the only person who was complaining about her. There were complaints coming from the police, from victims’ rights advocates that she was not sensitive and that she was moving too slowly. I can’t speak to whether or not those complaints were valid, but Rosenthal’s boss is Cy Vance, the Manhattan prosecutor, the same one who had been criticized for not prosecuting Weinstein in 2015. And he decides that he’s going to take Rosenthal off the case. And he puts in her place a veteran homicide prosecutor. Her name is Joan Illuzzi, and she’s also known for being tough.
Joan would ask me tough questions, but I still felt good about it.
But Lucia says that she feels like she’s on her side, that she’s being tough to toughen her up.
She was definitely the bad cop, and I think she had to be, because she wanted to prepare me, right? But I felt like she respected me in a way that I didn’t feel like I felt from Maxine. And I knew what she was doing. I was like, well, I want to be prepared for this trial. So if you think you have to be tough on me, that’s totally fine.
So that’s important for Lucia. And in another significant development, a new woman, a new accuser, is added to the criminal case.
Another thing that made me feel comfortable was the fact that there would be one other person who was involved. And that made me feel a lot more comfortable. Initially, it was just me for a long time. It just gave me a little more sense of community and just like I wasn’t doing it alone.
And so finally, at this point, Lucia is ready to make a decision.
I went back home to D.C. And a while earlier, I made this list of all the reasons why I should do it and all the reasons why I shouldn’t do it. And all the reasons why I shouldn’t do it — I mean, there were so many reasons — fear for my safety, fear for my family, my reputation, my career — everything. All these things would just be ruined. And then on the other side, I had just written, because it feels right. I didn’t really have much else to write on that side. It did feel like I could, at the very least, hopefully, put him in jail, this person that had assaulted so many people and harassed so many people. And I couldn’t say no to the chance to do that, ultimately. This is the right thing to do. I’m going to do it.
She’s in. She’s willing to be part of criminal charges.
So at this point, New York is able to do what it’s been trying to do ever since these allegations first came out.
Are you sorry, Harvey?
— who’ve accused you, Mr. Weinstein?
Harvey, you got anything to say?
In May of 2018, seven months after the police had first shown up on the door of Lucia’s home, prosecutors bring charges here in New York against Harvey Weinstein.
 And they also charge him with rape stemming from the encounter with the second woman in the criminal case.
So Megan, what happens after these charges against Weinstein are actually filed?
Law enforcement officials continue to build out this case, as they start to prepare to go to court. And Lucia says that she is, for the most part, feeling good about the process. But even with this new prosecutor in place, she says that she’s confused about some aspects of what’s going on.
They didn’t ask me for a full list of people I had told until months and months in. I would think that you kind of start with, who have you talked to? Who knows about this? And I told them some people that either I had told, or knew of me going to the meeting with him, or something to that respect.
She says that she is confused by the fact that law enforcement officials are not reaching out to more of the potential witnesses for her charge — she says that she had provided them with a list of names, people in whom she had confided about the alleged attack — and that, even at this stage of the investigation, that they have not reached out to all of those people to talk to them. This is also a case that involves both prosecutors and the police. And she says that she’s struck by the fact that they don’t seem to be in sync.
It just seemed like some things I had told to the police, the prosecutors weren’t aware of or didn’t remember when they would talk to me. They didn’t even interview my husband until — they never did, actually. They never talked to my husband.
Megan, what’s the significance of them not talking to her husband, exactly?
Well, I mean, think about it. If you are trying to build a case, if you’re trying to shore it up, presumably, you’re going to want to talk to the people closest to that alleged victim, the people who have the most knowledge about her. So for law enforcement officials to have not talked to her husband at this point seems a little weird to her. But she says that she’s not giving it that much thought. And then, one day in October 2018, Lucia is on a work trip in Hong Kong when she gets a call from her lawyer.
I was about to give a huge marketing presentation to a group of executives, and then I get a call from my lawyer saying that they were going to drop my charge.
The prosecutor’s office contacted her attorney and said that there was new information that had come to light, and that they were preparing to drop her charge.
Yeah. And she says that she can’t even process it right at that point, because she’s got to give that work presentation.
I just had to shut off my emotions and just try to just pull myself together right after that, and pretend that it didn’t happen.
I told my family, and then I got on a flight back home with no Wi-Fi, thank goodness, and fell asleep. And when I woke up, I was being destroyed in the press.
We begin with one of the sex assault charges against disgraced movie mogul Harvey Weinstein, tonight, dropped.
 But new information revealed yesterday casts doubt on Evans’s story.
And so as Lucia is learning about her charge being dropped, so, too, is the public. And in a lot of those news stories, it’s presented as contradictory evidence that’s come to light, evidence that undermines her allegation. Not surprisingly, Weinstein and his defense team seize on this new twist.
His attorney, Benjamin Brafman, says he believes Evans lied about what happened.
Lucia Evans, who you will see from the documents released, has clearly, in our opinion, committed perjury on several occasions.
For months, they’d been arguing that all of these women were lying. And now, they’re going out and making the claim that this entire criminal case is tainted, that it’s completely unfair.
The case is not over, but I think it is permanently and irreparably damaged.
So her story seems to be falling apart.
That’s how it appears.
How did that affect you? Did you have to have conversations with your friends and family, and anybody that you work with?
Was this something that you had to talk about or address?
I mean, it was interesting, because before this happened, I had been meeting with lots of actresses who — I became a very popular figure for a month in there in the summer, because I was kind of representing all of Hollywood that wanted to send him to jail, but they were too afraid to do it themselves — some of them. I’m not speaking for all of them. But the actresses I spoke to all had very credible potential charges. But they had families and careers, and they couldn’t do it. So I was kind of doing it for them. After my case is dropped, my friend group and that group whittled down to very few people who actually cared and wanted to know the truth and reached out to me. Some of them didn’t know me personally, so I don’t blame them for not reaching out. But some very clearly kind of severed ties with me, which was really hard and really hurtful.  I never fooled myself into thinking I was close with these women, these famous actresses, necessarily. But the ones — the women that have been with me since the beginning — that was really, that was really tough.
Megan, what happened here, exactly? What happened to this case? Because you’ve been describing law enforcement officials who, from day one, have been telling Lucia she’s their best chance at bringing criminal charges against Harvey Weinstein. She finally signs on. She risks all that that entails. And then they handle it in this confusing way, and then they drop it.
Well, what we now know is that prosecutors have spoken to a friend of Lucia’s, actually the friend who was with her the very first time she met Weinstein. Lucia said that when she went to that work meeting at Harvey Weinstein’s office after meeting him, that he sexually assaulted her, that he forced her to perform oral sex on him against her will. And this friend says that after that work meeting, Lucia told her that she had actually consented to perform oral sex on him, that she did that in exchange for the promise of acting jobs.
Wow. So a very different version of the story.
Right, this friend is providing an account of an encounter with Weinstein that, if true, turns it back into a variation of one of the common stories about Weinstein, but one that cannot be subject to criminal charges.
Why is this only now coming to light?
Well, one possibility is that this is an example of what can happen when there is a rush to prosecute. Well, we also now realize what we now know is that the lead detective in the case had apparently talked to this witness months before Weinstein was charged, and that she had shared this information with him. And prosecutors say that that detective did not share that information with them, the prosecutors.
Suggesting maybe he didn’t want to bring them information that might hurt the case.
Suggesting that he purposely withheld potentially complicating information from the case. Now, the detective says that he did tell the prosecutors this information. So that could also speak to what Lucia had complained about herself, that this entire investigation seemed to be plagued by the fact that the police and prosecutors were not in sync and communicating well with each other.
Mm-hmm. But if the detective had told prosecutors, it seems like that would only be further evidence of this desire to get this done, to bring these charges and overlook complicating information.
Right, so that is another interpretation of this, that both the police and the prosecutors were aware of this complicating information and moved forward with bringing charges anyway.
Well, in that case, what would explain them dropping this case when they did?
Well, with all of the finger-pointing that’s gone on, it’s hard to know, for certain, the answer to that question. But what seems likely is that prosecutors have realized, at this point, that this information is going to come to the attention of the defense and that it’s likely to undermine the entire criminal charge. But I should say that Lucia insists that she never consented to oral sex with Weinstein, that she never told this friend otherwise, and that she explained that to the detective when he asked her about it months and months before.
Megan, what should we make of Lucia’s experience?
For all the people who have been watching so many women come forward with allegations against Harvey Weinstein, watching what seems to be this overwhelming evidence of a pattern of predatory behavior, it shows how difficult it is to turn stories into criminal charges.
Her account fell within the statute of limitations, it was alleging criminal conduct, and she was willing to participate.
Right, to brave the spotlight and the scrutiny.
Exactly. And still, her charge was dropped.
So this is October of 2018. Where does that leave the case against Harvey Weinstein?
So in the lead-up to Lucia’s charge being dropped, there was actually a third woman who was added to the criminal case here in New York. So after Lucia’s charges dropped, there are still two women. But one of those women, one of those accusers, appears to also come with some potential complicating factors.
Weinstein’s legal team has produced emails between Weinstein and this woman that went on for years after the alleged attack. These emails appear extensive. They appear friendly. They even appear romantic at times.
Tomorrow, in Part 2, how the case against Weinstein moved forward after Lucia.
Do you wish that you were still part of this case as we head into trial?
Honestly, yes, I do. I do wish I was. I put so much into this. And when it comes down to it, I do wish I was a part of it. And I also just don’t want people to be discouraged from coming forward and doing it. So I would just hope people don’t — people, despite all the things I’ve said about how hard it is, still decide to come forward, because that’s literally the only hope that we have.
Good morning. I’m pleased to inform you the American people should be extremely grateful and happy. No Americans were harmed in last night’s attack by the Iranian regime.
On Wednesday, in a televised address to the nation, President Trump backed away from further military confrontation with Iran, saying that Iran’s retaliation for the U.S. killing of General Qassim Suleimani appeared to be over.
Iran appears to be standing down, which is a good thing for all parties concerned, and a very good thing for the world.
That retaliation, about a dozen missiles that inflicted minimal damage to two U.S. bases in Iraq, seemed designed to satisfy Iran’s desire for revenge without provoking a military response from the Trump administration. In his speech, Trump vowed to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon, but in a gesture of conciliation said he was prepared to make peace with the country’s leaders.
Finally, to the people and leaders of Iran, we want you to have a future, and a great future — one that you deserve, one of prosperity at home and harmony with the nations of the world. The United States is ready to embrace peace with all who seek it.
And a Ukrainian airliner carrying 176 people crashed inside of Iran on Wednesday morning shortly after takeoff from Tehran, killing everyone onboard. The cause of the crash was unknown, but the plane was new, and its crew was experienced, raising the possibility among aviation experts that the jetliner had been attacked at a volatile moment in Iran.
Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey contributed reporting.
