Carl Larson brews up a visual theme.
TUESDAY PUZZLE — We’re celebrating Carl Larson’s New York Times Crossword debut, and, because he’s such a great guy, the first round is on him. If you can find it.
22A. Nicely done. “Tiny sound?” is not a sound that one listens for; it’s a small body of water. In this puzzle, it’s an INLET.
25A. Keep an eye out for those question mark clues. If there is no question mark, “Hit from the ’60s” would probably hint at music. Since there is a question mark, however, we’re supposed to be thinking about another kind of hit. This “hit” is a dose of LSD.
Mr. Larson goes into detail about his theme in his notes below, but he’s hidden four six-packs of beer in his grid and he’s waiting for you to crack them open, so to speak.
There are three groups of circled squares in his puzzle, and each group spells out the six-letter name of a brand of beer. If you have already started without us and are wondering why your groups of circled squares don’t spell out anything that makes sense, the key to reading them is left to right on the top, drop down a line and then read right to left. For example, in the northeast, at 19A and 22A, the circled squares spell AMSTEL.
While this is an intoxicating idea (sorry), Mr. Larson missed a great opportunity on this one, because the name of each beer curls around and apparently there is a thing called beer curling. On second thought, don’t look it up.
Anyway, there is a central revealer at 34A, which is clued as “Party purchase … or a hint to each circled letter set.” The answer is SIX-PACK OF BEER.
In nontheme news, there are a lot of short words in Mr. Larson’s grid, but some very nice fill as well. I especially liked FOOFARAW, SELF CARE, ICE TONGS and I’M GAME.
My name is Carl Larson, I’m 56, retired and living in Studio City, Calif. When I worked, I was an electrical engineer and marketing manager in the computer industry. I’m very excited to have one of my crossword puzzles published for the first time in The New York Times!
I’ve been doing puzzles for as long as I can remember. I was a Games magazine early adopter, sneaking in puzzle solving during high school classes. I’ve been doing the New York Times Crossword for nearly as long, and have fond memories of sitting in the back of math class with a friend trying to finish the Sunday puzzle each week to the annoyance of our teacher. Win-win.
Toward the end of 2018, I decided that getting a crossword puzzle accepted for publication in The New York Times would be a 2019 goal and bucket list item. I had toyed with crossword construction a couple of times in the past, but was daunted by the difficulty of hand constructing. Today’s crossword constructing software and online databases definitely eases the task.
This puzzle was my fifth submission, and it was accepted for publication in May 2019. I came up with the idea when I was browsing through XwordInfo.com for inspiration. Specifically, I was looking through the list of past puzzles with circled or shaded squares, thinking about constructing a puzzle with one of those elements. I noticed that 3x2 blocks of circles had not been used in many puzzles. It occurred to me that a 3x2 block of circles looked like a six-pack of cans viewed from above, and a theme idea was born. As it turns out, there were plenty of six-letter beer brands from which to choose. STROHS, MODELO, LABATT, PERONI, MOLSON and BUD ICE were left in the cooler.
I’m guessing that Jeff Chen will enjoy my puzzle. I know from reading his notes on XWord Info that he gets a kick out of pointing out when different constructors come up with the same theme. In this puzzle, he gets to do it with one of his puzzles.
On June 24, 2019, Jeff and his co-constructor, Ari Richter, scooped me with a Universal puzzle that had a very similar six-pack theme — including three of the four brands I used. Doh! I enjoyed Jeff and Ari’s added level to their puzzle with the JOE SIX-PACK revealer and JOE-related theme entries passing through the six-packs in their grid.