At a Swiss economic forum, Mr. Mnuchin dismissed criticisms by Ms. Thunberg, the teenage environmental activist.
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin dismissed criticisms by the climate activist Greta Thunberg on Thursday, saying that she lacked the expertise to call for a complete divestment from the fossil fuel industry.
“After she goes and studies economics in college, she can come back and explain that to us,” he said at a press briefing at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, where many world leaders and powerful business figures meet annually.
Ms. Thunberg, a Swedish climate activist who has led demonstrations around the world, spoke at the forum on Tuesday and urged business leaders to stop investing in fossil fuels immediately.
After a brief pause, he said it was only a joke.
A few hours later, Ms. Thunberg shot back on Twitter without mentioning Mr. Mnuchin.
“My gap year ends in August, but it doesn’t take a college degree in economics to realize that our remaining 1.5° carbon budget and ongoing fossil fuel subsidies and investments don’t add up,” she wrote.
The exchange came two days after a speech by President Trump at the forum that made little mention of climate change.
“They predicted an overpopulation crisis in the 1960s, a mass starvation in the ‘70s, and an end of oil in the 1990s,” he said as Ms. Thunberg listened from the sixth row, where she sat with three other climate activists.
“This is not a time for pessimism,” Mr. Trump said.
An hour later, Ms. Thunberg opened a panel discussion in which she rebuked leaders for ignoring pleas for more action on climate change.
Mr. Trump and Ms. Thunberg have clashed before, most prominently on Twitter.
She quickly responded.
Ms. Thunberg has criticized American policy on the environment, including Mr. Trump’s decision early in his administration to pull out of the Paris climate accord.
The United States and China are the world’s largest emitters of greenhouse gases. Since taking office, Mr. Trump has rolled back a wide range of emissions regulations, calling them “horrible” examples of federal overreach. Most recently, the Trump administration moved toward finalizing a rule that would strip away environmental protections for streams, wetlands and other water bodies.
