Complete a first marathon and rejuvenate a major artery. That is the message of an inspiring new study of novice runners and their aortas.
Helpfully, some past research hints that exercise might alter this age-related arterial stiffening. Longtime older athletes, for instance, tend to have relatively supple, responsive arteries.
But most people are not longtime, competitive athletes, and it has not been clear if sedentary people can start to exercise and still improve the state of their arteries.
So, for the new study, which was published this month in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology, researchers at University College London and other institutions decided to track the arteries of a group of people who were new to exercise, targeting first-time entrants in an upcoming London Marathon.
The researchers zeroed in on race participants who had reported on entry forms that they were newcomers to the sport and to exercise in general, rarely working out before signing up. The scientists found more than 200 of these men and women, most of them middle-aged and all sedentary, and contacted them six months before race time.
Each runner then began his or her preferred marathon-training program, with most jogging a few times a week. This training continued for six months, although some developed injuries or other concerns and dropped out. Ultimately, 136 men and women completed the race, in an average finishing time of 4.5 hours for the men and 5.5 hours for the women. A week or two later, they returned to the lab to repeat the tests.
Their aortas proved to be more flexible now. In fact, their arteries seemed to have shed the equivalent of about four years, in functional terms. The aorta of a 60-year-old marathoner in the study now expanded and contracted about as lithely as that of a 56-year-old participant did at the study’s start, and the 56-year-old’s arteries worked like those of a pre-race 52-year-old, and so on.
These improvements were most marked in older male runners and those whose finishing times had been slowest. They did not depend on changes in runners’ fitness or weight, which, in most cases, had been negligible. All that had mattered was that people had kept up with their training and raced.
“Exercise is great for the entire body, including the arteries,” says Dr. Julio Chirinos, an associate professor at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, who wrote an editorial accompanying the new study.
It’s also uncertain whether someone must go the full 26.2 miles to improve arterial health, Dr. Chirinos says. “Is this the best dose” of exercise to produce healthier, more-youthful arteries, he asks. Perhaps less training would be sufficient, or different exercises of varying intensities, or any routine people will continue for the long haul.
Dr. Manisty agrees. “We really do not know the threshold amount of exercise needed” to gain the benefits seen in her study, she says.
