In addition to being a charter member of the celebrated British sketch troupe, he was a director, a screenwriter and an authority on Chaucer.
Terry Jones, who earned a spot in comedic lore as a member of the British troupe Monty Python and also had success as a director, screenwriter and author, died on Tuesday night at his home in the Highgate neighborhood of North London. He was 77.
His ex-wife, Alison Telfer, confirmed the death. Mr. Jones announced in 2016 that he had primary progressive aphasia, a neurological disease that impairs the ability to communicate.
Mr. Jones, four other Britons — Michael Palin, Eric Idle, John Cleese and Graham Chapman — and an American, Terry Gilliam, formed Monty Python in 1969. Their television sketch show, “Monty Python’s Flying Circus,” became a phenomenon, first in Britain and then in the United States when it was rebroadcast there in the mid-1970s.
The show worked a surreal brand of humor that was markedly different from most television fare. It led to “And Now for Something Completely Different,” a 1971 movie that was essentially a collection of skits from the TV show, and then several other feature films.
Mr. Jones and Mr. Gilliam jointly directed the first film after “Something Completely Different,” “Monty Python and the Holy Grail” (1975), and teamed up again on “Monty Python’s The Meaning of Life” (1983). Mr. Jones was the sole director of “Monty Python’s Life of Brian” (1979), the most successful financially. He also directed his own projects.
He was a Renaissance man of sorts on “Monty Python’s Flying Circus” as well. The many characters he played included an organist who tended not to wear clothes, a fellow known as the Amazing Mystico who could build buildings by hypnosis, and an assortment of middle-aged women.
The popularity of the show soon made “pythonesque” an entry in the Oxford English Dictionary.
Terence Graham Parry Jones was born in Colwyn Bay, North Wales, on Feb. 1, 1942, “right bang slap in the middle of World War II,” as he put it in “The Pythons Autobiography,” a 2003 book by the troupe with Bob McCabe. His father, Alick, was a banker by profession but was in the Royal Air Force at the time and stationed in Scotland.
When he was 5 the family moved to Claygate, in the London suburbs. A favorite among the radio offerings he listened to was “The Goon Show,” a comedy program that often veered into offbeat territory and had a cast that included Peter Sellers.
That, of course, was what Monty Python did with television, but Mr. Jones’s aspirations were yet to crystallize. He did think early on that it would be nice to be an actor, but Royal Grammar School, Guildford, which he attended, was not a place to encourage such things.
He joined the university’s Experimental Theater Club, known as E.T.C., spurning the more organized Oxford University Drama Society. He was also a decent scholar, something that he tapped later, but in “The Pythons” he recalled a moment in the library when, parsing some literary criticism, he realized that comedy and performing would take precedence.
In 1963 he performed in and helped write his first revue, “Loitering With Intent” (“because it was done in a tent,” he explained). Mr. Palin, a fellow Oxford student, contributed material to that show. Both also worked on “Hang Down Your Head and Die,” an E.T.C. show about capital punishment that, after its premiere at the university in 1963, went on to a six-week run at the Comedy Theater in the West End in 1964.
The two also contributed to the 1964 edition of a show called “The Oxford Revue,” which was noticed by David Frost, who soon offered both Mr. Jones and Mr. Palin jobs writing for “The Frost Report,” a television sketch show that had its premiere in 1966 on the BBC. Mr. Chapman and Mr. Idle were also on the writing staff, and Mr. Cleese was in the cast.
The next year Mr. Jones, Mr. Idle and Mr. Palin collaborated again on “Do Not Adjust Your Set,” a children’s TV show full of comedic sketches that foreshadowed the Python style. Mr. Gilliam eventually contributed some animation.
Though that show was aimed at children, it had a number of adult fans, including Mr. Cleese and Mr. Chapman.
And that, in 1969, was how “Monty Python’s Flying Circus” came about.
The name, though, was almost “Owl Stretching Time” or “A Horse, a Spoon and a Basin.” Those were among numerous names bandied about for weeks, until time ran out and the troupe and the BBC, which was to broadcast the show, had to agree on something and finally did.
Mr. Gilliam’s animations punctuated the proceedings. The show seemed simultaneously subversive, brainy and silly, though its creators tended to play down how much deep thought went into it.
“We didn’t know what we were doing, and insisted on doing it,” Mr. Idle wrote in “Always Look on the Bright Side of Life: A Sortabiography” (2018).
There were camps and alliances within the Pythons. Mr. Jones generally wrote with Mr. Palin. He was said not to get along with Mr. Cleese, although he shrugged off such claims.
He called it “the foulest-spoken biblical epic ever made, as well as the best-humored.” Some, though, were not amused; the film was banned in many places (Glasgow lifted its prohibition only in 2009) and prompted protests in many others.
Mr. Jones’s directing credits outside of the Pythons included “Personal Services” (1987), based on the story of a real-life madam, and “Erik the Viking” (1989), a Norse yarn he also wrote that starred Tim Robbins as the title character. That movie was somewhat related to a children’s book Mr. Jones had published in 1983, “The Saga of Erik the Viking,” illustrated by Michael Foreman — one of several children’s books by the two.
After he received a diagnosis of bowel cancer in 2006, Mr. Jones applied his skills to humorous educational videos about health issues.
Mr. Jones married Alison Telfer in 1970; they separated around 2005 and later divorced. In 2012 Mr. Jones married Anna Soderstrom.
She survives him. His survivors also include their daughter, Siri; two children from his first marriage, Bill and Sally Jones; and three grandchildren. A brother, Nigel, died before him.
In an interview on the CBC show “George Stroumboulopoulos Tonight” several years ago, Mr. Jones expressed some surprise at the longevity of Monty Python, whose “Holy Grail” Mr. Idle turned into a hit Broadway musical, “Spamalot,” in 2005 and whose legacy has been perpetuated in various DVD releases.
Mr. Jones’s former Python colleagues all expressed their condolences on Twitter.
