U.S.|Prosecutor Sues Her Own City Under a Law Passed to Fight the K.K.K.
Kimberly Gardner, the top prosecutor in St. Louis, who is under investigation herself, is accusing city officials of a “racially motivated conspiracy” to stop her from doing her job.
A battle between St. Louis’s first African-American top prosecutor and the city’s largely white legal establishment escalated this week, with the prosecutor suing her opponents under a little-used federal law passed in the wake of the Civil War to stem violence by the Ku Klux Klan.
Kimberly Gardner, the St. Louis circuit attorney, accused city officials, the local police union and a special prosecutor of a “racially motivated conspiracy to deny the civil rights of racial minorities” by interfering with her efforts to to crack down on police misconduct and to institute changes in the city’s criminal justice system.
The targets of her suit, filed on Monday in Federal District Court in St. Louis, sharply denied the accusations, with the police union calling the legal action “frivolous, desperate and pathetic” and characterizing the decision to file it as “the last act of a desperate woman” who is herself under investigation by the special prosecutor.
The tension between Ms. Gardner and other officials in St. Louis is one of many flashpoints around the country between the traditional law enforcement establishment and a new wave of prosecutors who were elected after promising to rein in police misconduct, send fewer nonviolent offenders to prison and repair relationships with minority communities.
On Tuesday, several other district attorneys from across the country, all of them African-American women, traveled to St. Louis to support Ms. Gardner at a rally with civil rights activists, saying she had been the target of a “fundamentally racist” system that has also thwarted some of their efforts.
“The keepers of the status quo that brought us mass incarceration, the over-criminalization of poor black and brown people, tough sentences, no redemption and no second chances won’t give up their power quietly,” said Marilyn Mosby, the chief prosecutor of Baltimore, who was joined by Aramis Ayala of Orlando and several others.
With her lawsuit, Ms. Gardner is in effect asking for a federal judge to step inside the workings of the city and the local court system to stop her civil rights from being violated under the Constitution and an 1871 law commonly called the Ku Klux Klan Act, which criminalized efforts to re-enslave African-Americans.
More recently, the law has been wielded in a lawsuit against the promoters of the 2017 white power rally in Charlottesville, Va., accusing them of a conspiracy to commit violence against a racial minority. It was also invoked during the civil rights era to try to stop Southern sheriffs from blocking African-Americans from voting, said Peter Joy, a law professor at Washington University in St. Louis.
Ms. Gardner has been at war with much of the St. Louis police force and the local legal establishment since she was elected in 2016, two years after nearby Ferguson, Mo., erupted in protest over a killing by a police officer. The St. Louis police force is mistrusted by many in the African-American community, which makes up half the city’s population.
She took several steps to make the Police Department more accountable, including creating a list of more than 50 officers who could not bring cases for prosecution to her office because of concerns over their credibility. She also indicted the state’s governor at the time, Eric Greitens, who had been a rising star in national Republican politics.
A special prosecutor, Jerry Carmody, began investigating Ms. Gardner in 2018 after Mr. Greitens’s lawyers accused her of allowing the perjury of a former F.B.I. agent whom she hired to investigate the governor. Ms. Gardner has said that she did nothing wrong, and that she corrected the former agent’s errors as soon as she learned about them. She later dismissed the case against Mr. Greitens.
In an interview, Ms. Gardner said the lawsuit was about making sure she was allowed to implement the platform she was elected on.
Mr. Carmody has said that his investigation of Ms. Gardner is continuing, which she has described as a way to limit her effectiveness by keeping a cloud of uncertainty over her future.
As evidence of a conspiracy against her, Ms. Gardner’s lawsuit notes that one of Mr. Greitens’s chief defense lawyers is a longtime friend of Mr. Carmody, creating what she called a conflict of interest that made Mr. Carmody an improper choice to investigate a complaint filed by the governor’s legal team. He was appointed by a state judge at the request of the city’s police force after the complaint was filed.
