A back injury waylaid him for years, and he now wants to be the best player in the world.
Patrick Cantlay has not generated as much attention as some other golfers in their 20s, but that might change soon.
Cantlay, 27, of the United States, who will make his European Tour debut at the Abu Dhabi HSBC Championship, is ranked No. 6 in the world. He was the top-ranked amateur in the world and tied for 21st at the 2011 United States Open at the age of 19. He is coming off a 3-2 performance in the United States triumph over the International Team at the Presidents Cup in December and finished fourth this month at the Sentry Tournament of Champions in Hawaii.
But for someone his age, he has endured a lot. Problems with his back limited him to only six starts on the PGA Tour from June 2013 until early 2017. During that time, Cantlay was walking with his best friend in Newport Beach, Calif., when his friend was killed by a hit-and-run driver.
Cantlay reflected recently on those ordeals and on the game. The conversation has been edited and condensed.
How excited are you about playing in your first European Tour event?
I played with Rickie Fowler this week, and he was talking about all the good restaurants and how good the golf course is. Part of the cool thing about playing professional golf is seeing different parts of the world and different cultures. I’m looking forward to playing in some more global events and enjoying all the places that it takes me.
Why haven’t you played the European Tour before?
I play a pretty selective schedule, and I was out for a majority of time with a back injury, and it still feels like I’m just getting to know the golf courses on the U.S. tour. Also, some of these events are during the West Coast swing. I grew up on the West Coast. I hadn’t wanted to miss them.
You mentioned the back injury. Did you have doubts that you’d play again?
Not necessarily that I wouldn’t play again, just if I’d ever be able to play again pain free. Fortunately, for the last couple of years, in general, I have been able to do that. It was a tough time. I never expected, growing up, that I’d have to take a break for that long from competitive golf.
How did the back problems and the loss of your best friend change who you are?
It gave me a different perspective on how important golf is compared to how important other parts of your life are, and I think you take other parts of your life for granted, or, at least, I did. I thought if you worked hard and did everything the right way, only good things would happen, and it was proved to me that sometimes that’s not the case.
What did you discover that’s more important than golf?
Relationships obviously are more important than golf. Some of the most rewarding experiences I’ve had from golf aren’t from winning, but are maybe from having a tough time on the course and being able to call up Jack Nicklaus and talk to him about life and golf and family.
I’ve made some really nice friends and met some really interesting people. I think even after my career is done, I’ll look back and realize those were the most meaningful things that golf gave me the opportunity to do.
I believe I can be the best player in the world, and I’m doing everything I possibly can to do that, finding the right combination of practicing hard and working out hard and then also having enough off time so golf doesn’t get stale.
What did you gain from your experience at the Presidents Cup?
It was extremely fun and exciting to play with the guys. Also, being able to play for Tiger; it was great to spend time with him and see how invested he was. It was an experience I’ll cherish forever.
How will you approach the majors?
I talked to Nicklaus, and I like how he thinks about the majors. His plan was to do his work on the golf course before tournament week started, the week before, or at a point in your schedule that gave you some time to see the golf course and do your work. I’ll go to the sites early and do my work, and when the tournament rolls around, I’ll have an emphasis on rest and relaxation, and give myself the best opportunity to perform.