Nolan Turner caught a game-clinching interception to send Clemson to college football’s title game. Kevin Turner, his father, played in the N.F.L. and died after battling a disease associated with blows to the head.
NEW ORLEANS — As the Ohio State Buckeyes moved into striking range of a touchdown that could have sent them to the national championship game, Raymond Turner could not bear to watch.
His grandson, Nolan Turner, a junior safety for Clemson, would end up as the last line of defense against the Buckeyes — an opportunity as alarming as it was thrilling. Nolan had been beaten early in the fourth quarter for a touchdown pass that gave Ohio State the lead, which Clemson reclaimed with less than two minutes to go.
Now, in the final seconds of the game, Raymond sat in the stands with his eyes closed, bowed his head and had a conversation with his late son, Kevin, who was Nolan’s father.
Raymond did not raise his head or open his eyes until he felt the roar of the crowd. When he looked up, Nolan was holding the ball in the end zone — cradling an interception that sealed the win and advanced Clemson, the reigning national champion, to the title game against Louisiana State on Monday night.
In recent years, an increasing awareness of brain injuries connected to playing football has led to a reckoning about America’s most popular sport, forcing fans to reconsider their devotion to the game as a wave of former players developed dementia or died by the time they reached middle age.
It is hard to imagine a family with more to reconcile than the Turners.
Kevin, a bruising fullback who played eight seasons in the N.F.L., died at age 46 in 2016, six years after he began receiving treatment for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a rare, incurable degenerative disease that is better known as Lou Gehrig’s disease or A.L.S.
Research suggests that athletes in the N.F.L. are almost four times more likely than the general population to die of A.L.S. or Alzheimer’s disease. In the final years of his life, Kevin was a lead plaintiff in a concussion-related lawsuit against the league, and he pushed for former players to approve a settlement that could give them much-needed financial help. After his death, Kevin was found to have severe chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or C.T.E. — a deterioration of the brain that is associated with repeated blows to the head and has increasingly been tied to A.L.S. symptoms.
So when Kevin’s parents, Raymond and Myra, and his ex-wife, Joyce, watch Nolan run around on a football field in front of adoring fans — wearing a No. 24 jersey, just as his father did in college — front and center are reminders of what football has given and taken away.
It is not just the uniform number that Nolan Turner shares with his father. He has a full head of thick brown hair like his father’s at the same age, the same deep-set brown eyes, the slightly hawkish nose, plus the sure hands, work ethic and bonhomie that make him a respected teammate.
“When he’s on the field, I can tell it’s Nolan without even looking at his number,” Myra said. “He walks like Kevin, he runs like Kevin. …” She stopped and began to cry.
Swinney and Kevin Turner were teammates and close friends at the University of Alabama, often arriving together at Raymond and Myra’s recreational vehicle after games to eat grilled meat and drink beer. As Clemson’s interim head coach in 2008, Swinney lured Kevin into briefly being an “emergency grad assistant” for a bowl game.
After Nolan’s senior season in high school in Vestavia Hills, Ala., he had opportunities to walk on at Alabama and Clemson, but had only one scholarship offer as signing day approached — from Alabama-Birmingham.
Swinney flew the next day to meet with Turner and offer a scholarship.
Two months later, Kevin Turner died. Swinney delivered a eulogy at the funeral.
What gives everyone in the family a degree of comfort is changes to the sport that have been made around the margins. Some teams now have less contact in practice; Kevin was certain that practice collisions were primarily responsible for his depression and A.L.S. There is greater vigilance about concussions; rules have been changed in an attempt to make the game safer; and the Turners place great trust in Swinney to care for Nolan.
Joyce said she is at peace.
Still, players are bigger than ever, seasons are longer than ever, and many changes are so new that there is little data on whether the game has become safer, a point she acknowledged.
A year from now, Nolan will consider his career path. He is on track to graduate in August with a degree in finance, and he could follow in the steps of Myra, who worked as a financial services manager. Coaching is another possibility. But with another year of development, Swinney believes Nolan has a chance to play in the N.F.L. After all, as a freshman, Nolan did something that plenty of N.F.L. players struggle with — he tackled quarterback Lamar Jackson, then of Louisville, in the open field.
“As a competitor, you’re always looking for the next step so it’s definitely something I would pursue — trying to play in the league,” Nolan said.
Once Monday’s championship game is over, Raymond anticipates that he and Myra will eagerly shift attention to their youngest grandson, Cole. He is a sophomore in high school and a talented athlete. Best of all: He plays only basketball.