No. 10-ranked Williams beat fellow American Jessica Pegula, 6-3, 6-4, on Sunday in New Zealand.
Serena Williams won her first singles title since giving birth, defeating the unseeded American Jessica Pegula, 6-3, 6-4, to win the ASB Classic on Sunday in Auckland, New Zealand.
Williams’s 6-1, 6-1 demolition of the 25th-ranked Anisimova in the semifinals was her most impressive performance of the week, but she also hit plenty of high notes against Pegula, the daughter of the Buffalo Bills owners Terry and Kim Pegula. After losing her opening service game, Williams fell behind, 1-3.
As word spread of Williams’s victory, you could also see the admiration on the faces of her fellow professionals.
“I think it’s truly incredible that she’s still at the top of the game so many years later,” said Madison Keys, the 24-year-old American who reached the Brisbane International final on Sunday and lost to Karolina Pliskova.
The next challenge for Williams will be translating her promising form into success at the Australian Open, where she will try again to win her 24th Grand Slam singles title and tie Margaret Court’s record.
Williams, who donated her singles prize money of about $43,000 to Australian fire relief, did not face the tour elite in Auckland. None of her five singles opponents were in the top 20, and only Anisimova was in the top 70.
Williams struggled in the second round against the 86th-ranked Christina McHale, looking edgy and dropping the opening set before finding her range and shaking free to win, 3-6, 6-2, 6-3.
McHale, like an increasing number of players, was able to hold her own against Williams’s power. But matching Williams’s staying power is quite another matter.
She has now won a title in the 1990s, the 2000s, the 2010s and the 2020s.
She won her first tour singles title nearly 21 years ago, in February 1999 at an indoor event in Paris. That span surpasses one achieved by Martina Navratilova, long the benchmark for enduring excellence in women’s tennis. She had a nearly 20-year span between her first and last tour singles titles (September 1974 to February 1994).
Williams continues to break new ground, and though it is very safe to say that she will never match Navratilova’s Open-era record of 167 singles titles, Court’s Grand Slam record remains in definite peril.
Winning No. 24 would most likely be the most remarkable achievement of Williams’s career after all she has experienced and overcome in the last three years.
But perhaps the most remarkable part is that winning it would come as no great surprise.
Ben Rothenberg contributed reporting from Brisbane, Australia.