We’re looking ahead to a big day in Washington, including the expected vote to begin the process of President Trump’s impeachment trial and the scheduled signing of a U.S.-China trade deal. We’re also covering last night’s Democratic presidential debate.
After a monthlong delay, the House is expected to vote today to send charges against President Trump to the Senate, setting in motion the third presidential impeachment trial in U.S. history.
Speaker Nancy Pelosi named seven impeachment managers, who will act as prosecutors in the Senate. They include the most prominent leaders of the impeachment investigation, Representatives Adam Schiff, the chairman of the Intelligence Committee, and Jerrold Nadler, the chairman of the Judiciary Committee. Here are the latest updates.
On Tuesday, House Democrats released records detailing how Mr. Trump’s associates pushed Ukrainian officials to investigate his political rivals. The records add pressure on Republicans to include witness testimony and additional documents.
Another angle: Chief Justice John Roberts will preside over the trial. The role is largely ceremonial, but it still carries risks, our Supreme Court reporter writes.
What’s next: Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, said the Senate was unlikely to consider the substance of the case until Tuesday.
In their final debate before the Iowa caucuses, six presidential candidates disagreed on Tuesday over international affairs, President Trump’s North American trade deal, climate change and health care.
News analysis: The Democrats were united in their criticism of Mr. Trump’s foreign policy, but they became vague when pressed on how they would accomplish their goals without threatening military force. Read more from our national security correspondent.
Go deeper: Here are six takeaways from the night and a fact-check of the candidates’ statements.
The details: Watch debate highlights and see who got the most speaking time.
President Trump is expected to sign an initial trade deal with China today that would be a first step in ending the long-running dispute between the world’s two largest economies.
The agreement, which has not been made public, is expected to provide greater protection for American technology and trade secrets, and to give American companies more access to Chinese markets.
What’s next: The success of the deal hinges on whether China will follow through on its commitments, something Trump administration officials say it has failed to do in the past. Because of that, the U.S. will maintain tariffs on $360 billion worth of Chinese goods.
Related: Companies have long accused Chinese rivals of swiping or seizing valuable technology. Beijing promises to ban those practices, but enforcement could be tough.
The Times on Tuesday verified security camera footage that shows, for the first time, that the Ukrainian airliner downed in Tehran last week was hit by two missiles.
The video, taken from the roof of a building near an Iranian military site, explains why the plane’s transponder stopped working before the impact of what now appears to have been the second missile.
Related: President Hassan Rouhani of Iran denounced Britain, France and Germany today for accusing his country of breaking the 2015 nuclear accord.
Another angle: A measure that would force President Trump to secure congressional authorization before taking further military action against Iran has enough Republican support to pass the Senate, a Democratic senator said — though not to override a presidential veto. A vote could come as soon as next week.
Last summer, Old Town, Maine, greeted the new owner of its defunct paper factory: one of the richest tycoons in China. Zhang Yin, above center, has built a $35 billion empire called Nine Dragons Paper.
For the town of 7,500, “Along with gratitude came a tinge of apprehension, a sense that unpredictable change had come to the north woods,” writes our New England bureau chief, Ellen Barry.
Her report is the start of a project that we’re calling The Great Read — pieces that take you beyond the headlines with some of the best writing at The Times.
Resignations in Russia: Prime Minister Dmitri Medvedev and his cabinet unexpectedly stepped down today, shortly after President Vladimir Putin proposed sweeping constitutional changes that could extend his hold on power.
Free public transportation: As city officials around the U.S. consider ways to combat inequality and reduce carbon emissions, several transit systems are experimenting with waiving fares. The question is how to pay for it.
Two popes, one controversy: A book co-written by Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI firmly defends priestly celibacy, just as his successor, Pope Francis, faces a critical decision on allowing married priests in remote areas.
Snapshot: Above, an ash-covered village on Taal, a volcanic island in the Philippines, on Tuesday. At least 30,000 people were evacuated after an eruption over the weekend, and scientists say a more powerful one could follow.
In memoriam: Gladys Bourdain, a longtime copy editor at The Times, helped kick-start the writing career of her son Anthony, who went on to become a celebrity chef and TV host. She died on Friday at 85.
Cook: Oat milk chocolate pudding uses cornstarch instead of eggs for a pure chocolate flavor.
Eat: When Sushi Nakazawa opened in the West Village in 2013, our restaurant critic, Pete Wells, gave it four stars. He recently found that it’s not what it was.
Go: Jimi Hendrix fans can find pieces of his legacy across London, 50 years after the guitarist died there.
Smarter Living: Is your child shy? NYT Parenting has a guide on when to help, when to step back and when to worry.
For nearly six years, residents of the English village of Blackhall Colliery would sometimes find neat bundles of cash amounting to 2,000 pounds, or about $2,600, on the sidewalk.
This week, the police there revealed that two people who wished to be known only as good Samaritans were the source of the anonymous charity.
Samaritans still exist, in the same part of what is now the West Bank. They number around 800 and practice a religion closely related to Judaism, but they reject the idea of Jerusalem as their central place of worship.
The answer to the Final Jeopardy question: Who is Iago?
Mark Josephson and Eleanor Stanford provided the break from the news. Victoria Shannon of the briefings team wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| • We’re listening to “The Daily.” Today’s episode is about Russian hacking efforts and the 2020 election.
• Here’s today’s Mini Crossword, and a clue: Autograph (four letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
• In a State of The Times address on Tuesday, our publisher, A.G. Sulzberger, outlined three stories that he said would shape the world for generations to come.