The removal of the cars, which were used on the A, C, J and Z lines, is a setback to efforts to modernize New York’s system.
An entire fleet of New York City’s newest subway cars was abruptly pulled out of service on Wednesday after two recent episodes raised concerns that doors could open while trains were moving, according to people involved in the transit system who were told about the defects.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which runs the subway, did not provide details about the episodes that led it to sideline the 298 cars, but officials said that no riders had been injured.
Authority officials also declined to comment on whether the problems would have allowed doors to open while trains were in motion until an investigation is complete.
The removal of the cars, which were being used on trains on the A, C, J and Z lines, is a significant setback in the authority’s effort to modernize the subway system’s antiquated infrastructure. It is also the largest such equipment removal in recent years.
The new cars were supposed to replace others that date to President Lyndon B. Johnson’s administration and are some of the oldest train cars in operation in the world.
The new cars, known as R-179s, were bought as part of a problem-plagued, $600 million contract between the authority and the Canadian manufacturing giant Bombardier that has raised questions about the M.T.A.’s oversight of its vendors.
Troubling signs emerged when the cars first started to roll after multiple delays.
Transit workers complained that the R-179’s speedometer was hard to see, that the master controller used to drive the train was uncomfortable and that the space between cars was too narrow for some workers to maneuver in.
A more pressing concern for riders was that the new cars broke down more often than some older ones that had been in service since the 1980s, according to authority data.
The authority has hired an outside firm to inspect the faulty cars and has replaced them for now with others in its roughly 6,700-car fleet. The move has resulted in trains running less frequently on the J and Z lines, officials said. It was unclear how long the inspections would take.
A Bombardier spokeswoman said on Wednesday that the company’s own investigation of the cars, which prompted the authority’s action, showed that the doors had not been properly calibrated by a supplier, Nanjing Kangni Mechanical & Electrical of China.
“We are now inspecting all of the R-179 cars and, where necessary, making adjustments to ensure the safe and reliable performance of the doors for the entire fleet,” she said.
Modernizing the subway-car fleet has been a priority since the system fell into crisis in 2017 and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who controls the authority, declared a state of emergency.
The M.T.A.’s contract with Bombardier has been troubled with delays and design flaws since the first R-179s were delivered in 2016. Several cars were pulled from service last January because of software defects.
The extent of the problems was outlined in an audit by Scott M. Stringer, the city comptroller, in December. The audit faulted Bombardier for performance issues and found that the authority had not sufficiently held the company accountable.
The audit determined that missed deadlines combined with problems in the car’s design had delayed the contract’s completion by three years, costing the authority $35 million to keep old cars in service.
Because of the delays in delivering the cars, Bombardier agreed to give the authority 18 extra cars at no cost.
The authority has started to increase pressure on contractors like Bombardier that fail to comply with contract terms, including adopting rules that would disqualify them from doing business with the agency for five years under certain conditions.
Transit advocates have welcomed the M.T.A.’s push to hold contractors more accountable, but many say that those regulations are too harsh.
By automatically disqualifying a contractor, even when a project is delayed or goes over budget for reasons beyond the contractor’s control, the policy could make some companies reluctant to work with the authority.
That could create hurdles for the M.T.A.’s effort to transform the subway because there is a relatively small pool of companies that can meet the vast system’s needs.
