The lead-up to the Oscar race officially begins, and a J.R.R. Tolkien biopic airs on HBO.
77TH ANNUAL GOLDEN GLOBES 8 p.m. on NBC. Netflix will likely be the big winner at the 2020 Golden Globe Awards. The streaming giant has 34 nods in total: “Marriage Story,” starring Scarlett Johansson and Adam Driver, received six alone, the most of any movie. Among the other contenders are “1917,” “The Irishman” and “The Joker,” for best drama, and “Dolemite Is My Name,” “Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood” and “Rocketman” for best musical or comedy. The Hollywood Foreign Press Association, the group that produces the Globes, faced a backlash for excluding women in several major categories, including best director and motion picture. The best drama series category includes nominations for “The Morning Show,” “Big Little Lies” and “Killing Eve,” while “Fleabag,” “The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel” and “Barry” will compete for best comedy series. Ricky Gervais returns to host for the fifth time, which he says will be his last. Expect plenty of jabs.
GOD FRIENDED ME 8 p.m. on CBS. This feel-good drama series follows Miles (Brandon Micheal Hall), a reluctant hero who meets and helps New Yorkers in need through a mysterious Facebook account called God. In this midseason premiere, Miles meets a Holocaust survivor who wants to know whether his sister is still alive. And, in a twist, Joy (Jessica Lu) has a hunch that all of the people Miles has been helping are clients of the same insurance company.
TOLKIEN (2019) 8 p.m. on HBO; stream on HBO platforms. Nicholas Hoult stars as J.R.R. Tolkien in this biopic about the writer of “The Lord of the Rings” and “The Hobbit.” The film chronicles Tolkien’s early days as a young orphan in Birmingham, England, who bonds with three friends and forms a fellowship. He finds love at his boardinghouse, enrolls at Oxford and enlists in the army during World War I, and, all throughout, shares his fascination with language. The film received mixed reviews. Critics praised the performances but said the movie could do with more imagination and less obvious nods to Tolkien’s legacy.
