When Kate Hamill first met Jason O’Connell there was an immediate spark that neither could act on. He later went from being her leading man to her real-life beau.
After Ms. Hamill praised Mr. O’Connell’s work later that day — “He was simply brilliant,” she said — she parted ways feeling a bit uneasy, having been wowed at the first sight of a man whom she had never met, while already in a relationship.
But she couldn’t ignore Mr. O’Connell, or let him go that easily.
Instead, they became fast friends, and Mr. O’Connell, a veteran stage actor from Huntington, N.Y., had a critique of Ms. Hamill even better than the one she gave him.
He was given that opportunity when Ms. Hamill went about the business of making him her leading man, but only in the world of theater.
Mr. O’Connell was thrilled.
Mr. O’Connell would eventually be awarded the role in “Sense and Sensibility,” and soon landed a better one in October 2012, as Ms. Hamill’s real-life boyfriend.
“But once we started spending more time together, I realized that not only was she brilliant and hysterically funny, but she was incredibly kind, loving and supportive,” said Mr. O’Connell, who moved in with Ms. Hamill to an apartment in Forest Hills, Queens, in 2015.
Ms. Hamill, who is currently starring in her own adaptation of Bram Stoker’s “Dracula,” an Off Broadway production running at the Classic Stage Company, that she described as “a feminist revenge fantasy,” was equally thrilled to be dating Mr. O’Connell.
In February, the couple, who consider themselves business partners, will have to deal once again with one of the more difficult aspects of their careers: traveling, on separate assignments. Mr. O’Connell has to leave town to direct a play for three weeks and then to go act in a play for another six weeks. Ms. Hamill will be traveling even more in the coming days, as she will be at three world premieres in the next four months.
Ms. Hamill was born in Charleston, S.C., and lived there until she was four before her parents, Monica Joyce Hamill and Paul Hamill, both grant writers, moved the family to Lansing, N.Y. There, they raised Ms. Hamill and her three siblings in an 1850s farmhouse on a dairy farm.
Ms. Hamill graduated from Ithaca College with a bachelor of fine arts degree in acting. Her parents eventually divorced.Her father, a published poet who also taught English at Ithaca College, married Kristin Colongeli, who had two children of her own.
Mr. O’Connell, who graduated with a bachelor of fine arts in theater from Hofstra University, did not have as calculated a plan to work professionally in theater.
“At first I thought I would become a cartoonist,” said Mr. O’Connell, the only son of Marie Favale, a retired painter, and Walter O’Connell, a former commercial artist. His parents divorced when he and his sister, Tiffany, were very young, leaving them to be raised with the help of their grandparents, Philomena and Eugene Favale.
Mr. O’Connell’s path to stage acting and writing took stronger root in a childhood love of reading and creating “homemade comic books and magazines,” as he called them. Mr. O’Connell would distribute his works, which would take entire summers to produce, to his high school classmates at the start of every school year, “and just watch them laugh and laugh and laugh,” he said.
At some point during his comic book and magazine phase, Mr. O’Connell, whose father died in 2007, began mimicking the voices of characters on “Saturday Night Live,” and, soon after, other voices, which got him more immediate laughs, and the kind of instant gratification that led him to do standup routines in comedy clubs on the same Long Island circuit where Eddie Murphy, Jerry Seinfeld and Rosie O’Donnell had performed.
“With her, I’m more of an adult than I’ve ever been, and at the same time, I’m as much of a child as I’ve ever been,” he said.
Ms. Hamill, who later chose Mr. O’Connell to be her love interest in a lively adaptation of “Pride and Prejudice,” which ran from June 2017 to early January 2018, said it was Mr. O’Connell who changed her life for the better.
They were married Jan. 20 at the Brooklyn Winery before Gabra Zackman, a friend of the couple who became a Universal Life minister for the event, and about 150 guests.
Ms. Sharma, the maid of honor, agreed.
