Neoconservatives have long urged action against Iran, just as they once did about Iraq. Now, Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani is dead.
WASHINGTON — Years before President Trump ordered the killing of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, Reuel Marc Gerecht, a former C.I.A. officer and prominent neoconservative commentator, had recommended taking out the notorious Iranian general.
More than eight years later, Mr. Gerecht got his wish when a drone strike ordered by President Trump killed General Suleimani in Baghdad, touching off an international crisis even as it delighted a cadre of Republican Middle East hawks who have been sharply critical of Mr. Trump on many other issues.
But it was an unusual admission from Mr. Gerecht, who has regularly criticized the president, dating to the 2016 campaign, when he was among the dozens of Republican foreign policy insiders who added their names to a letter denouncing Mr. Trump as unfit to lead the nation and collectively came to be known as Never Trumpers.
It was clear on Monday that Mr. Gerecht spoke for many of his ideological comrades, who generally believe that military force can be a positive tool and not always a dreaded last resort, and that Iran in particular is likely to back down when confronted with strength. Many of them are collectively known as neoconservatives, or neocons, even if not all of them accept the label.
Many of those hawks have long applauded Mr. Trump’s sanctions-based “maximum pressure” campaign against Iran, but they had come to doubt the president’s willingness to use military force and were delighted to see him take action against someone responsible for consolidating Iranian influence at the expense of many American lives.
Other frequent Trump critics who cheered the strike against General Suleimani include Representative Liz Cheney of Wyoming, a frequent critic of Mr. Trump’s foreign policy who posted on Twitter shortly after the Iranian commander’s death that Mr. Trump was “was right to order decisive action to kill” him.
Calls for regime change in Tehran — which Mr. Trump himself says he does not seek — are deeply unsettling to Democrats, as is the track record of Mr. Bolton and other Republicans applauding the strike on General Suleimani.
Mr. Bolton has refused opportunities to call the Iraq war a mistake, and Mr. Gerecht said on Monday that he did not “regret the fall of Saddam Hussein.” Ms. Cheney’s father, former Vice President Dick Cheney, was a main proponent of the invasion and subsequent occupation, and she supported them both.
Their backing for Mr. Trump in this moment not only scrambles Republican political lines, it alarms Democrats and noninterventionists who see some echoes of the worldview that led to President George W. Bush’s invasion of Iraq.
Such commentary comes just after conventional wisdom in Washington and abroad had hardened around the notion that Mr. Trump was determined to avoid a new Middle East conflict.
Although it remains far from clear that Mr. Trump wants a full-scale conflict with Iran as he kicks off an election year — speaking to reporters on Sunday, he repeated his view that invading Iraq was “the worst decision ever made in the history of our country” — the concern is further stoked by similarities that some analysts see between his justification for the Suleimani strike and that of the Bush administration’s march to war in 2003.
Mr. Trump, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and others have insisted that General Suleimani was killed to pre-empt planning for attacks that could have killed hundreds of American troops and diplomats in the Middle East, but they have declined to provide details. In 2002, Bush administration officials distorted intelligence to claim, falsely, that the Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction.
“There are elements of this that on the surface look like 2002 and 2003,” said James Mann, who has written several books about how Washington thinking shapes American foreign policy. He cited the Trump administration’s claim that it acted pre-emptively and the conservative belief in the efficacy of military force.
Although Mr. Bolton is gone from the West Wing and Ms. Cheney has little sway there, Mr. Pompeo’s messaging often echoes themes from think tanks like the American Enterprise Institute and the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, including the importance of “restoring deterrence” against Iran.
