The online magazine deleted a glowing story about Facebook after questions were raised about whether it was an ad.
On Wednesday, Teen Vogue published an article on Facebook’s efforts to safeguard political speech. It had no byline and a glowing tone.
Soon after, the “sponsored editorial content” label disappeared. And then, the article itself vanished.
Under the headline “How Facebook Is Helping Ensure the Integrity of the 2020 Election,” the lengthy Teen Vogue post included question-and-answer-style interviews with five female Facebook managers who said the platform was taking steps to avoid spreading misinformation and propaganda as another presidential election drew near. The article also included a portrait of the women.
A Condé Nast employee with knowledge of the arrangement, who was not authorized to discuss the matter publicly, said the article had indeed been commissioned as sponsored content, meaning it was an ad.
Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook’s chief operating officer, and other executives at the company shared the Teen Vogue story Wednesday morning, before it went into the digital ether.
Phillip Picardi, Teen Vogue’s former chief content officer, was one of the article’s critics. “I am so sorry to the @TeenVogue team for whatever irresponsible sales or marketing staff pushed this article into their feed, therefore discrediting all the GOOD work they’ve been doing to educate their audience about the REAL threats posed by @Facebook in our election,” he wrote on Twitter.
Facebook has struggled to shore up its reputation after a three-year string of debacles related to its handling of election interference and data privacy. Lawmakers and civil rights groups have warned that the company seems unprepared to counter the disinformation campaigns that clogged social media during the last presidential campaign.
This week, a 2,500-word internal post by a Facebook executive, Andrew Bosworth, set off discord at the company. In his post, which was obtained by The New York Times, he warned against the temptation to skew the platform against President Trump’s 2020 re-election campaign and stood by the company’s stance on not censoring politicians’ posts.
Teen Vogue started in 2003 as a pet project of Anna Wintour, the longtime editor in chief of Vogue and Condé Nast’s artistic director. In 2017, as the magazine gained attention for adding articles on politics and social issues to its mix, Condé Nast shut down the print edition.
