Since the Harvey Weinstein story broke more than two years ago, everything about it has been outsize: the scope of the allegations of sexual harassment and assault, stretching back decades; the number of his accusers, who total more than 80; and the global scale of the reckoning their stories have inspired.
But for all the expectations about the high-profile trial, the jurors will be hearing a narrow legal case, with an already-fraught back story and a highly unpredictable result.
More than 80 women have come forward with allegations of sexual misconduct against Harvey Weinstein, but as he goes on trial in New York, the criminal charges center on just two. The story of Lucia Evans helps explain why.
I was at a dinner in New York City one night with a bunch of friends, and I sat down at the table at an empty seat. And he came up behind me and said, I think you’re in my seat. And I recognized him immediately.
I was a very young actor new to Los Angeles.
It was my first job also out of college, and I was 24 years old. My passion all my life was to work in the film industry.
And he was completely — I mean, he’s really charming when he wants to be.
We had been in touch about an audition for a Quentin Tarantino film, and that’s when I met with him at the Peninsula.
He had his assistant call me at the last minute and say, Harvey can’t meet you in the lobby. Harvey can’t meet you in the cafe. Can you go up to his office, his hotel suite?
That’s when he said, well, come and see me at my hotel.
And he told me, O.K., we’re going to my room now.
I opened the door, and he just went straight into my bedroom.
He wanted to know if I was cool and if we were friends, and he just wanted to relax with me.
He said, how about you just give me a massage?
He asked me if I’d give him a massage.
He asked me to give him massage.
Which I declined.
And I thought it would end there, but that’s when he blocked the exit for me.
His whole affect changed, and he looked like a predator.
I just remember that feeling of having to fight off an invader.
If I would try to fight myself away from him, he would then move around to a place where he could block me in somewhere. And he’s a big individual.
He just is very dominant, persuasive.
He’s a very big guy.
He backed me into a dark room.
He led me to his bathroom.
He pushed me back against the bed.
Pleading that I just watch him masturbate.

And I was petrified and terrified.
I pulled my arm away, finally, and headed to the door. He started following me and telling me that I could get a three-picture deal and that he would greenlight my script. But I had to watch him masturbate.
A nightmare — literally a nightmare.
The story of Harvey Weinstein was a story of patterns. Dozens of women — more than 80 — all telling a very familiar and eerily similar story of abuse and harassment by the famed movie producer. But this week, two years after that pattern of allegations was first reported in The Times by my colleagues Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey, there are just two women at the center of the criminal case against him as his trial opens in Manhattan. Today, in Part 1, Megan Twohey on how we got from 80 to 2.
It’s Thursday, January 9.
Megan, help us understand how, after these dozens of allegations against Harvey Weinstein, the charges that he’s facing in this trial center on just two women.
Well, after we broke our first Harvey Weinstein story, and then Ronan Farrow published his first story in The New Yorker, there were these dozens of women who came forward with accusations.
The L.A. County district attorney’s office is determining if Weinstein should be charged.
And the BBC is reporting police in England are now investigating an allegation against him as well.
— that responded by launching criminal investigations. And that’s because the vast majority of allegations that were coming out were centered in those three jurisdictions. But even as they launched these criminal investigations, there were questions about whether or not they would be able to bring criminal charges.
And why would that be, given the overwhelming number of these allegations that are now surfacing?
Well, there are several reasons that explain that. First, a lot of these allegations were of inappropriate behavior, sexual harassment, which is illegal under civil law, but it’s not a sex crime. You’re never going to be prosecuted for it. Other allegations of actual sex crimes fell outside the statute of limitations for prosecution. And there were women who had really serious allegations who were reluctant to participate in a criminal investigation, let alone a prosecution. But from the beginning, New York, in particular, was very intent on bringing a prosecution.
Well, that’s because they had actually investigated Harvey Weinstein once before in 2015. That was the year that a model from Italy walked into a New York City police precinct and reported that Harvey Weinstein had groped her breast and tried to force his hand up her skirt during a work meeting at his office. And she worked closely with the police at that time. She actually wore a wire into a follow-up meeting with Weinstein that captured what sounded like a confession to at least some of what she had alleged.
What do we have to do here?
Nothing. I’m going to take a shower. 
I don’t drink. Can I stay on the bar?
No, you must come here now.
I’m not doing anything with you, I promise.
Now you’re embarrassing me.
I’m sorry. I cannot.
No, come in here.
No, yesterday was kind of aggressive for me.
I need to know a person to be touched.
I know, but I don’t want to.
Please, I don’t want to do something I don’t want to.
Go to the bath — hey, come here. Listen to me.
I want to go downstairs.
I’m not embarrassing you.
It’s just that I don’t feel comfortable.
Honey, don’t have a fight with me in the hallway.
Please, I am not going to do anything. I swear on my children. Please, come in. On everything. I’m a famous guy.
I’m feeling very uncomfortable right now.
Please come in now. And one minute. And if you want to leave when the guy comes with my jacket, you can go.
Why yesterday you touch my breast?
You’re used to that?
No, but I’m not used to that.
I won’t do it again. Come on. Sit here. Sit here for a minute, please.
But in spite of that recording and the woman wanting them to prosecute, the district attorney’s office declined to bring charges against Weinstein at that time. They said that they felt like a shifting account that she had provided about an alleged sexual assault in Italy years earlier would make her seem not credible on the witness stand.
So then, in 2017, as the Harvey Weinstein story is exploding, this case comes back into public focus.
D.A. Cyrus Vance Jr. was mobbed by reporters, who asked whether Weinstein’s wealth and fame influenced his decision not to press charges.
There are so many questions about Cy Vance, the Manhattan district attorney, and why he didn’t prosecute Harvey Weinstein in 2015.
D.A. Vance, did you not have the evidence you need? Was this not a slam-dunk case?
If we had a case that we felt we could prosecute, and my experts felt we could prosecute, against Harvey Weinstein, we would have.
Critics say financial contributions by Weinstein’s lawyers to Vance’s campaign could have played a role in the D.A.‘s decision.
— and had allowed this alleged predator to slip through the cracks.
And so that is what left New York in a position, I guess, where, by 2017, they feel all this pressure to aggressively pursue these new allegations against Weinstein?
They’re feeling a lot of pressure. And so even with all of those challenges to bringing a sex crimes charge, they are on the hunt for an allegation that will allow them to make an arrest.
I’m going to put my headset on.
Oh, yeah. Megan, I just have some notes on my phone I’m just going to, like, keep open if I need them.
And so they quickly zoom in on this account of a sexual assault from 2004 that had been made in Ronan Farrow’s New Yorker article by a woman named Lucia Evans.
 She said that she said over and over she didn’t want to do this, to stop. And she said that Weinstein overpowered her.
So a clear allegation of a sex crime.
A clear allegation of a sex crime and also one that falls within the statute of limitations — exactly what New York is looking for. And so within hours of that story being published, New York detectives are trying to find Lucia.
So a lot of different things happened very quickly, and it was very overwhelming. The N.Y.P.D. showed up at my parents’ house. They live in upstate New York. And they said, Lucia has a prosecutable charge. And they were like, what are you talking about, you know? They were just kind of overwhelmed anyway, you know? And they said, we’re worried about her safety, and we — where does she live? We want to talk to her.
She says that they told her immediately that they wanted her to participate in the criminal investigation.
They immediately wanted me to go on the record, because they said I was the only one that could put him in jail.
And how are you feeling in this moment? Are you feeling scared? Are you feeling nervous? Are you feeling — what is it like when, you know, several detectives show up at your door and come into your living room?
Yeah, I mean, it was the most surreal thing. I never conceived of this happening. I was one of the few, or maybe the only, people in that article that wasn’t an actress, you know? And it was frightening to me, because I didn’t do this for the press, obviously. I didn’t do this for any kind of fame or fortune. And so I think I was scared for a few reasons. I was nervous about what it could do to my family, to — you know, I mean, I know what criminal proceedings can be like. I’ve seen a bunch of movies, and I’ve watched a lot of court TV. It’s like, I know how this could go. And I think that the narrative has always been that victims are torn apart on the stand. And why would you do that to yourself? Why would you put yourself or your family through that? And all these things are kind of just running through my mind. And they were positioning it as a very empowering thing — like, oh, you can change society forever. You can change the laws. And of course, that made me a little excited, too. I was like, wow, you know, I would absolutely love to influence the law, and to empower victims, and to put him in jail. Like, that would be an incredible feeling, but also tempering that with my more rational side. Like, are you serious? First of all, I can’t be the only one that can put him in jail. And also, you need to give me time to process this, you know?
So you finish your pot of coffee.
You finish this conversation with them. How does it end? How do you guys part after that?
So they told us — my husband, who was there, and myself — to get out of town for a few weeks.
They tell her that they think that she’s in danger and that Harvey Weinstein and any of his kind of associates could potentially come after her. So they really want to relocate her — officially relocate her to a safe location.
They didn’t think I was safe there, just because I was easily traceable. And they were worried about my safety at that point, since I was the only one that could put him in jail, quote, unquote, that we knew of.
And so she and her husband packed their bags and moved into this house for two weeks, closer to New York City, as they decided what they were going to do next.
Mm-hmm. And what did she do?
Well, she started weighing her options. She starts meeting with a variety of lawyers. And as she tells it, many of those lawyers are actually discouraging her from participating in the criminal case, telling her that she would be much better off just seeking to strike an out-of-court — like, basically a private out-of-court civil settlement with Weinstein in which she would receive money.
I met with lawyers who said, forget the criminal case. Just file a civil suit, you know what I mean? And that didn’t feel right to me. And I didn’t even know what that would entail at the time.
And why are the lawyers telling her that the civil route is better than this criminal prosecution?
They basically tell her that it’s going to play out the way that she’s seen it depicted on all those TV shows.
And that means it’s going to be really ugly.
Yeah, it’s going to be really ugly.
The narratives I heard the most often were, it’s going to be a long, drawn-out, painful process. They’re going to tear apart your background, your life. They’re going to talk to everyone you’ve ever worked with, everyone you’ve ever been in a relationship with, find anything they can to discredit you. And it’s hard on you. It’s hard on your family.  I just had this vision of myself just being left with nothing on the street. That’s the narrative that I think still exists, but also that I was hearing at the time. It’s really scary to hear over and over, and it starts to kind of become part of you.  How can you not feel like that?
So she’s put off by these lawyers. And as she tells it, they’re not the only people who are counseling her against participating in the criminal case. She says that she has friends and family members who are saying the same thing.
The narrative that I heard a lot was, you’ve already done enough — and in a good way, not a negative way at all. But you’ve already done so much. Look at — the movement was starting to pick up steam at that point. Like, look at what you helped to reignite?
You did your part. You participated in the journalism, some of these first stories that are helping to ignite the #MeToo movement. You’ve done enough. But as Lucia tells it, something keeps pulling at her.
The criminal case was really kind of calling my name in a way right from the beginning, and I wanted to understand what that would be like. And I just wanted to be able to have the option to pursue it without having a lawyer say, it’s not right for you. Don’t do it.
And when you say that the criminal case was calling to you from the beginning, what do you mean?
I wanted this to continue to mean something to me and to mean something for other people. And it always kind of felt right to me deep down. And even though I struggled with it for so many months, and it was so hard to decide what to do, I just felt like it was the right thing to do, ultimately.
So she decides to meet with the prosecutor’s office, which is a significant step, because the prosecutors are ultimately the ones who will decide whether or not to bring charges. And the lead prosecutor on the Weinstein case at the time was a woman named Maxine Rosenthal. And as Lucia tells it, she did not have a good experience with her.
I didn’t feel comfortable talking to her, and I didn’t have a lot of confidence in it.
it doesn’t even need an explanation about why that’s so horrifying to say.
So listen, I can’t speak to this particular prosecutor’s conduct. What I can tell you is that she’s a veteran sex crimes prosecutor who’s known for being very hard-nosed and that Lucia wasn’t the only person who was complaining about her. There were complaints coming from the police, from victims’ rights advocates that she was not sensitive and that she was moving too slowly. I can’t speak to whether or not those complaints were valid, but Rosenthal’s boss is Cy Vance, the Manhattan prosecutor, the same one who had been criticized for not prosecuting Weinstein in 2015. And he decides that he’s going to take Rosenthal off the case. And he puts in her place a veteran homicide prosecutor. Her name is Joan Illuzzi, and she’s also known for being tough.
Joan would ask me tough questions, but I still felt good about it.
But Lucia says that she feels like she’s on her side, that she’s being tough to toughen her up.
She was definitely the bad cop, and I think she had to be, because she wanted to prepare me, right? But I felt like she respected me in a way that I didn’t feel like I felt from Maxine. And I knew what she was doing. I was like, well, I want to be prepared for this trial. So if you think you have to be tough on me, that’s totally fine.
So that’s important for Lucia. And in another significant development, a new woman, a new accuser, is added to the criminal case.
Another thing that made me feel comfortable was the fact that there would be one other person who was involved. And that made me feel a lot more comfortable. Initially, it was just me for a long time. It just gave me a little more sense of community and just like I wasn’t doing it alone.
And so finally, at this point, Lucia is ready to make a decision.
I went back home to D.C. And a while earlier, I made this list of all the reasons why I should do it and all the reasons why I shouldn’t do it. And all the reasons why I shouldn’t do it — I mean, there were so many reasons — fear for my safety, fear for my family, my reputation, my career — everything. All these things would just be ruined. And then on the other side, I had just written, because it feels right. I didn’t really have much else to write on that side. It did feel like I could, at the very least, hopefully, put him in jail, this person that had assaulted so many people and harassed so many people. And I couldn’t say no to the chance to do that, ultimately. This is the right thing to do. I’m going to do it.
She’s in. She’s willing to be part of criminal charges.
So at this point, New York is able to do what it’s been trying to do ever since these allegations first came out.
Are you sorry, Harvey?
— who’ve accused you, Mr. Weinstein?
Harvey, you got anything to say?
In May of 2018, seven months after the police had first shown up on the door of Lucia’s home, prosecutors bring charges here in New York against Harvey Weinstein.
 And they also charge him with rape stemming from the encounter with the second woman in the criminal case.
So Megan, what happens after these charges against Weinstein are actually filed?
Law enforcement officials continue to build out this case, as they start to prepare to go to court. And Lucia says that she is, for the most part, feeling good about the process. But even with this new prosecutor in place, she says that she’s confused about some aspects of what’s going on.
They didn’t ask me for a full list of people I had told until months and months in. I would think that you kind of start with, who have you talked to? Who knows about this? And I told them some people that either I had told, or knew of me going to the meeting with him, or something to that respect.
She says that she is confused by the fact that law enforcement officials are not reaching out to more of the potential witnesses for her charge — she says that she had provided them with a list of names, people in whom she had confided about the alleged attack — and that, even at this stage of the investigation, that they have not reached out to all of those people to talk to them. This is also a case that involves both prosecutors and the police. And she says that she’s struck by the fact that they don’t seem to be in sync.
It just seemed like some things I had told to the police, the prosecutors weren’t aware of or didn’t remember when they would talk to me. They didn’t even interview my husband until — they never did, actually. They never talked to my husband.
Megan, what’s the significance of them not talking to her husband, exactly?
Well, I mean, think about it. If you are trying to build a case, if you’re trying to shore it up, presumably, you’re going to want to talk to the people closest to that alleged victim, the people who have the most knowledge about her. So for law enforcement officials to have not talked to her husband at this point seems a little weird to her. But she says that she’s not giving it that much thought. And then, one day in October 2018, Lucia is on a work trip in Hong Kong when she gets a call from her lawyer.
I was about to give a huge marketing presentation to a group of executives, and then I get a call from my lawyer saying that they were going to drop my charge.
The prosecutor’s office contacted her attorney and said that there was new information that had come to light, and that they were preparing to drop her charge.
Yeah. And she says that she can’t even process it right at that point, because she’s got to give that work presentation.
I just had to shut off my emotions and just try to just pull myself together right after that, and pretend that it didn’t happen.
I told my family, and then I got on a flight back home with no Wi-Fi, thank goodness, and fell asleep. And when I woke up, I was being destroyed in the press.
We begin with one of the sex assault charges against disgraced movie mogul Harvey Weinstein, tonight, dropped.
 But new information revealed yesterday casts doubt on Evans’s story.
And so as Lucia is learning about her charge being dropped, so, too, is the public. And in a lot of those news stories, it’s presented as contradictory evidence that’s come to light, evidence that undermines her allegation. Not surprisingly, Weinstein and his defense team seize on this new twist.
His attorney, Benjamin Brafman, says he believes Evans lied about what happened.
Lucia Evans, who you will see from the documents released, has clearly, in our opinion, committed perjury on several occasions.
For months, they’d been arguing that all of these women were lying. And now, they’re going out and making the claim that this entire criminal case is tainted, that it’s completely unfair.
The case is not over, but I think it is permanently and irreparably damaged.
So her story seems to be falling apart.
That’s how it appears.
How did that affect you? Did you have to have conversations with your friends and family, and anybody that you work with?
Was this something that you had to talk about or address?
I mean, it was interesting, because before this happened, I had been meeting with lots of actresses who — I became a very popular figure for a month in there in the summer, because I was kind of representing all of Hollywood that wanted to send him to jail, but they were too afraid to do it themselves — some of them. I’m not speaking for all of them. But the actresses I spoke to all had very credible potential charges. But they had families and careers, and they couldn’t do it. So I was kind of doing it for them. After my case is dropped, my friend group and that group whittled down to very few people who actually cared and wanted to know the truth and reached out to me. Some of them didn’t know me personally, so I don’t blame them for not reaching out. But some very clearly kind of severed ties with me, which was really hard and really hurtful.  I never fooled myself into thinking I was close with these women, these famous actresses, necessarily. But the ones — the women that have been with me since the beginning — that was really, that was really tough.
Megan, what happened here, exactly? What happened to this case? Because you’ve been describing law enforcement officials who, from day one, have been telling Lucia she’s their best chance at bringing criminal charges against Harvey Weinstein. She finally signs on. She risks all that that entails. And then they handle it in this confusing way, and then they drop it.
Well, what we now know is that prosecutors have spoken to a friend of Lucia’s, actually the friend who was with her the very first time she met Weinstein. Lucia said that when she went to that work meeting at Harvey Weinstein’s office after meeting him, that he sexually assaulted her, that he forced her to perform oral sex on him against her will. And this friend says that after that work meeting, Lucia told her that she had actually consented to perform oral sex on him, that she did that in exchange for the promise of acting jobs.
Wow. So a very different version of the story.
Right, this friend is providing an account of an encounter with Weinstein that, if true, turns it back into a variation of one of the common stories about Weinstein, but one that cannot be subject to criminal charges.
Why is this only now coming to light?
Well, one possibility is that this is an example of what can happen when there is a rush to prosecute. Well, we also now realize what we now know is that the lead detective in the case had apparently talked to this witness months before Weinstein was charged, and that she had shared this information with him. And prosecutors say that that detective did not share that information with them, the prosecutors.
Suggesting maybe he didn’t want to bring them information that might hurt the case.
Suggesting that he purposely withheld potentially complicating information from the case. Now, the detective says that he did tell the prosecutors this information. So that could also speak to what Lucia had complained about herself, that this entire investigation seemed to be plagued by the fact that the police and prosecutors were not in sync and communicating well with each other.
Mm-hmm. But if the detective had told prosecutors, it seems like that would only be further evidence of this desire to get this done, to bring these charges and overlook complicating information.
Right, so that is another interpretation of this, that both the police and the prosecutors were aware of this complicating information and moved forward with bringing charges anyway.
Well, in that case, what would explain them dropping this case when they did?
Well, with all of the finger-pointing that’s gone on, it’s hard to know, for certain, the answer to that question. But what seems likely is that prosecutors have realized, at this point, that this information is going to come to the attention of the defense and that it’s likely to undermine the entire criminal charge. But I should say that Lucia insists that she never consented to oral sex with Weinstein, that she never told this friend otherwise, and that she explained that to the detective when he asked her about it months and months before.
Megan, what should we make of Lucia’s experience?
For all the people who have been watching so many women come forward with allegations against Harvey Weinstein, watching what seems to be this overwhelming evidence of a pattern of predatory behavior, it shows how difficult it is to turn stories into criminal charges.
Her account fell within the statute of limitations, it was alleging criminal conduct, and she was willing to participate.
Right, to brave the spotlight and the scrutiny.
Exactly. And still, her charge was dropped.
So this is October of 2018. Where does that leave the case against Harvey Weinstein?
So in the lead-up to Lucia’s charge being dropped, there was actually a third woman who was added to the criminal case here in New York. So after Lucia’s charges dropped, there are still two women. But one of those women, one of those accusers, appears to also come with some potential complicating factors.
Weinstein’s legal team has produced emails between Weinstein and this woman that went on for years after the alleged attack. These emails appear extensive. They appear friendly. They even appear romantic at times.
Tomorrow, in Part 2, how the case against Weinstein moved forward after Lucia.
Do you wish that you were still part of this case as we head into trial?
Honestly, yes, I do. I do wish I was. I put so much into this. And when it comes down to it, I do wish I was a part of it. And I also just don’t want people to be discouraged from coming forward and doing it. So I would just hope people don’t — people, despite all the things I’ve said about how hard it is, still decide to come forward, because that’s literally the only hope that we have.
Good morning. I’m pleased to inform you the American people should be extremely grateful and happy. No Americans were harmed in last night’s attack by the Iranian regime.
On Wednesday, in a televised address to the nation, President Trump backed away from further military confrontation with Iran, saying that Iran’s retaliation for the U.S. killing of General Qassim Suleimani appeared to be over.
Iran appears to be standing down, which is a good thing for all parties concerned, and a very good thing for the world.
That retaliation, about a dozen missiles that inflicted minimal damage to two U.S. bases in Iraq, seemed designed to satisfy Iran’s desire for revenge without provoking a military response from the Trump administration. In his speech, Trump vowed to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon, but in a gesture of conciliation said he was prepared to make peace with the country’s leaders.
Finally, to the people and leaders of Iran, we want you to have a future, and a great future — one that you deserve, one of prosperity at home and harmony with the nations of the world. The United States is ready to embrace peace with all who seek it.
And a Ukrainian airliner carrying 176 people crashed inside of Iran on Wednesday morning shortly after takeoff from Tehran, killing everyone onboard. The cause of the crash was unknown, but the plane was new, and its crew was experienced, raising the possibility among aviation experts that the jetliner had been attacked at a volatile moment in Iran.
While prosecutors intend to call several female witnesses to show a pattern of misconduct, the charges rest largely on two women. Mr.  Most of the other allegations against Mr. Weinstein dated too far back to be prosecuted, fell outside New York’s jurisdiction or involved abusive behavior that was not criminal. Other accusers were unwilling to participate, convinced the personal toll would be too great.
The prosecutors’ path to the courthouse has been difficult. They were forced to drop one accuser who had been central to the case. The lead detective was ousted over allegations of police misconduct. And Mr. Weinstein, who claims his sexual encounters were consensual, produced emails that he says show a long, intimate relationship that continued after the alleged rape.
The defense team has its own tale of troubles. Mr. Weinstein, who could face life in prison if convicted on the most serious charge, has hired, alienated and discarded a series of high-powered lawyers. He has been accused of tampering with his electronic ankle bracelet, and tested the patience of the clearly annoyed judge who will preside over the proceedings. Just weeks ago, Mr. Weinstein deviated from his lawyers’ script with a tabloid interview in which he boasted of being a pioneering advocate for women in film and complained that his work had been forgotten.
The trial, expected to stretch more than two months, will begin with the judge’s instructions at the State Supreme Court in Manhattan, followed by two weeks of jury selection. Until opening arguments begin, it will be hard to gauge either side’s strength.
As dozens of actresses, office assistants and other women spoke out about mistreatment by Mr. Weinstein in late 2017 after The New York Times first reported about allegations against him, law enforcement officials in New York, Los Angeles and London quickly opened criminal investigations. The three jurisdictions were feeling the heat: If Mr. Weinstein had engaged in decades of alleged predation in those cities, why hadn’t the criminal justice system stopped him?
The pressure on the police and prosecutors in New York was especially intense because they had investigated the producer once before. In 2015, an Italian model told police that Mr. Weinstein had groped her breasts and tried to force his hand up her skirt during a work meeting at his Tribeca office. The police asked the woman, Ambra Battilana Gutierrez, to wear a wire during a follow-up meeting, and she recorded what sounded like an admission. But the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., declined to bring charges, believing that the model’s credibility would be called into question over her shifting account of an earlier alleged sexual assault in Italy.
When the Weinstein story exploded, Mr. Vance came under attack for not prosecuting him in 2015. A growing chorus of critics called for Mr. Weinstein’s arrest this time around, and fast. Police investigators interviewed more than 70 witnesses over 10 months, traveling to cities across the United States and to others including Montreal, London and Paris, according to a law enforcement official familiar with the inquiry.
But many of the alleged incidents took place outside New York. Police detectives and prosecutors investigated at least 14 alleged assaults that took place in the city, but most were beyond the state’s statute of limitations for prosecuting sex crimes, according to the law enforcement official.
Other women had stories that seemed to meet the criteria, but were not willing to face the scrutiny of a criminal trial. One aspiring actress, for example, told investigators an account of Mr. Weinstein sexually abusing her in New York, but she decided to file a lawsuit against him instead, which allowed her to remain anonymous.
“Her concern, as with many victims, is: What’s going to happen to me?” Genie Harrison, her lawyer, said in an interview.
The actress recently signed on to a tentative $25 million settlement of lawsuits involving dozens of Mr. Weinstein’s other alleged victims of sexual harassment and misconduct, a deal that would not require him to admit wrongdoing or pay anything to the women himself.
For months, the police considered the most promising victim in the criminal case to be Lucia Evans, who had gone on the record in The New Yorker with an allegation of sexual assault against Mr. Weinstein. She said that the producer had forced her to perform oral sex on him when she showed up for a 2004 work meeting at his office as a young aspiring actress.
“You’re the only one who can put him in jail,” Ms. Evans, in an interview, recalled the detectives telling her.
She eventually agreed to cooperate, but the investigation faced other challenges, with the police and prosecutors often at odds with each other. Others stepped up the pressure to charge Mr. Weinstein. Carrie Goldberg, a lawyer representing Ms. Evans, and #MeToo activists complained publicly that Mr. Vance’s office was allowing Mr. Weinstein to evade punishment.
In March 2018, Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York instructed Eric Schneiderman, then the attorney general, to review how Manhattan prosecutors had handled sex crimes complaints, specifically the one against Mr. Weinstein in 2015.
Mr. Vance publicly denounced the move as “unwarranted intrusion,” but within a month, he had removed Maxine Rosenthal, a hard-nosed sex crimes prosecutor who had been criticized for moving too slowly and offending alleged victims. He replaced her with Joan Illuzzi, a veteran homicide prosecutor.

 The predatory sexual assault charge is especially significant because it exposes Mr. Weinstein to a potential life sentence. To further support that charge, the actress Annabella Sciorra is expected to testify that Mr. Weinstein raped her in Manhattan in 1993.
But cracks appeared in the case.
In October 2018, the charge based on Ms. Evans collapsed when contradictory accounts and alleged police misconduct came to light. Ms. Illuzzi said the lead detective on the case, Nicholas DiGaudio, had failed to inform prosecutors that a friend of the young woman claimed that Ms. Evans had agreed to perform oral sex on Mr. Weinstein after he promised her acting jobs in return.
Ms. Evans insisted she had never consented, and Mr. DiGaudio denied withholding information from the prosecutors, but he was removed from the case. Since then, Sgt. Keri Thompson, who oversaw the inquiry, has come under internal investigation for allegations of misconduct unrelated to the Weinstein case.
For those reasons, prosecutors are not intending to call any police officials to testify in the criminal trial. Instead, Mr. Weinstein’s lawyers are likely to seek to subpoena Sergeant Thompson and Mr. DiGaudio, in an effort to discredit the case.
In recent months, the prosecution won a major victory: the ability to call three additional women who said Mr. Weinstein had abused them. These witnesses, whose allegations are too dated to prosecute, could help override some of the prosecution’s constraints — the small number of victims, the short arm of the statute of limitations. The women, whose names have not yet been disclosed, may bring to life for jurors the pattern of the producer’s alleged predation and its details, many of them consistent in accounts from woman to woman, year to year.
In the prosecution of Bill Cosby, such witnesses made all the difference. His first criminal trial, in which they were not allowed, ended in a mistrial in 2017. But in a second trial in 2018, additional victims testified, and Mr. Cosby is now a Pennsylvania prison inmate.
The defense’s grilling of the alleged victims is likely to create some of the most dramatic moments of the trial. Former prosecutors say that cross-examination will be long, painful for the women, and require deftness from Ms. Rotunno, whose natural forcefulness could backfire.
“If your claim is that someone is lying then you’ve got to act like they’re lying,” said Daniel C. Richman, a Columbia law professor and former prosecutor.
The defense’s greatest challenge may be Mr. Weinstein himself, even though he is not expected to testify. “Right or wrong, fairly or unfairly — who is more despised than Harvey Weinstein?” said Mr. Bederow, the defense lawyer.
Mr. Weinstein parted ways from Benjamin Brafman, who has a record of acquittals for high-profile clients; then a supposed “dream team” of defense lawyers collapsed. Mr. Weinstein was the person who insisted on obtaining the old emails with the two women at the core of the case. But he has also overdirected, undermined, second-guessed and frustrated lawyers who were trying to help him.
Mr. Weinstein has sometimes irritated Justice James M. Burke, who will hear his case and shape many of the critical decisions of the trial, such as whether the defense will be able to air the questions of police misconduct. A former prosecutor in the Manhattan district attorney’s office, where he worked for 12 years, Justice Burke is known as a prickly but fair-minded jurist with little tolerance for legal showboating or incompetence.
Though the judge agreed to dismiss one of the charges against Mr. Weinstein, he has ruled against the defendant and his lawyers on numerous other issues. He has snapped at Mr. Weinstein not to use his cellphone in the courtroom and told the producer, who was about to undergo back surgery for injuries from a car accident, that the trial would be held with or without him regardless of his health.
On Monday, Justice Burke will lay out the timeline for the trial, which will begin with two weeks of jury selection — no simple matter, given Mr. Weinstein’s notoriety. Two thousand summonses were issued in the hope of getting 500 potential jurors to report Tuesday to the State Supreme Court, where the judge and lawyers for both sides will begin whittling the pool down to 12 people and six alternates, said Lucian Chalfen, a court spokesman.
“Picking a jury in this case will require extraordinary candor not only by prospective jurors, but also an extraordinary amount of patience from the court to allow the attorneys to explore in a meaningful way what peoples’ values, beliefs and biases are,” said Josh Dubin, a New York lawyer who specializes in analyzing and selecting juries.
“This is exactly the type of case where jury selection is critical — the lights are shining bright here,” he said.