The president asked administration officials to help kill the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, according to a new book from two Washington Post reporters.
WASHINGTON — President Trump wanted to strike down a law that prohibits companies from bribing foreign officials, calling the ban “so unfair” to American companies, two Washington Post reporters recount in a new book.
In the spring of 2017, Mr. Trump was at a briefing with Rex W. Tillerson, then the secretary of state, and aides in the Oval Office. At the mention of a bribery allegation, Mr. Trump “perked up” and told Mr. Tillerson that he wanted his help in scrapping the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, the authors write.
Mr. Trump said that it was “just so unfair that American companies aren’t allowed to pay bribes to get business overseas,” according to the book, “A Very Stable Genius,” by Philip Rucker and Carol D. Leonnig.
The Securities and Exchange Commission and the Justice Department began enforcing the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act more concertedly about 15 years ago. It has led to huge fines for companies, including the engineering conglomerate Siemens and Brazil’s state-owned energy company Petrobras.
Skeptics have included Jay Clayton, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, whom Mr. Trump nominated to the position in early 2017. Mr. Clayton was an author of a 2011 paper that argued that the United States’ anti-bribery policies tended “to place disproportionate burdens on U.S. regulated companies in international transactions,” hurting American competitiveness.
Despite such criticisms and Mr. Trump’s misgivings, top administration officials have pledged to uphold the law.
And under the current attorney general, William P. Barr, who was confirmed last year, enforcement actions have continued to rapidly roll in.
Early in his administration, Mr. Trump signed a measure from Congress striking down a rule from the Securities and Exchange Commission that would have required oil, gas and mining companies listed on United States stock exchanges to disclose how much they were paying to foreign governments.
