MOSCOW — Ukraine has opened a criminal investigation into allies of President Trump, following reports that they had the United States ambassador under surveillance while she was stationed in Kyiv, the Ukrainian government said on Thursday.
The current situation has heightened those sensitivities, with Ukraine caught in the middle of the conflict between Democrats and Republicans over the impeachment of Mr. Trump for his pressure campaign on Ukraine.
But the recent release of documents in Washington has prompted a change of course. On Tuesday, just before Mr. Trump’s impeachment trial in the Senate was scheduled to begin, Democrats in the House of Representatives published text messages to and from Lev Parnas — an associate of Rudolph W. Giuliani, the president’s personal lawyer — pointing to surveillance of the ambassador, Marie L. Yovanovitch.
Also on Thursday, Ukraine said it had asked the F.B.I. for help investigating the reported penetration of computer systems belonging to Burisma, a Ukrainian gas company, by hackers working for Russian intelligence.
Mr. Parnas was involved in a campaign, led by Mr. Giuliani, to pressure the Ukrainian government to investigate former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., a Democratic presidential candidate, and his son, Hunter Biden, over the younger Mr. Biden’s lucrative time on the board of Burisma.
As part of the pressure campaign against Ukraine, Mr. Trump’s allies were trying to remove Ms. Yovanovitch from her post, seeing her as an impediment to their business dealings as well as the campaign to force the government to investigate the Bidens.
Last March, an exchange between Mr. Parnas and another man, Robert F. Hyde, indicated that Mr. Hyde was in contact with people watching Ms. Yovanovitch.
Mr. Hyde told the Sinclair Broadcasting host Eric Bolling in a television interview on Wednesday that he had been “absolutely not” monitoring Ms. Yovanovitch. He said he had been under the influence of alcohol when he sent his messages to Mr. Parnas.
Until now, Ukraine’s government has tried to stay out of the impeachment debate as much as possible. Washington is Kyiv’s most powerful ally in Ukraine’s conflict with Russia, and Ukrainian officials have sought to build a good relationship with Mr. Trump.
At the same time, Ukrainians are aware that a Democrat could win the White House in November. They have refrained from making moves — such as publicly announcing an investigation related to Mr. Biden, as Mr. Trump’s emissaries sought — that could leave Ukraine open to accusations of interfering in domestic American politics.
Anton Troianovski reported from Moscow, and Richard Pérez-Peña from London. Edward Wong contributed reporting from Washington.