Nancy Pelosi selected seven House Democrats to prosecute the case against President Trump in the Senate.
On a day full of choreographed symbolism, the House of Representatives voted 228 to 193 to send the Senate its impeachment articles against President Trump, formally adopting them and approving the managers who will function as prosecutors in the trial.
Nancy Pelosi, the House speaker, signed the articles in what’s called an engrossment ceremony, before the seven managers, all members of the House, walked them in a leather case across the Capitol to the Senate in a televised procession. Upon arrival in the Senate chamber, the House clerk announced a “message” from the House, before announcing the vote adopting the articles.
A Senate official then marched toward Chuck Grassley, the Senate president pro tempore, to formally deliver the articles. Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, rose to announce a series of resolutions that are the first steps of the trial, which officially starts Thursday but won’t begin in earnest until next Tuesday.
We also learned that the trial, which some Senate leaders have predicted could last three to five weeks, may take on a lot of unexpected drama. Susan Collins, a centrist Republican senator from Maine, said that Mr. McConnell would include language in the Senate’s impeachment rules allowing a vote on whether to subpoena witnesses or new documents.
Ms. Pelosi oversees the most diverse caucus in the history of the House of Representatives, which served as a guiding principle in how she chose her team of prosecutors. The group features several lawyers, a former police chief, three women, two African-Americans and one Latina.
There are familiar and obvious names — Adam Schiff and Jerry Nadler — but also figures heavily involved in Democratic committee work who have a less visible television presence, such as Val Demings.
And Ms. Pelosi surprised with some freshmen: Jason Crow and Sylvia Garcia, both of whom represent elements of the electoral wave that gave the House back to the Democrats in 2018.
Above all, Ms. Pelosi said she looked for people in the Democratic caucus fluent as litigators. “The emphasis is on comfort level in the courtroom,” Ms. Pelosi said at a morning news conference.
Here’s a brief look at who they are.
Around noon Thursday, the seven House managers will enter the Senate chamber and read aloud the articles of impeachment.
Some time later, Chief Justice John Roberts will walk from the Supreme Court to the Senate, where he will preside over the trial. Senator Grassley will administer an oath to do “impartial justice” to Chief Justice Roberts, who will then administer the same oath to all 100 senators.
Senate rules dictate that Mr. Trump must be summoned and given time to answer the charges against him. His response will most likely come in written form, and could take several days.
The Senate is then expected to break for the holiday weekend and reconvene next Tuesday, when the trial will begin in earnest.
Evidence released by House Democrats Tuesday night offered new details on efforts by Rudy Giuliani and his associates, including text messages that suggested they were monitoring the movements of Marie Yovanovitch, then the U.S. ambassador to Ukraine. The materials also contained a letter by Mr. Giuliani requesting, with Mr. Trump’s “knowledge and consent,” a meeting with the president of Ukraine.
“It’s the fourth quarter. The game is close. And you are benched.” That’s how my colleague Stephanie Saul described the predicament facing the Democratic senators running for president, who could lose out on crucial days of campaigning in early primary states because of the impeachment trial, which will lock them in their seats.