Patricia Arquette, Joaquin Phoenix and other winners took the opportunity to speak directly about some pressing events as well.
While the Golden Globes are a celebration of the year’s best in film and television, the show has for years been used as a platform to raise awareness of more somber issues.
On Sunday, some winners took advantage of the spotlight to speak out about some of today’s most pressing and divisive matters.
Michelle Williams, accepting best actress in a limited series or TV movie for “Fosse/Verdon,” implored women to vote for their interests, speaking personally about the importance of women’s rights and reproductive freedom. Last week, more than 200 Republicans urged the Supreme Court to weigh overturning Roe v. Wade.
“As women and as girls, things can happen to our bodies that are not our choice,” she said, adding how fortunate she has been to mostly have control over the events of her life. “I wouldn’t have been able to do this without employing a woman’s right to choose — to choose when to have my children and with whom,” she said, acknowledging that not every woman’s choice looks the same but that we’re tied by the country’s founding principle of freedom.
Earlier in the night, Patricia Arquette, accepting an award for her role in “The Act,” addressed the fires ravaging Australia, as well as President Trump’s targeted killing of Iran’s most powerful commander, Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani last week and the consequences of the attack.
When we look back on this night, Arquette said, “we will see a country on the brink of war, the United States of America, a president tweeting out a threat of 52 bombs including cultural sites.” On Sunday, President Trump tweeted about destroying Iranian cultural sites.
She wasn’t the first to bring up the dire situation in Australia. Early on, Russell Crowe won best actor in a limited series for “The Loudest Voice.” But he wasn’t there to accept: He opted to remain at his home in Australia out of concern for the fires. Instead, he sent a message that was read on his behalf by Jennifer Aniston.
And winning one of the final awards of the night, best actor in a drama for his twisted turn in “Joker,” Joaquin Phoenix said he didn’t want to rock the boat, but that the boat had already been rocked.
In past years, Globes winners and presenters took a more united approach to issues.
