The actress and activist decided against running for office herself a few years ago. But she’s out stumping for Elizabeth Warren.
NASHUA, N.H — Can Ashley Judd help Senator Elizabeth Warren’s chances here?
Eighteen days ahead of the state primary, Warren supporters at Ms. Judd’s three-stop tour on Friday were not entirely sure. Per recent history, the impact of celebrity political endorsements has been decidedly mixed.
But with Ms. Warren, a Democrat from Massachusetts, having a bumpy go of it in the polls, and the timeworn question of whether a woman can win the presidency having made its way front and center of the 2020 contest just in time for actual voting to begin, Ms. Judd’s whistle-stop visits to Hanover, Lebanon and Nashua gave Warren backers in this early voting state, at the very least, a lift.
Ms. Judd announced just over three weeks ago that Ms. Warren had her vote, and, with the senator stuck in Washington for the impeachment trial, the actress and activist showed up as Ms. Warren’s surrogate, with the promise to return and knock on doors.
Ms. Judd brings feminist bona fides, and seemed well positioned to answer the “electability” question, or at least urge people to believe that Elizabeth Warren could win — with their votes.
Ms. Warren’s New Hampshire supporters said they were very grateful that Ashley Judd came their way.
“It encourages all of us little folks who, you know, who are trying to accomplish the same thing,” said Mary Ann Haagen, 74, a Warren supporter and retired teacher who showed up to see Ms. Judd speak in Lebanon.
Ms. Judd rounded a corner, smiling. “I’ll hope you show me some mercy today,” she said, adding that it was her first outing on behalf of Ms. Warren as she rifled through sheets of talking points.
She told the crowd that she got her first taste of activism in college, and said though she knew Ms. Warren only slightly, she had been intrigued ever since Ms. Warren’s first appearance in 2009 on “The Daily Show.” She drew parallels between the experiences of Ms. Warren’s parents in Oklahoma and her own impoverished Kentucky kin: her “Papaw” Judd who had a filling station and kept his money rolled in a paper sack in the trunk of his car, and her Papaw and Mamaw Ciminella, who ran an aluminum siding business. Like Ms. Warren’s parents, she said, they all were one health shock away from financial catastrophe.
At her second stop, in Lebanon, she was introduced by Deb Nelson, the chairwoman of the Hanover-Lyme Democratic Party, who noted that along with Golden Globe and Emmy nominations, Ms. Judd had earned a master’s in public administration from Harvard and won a dean’s award there.
Ms. Nelson lamented the actress’s 2013 decision to not challenge Mitch McConnell for his Kentucky Senate seat.
“Just think for a minute about how different life would be had Ashley Judd run for the Senate, because she would have been elected,” Ms. Nelson said.
The crowd cheered, and then, among themselves, debated Ms. Warren’s chances, reaching little in the way of consensus.
Elizabeth Burton, 36, said while she loved Ms. Judd’s speech, celebrity endorsements rarely carried weight. Burton was also discouraged by Ms. Warren’s struggles in the polls.
But Jennifer Bernet, 57, a state representative, said the race was still fluid, and dismissed talk of Ms. Warren’s electability as a canard.
Wendy Thomas, a mother of six and “water warrior” environmentalist who won her race for state representative in 2018, said she had faith that, this decade, American women would continue stepping to the fore.
The whole question of “electability,” Ms. Thomas said, amounted to little more than a Republican talking point.
