Wednesday: A group called Moms 4 Housing took over a vacant house in Oakland in an effort to draw attention to the housing crisis. Also: The Democratic debate recap.
A week before Thanksgiving, Dominique Walker, her two children and two other families moved into a vacant three-bedroom house at 2928 Magnolia Street in West Oakland. They washed the walls, installed a water heater, hauled their kids’ bunk beds upstairs and appointed the living room with a mix of plants and soft furniture. They paid the water and electric bills.
For Ms. Walker, a lifelong community organizer who was born and raised in Oakland, moving into the house was a way to find shelter as well as a statement. By living there, she and the two other founding members of a group that called itself Moms 4 Housing were engaging in an act of civil disobedience to protest house flipping.
Two months after entering the house, Moms 4 Housing had morphed into a Bay Area-wide phenomenon, rotating through newspapers, TV and social media that elevated the saga into a compelling moral drama that pit moms seeking housing against a company seeking profit. The movement hit its apex this week, after a judge ruled that Ms. Walker and the other families living there had to leave the home.
Aware that sheriff’s deputies could arrive any moment, a crowd of about 50 supporters had packed the street Monday afternoon, holding Moms 4 Housing banners and creating a human blockade on the home’s front steps. By evening the crowd had swelled to several hundred and shut down the block after the Moms 4 Housing text message chain alerted supporters that the police were said to be on the way.
This turned out to be premature, if barely. Early the next morning, sheriff’s deputies from the Alameda County Sheriff’s office arrived in riot gear with armored vehicles to remove them from the property, arresting two of the occupants and two supporters, according to news reports.
“The solution to Oakland’s housing crisis is not the redistribution of citizens’ homes through illegal break-ins and seizures by squatters,” wrote a spokesman for Wedgewood, in a news release.
Moms 4 Housing was always more of a coordinated protest than a spontaneous action. Ms. Walker works as an organizer for the Alliance of Californians for Community Empowerment, an organizing nonprofit that has pushed rent control bills in the State Legislature, arranged housing protests and group meditations, and issued reports on vacant units, including one that was pulled following questions about its methodology.
On Monday, a few hours before sheriff’s deputies arrived at the house, outside on the sidewalk sat a roast pig and a pop-up snack bar stocked with bananas and chips. Inside was Fred Hampton Jr., the Chicago-based political activist whose father, Fred Hampton, a member of the Black Panther Party, was killed in a police raid in 1969. Mr. Hampton flew in to join the protest out of solidarity. “This transcends the borderlines of Oakland,” he said.
But staying in the Magnolia Street house was never really part of the calculus, or at least the occupants understood that it was a major long shot. The point, Ms. Walker said, was to bring even more awareness to a spiraling housing crisis that is on the verge of tearing the Bay Area apart.
Six Democratic presidential candidates met onstage Tuesday night in their last debate before the Iowa caucuses. Going into the night, Senator Bernie Sanders was leading among likely California voters in a recent survey.
You can read the highlights of the debate here.
Imagine it: For 30 years, you eke out a comfortable — if circumscribed — existence in San Diego.
But deep down, you know there’s something different about you. You’re voracious and you have a power over others you can’t explain.
One day, the call comes for you to return to your homeland. You have a special mission.
 It’s 1976, and you, with your exceptional sex drive, have been sent back to the Galápagos to help ensure the future of your species.
On Friday, the Galápagos National Park announced the end of a tortoise breeding program, which was deemed a success thanks in large part to Diego’s contributions. So Diego, now more than 100 years old, can retire.
