The trade truce may have eased tensions between the world’s two largest economies, but European and Latin American officials are worried it will come at a cost.
In the halls of Davos, where global leaders gathered at the World Economic Forum this week to discuss fraying international ties, two realities were becoming clear: China plans to honor the deal, and everybody except the United States may be about to lose a lot of business.
The two sides are also clear on what that means for other countries. China could pull off those purchases only if it stopped buying a lot of farm products and merchandise from countries in Europe, Latin America and East Asia. Many of those countries are American allies, and some are not pleased at the prospect of losing China and its giant economy as a consumer of their exports.
He cited the example of China’s buying more American oil and gas, with which European suppliers do not compete.
Freer, fairer trade would have made last week’s deal virtually impossible, however. Chinese businesses would not and could not buy $200 billion more in American grain, energy and equipment over two years unless Beijing told them to. The trade pact allows Chinese buyers to go elsewhere if American goods are more costly than products from other countries, but Beijing can tell state-run companies that they have more than profitability to think about.
American allies have other reasons to dislike the trade pact. The agreement locks in place 25 percent American tariffs on a wide range of high-tech, Chinese-made goods subsidized by Beijing, from electric cars and farm equipment to commercial aircraft.
“In a worrying return to 19th-century practices of managed trade, the ‘shopping list’ imposed by the deal could be seen as going against the rules-based international trading system,” said Joerg Wuttke, the president of the European Union Chamber of Commerce in China.
For now, Chinese willingness to buy American goods could cover a wide variety of industries.
Many of the subcategories highlight manufactured goods that China currently imports from Europe and East Asia or many agricultural goods from Latin America. The trade agreement does almost nothing to change China’s rules to increase its total purchases of foreign goods, instead leaving it to the government to reallocate orders toward American exporters.
Over the past quarter-century, China has managed its trade so that it has fairly consistently sold about $4 worth of goods to the United States for each $1 of goods that it bought. China’s trade with Europe has been more balanced, in part because Europe has often been seen as a politically safer choice in Beijing given China’s often rocky relationship with the United States.
Despite the potential loss of business, some American allies like Japan say the greater economic certainty created by the deal is beneficial. Although Japan is likely to lose some export orders to the United States, it welcomed the agreement, said Takeshi Niinami, a member of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s economic policy council who is also the chief executive and president of Suntory Holdings, a big beverages company.
The trade deal eases tensions between the United States and China and improves political stability and security in East Asia, Mr. Niinami said. It makes it easier for Japan to invite President Xi Jinping of China for a possible visit this year, he said.
The pact will allow the United States to scrutinize its monthly trade figures to see whether the surge in American exports to China has begun. So the Trump administration could restart the trade war by imposing tariffs on Chinese goods if China’s purchases fall short.
In interviews over the past month, people familiar with Chinese policymaking have made clear that Beijing officials do not want to intervene in the presidential election in November. Indeed, their hope is that the trade deal will make China less of a political punching bag during the campaign this year.
But if the American trade deficit with China does narrow precipitously this year, Mr. Trump may well cite that as a success — particularly in Rust Belt states where trade has been a potent political issue for several decades. Those regions have also tended to be swing states in recent presidential elections.
