Before the Iowa caucuses, we sat down with the 2020 Democratic presidential candidates (again) to ask 20 questions on President Trump, foreign policy, celebrity crushes and more.
The first time we interviewed the Democratic presidential candidates, late last spring, we had a pile of yes-or-no, either-or policy questions to ask, many of them representing litmus-test issues at the heart of Democratic politics: single-payer health care and foreign wars, wealth concentration and tech regulation.
Our second round of interviews was different. For starters, we asked fewer candidates to participate, inviting only the ones with a realistic shot at accumulating a substantial number of delegates.
And we asked them, for the most part, a different genre of questions, exploring not just policy issues but also their ideas about leadership and the presidency.
Our hope was to produce a set of interviews that would guide voters trying to make a difficult final decision about which candidate they’d like to put in the country’s most powerful job.
Here are some of our takeaways.
Should Trump Be Investigated Even If He Is Defeated in November? Most Said Yes.
Nearly every Democratic candidate we interviewed left the door open to investigating Mr. Trump and members of his family, even after the president has left office. Ms. Warren and Mr. Steyer sounded particularly determined to hold Mr. Trump to account.
“Nobody is above the law, not even the president of the United States, not even the family,” Ms. Warren said.
“I don’t think there’s any question but that Mr. Trump has broken the law,” Mr. Steyer said.
And some candidates sounded more eager to turn the page on the Trump administration than to probe allegations of wrongdoing.
We asked all the candidates to sketch their approaches to the general election, and describe how they would choose a running mate and debate President Trump. In every case, they said they would not seek to fight fire with fire, but instead harry the president in a way that would undercut the foundations of his political strength.
Mr. Buttigieg said he would make sure Mr. Trump could not simply “change the subject” with lies and outlandish claims. Ms. Klobuchar said her focus would be an “optimistic economic agenda,” while Mr. Yang said he believed he could make Mr. Trump “seem totally ridiculous,” in part by using humor. Both Ms. Warren and Mr. Bloomberg said they would not make a general-election debate all about the president.
Some of the candidates wrestled more visibly than others with questions about the role of the United States in Hong Kong, and its alliance with Saudi Arabia. Every candidate expressed some level of concern about the American relationship with the Saudis, though some were more pointed than others: “We have to rethink our relationship with Saudi Arabia,” Ms. Warren said.
With few exceptions, the candidates said the American president should be a public champion of democratic values, including in Hong Kong. “Those who are rising up in Hong Kong demanding democracy deserve to know that they have a friend in the United States of America,” Mr. Buttigieg said.
But Mr. Bloomberg said he favored a more discreet approach, run through “backdoor” communication with China: “The people of Hong Kong certainly don’t need us weighing in and increasing the tension,” he said.
None of the Democratic candidates has shown any appetite for criticizing President Barack Obama. So, we wondered what they would say if we asked whether Barack Obama made any mistakes at all. Some of them responded by dodging the core of the question: Mr. Buttigieg and Ms. Warren, for instance, declined to name anything in particular they thought Mr. Obama did wrong.
“He trusted the Republicans too much, too long,” Mr. Steyer said.
Most interesting of all may have been Mr. Yang, who delivered a big-picture critique of the Obama economic record: “When we had a fundamental choice to either recapitalize the banks or keep Americans in their homes, we chose the banks, we bailed out Wall Street,” Mr. Yang said. That is a view several other candidates in the race surely share, even if they did not say it out loud.
While the interviews were mostly serious, eat-your-vegetables questions, we couldn’t resist adding a bit of dessert. And so we asked all of the candidates to name their bad habits, the last book they read and their celebrity crushes.
The bad habits were almost endearingly normal.
“I bite my nails,” said Mr. Buttigieg.
Mr. Booker, who left the race after recording his interview, had perhaps the easiest answer to that question.
