“He shouted at me for about the same amount of time as the interview itself had lasted,” said Mary Louise Kelly of NPR.
Update: On Saturday, Mike Pompeo, the top American diplomat, lashed out at a reporter from NPR and what he called the “unhinged” news media in an extraordinary statement, apparently angered by her description of an interview she conducted with him on Iran and Ukraine. Read more about how it ignited outrage among foreign policy experts, scholars of diplomacy and press freedom advocates.
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, apparently angered by a reporter’s questions about the Trump administration’s firing of the United States ambassador to Ukraine, lashed out at her after the interview, cursing and challenging her to find Ukraine on a map, according to the reporter.
Mr. Pompeo, who is known for his bombast, occasional thin skin and contentious relationship with many in the State Department press corps, had declined to say during the interview whether he owed an apology to the ambassador, Marie L. Yovanovitch.
Soon after that, Ms. Kelly said, an aide to Mr. Pompeo ended the roughly nine-minute interview, and Mr. Pompeo glared at her and left the room — hardly an unusual reaction in hurly-burly Washington.
But in a broadcast later on NPR, Ms. Kelly described what happened next.
Ms. Kelly said that when Mr. Pompeo’s aide had summoned her to the room, the aide never asked that the meeting with Mr. Pompeo be kept off the record — nor would she have agreed to such an arrangement.
Ms. Kelly also said she told the State Department afterward that she planned to report on Mr. Pompeo’s tirade, and had not heard back.
On NPR, Ms. Kelly said she had confirmed with the secretary’s aides before the interview that she planned to ask him about Iran and Ukraine, so the topic was not a surprise. But Mr. Pompeo still bristled at Ms. Kelly’s questions about Ms. Yovanovitch.
“I just don’t have anything else to say about that this morning,” he said at one point.
The State Department did not respond to a request for comment on Friday. In a statement on Saturday, Mr. Pompeo responded to Ms. Kelly’s account, but did not deny Ms. Kelly’s account of obscenities and shouting.
Mr. Pompeo ended the statement by saying, “It is worth noting that Bangladesh is NOT Ukraine.” The line implied, though did not specifically assert, that when Mr. Pompeo challenged Ms. Kelly to identify Ukraine, which is in Eastern Europe, on an unlabeled map, she had mistakenly pointed to Bangladesh, in South Asia. But some speculated Mr. Pompeo had meant to write Belarus, which borders Ukraine.
Ms. Yovanovitch was abruptly recalled from Ukraine last May and has become a key figure in the Senate impeachment trial of President Trump after she testified last year that she was the target of a smear campaign by the president’s personal lawyer Rudolph W. Giuliani and two of his associates, Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman. The two have since been indicted in a scheme to violate campaign finance laws.
Ms. Yovanovitch testified last year that she felt “threatened” by Mr. Trump after it emerged that he told the Ukrainian president she would “go through some things.” Mr. Trump has also disparaged Ms. Yovanovitch, a decorated 33-year veteran diplomat, on Twitter.
David E. Sanger, Edward Wong and Johnny Diaz contributed reporting.