In an interview, he describes it as “the greatest professional embarrassment I’ve ever endured.” But we’d argue he was actually one of the better hosts the ceremony has seen.
David Letterman is ready to talk. He’s “giddy,” he tells me, and “delighted,” and “about to crack with excitement,” and at first he seems to be joking, laying on thick the irony and sarcasm that defined his persona for so long.
But I remember watching that show and laughing throughout. In the years since, I’ve assumed it was a case of a film-industry outsider whose East Coast cynicism was simply a bad match for the room. After I arranged an interview in Midtown Manhattan to put my theory to Letterman, however, I was shocked to discover he agreed with all those lists of the worst Oscar hosts ever.
From the beginning, Letterman and his longtime producer, Rob Burnett, determined that the smartest strategy was to do what they did best, “things that had proven successful for a number of years.” 
It was the kind of thing Letterman did on his talk shows all the time — seizing on a funny turn of phrase, overselling it, then using it as a silly running gag, an oddball refrain to fill awkward pauses.
But here’s the thing: the dog didn’t choke. You can watch the segment (along with the rest of Letterman’s show) on YouTube. Sadie whirls in circles, the audience cheers, the bit goes just fine. So does “Oprah, Uma,” which gets a good, hearty laugh, every time. Yet in Letterman’s memory, in Letterman’s head, they failed. Like everything else that night. Including — especially — himself.
That cloud complements a potent, persistent case of Impostor Syndrome; he’s spent much of his career, he told me, waiting for someone to tap his shoulder and whisper, “Dave, the real guy is here.” So yes, he may have created a self-fulfilling prophecy. He’ll grant that much. But nothing more.
My belief, on the other hand, is that the Letterman Oscars were a secret success. The ratings were the telecast’s highest in more than a decade at the time. He was asked to come back, more than once, “but I think one phone call may have been high school kids screwing around.” And just as he was ahead of his time in late night, Letterman was ahead of his time as an awards show host. The chummy, gentle ribbing of Billy Crystal or Bob Hope is the outlier now; subsequent hosts like Kimmel and Seth MacFarlane (and, taken to the extreme, Ricky Gervais’s combative Golden Globe gigs) have hewed much closer to the Letterman model of jaded outsider.
These days, finding a merely satisfactory master of ceremonies is tough; the Oscars went hostless in 2019, and will do the same this year. Is it simply an impossible job?
Letterman, in the meantime, will continue to relive that evening in March 1995, to rehash it in his head, second-guessing himself, the choices he made, the jokes he told.
