Bryant Eslava, 27, shoots the biggest online stars, and in the process, has become one himself.
There are several big milestones in an influencer’s life: hitting a million followers, getting your first brand deal, and (for the very lucky) landing a photo shoot with Bryant Eslava.
Mr. Eslava, a 27-year-old photographer, is known for working with the biggest social media stars, often before they hit the mainstream. His Instagram feed, on which he has accrued more than 4.4 million followers, is a who’s who of the internet. There’s Kylie Jenner, Emma Chamberlain, David Dobrik, to name a few.
The Hype House, the largest and most prominent TikTok collective, recently announced its arrival in Los Angeles with a series of photos by Mr. Eslava.
His photos are distinctive. Mr. Eslava shoots with film, not digital. The images he captures are candid, but always flattering. He often photographs his very famous subjects out and about, but away from hordes of adoring fans.
Mr. Eslava makes the majority of his living doing brand work and commercial photography. This allows him to have a more casual relationship with his subjects, some of whom have become close friends. It’s a win-win situation: They get photos to post on social media and Mr. Eslava gets to capture a world he’s been immersed in for nearly a decade.
Influencers he has shot often view the photos as keepsakes from a particular time in their life, often when they were just coming up, before they achieved true internet fame.
After receiving a Nikon D40 camera from his parents for getting good grades his sophomore year of high school, Mr. Eslava began posting his work to Tumblr. He taught himself the mechanics of photography on Google and by watching videos online. He pored over Urban Outfitters catalogs for inspiration.
By the time Mr. Eslava arrived in New York City in 2011 as a freshman at the School of Visual Arts, he had amassed a major following on Tumblr. He became so well known that the platform itself took notice. In February 2012, Tumblr invited Mr. Eslava and several other Tumblr stars to cover New York Fashion Week.
The experience proved to be a pivotal moment. Mr. Eslava was captivated by the energy and passion he saw from designers and loved documenting backstage moments. “I was like, this is what I want to do for the rest of my life,” he said.
Tumblr began inviting him to more and more events. Eventually, Mr. Eslava dropped out of school to move back to Orange County, Calif. and pursue photography full time.
When Cameron Dallas, then just a Vine star, invited him to collaborate in early 2014, he jumped at the chance. Before long, Mr. Dallas and the boys of Magcon, a social media influencer tour, were regularly working with Mr. Eslava. He eventually moved into a house in Los Angeles with Mr. Dallas and Nash Grier, another Vine star, to continue documenting early creators. “I was just doing it for fun — for me it was keeping me creative and busy,” Mr. Eslava said.
Like many of the influencers he works with, Mr. Eslava is quick to leverage new technologies to promote his work. Already he has more than a half million followers on TikTok alone.
When Snapchat (and later Instagram) rolled out the ability to create custom filters for Stories, Mr. Eslava launched several. He hands out stickers printed with Snap codes that link directly to the lenses. And he worked with a developer to customize his Instagram filters to include a pop-up that encourages people to follow him.
It wasn’t until last year, when Mr. Eslava began to update his followers about his efforts to lose weight, that he put more of a public face on his work. “Now I post photos of myself and I see comments like, ‘Yes king! Keep it up! You’re glowing.’ It’s motivating,” he said. In addition to his photography, Mr. Eslava released a hoodie and T-shirt with Fanjoy, an influencer merch platform.
Mr. Eslava told people in the crowd that they didn’t need a fancy camera to get into photography. “You can shoot with a disposable,” he said. When one group of giddy teens asked if he could do the “Renegade” with them for a TikTok, he admitted that he still hadn’t mastered the viral dance.
Mr. Eslava’s demeanor is earnest and accessible. “He’s not just going to use someone,” said Ms. D’Amelio.
