Opinion|What Do We Owe the Dead?
What Do We Owe the Dead?
The dust-up over a Washington Post reporter’s tweets about Kobe Bryant raises a moral question and a cultural taboo.
Ms. Fileva is an assistant professor at the University of Colorado, Boulder.
Not all people who die were good people. Yet there is strong social pressure to pretend they were, at least for a period of time. Exactly how long a period of time that should be has never been made clear.
In almost every culture, posthumous praise immediately after a person’s death is the norm. Except in cases of the most obviously evil figures, it is generally accepted that the hours and days after a death should be a time of remembrance, grief and praise.
I believe this is the norm that was violated by the Washington Post reporter Felicia Sonmez, when — shortly after the death of basketball star Kobe Bryant — she tweeted a 2016 article about the sexual assault charge brought against Bryant in 2003. Sonmez reportedly received a swift and intense backlash on social media. Had she written her tweet a week ago, when Bryant was alive and well, I suspect that she would have faced little backlash.
This norm is so firmly ingrained that almost everyone, not only those as widely admired as Bryant, can count on posthumous praise, and there are both fictional and real cases involving people who faked their own deaths in part to gain the benefit of reading their own obituaries. For instance, in Isaac Asimov’s story “Obituary,” a theoretical physicist named Stebbins, frustrated with his own failure to achieve fame, concocts an elaborate plan to fake his own death in an attempt to get publicity and the benefits of an obituary. Stebbins, though not a particularly agreeable character, is right to expect a eulogy.
In general, we pretend that the recently deceased were good or better than they really were. Why? Perhaps we think that we owe it to the deceased person’s family to show deference. This makes sense in cases where the deceased person is a public figure who, while reviled by segments of the public, was deeply loved by his or her own immediate relatives. But it does not tell us what is going on in a large number of other cases. Many of those seen as unsavory characters by outsiders are regarded as morally deficient by their families as well. I have personal knowledge of cases in which the adult children of an abusive now deceased parent were pressured to pretend the deceased were good mothers and fathers. At least one person I know faced harsh criticism for refusing to comply. This suggests that the norm is so strong, we are willing to force people abused in childhood to hide their pain behind a socially acceptable mask.
One may suppose that we are concerned, rightly, with the deceased person’s current inability to defend him- or herself. Decency, it could be argued, requires that we not attack an opponent who happens to be lying defenseless on the ground. And the deceased, it may be thought further, are less capable of fighting back and to that extent, more defenseless than any living person.
I doubt that this is the reason either. We do not have parallel norms, for instance, against gossip behind another’s back, even though the harm we can inflict on a living person is much greater than any possible harm to the dead, save the possible damage to their reputation or legacy.
It’s possible that we see funerals and memorial services as public affairs and believe we ought not air dirty laundry there, but rather keep up appearances for the sake of family pride. But I suspect that we feel pressure to whitewash the acts of the dead even when only immediate family are present. This stands in stark contrast with the way we behave at family affairs not involving death. Those are not generally known for their high level of decorum. It depends on the family, of course, but it is quite common for people to express mixed feelings (or worse) about family holidays and reunions. We are not, it seems, all that committed to saving face at family gatherings.
I wish to suggest here that there is something about death itself that motivates us to act as we do. Death seems significant and perhaps, otherworldly. Think of our tendency to lower our voices when in a cemetery. We see this tendency in both religious and nonreligious people, that is, both people who do and who do not believe that the dead might hear them. What explains that tendency? I am not sure, but my best guess is that it has to do with the perceived otherworldliness of death. If that’s right, then perhaps, it is not the person who has just died that we want to show respect to — for that person may well have been a terrible human being — but death itself. It’s as though death has put a stamp of nobility on the forehead of the one whose heart is no longer beating, and it is that stamp, that halo that pushes us to act as we do. The deceased belong to death now, not to us. And it may be that we feel that it is not simply other people watching us; we are being watched by death itself. Death has come to visit, and we are all in its presence when we share a room with one of its recent claimees.
I have a good deal of sympathy with this idea, in general. I’ve often thought that there is something unseemly about celebrating a person’s death, even that of a serial killer or a dictator. Dancing on another’s grave — even metaphorically — is not the mark of a highly civilized person. What makes this unseemly may not be any quality of the person who’s passed away, since there may be no redeeming qualities. (It could be completely appropriate to rejoice in that person’s being sentenced to life imprisonment.) It’s sometimes death, really — not anything else about the dead person — that rightly gives us pause.
What I wish to suggest here, however, is that there is more than one alternative to posthumously and disingenuously praising deceased bad people. We can engage in, as Sonmez suggested, perhaps a little too quickly, somber and honest reflection on the person’s entire legacy — the good, the bad, and the ugly.
There are several reasons to prefer honesty. One is that pretense norms work against the people truly deserving of praise. When we bestow posthumous praise indiscriminately, we are all acting like those professors who give every student an A. As a consequence, the students who earned it get the same grade as the students who didn’t. Posthumous evaluation is like a grade of the whole of someone’s life. High marks here too ought to be earned.
This is not, of course, to suggest that we should encourage petty vindictiveness against the dead and give a carte blanche to haters whose hatred shows more about them than about the deceased. It is only to say that there is a difference between a norm prohibiting petty vindictiveness and one demanding indiscriminate praise.
I hope that this proposal will be palatable even to those who in following traditional norms aim, perhaps unconsciously, to show an appropriate attitude not so much toward the dead but toward death and its inevitability. Death will claim us all in the end, and every demise that takes place in proximity to us serves as a reminder. But death should not, for this reason, be seen as a universal equalizer. We are all equally mortal and the dead are all equally dead; but neither the living nor the dead are equally good and death need not force us to pretend otherwise.
Finally, while it is true that death will claim us all, it is not necessary to cede ground to it prematurely. The dead are not coming back, and in that sense, they do not belong to us anymore. Yet they lived among us once, and their lives — including both the good and the bad things they may have done — are intimately intertwined with our own stories and identities. The truth about what they did or didn’t do, how they treated us or others may, in a deep sense, be our own — living — truth.
Iskra Fileva is an assistant professor of philosophy at the University of Colorado, Boulder.
Now in print: “Modern Ethics in 77 Arguments,” and “The Stone Reader: Modern Philosophy in 133 Arguments,” with essays from the series, edited by Peter Catapano and Simon Critchley, published by Liveright Books.