How has racial diversity in American neighborhoods changed since 1980?
These graphs, which show the extent to which U.S. neighborhoods are racially integrated (white and nonwhite) for 1980, 2000 and 2017, appeared elsewhere on NYTimes.com.
What do you wonder? What are you curious about that comes from what you notice in the graphs?
What’s going on in these graphs? Write a catchy headline that captures the graphs’ main idea.
On Wednesday, Feb. 5, our collaborator, the American Statistical Association, will facilitate this discussion from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern time to help students’ understanding go deeper. You might use their responses as models for your own.
4. By Friday morning, Feb. 7, we will reveal more information about the graphs at the bottom of this post. Students, we encourage you to post an additional comment after reading the reveal. How does the original article and the moderators’ comments help you see the map differently? Try to incorporate the statistical terms defined in the Stat Nuggets in your response.
Sign up for our free weekly newsletter so you never miss a graph, and add our 2019-20 “What’s Going On in This Graph?” live-moderated discussion Wednesdays to your Google calendar (2/5, 2/12, 2/26, 3/4, 3/11, 3/18, 3/25, 4/1, 4/8). Graphs are always released by the Friday before to give teachers time to plan ahead.
Americans are movers. In 2017, about 11 percent of all Americans moved. Historically, Americans move on average 11.4 times in a lifetime. Therefore, it should not surprise us that the composition of our neighborhoods could be changing. Someone moves out and someone, maybe of a different race, moves in. The New York Times published two articles on how neighborhoods are changing. These graphs came from the May 2, 2019 article “Data Shows Decline in Number of White Neighborhoods.” But, the Times also published an article on April 27, 2019 “The Neighborhood Is Mostly Black. The Home Buyers Are Mostly White.” These articles provide a narrative of how our neighborhoods are changing. There are fewer mostly white and mostly nonwhite neighborhoods.
The U. S. Census asks respondents to self-identify by racial category. The data for these graphs is divided into white and nonwhite, which includes everyone who do not self-identify as white. The data is summarized by census tract, which are subdivisions of state counties. Census tracts have an average of 4,000 inhabitants and range from 2,500 to 8,000 residents. Census tracts are one way to define neighborhoods. We will use word neighborhood rather than census tract since it is a more familiar designation of where people live.
How are the graphs for 1980, 2000, and 2017 similar? How are they different? What seems to be happening with all of these moves? Why do you think this is happening? Do you think this trend will continue? What do you predict the 2020 U.S. Census will show regarding the diversity of our neighborhoods?
Here are some of the headlines that really capture the meaning of this graph: ”Is the American ‘Melting Pot’ Mixing Even Further?” by Francesca of Illinois and “Desegregation or Racial Stagnation?” by Tony Kinchen of Ithaca.
These graphs have to do with the diversity of neighborhoods. How do you define diversity — literally and numerically? Where on the graph would you find the most diverse neighborhoods? Are our neighborhoods becoming more or less diversified?
These graphs use data from the U.S. Census Bureau, which totals data by census tract. (See above for the definition of census tract and why we are using the word neighborhood here.) Here are some questions related to these graphs.
The sum of all of the bars in each of the graphs is 100 percent of all neighborhoods. What is your understanding of the tall bar on the right of the 1980 graph? And, the shorter bar on the left of the 1980 graph?
From 1980 to 2017, describe how the diversity of neighborhoods has changed. Which has changed more – the number of all white neighborhoods or the number of all nonwhite neighborhoods? Explain how neighborhood diversity has changed over the 37-year time period.
From 1980 to 2017, there was a decrease in the number of neighborhoods with mostly white residents. For the same time period, there was also a decrease in the number of neighborhoods with mostly nonwhite residents. How could this be possible? Explain your answer.
Ask neighbors who have lived in your neighborhood for a long time how the neighborhood has changed. What might explain these changes?
What do the colors of the bars signify?
Below in the Stat Nuggets, we define and explain mathematical terms that apply to the graphs.
Thank you for participating in “What’s Going on in This Graph?” which is intended to help you think more critically about graphs and the underlying data. Critical thinking is an essential element of statistics, the science of learning from data.
Join us Wednesday, Feb. 12 to notice and wonder about engagement rings in keeping with Valentine’s Day. We look forward to your responses between 9 a.m. - 2 p.m. Eastern Time during the live online moderation.
The distribution of a numerical variable describes how the values of the variable are distributed along the number line. A histogram summarizes the distribution of a numerical variable by showing the number or percentage of the values that fall in specified intervals. The intervals are on the x-axis. Bars drawn above the corresponding intervals represent the number or percentage of values falling in each of the intervals. These numbers or percentages are shown on the y-axis.
In the U.S. neighborhood diversity graphs, the numerical variable is the percentage of a census tract’s population that is white. The x-axis is the white population share, marked in intervals of width 2.5 percent. The frequency of each interval is shown on the y-axis.
A normal distribution is symmetric (as if reflected in a mirror) with one peak (or unimodal). Some call it a bell curve due to its shape. A skewed distribution is asymmetric and unimodal with a longer “tail” in the direction of its skew.
In the U.S. neighborhood diversity graphs, none of the distributions are normal. The 1980 distribution is much more skewed left than either the 2000 or 2017 distributions.
The graph for “What’s Going on in This Graph?” are selected in partnership with Sharon Hessney. Ms. Hessney wrote the “reveal” and Stat Nuggets with Roxy Peck, professor emerita, California Polytechnic State University San Luis Obispo, and moderates online with Leah Lynn, high school mathematics teacher at Floyd County College and Career Academy in Rome, Georgia.