Several officers and a World Food Program employee were among those who died when the Russian aircraft went down shortly after takeoff.
CAIRO — A Sudanese military plane crashed in the West Darfur region on Thursday evening, killing all 16 people onboard, including two children, the military said. A Sudanese employee of the World Food Program and his family were among the casualties.
Several officers were also among those killed when the plane went down in the restless region of West Darfur, which has recently experienced deadly ethnic clashes.
Abeer Etefa, the food program’s spokeswoman for the Mideast and North Africa, said on Friday that one of the organization’s Sudanese employees, who was onboard with his wife and two children, had been killed in the crash. The food program was withholding the staff member’s name and other details, pending notification of next of kin.
The plane, a Russian Antonov An-12, crashed five minutes after taking off from an airport in the town of Geneina, according to Brig. Gen. Amer Mohammed al-Hassan, who posted a statement late Thursday on the Sudanese armed forces’ official Facebook page.
An investigation was underway to determine the cause of the crash, although there were no immediate reports of foul play. General Al-Hassan said the casualties included seven troops, three judges and six civilians.
The town of Geneina has recently been the site of clashes between Arabs and non-Arabs that killed at least three dozen people, according to a health official and a local aid group.
On Thursday, the Sudan’s Red Crescent said that the casualty toll had risen to 48 killed and 167 wounded in the violence. The local relief group has also said that more than 8,000 families had been displaced when violence erupted in the region.
The clashes pose a challenge to efforts by Sudan’s transitional government to end decades-long rebellions in areas like Darfur. In response, rebel groups pulled out of peace talks with the government and called for an investigation.
Prime Minister Hamdok visited the town this week and expressed a commitment to prosecute the perpetrators.
Plane crashes are not uncommon in Sudan, which has a poor aviation safety record. In 2003, a civilian Sudan Airways plane crashed into a hillside while trying to make an emergency landing, killing 116 people, including eight foreigners. Only a small boy survived that crash, which involved a Boeing plane.