The photographer Pieter Hugo, who has captured scenes from Nigeria to Mexico, takes T inside his studio.
In 2018, the curator Francisco Berzunza invited the South African artist Pieter Hugo to Mexico to create a body of work that would engage with themes of sexuality and death for an exhibition at the Centro Fotográfico Manuel Álvarez Bravo. During his monthlong stay, Hugo searched for a response to this prompt, and inspiration came when he chanced upon a platter of desiccated fruits in Oaxaca. “Making Pigments. San Agustin Etla” (2018), which shows a spread of dying crops in bold hues, was the first image Hugo captured in Mexico. But “something shifted” during that first visit, Hugo says. “I don’t know why, but I’m not done here,” he remembers thinking; he has since visited Mexico four more times, traveling between the bustling border city of Tijuana in the north, the colonial town of San Cristóbal de las Casas in the Central Highlands and the indigenous Zapotec town of Juchitán in the southern state of Oaxaca. “From the Day of the Dead to narco-politics, death is strongly felt there,” he says of the country, but it was its people’s day-to-day understanding of life’s fragility that inspired his new photography series, “La Cucaracha,” which will go on display at Yossi Milo Gallery in New York this month. Hugo named the series after the popular folk song about an injured cockroach whose lyrics are often rewritten in Mexico as political satire.
The project depicts people from different walks of life across Mexico, capturing them within their social habitats, in emotionally, and often physically, stripped-down states. In “The Snake Charmer, Hermosillo” (2019), for example, a naked man holds an albino snake that curls around his leg; his expression is piercing, his posture stoic. “The Advocate at Home, Mexico City” (2019), shows a moment of intimacy, in which a man Hugo met at a photography course wears nothing but white socks and reclines over the couch in his living room. A similar degree of trust is felt in “The Sex Worker, Oaxaca de Juárez” (2018), a shot of a nude sex worker photographed against a pastel pink wall in her home. “The dynamic must feel equal for subjects to feel comfortable,” Hugo says about shooting people in their personal spaces. He cast his subjects at bars and gas stations, or even from social media, where he found the two musician friends who appear in “Gabrielle and One of Her Sisters, Mexico City” (2019), which shows two nude women standing in front a wall, while one pinches the other’s nipple, in homage to the anonymous 16th-century French painting “Gabrielle d’Estrées and One of Her Sisters.” “I am interested in bodies that tell stories and capture the surrounding environments that shape those narratives,” Hugo says over the phone from his Cape Town studio, a 2,150-square-foot space where he shoots, edits and prints his images when he’s not traveling for an editorial or art project. “I don’t get ideas by sitting at my studio — traveling and being outside feed me as an artist,” he says.
I try to sleep nine hours every night. I wake up at 6 a.m. to drop off my kids at school, and I’m at the studio by 7:30 a.m. At some point, I go to the gym, but I try not to do the same thing at the same time, so I mix things up a little bit. If I’m not traveling, I try to spend time with the kids. I’m home at 4:30 p.m. — we have an early dinner, and by 8:30 p.m., I’m in bed.
I sold a portrait of a boy that I had photographed in Cape Town. His name was Tam Vleksi, and he had albinism. I sold it for $150 in 2003.
I’m usually done when I’m three-quarters of the way through a project, when I realize that I have started seeing the world in a different way. There’s still the labor part and finishing the work, but mentally and spiritually, I’m finished when I start looking at the world in a different way.
If I’m writing emails or writing for a catalog, which takes up a lot of time, I don’t listen to music. I have an eclectic taste for when I’m editing, ranging from Beethoven to Katy Perry. I love Katy Perry. I actually once reached out to her agent to shoot a music video for her.
I was going through a particularly intense period in which I was traveling a lot. One night, I was very tired and I couldn’t help weeping while watching “Mamma Mia” with my daughter.
A catalog published by Camera Austria International for an exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in Salzburg. It’s fascinating.
“Pieter Hugo: La Cucaracha” is on view from Jan. 10 through Feb. 21, at Yossi Milo Gallery, 245 10th Avenue, New York, yossimilo.com.