Weather: Expect a high in the upper 40s, with a mostly sunny day.
For decades, Faith Hope Consolo was a renowned character in New York’s real estate scene.
She made deals with the Spanish clothing store Zara, Cartier’s landlord on Fifth Avenue and Ivanka Trump’s jewelry boutique.
When Ms. Consolo died in 2018, there were numerous obituaries recounting the remarkable life story that Ms. Consolo had been telling about herself for years.
Then, a childhood friend reached out, and the truth emerged.
Ms. Consolo said that she was born in the wealthy enclave of Shaker Heights, Ohio. In reality, she was born in downtown Cleveland.
She said she moved to the idyllic suburb of Westport, Conn., as a young girl. In reality, she grew up on a dead-end street in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn. Hers was a small house off Coney Island Avenue.
As an adult, her closest friends never knew the truth about her past — not even her business partner of 26 years, Joseph Aquino, who grew up just 10 blocks from her childhood home.
Ms. Consolo said her father’s name was John. In fact, his name was Frank. She said he died when she was 2.
In fact, he died in 2012, at age 94.
She said her father was a real estate executive. He was, in reality, a gambler who spent periods of time incarcerated. He was arrested on charges of armed robbery and assault and battery and was involved in a major heroin racket in 1954. He served time in Alcatraz and at the federal penitentiary in Leavenworth, Kan.
Ms. Consolo said her mother was a child psychiatrist. But she was a hairdresser at Martin’s, a department store in Downtown Brooklyn.
Ms. Consolo’s success in New York real estate, however, was real. William Rudin, one of the city’s largest developers, said, “She really changed the retail marketplace.” In 2005, she joined the real estate firm Douglas Elliman and was the chairwoman of its retail division.
She was known for spending lavishly: meals at Brasserie in the Seagram Building, and overnight stays at a Four Seasons or a Ritz Carlton.
In 2016, Ms. Consolo’s business partner, Mr. Aquino, sued her and Douglas Elliman over commission payments. Though the lawsuit was eventually dismissed, it did lead to revelations about Ms. Consolo’s spending habits. They included $100 daily makeup sessions and a $60,000 annual travel and entertainment budget.
I wrote an obituary of Ms. Consolo for The Times. After it was published, one of her childhood friends contacted me. That friend, Elizabeth Anne Tursi, provided information about Ms. Consolo’s early years.
“I really believe that Faith just didn’t want people to know who she was,” Ms. Tursi said.
I began investigating Ms. Consolo’s real story, and shared what I had learned with those who had known Ms. Consolo for years. Some were surprised, some were saddened.
Others, like Esther Muller, a friend and real estate broker, said the lies might have been a necessity. “Faith believed she would not be able to succeed in the world of men if she didn’t have a tough-looking cover-up, so she covered up who she really was,” she said.
Meeko Gattuso is easy to recognize with his numerous tattoos: the number 36 on his left cheek, the number 12 on his neck and what looks like the New York Yankees logo below his clavicle.
“Authenticity is real big in the entertainment thing now,” Meeko said in an interview.
Indeed, Meeko, a member of the Latin Kings gang, although not an active one, is acting in the HBO show “Euphoria,” in which he plays a character not unlike himself.
One of the men in the show with Meeko is Alejandro “Pirata” Cintron.
The second man is Mario “Machete” Perez.
The third man is Peter Shue.
It’s Monday — get ready for the show.
It was 1947. Larry Goldberg and I were 13 years old. We lived in Brooklyn, but we were New York Yankees fans.
The World Series that year was a memorable one. The Yankees played the Dodgers, with notables on the field like Joe DiMaggio, Phil Rizzuto, Yogi Berra and, of course, Brooklyn’s Jackie Robinson, in his rookie year and first World Series.
When we got to the stadium, we stopped at Nedick’s for a breakfast special: its famous orange drink, a doughnut and a cup of coffee, all for 15 cents.
We waited in line until 10 a.m., when the gates opened. We bought bleacher tickets for $1 and watched the Yankees do their thing, beating the Dodgers, 5-3.
We repeated the adventure for Game 7, and we saw the Yankees win the game and the series. I still have the ticket stubs.
I am curious where Larry Goldberg is today.
