BRUSSELS — Britain, France and Germany on Tuesday formally accused Iran of breaking the 2015 agreement that limited its nuclear program, taking the first step toward reimposing United Nations sanctions.
The European countries started the clock running on what could be some 60 days of negotiations with Iran about coming back into full compliance with the nuclear deal. Under the agreement, if they cannot resolve their dispute, that could revive United Nations sanctions on Iran that had been suspended under the deal, including an arms embargo.
The move, which had been expected for more than a week, was delayed when the United States killed a top Iranian commander, Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, with repercussions that are still playing out in Iran and across the region.
Still, Iran has allowed international inspectors to stay in the country, making it unlikely that it could go forward with a bomb in secret.
The Europeans want to save the deal and persuade both Washington and Tehran to begin a new set of negotiations about missile development and Iran’s regional activities, a senior European official said.
But the three European countries, all signatories to the deal known as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, or JCPOA, clearly felt that they had to respond to Iran’s movement away from compliance.
The Europeans reiterated that they opposed Mr. Trump’s withdrawal from the deal and were not joining his campaign of “maximum pressure” to cripple Iran economically. “Our hope is to bring Iran back into full compliance,” they said.
The 2015 agreement restricted how many centrifuges Iran could use to enrich uranium — increasing the percentage of U-235, the rare isotope crucial to its use in nuclear fission — how highly it could enrich the metal, and how much uranium it could stockpile.
It has taken a series of steps beyond those limits, trying in vain to pressure the Europeans to make good on a commitment to ease the economic pain of American sanctions.
Iran had been put under a series of United Nations Security Council sanctions, mostly dating from 2006 and later, after it refused to comply with a Security Council resolution to stop uranium enrichment. Nearly all those sanctions were lifted after the 2015 nuclear deal.
Even if they were reinstated — something the Europeans do not want to do — they would not make a significant economic difference to Iran, given the power of the separate American sanctions reimposed by Mr. Trump.
One measure that could matter to Tehran if reimposed would restore an essentially blanket arms embargo on Iran. Iran in the past has threatened to quit the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty if United Nations sanctions were to be restored.
On Tuesday, Iran’s Foreign Ministry warned of a “serious and strong response” to the European decision. At the same time, its spokesman Abbas Mousavi said that Iran was “fully ready to answer any good-will and constructive effort” that would preserve the nuclear deal, according to the official IRNA news agency.
Edward Wong contributed reporting from Washington.