Faced with an unrelenting protest over proposed changes in France’s generous pension system, officials withdraw a move to raise the full-benefit retirement age to 64 from the present 62.
PARIS — With tens of thousands of anti-government demonstrators once again coursing through the streets of Paris and other cities and clouds of tear gas and smashed store windows punctuating the urban landscape, the French government made a major concession on Saturday to unions protesting its pension reform plan.
And the government’s concession is unlikely to end either the strike or the demonstrations. The more militant unions — and the ones most heavily represented in the railways and the Paris subway — are demanding that Mr. Macron abandon his entire reform plan.
The demand in the streets Saturday was for precisely that. The mood was militant, and the more violent demonstrators once again clashed with the police, even as they sowed a trail of damage through eastern Paris. A bank branch was sacked, and bus shelters smashed and fires set. Unions said 150,000 protesters were in the streets of Paris on Saturday.
“We’ve got to continue to mobilize, until they pull the whole plan, pure and simple,” Eric Coquerel, a representative in Parliament and a leading voice in the far-left France Unbowed party, told French television Saturday afternoon, as police sirens blared in the background.
Mr. Macron’s prime minister, Edouard Philippe, announced the concession.
The far-right leader, Marine Le Pen, called the government’s move a “dishonest” negotiating tactic.
“You introduce something that’s unacceptable, and then you withdraw it,” she told French media. Like other opposition figures, Ms. Le Pen has been demanding the government withdraw its whole plan. “Nothing justifies this reform,” she said.
Mr. Macron has insisted that his retirement plan represents a fair, rational response to the new world of work, where careers are interrupted and French citizens no longer stay in the same job for life.
The French, though, are uneasy with Mr. Macron’s proposals. Although polls show they support some form of universal pension plan, they are also deeply attached to a system which has achieved among the lowest old-age poverty rates in the world.
Faced with weeks of strikes and mass demonstrations that have ripped into the economy, Mr. Macron’s government has been forced to carve out a series of concessions to individual professions in recent days — the police, dancers at the Paris Opera, nurses, airline flight attendants, pilots — moving back toward precisely the same type of tailored retirement structure his reform sought to end.
On Saturday crowds of strikers, unionists and hard-core demonstrators began gathering early, with the sprawling Place de la Nation in eastern Paris packed by early afternoon. Revolutionary hymns from Latin America blared over the loudspeakers, as did rap mocking Mr. Macron.
Later, Mr. Martinez, at the head of the march, told reporters the issue of the new age limit “is a red herring.” The solution to the pensions-funding problem was simple, he insisted: raise salaries.