Her startling 1994 memoir won praise for opening a dialogue about clinical depression and helped introduce an unsparing style of confessional writing that remains influential.
Elizabeth Wurtzel, whose startling 1994 memoir, “Prozac Nation: Young and Depressed in America,” won praise for opening a dialogue about clinical depression and helped introduce an unsparing style of confessional writing that remains influential, died on Tuesday in Manhattan. She was 52.
The writer David Samuels, a friend since childhood, said the cause was metastatic breast cancer, which in her case had resulted from the BRCA genetic mutation. Ms. Wurtzel had a double mastectomy in 2015. After her diagnosis, she became an advocate for BRCA testing — something she had not had — and wrote about her cancer experience in The New York Times.
Writing about her final illness was a natural choice for Ms. Wurtzel, who had for a quarter-century scrutinized her life in relentless detail, becoming a hero to some, especially to many women of her generation and younger, but also drawing scorn. “Prozac Nation,” her first book, published when she was 27, was unvarnished in its accounts of her student days at Harvard, her drug use, her extensive sex life and more.
It divided critics.
In a 2013 article in The New Yorker drawing parallels between “Prozac Nation” and the HBO series “Girls,” then in its second season, Meghan Daum expressed the admiration and frustration the book inspired in some women.
Elizabeth Lee Wurtzel was born on July 31, 1967, in Manhattan. Her mother, Lynne Ellen Winters, was married to Donald Wurtzel, and until recently Ms. Wurtzel had assumed that he was her father. In a 2018 essay in New York, she wrote of learning that she was actually the product of an affair between her mother and the photographer Bob Adelman, who died in 2016. She had written voluminously about her difficult relationship with Mr. Wurtzel, who divorced her mother when she was young; in the essay, she reassessed that angst.
She grew up on the Upper East Side and began writing “Prozac Nation” in 1986, while she was a student at Harvard.
While earning her bachelor’s degree she wrote for The Harvard Crimson and started an internship at The Dallas Morning News, but she lost that job amid accusations of plagiarism. After graduating she was able to get jobs with New York magazine and The New Yorker, writing about rock music, often in a way that invited derision. When Tina Brown took over as editor of The New Yorker in 1992, Ms. Wurtzel was one of her first cuts.
Although Ms. Wurtzel’s tone in “Prozac Nation” was often described as self-absorbed, she had a different explanation.
Her first book after “Prozac Nation” was “Bitch: In Praise of Difficult Women,” published in 1998. Its original cover photograph showed Ms. Wurtzel topless and extending her middle finger.
The book didn’t do as well as it might have, because by the time it came out Ms. Wurtzel was struggling with the drug addictions she later detailed in “More, Now, Again.” In that book, she bluntly described how she would feed her addiction by whatever means necessary.
Ms. Wurtzel cleaned up enough to be admitted, in the mid-2000s, to Yale Law School. Her past gave her unusual insights in some of her classes, especially criminal law.
For a time she worked for the law firm Boies Schiller Flexner, though she left in 2012, saying she wanted to devote more time to writing.
In 2015 Ms. Wurtzel married James Freed Jr., a writer, who survives her, as does her mother. She died at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and lived in Manhattan.
In 1995, in an afterword to a new edition of “Prozac Nation,” Ms. Wurtzel sought to draw a broader lesson from her landmark book.
