At a time when disinformation, hate crimes, inequality and white supremacy seem to be on the rise, stories like these helped amplify the voices of the unheard and raise awareness about efforts across the country to curb the rising tide of racial injustice. They were stories about bravery and celebrating difference. They were stories that provided a little dose of optimism.
If you have a story that gives you hope as you head into 2020, email it to us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| “Molly of Denali” became the first nationally distributed children’s series with a Native American lead, according to PBS. An exhibition at the Minneapolis Institute of Art shined a light on over a thousand years of art made by Native American women. And the Navajos, one of the largest tribes in the United States, shattered long-held stereotypes of “cowboys and Indians” with their country music circuit.
That wasn’t all. In San Francisco, Indigenous people from the United States and Canada gathered to commemorate the 50 years since dozens of Native Americans occupied Alcatraz Island to defy a government they said had long trampled on their rights. “I do it for my grandchildren, for the future generation,” one participant said.
And even where there is racist resistance to this change, elected leaders are pushing back and finding support. After Shahid Shafi, a Muslim immigrant, won a county Republican Party leadership role in Texas, his critics tried to have him removed on the grounds that his religion disqualified him for the job. Mr. Shafi survived the challenge.
“When I saw someone who looked like me onstage, I thought, that’s amazing,” Charlotte said. “She was representing me and all the people like me.” This was among several milestones for black artists in theater and dance and fine art this year.
“Slave Play” opened on Broadway and quickly became the subject of much discussion. The play, written by Jeremy O. Harris, has been called “one of the best and most provocative new works to show up on Broadway in years.” It has also caused a roaring debate regarding how Americans go about confronting racism in their daily lives.
A rising number of American Catholics are of Hispanic descent — about 40 percent — and Archbishop Gomez himself is a naturalized United States citizen born in Mexico. And he has vowed to defend immigrants. In September, he celebrated Mass during a three-day, 60-mile walking pilgrimage in solidarity with families separated at the border.
When Father Tolton was a young man, no Catholic seminary in the United States would admit him because he was black. He studied in Rome instead, and eventually made his way to Chicago, where he ministered to the poor and built the community at St. Monica’s Catholic Church, which served African-Americans.
He brought on players like Serge Ibaka, who once found himself on the streets in the Republic of Congo, surviving on leftovers from a restaurant. This year he completed a fairy-tale journey, returning to that restaurant with the N.B.A. champions’ trophy.
That was the reaction of Henry Goodgame, a Morehouse College administrator, when the billionaire Robert F. Smith’s announced that he would eliminate the student debt of the class of 2019 at the private, all-male, historically black college in Atlanta.
