Fans of popular shows are converging on Facebook to talk about what they hear, and pretty much everything else too.
When news broke last week that Prince Harry and Meghan, Duchess of Sussex, would be stepping aside from royal duties, fans of the celebrity-focused podcast “Who? Weekly” thrilled to discuss it: Where would they live? (Canada? California?) Would they get jobs? What did the queen think? Their ideas — and inside jokes — played out across several of the podcast’s Facebook fan groups.
Podcasts, as Jamie Lauren Keiles wrote last year in The New York Times Magazine, have given rise to fan universes once reserved for popular TV shows. And many of those fandoms live on Facebook. Groups for podcasts like “Crime Junkie” and “Shameless” have ballooned to tens of thousands of members, and in some cases more than 100,000. And those are just the primary fan pages.
Podcast groups are similar; though they are ostensibly meant for conversation about the shows themselves, actual episodes are seldom discussed. Instead, members get sidetracked and end up on tangents, talking about their failed marriages, sharing parenting advice and helping each other pick outfits for first dates.
Sometimes deep bonds form. Last summer, two members of the main “LadyGang” Facebook group got married, according to one of the podcast hosts; the officiant was someone the couple also met in the group.
Some podcast hosts use groups to disseminate information, drop exclusive merchandise or announce tour dates and giveaways. The groups can also function as forums for feedback.
“From my experience, podcasting is a very isolated craft. A lot of us are doing it in our closets and home offices, so we’re craving to have someone to talk to and bounce ideas off of,” said Danielle Desir, the founder of the group Women of Color Podcasters.
Some hosts rely on moderators and administrators to keep their groups in check. Katherine Littleton, an administrator of the Facebook group for the film-focused podcast “Unspooled,” said she dedicates about 40 to 60 hours a week to overseeing the Facebook community. “I don’t like anything to sit for even five minutes. I’m not joking when I say it’s a full-time job for me,” she said.
Ms. Littleton, who doesn’t spend much time on social media outside of Facebook, didn’t anticipate the emotional toll moderating a group would take. “It was really surprising how toxic it can get,” she said. She has observed infighting, vulgar remarks and threats, which are just a few of the problems that plague private groups that have grown to unwieldy proportions.
Still, podcast groups remain an incredibly effective way to keep existing fans engaged, bring new listeners into the fold and even forge friendships.
