In choosing Ms. Lofgren, Speaker Nancy Pelosi put a seasoned, even-tempered ally on the team that will prosecute the House’s case in the Senate.
WASHINGTON — When it comes to impeachment, Representative Zoe Lofgren, Democrat of California, is arguably the institutional memory for Congress.
She was a member of the House Judiciary Committee in 1998 when it approved articles of impeachment against President Bill Clinton for lying about an affair with a White House intern. And as a young law student in 1974, she helped the committee draft its Watergate charges against President Richard M. Nixon.
Now — 46 years after the Nixon case — the 72-year-old lawmaker will take a high-profile role in the nation’s third impeachment trial, serving as one of the managers who will prosecute the House’s case against President Trump in the Senate.
For Speaker Nancy Pelosi, the decision to pick Ms. Lofgren puts a seasoned, even-tempered ally on the small team of lawmakers whose arguments during the Senate proceedings will be closely scrutinized by other lawmakers, the news media and — perhaps most importantly — voters in an election year.
Unlike many members of the Judiciary Committee, Ms. Lofgren resisted calling for the impeachment of Mr. Trump for efforts to obstruct the two-year investigation by Robert S. Mueller, the special counsel, into Russia’s interference in the 2016 election. After Mr. Mueller presented his report detailing 10 instances of possible obstruction of justice by the president, she said that Democrats had not proven that charge to the American people.
“In retrospect, it probably was a mistake” to have relied on Mr. Mueller’s investigation, she said later.
But Ms. Lofgren embraced impeachment over the revelations about Mr. Trump’s efforts to pressure Ukraine to announce investigations of his political rivals. And now, Ms. Pelosi is counting on her to bring decades of historical perspective to the arguments she and the other managers will make during the trial.
Ms. Lofgren was raised in the Silicon Valley suburbs of San Francisco, the daughter of a school-cafeteria cook and a beer-truck driver. As an undergraduate student at Stanford University, she worked as an intern for Representative Don Edwards, a Democrat on the Judiciary Committee, whom she replaced when he retired in 1995.
Now a senior member of Judiciary Committee, she is something of a temperate outlier on a panel that is known for attracting the most fiery, outspoken and partisan lawmakers.
When constitutional scholars testified before the committee last year, Ms. Lofgren brought the official, 528-page record of the Nixon impeachment case. She said she had taken it out again to better understand what the founders meant by setting the standard of “high crimes and misdemeanors” for impeachment.