The Pentagon said Iran fired more than a dozen ballistic missiles at the Asad and Erbil bases in Iraq, where American troops are stationed.
A sprawling air base in western Iraq that hosted President Trump during his first visit to a combat zone as commander in chief was one of two military installations where American troops are stationed that came under ballistic missile attack by Iran early Wednesday.
The fusillade also came one day after Mr. Trump threatened to attack cultural sites in Iran in response to any reprisals for General Suleimani’s killing. Mr. Trump backed away from the threat earlier Tuesday after being told it would be illegal.
Were there any casualties?
The Pentagon announced that more than a dozen ballistic missiles had been fired at the two bases but said it was still assessing the damage. The editor in chief of Mashregh, the main news website for Iran’s Revolutionary Guards, said more than 30 ballistic missiles had been fired at the American base at Asad.
Mr. Trump later wrote on Twitter that the assessment of casualties and damages was continuing, and that he would make a statement on Wednesday morning.
As of December, there were about 6,000 United States troops deployed in Iraq, which is a fraction of the peak number of 150,000 military personnel who served during Operation Iraqi Freedom, which lasted from 2003 to 2011. After General Suleimani’s death, the Iraqi Parliament voted to expel American troops from the country, which Mr. Trump then said would be met with sanctions.
What is the strategic importance of the Asad air base?
During the past two years, both Mr. Trump and Vice President Mike Pence made unexpected visits to the base, which is in Anbar Province and about 135 miles from the Syrian border. At the time of his visit, which he left for on Christmas night in 2018, Mr. Trump characterized the journey as harrowing and under the cloak of darkness.
In 2015, Iraqi security forces repelled an attack on the base by the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS.
The remaining American troops at the base are helping to train Iraqi security forces.
What is the significance of the base near Erbil?
In October, Delta Force commandos stationed at the base started the operation in Syria that led to the death of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State. Eight American helicopters, primarily CH-47 Chinooks, took off from the base, flying low and fast to avoid detection during the mission.
The president, along with Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper, Mr. Pence and Gen. Mark A. Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, watched video of the raid piped into the White House Situation Room from surveillance aircraft orbiting over the battlefield. Mr. Pence visited the base in November.
Mr. al-Baghdadi detonated a suicide vest, killing himself and three children, which Mr. Trump recounted with particularly brash language.
