CASHMERE CAT at Webster Hall (Jan. 17, 8 p.m.). Few artists have navigated the parallel universes of pop and electronic music with as much success — or as little interest in the spotlight — as this Norwegian producer, born Magnus August Hoiberg. On his 2017 album, “9,” which featured guest turns by the likes of Ariana Grande and the Weeknd, his pop allegiances seemed to be winning out; in retrospect, those big names may just have been decoys behind which the attention-averse Hoiberg could hide. “Princess Catgirl,” his latest release, uses a different tactic: Instead of wielding A-list star power, Hoiberg created the titular digital avatar to be the face of his pillowy synthetic soundscapes.
LOAMLANDS at Baby’s All Right (Jan. 17, 7 p.m.). The music put forth by this recording project based in Durham, N.C., resists easy categorization, in part because of a range of influences: Kym Register, the singer and songwriter at the helm, has name-checked everyone from Bonnie Raitt to Prince to the Breeders’ Kim Deal as sources of inspiration. Evasion of labels is central to Register’s craft in more ways than one: Loamlands’ music examines nonbinary gender identity and its complex intersections, particularly on the project’s sophomore album, “Lez Dance.” 
‘REALITY CACHE’ at Knockdown Center (Jan. 17, 10 p.m.). If your horoscope calls for dancing, this late-night party may provide the outlet you seek. Co-Star, the astrology app wildly popular among millennials, is the architect behind the robust, genre-spanning lineup set to perform in Queens on Friday night. Highlights include Joey LaBeija, a D.J., producer and member of the storied ballroom house from which he takes his surname, and BbyMutha, an underground rapper whose music foregrounds her experiences as a mother of four. The vitriolic noise-punk duo Deli Girls and Shyboi, an affiliate of the D.J. collective Discwoman, are also slated to appear.
TEMPLES at Webster Hall (Jan. 21, 8 p.m.). “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it” may be the unspoken motto of this band from Kettering, England, who forego innovation in favor of painstaking replication of 1970s psych rock. The group’s revivalist approach has won them fans within the rock establishment — they’ve opened for the Rolling Stones and earned praise from Noel Gallagher — and sustained them through three albums, the most recent of which, “Hot Motion,” was released in September. The 2020 United States leg of the record’s corresponding tour kicks off this week, hitting Manhattan on Tuesday. Attendees can expect trippy visuals and fuzzy guitar riffs to be in ample supply.
BILLY WOODS at Mercury Lounge (Jan. 19, 8 p.m.). “Spongebob” is one of this underground rapper’s biggest songs to date, but his music isn’t so lighthearted as that title suggests. Over the course of a prolific decade-plus career in which he has worked both solo and as half of the duo Armand Hammer, Woods has cultivated a sludgy sound and a somber aesthetic. On his recent album, October’s “Terror Management,” songs like the opener, “Marlow,” typify his hook-averse production and heady lyricism (in this case, with references ranging from Kurt Vonnegut to Kafka to South African politics). At Mercury Lounge, Woods will host a belated celebration of the record’s release.
‘YAMS DAY’ at Barclays Center (Jan. 17, 8 p.m.). Though neither an M.C. nor a producer himself, ASAP Yams is widely regarded as the linchpin of ASAP Mob, the Harlem-based rap crew that he helped found. Yams, born Steven Rodriguez, jump-started the career of ASAP Rocky, the Mob’s brightest star, and steered him toward a sound that eschewed rap regionalism. When Rodriguez died in 2015 at the age of 26, an immediate outpouring of grief from the hip-hop community underscored the scope of his influence. Every year since, the ASAP Mob has honored Rodriguez with a tribute concert; this year’s lineup includes the full ASAP company along with as-yet-unannounced special guests.
RANDY BRECKER at the Iridium (Jan. 21-22, 8 p.m.). This trumpeter was one of the most versatile studio musicians of the 1970s and ’80s, and together with his sibling — the influential saxophonist Michael Brecker — he led a successful fusion group, the Brecker Brothers, in which he served as primary songwriter. That band became known for its balance of pop sensibilities and jazz sophistication, a calculus that has remained Brecker’s calling card. At the Iridium he will perform with a modern-day iteration of the Brecker Brothers band, playing music from that group’s back catalog as well as newer compositions, including some by himself and others by the tenor saxophonist Ada Rovatti, his wife and longtime collaborator.
CYRUS CHESTNUT TRIO at Smoke (Jan. 16 and 19, 7 and 9 p.m.; Jan. 17-18, 7, 9 and 10:30 p.m.). A straight-ahead jazz pianist of enormous grace and power, Chestnut invests in a broad reading of the black American piano tradition, pulling equally from stride, bebop and modern gospel. He turns 57 on Friday, and these concerts — with Eric Wheeler on bass and Chris Beck on drums — will double as his birthday celebration.
MACEO PARKER at the Blue Note (through Jan. 19, 8 and 10:30 p.m.). This esteemed alto saxophonist was a central player on some of the most influential funk records of the 1970s, as a member of both James Brown’s bands and George Clinton’s Parliament. You can tell Parker was Brown’s right-hand man from listening to those albums: For one thing, you can hear the Godfather of Soul admonishing him to “blow your horn” on the hit “Papa’s Got a Brand New Bag.” Over the past few decades Parker has focused mostly on leading his own groups, switching between greased-up funk and soul-jazz.
ERICA SEGUINE AND SHAN BAKER JAZZ ORCHESTRA at the Jazz Gallery (Jan. 18, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Fans of the bandleader Maria Schneider, the indie-rocker Sufjan Stevens, the composer Olivier Messiaen and a lot in between should check out this 20-piece big band, led by the two young composers Seguine and Baker. They pour their ideas about politics, ecology and interpersonal relationships into vast, multifaceted, semi-abstract compositions that deal in dissonance and overload but often resolve into major-key resplendence. The group has been around since 2011 but is just now preparing to release its debut album.
‘LARRY WILLIS: A LIFE IN JAZZ’ at Dizzy’s Club (Jan. 22, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Willis was a pianist whose impact was perhaps best measured by the achievements of those around him: He played on and contributed compositions to landmark recordings by Jackie McLean, Hugh Masekela and others. He mentored Roy Hargrove, the younger trumpeter whose career would come to define a jazz generation. But Willis also led a distinguished — if less prominent — career as a bandleader, recording close to two dozen albums and assembling a thick book of original compositions. He died last year at 76, and at this concert an intergenerational squad of musicians will pay homage to the work of a musician whom many knew as “Prof.” Led by the drummer Willie Jones III, the band will also include Justin Robinson on alto saxophone, Jeremy Pelt on trumpet, Steve Davis on trombone, George Cables on piano and Gerald Cannon on bass.
