Mr. Van Drew said he had requested a rally when Mr. Trump asked how he could help.
At the rally, Mr. Van Drew was immediately embraced by Trump supporters as one of their own. Mr. Trump lost New Jersey by 14 points to Hillary Clinton, his Democratic challenger in 2016, but the rally drew thousands who hope to change the political fortunes for local Republicans, starting with Mr. Van Drew’s re-election.
Tim Murtaugh, the Trump campaign’s communications director, said that campaign officials were betting that Mr. Van Drew represented the type of politician that moderate Democrats might want to hear more from.
“We think a lot of Democrats across the country are looking for a new home,” Mr. Murtaugh said at the rally.
Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey, a former 2020 presidential candidate, said the opposite in a fund-raising email sent to supporters of his Senate re-election campaign.
“Trump will be spreading his platform of hatred and bigotry to help re-elect Jeff Van Drew, the congressman who shamefully switched his party affiliation from Democrat to Republican during the impeachment process,” the email said.
The rally location — essentially empty in January — gave attendees an opportunity to bundle up and engage in a spiritual takeover of the area for a few days. Beachside motels opened up to board an influx of supporters.
On Monday evening, the Trump faithful overran local bars, singing renditions of “Sweet Caroline” late into the night. Hundreds of people were lined up outside the Wildwoods Convention Center, staking out their claim to the front of the line with plastic chairs. Near the boardwalk, Trump-themed recreational vehicles were parked in the shadow of dormant roller coasters.
Mr. Trump, who on his way out of Washington did not stop to answer questions as his impeachment defense team wrapped up its case in the Senate, used his time at the rally podium to fight back — and to train the spotlight back on his own re-election campaign. He promised that his campaign would be signing up “millions and millions” of registered independent and Democratic voters, and bragged about his poll numbers.
The president’s approval rating has hovered at around 43 percent, but an increasing number of Americans are voicing support for hearing witnesses in his impeachment trial.
Mr. Trump is facing several roadblocks in his administration’s quest for a speedy acquittal in the Senate. His former national security adviser, John R. Bolton, wrote in a book draft that Mr. Trump had held up aid to Ukraine to further his political ambitions, making it harder for Senate Republicans to abstain from requesting that witnesses offer further testimony.
On Tuesday evening, cracks in the united front that the White House has tried so hard to build with Senate Republicans started showing when Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, told a closed-door meeting of Republicans that he did not currently have the votes to block Democrats from calling witnesses at the trial.
While he targeted the topic of impeachment at times, calling out individual Democrats like Speaker Nancy Pelosi by name, Mr. Trump’s hourlong address largely hewed to the same red-meat themes he has introduced to his base.
Mr. Trump introduced several inaccurate claims, including falsely accusing the Obama administration of choosing not to end the AIDS epidemic — even though President Barack Obama directed billions to accelerate efforts to find a cure.
He also claimed that the Republican Party would protect patients with pre-existing medical conditions. “We are protecting people with pre-existing conditions and we always will,” said Mr. Trump, whose administration has taken steps to weaken such protections.