Emily Carroll is lost. Can you find her?
THURSDAY PUZZLE — We are all here for the games, right? Mostly, we talk about the daily Crossword on Wordplay, but once in a while the puzzle challenges us to metaphorically leave our chairs and play a more three-dimensional game.
These are always a joy for me, because they are proof that crosswords are not just stiff, 2-D, uber-intellectual tests of knowledge. This puzzle by Emily Carroll is a trip back to our childhoods, and I smiled all the way through it.
52A. I’ve said this before, but it’s worth saying again: Classifying things as P.C. or NON-P.C. is a weapon used to divide people. It divides us into those who stand up for people who have less of a voice than the majority, versus those who feel that being an ally is just too much work. It’s usually said with an eye roll, as if being sensitive to others’ feelings is a bad thing. Don’t fall for it. It’s appallingly easy to be kind.
Also, I’m not sure what humor this clue is talking about, but most comedy today is not NON-P.C. Some comedy is NON-P.C., but most of the writers and comedians are making efforts not to hurt others in their material.
41D. I loved this clue. “A long way to go?” sounds as if we are supposed to be thinking in terms of distance, but this is about the length of the vehicle itself. The answer is LIMO.
It took me a while to piece this theme together, but what an “Aha!” moment I received once I got it.
Yes, this is a rebus puzzle, where solvers are asked to enter more than one letter in a square (here is how to do that on your devices). The game we are playing is HIDE AND SEEK, which is part of the central revealer at 40A.
Let’s say that we are the “finder” (IT) at the northwestern corner (at the beginning of 1A’s IT COUPLE).
Now we have to find Ms. Carroll, who is the hider. If we travel toward the northeast, we are COLD (18A’s COLD SHOWER), so let’s go in a different direction. When we find ourselves in the center, we’re COOL (35A’s BE COOL), and we are getting WARM (61A’s WARM UP) when we keep traveling south. But that’s not enough; we have to actually find Ms. Carroll. When we travel east again, we wind up RED HOT (62A).
And there she is, hiding in the southeast corner at the end of 74A’s LEAN ON ME.
That was fun! Can we play tag next?
If you missed today’s live stream, you can watch it here.
There’s some debate over whether rebus puzzles should have symmetric placement of the theme squares. Personally, as a solver, I like the challenge it adds when they are not symmetrical, because you not only have to figure out the trick, but you also can’t predict where they are going to pop up. From a constructor’s standpoint, it’s also much easier to put the rebus wherever you want and then fill around it, making symmetric rebuses a more technically impressive feat. So I wanted to make a puzzle where asymmetry in the rebuses was essential to the theme and not just a construction crutch. And I thought the game-within-a-game aspect of hide-and-seek would be unique.
If I’m trying to be an objective evaluator, though, I think my execution lets down the creativity of this theme. Ambitious effort, but didn’t quite stick the landing, and there’s a lot of gluey short stuff holding things together. I hope the head-scratching this puzzle induces will be mostly the fun “What the heck is going on?” kind, and less the “How could anyone think EDILE, NEH and TEHEES are good fill?” because I don’t have an answer to that.
