The great-granddaughter of a storied Vogue editor, Ms. Vreeland plans to release her first album in February.
Hometown: Belvedere, Calif.
Now lives: In a one-bedroom apartment in the Boerum Hill neighborhood of Brooklyn.
Claim to fame: Ms. Vreeland, the great-granddaughter of Diana Vreeland, the storied Vogue editor, is a singer-songwriter and multi-hyphenate fashion darling, so on-trend that she even has a fan site.
Big break: After high school, Ms. Vreeland moved to Los Angeles to pursue a career in music, waitressing and tending bar between stints in the music world (including singing background for the band 30 Seconds to Mars).
Five years ago, she decided to embrace her fashion legacy and started modeling, including for C.R. Fashion Book, the magazine started by Carine Roitfeld. Last February, her two worlds collided when she sang for the fashion industry at the 21st amfAR Gala in New York City. “When you Google me, it says ‘singer,’” Ms. Vreeland said.
Latest project: In November, she performed at the Top of the Standard, the first time she performed publicly. “It was sold out, like what is that?” she said. Some people in the audience even knew the words to her new single, “Stay Drunk With Me,” a sultry ode to her vice of choice. She also recently designed an underwear collection with Kiki de Montparnasse that includes a sheer thong and a bloomer.
Next thing: Her debut self-published album, “Notes on Sex and Wine,” drops on Feb. 28 on Spotify, Apple Music and Amazon. She wrote the autobiographical blues-pop album in the wake of a breakup. “I actually met myself where I was at, not where I wanted to be,” she said.
To promote the album, she plans to tour with the bands Roses & Revolutions and Kopps. “I don’t know what to expect, but I’m so excited to be on the road,” she said. She plans to write her next album, which will be largely jazz, when she returns home.
False idol: When she was 21, she developed a reality TV show with Ryan Seacrest called “L.A. Shrink,” about a group of women who see the same male therapist. In true Hollywood form, the pilot never aired.
She tried out for “American Idol” in 2013. The celebrity judges said yes to her audition, but Ms. Vreeland couldn’t compete because she knew Mr. Seacrest. “I was in there reading Dostoyevsky in the corner not talking to anyone,” she said.