Until recently, intimacy coordination was virtually nonexistent. But in the space of about two years, alongside the evolution of the #MeToo movement, the profession has become highly sought across parts of the entertainment industry newly made answerable for the vulnerability of their actors and the exploitability of their hierarchies. In the fall of 2018, HBO began requiring the presence of an intimacy coordinator on any set that called for nudity or intimacy, and this past summer, intimacy directors (in theater, the profession is ‘‘director,’’ rather than ‘‘coordinator’’) began peppering crews on Broadway. The role includes aspects of both counselor and choreographer, introducing consent practices to the artistic process and a new area of technical expertise to theater and film.
While the director of photography focused her lens, the actors lay down to practice. Pace had held a rehearsal earlier that week with Fuirst and two actors via video call. Now one snaked his hand around the other’s thigh; the other turned. Their eyes met. They embraced. A few gyrations in one position, a gruff rolling maneuver, then a few more gyrations in another. Pace counted out loud to time the length of each position.
Pace bent down encouragingly, hands on her knees. Like most intimacy coordinators, she wore the kind of dark, functional clothing that made her blend in with the rest of a film crew, but her physical presence seemed designed to welcome curiosity, feet planted and eye contact direct. One actor positioned himself gingerly on top of the other, his face in the crook of his partner’s neck. ‘‘You’re going to want to drop your back knee further behind you,’’ she told him. ‘‘Further. Even further. It’ll look good from where the camera is behind you.’’ As the actor extended his leg, his body elongated, and his pelvis lowered; although it wasn’t mashed directly on top of his partner’s, it began to look much more as if it were.
The director of photography approached. Could Pace rotate the entire setup by 90 degrees? Fuirst expressed mild panic, but Pace had already choreographed the scene as a fluid series of gestures instead of breaking it into different poses for different shots. The whole sequence shifted quickly on an axis.
Pace and Fuirst hunched together over a monitor, viewing the first of several takes. The leaves covering the ground, impossibly crunchy and loud, required everyone watching to be utterly motionless while the camera rolled. Once Fuirst thought he’d gotten it, the crew dissolved like a held breath, with congratulations and stomping. Pace handed out hand warmers. ‘‘That was fascinating,’’ one actor said to her. The other grinned and picked a few leaves out of his hair.
The practice of relying on an expert to help stage sex scenes is so new to the entertainment industry that even fairly young actors speak with authority about how different it used to be. The 27-year-old actor Humberly González, who recently finished working with an intimacy coordinator for the first time on the set of the Netflix show ‘‘Jupiter’s Legacy,’’ described a different, fairly typical gig for television to me. She and her scene partner, whom she met earlier that day, were going to be filmed kissing from outside a camping tent, outlined in silhouette. There was no rehearsal and no specific choreography. When it was time to shoot, the two actors clambered inside the tent and were instructed to ‘‘just go for it,’’ González recalled, while the director watched from outside, shouting evaluations. The actors improvised ‘‘full on’’ as the crew struggled to best instruct them to position themselves so the shadows would look right. It took several hours to painstakingly establish the simple series of movements by trial and error. Based on what she described, it didn’t seem totally clear that the actors even needed to kiss — I thought of 2000s production footage of ‘‘Hair’’ that I had recently seen on YouTube, in which the actors created shadow play of sexual appendages using their arms. In González’s situation, she and her scene partner were touching the whole time, and he became unintentionally aroused. ‘‘It was so awkward,’’ González said.
An unchoreographed sex scene is not always an irresponsible one, and some directors do take pains to choreograph simulated sex. But sex scenes are ripe both for failures of communication and for deliberate abuses of power, which, in the absence of a clear protocol, can be hard to tell apart. In December, The Hollywood Reporter reported that Ruth Wilson left Showtime’s ‘‘The Affair’’ in part because of the way the show’s sex scenes were handled; sources claimed that she felt pressured past her comfort level on set and ignored when she took objection with the frequency of nudity on the show. For the show’s final season, this year, the network hired an intimacy coordinator. After the release of the 2013 Abdellatif Kechiche film ‘‘Blue Is the Warmest Color,’’ the film’s lead actors, Léa Seydoux and Adèle Exarchopoulos, spoke about feeling ‘‘horrible’’ and ‘‘manipulated’’ during the exhaustive shoot, which, in a manner most chalked up to Kechiche’s directing style, included days devoted to extracting satisfactory performances of simulated sex. Further along the spectrum, decades after the filming of Bernardo Bertolucci’s 1972 film ‘‘Last Tango in Paris,’’ and nearly seven years after Maria Schneider told The Daily Mail she had ‘‘felt a little raped’’ on set, Bertolucci admitted that he and Marlon Brando conspired to have Brando surprise the much younger and less famous Schneider with unscripted sexual contact — in order, Bertolucci told a 2013 interviewer, to give her performance a quality of ‘‘real rage’’ that he presumably did not think her capable of producing otherwise. Similar issues have been reported in the theater world: In 2016, the respected nonunion Chicago theater company Profiles closed after The Chicago Reader revealed a widely known, 20-year pattern of abuse by its artistic director that included sexual harassment of actors during performances of intimate scenes.
HBO hired Alicia Rodis, a founder of Intimacy Directors International, now the leading organization for intimacy coordination, to work on the show. After the season wrapped, Rodis moved in-house, and a host of other networks, including Netflix, Showtime, FX and TNT, began hiring coordinators for the first time.
Meade’s relationship with Rodis ‘‘completely transformed’’ her experience as an actor. She and Rodis are currently consulting with SAG-AFTRA on the union’s first set of guidelines for intimacy coordination. Before working with an intimacy coordinator, ‘‘the only power I ever had in my career was just saying no’’ to a sex scene, she said. ‘‘There’s always been a very complicated relationship with how you communicate, and what power you have, once you say yes.’’ Having a professional to discuss her concerns about each scene before shooting ‘‘brought a sort of consciousness and awareness and purposefulness to these scenes that I had never had before,’’ she said. Meade had approached HBO worried about the toll sex scenes were taking on her personally; she now realized that the toll had also been an artistic one.
Typically, an actor is supposed to ignore any distractions of her body — the fact that she is hungry, cold, physically intimidated or coursing with adrenaline — although a director measures an artist, at least in part, precisely by how deftly she manages to show these falling away when she performs. One definition of artistry in performance is the sophistication with which an actor marks the space between art and the everyday. Yet it is still fairly novel to argue that the material conditions of an artist’s physical existence are of fundamental importance to the question of how and whether she can do her best work. Working with an intimacy coordinator, ‘‘I’ve found so many different layers within’’ the performance of sex, Meade said. She sounded both strident and buoyant about the discovery, the way people do when they’ve just solved the source of a long-bothersome bug infestation or allergic reaction.
In September, a few weeks before the Broadway previews for Jeremy O. Harris’s ‘‘Slave Play’’ began, Claire Warden arrived to finesse an intimate scene at a Midtown rehearsal studio. The actor Ato Blankson-Wood, who plays a character the audience first meets as an enslaved man, Gary, hopped up on a prop wagon and stood cockily on its lip, arms akimbo, pelvis pointed square to the front of the room.
Although stage directions, especially in ambitious plays, often barely describe what will take place onstage, Warden, who was one of Intimacy Directors International’s first members, told me she wondered, How are we going to do this? when she first read ‘‘Slave Play.’’ This scene called for an increasingly erotic ‘‘meleed pas-de-deux’’ between two characters, in which ‘‘bloodied faces begin colliding, open mouths swallowing chins and noses and ears and missing mouths completely.’’ The scufflers are an ‘‘off-white’’ man named Dustin and ‘‘blue-black’’ Gary, one of three interracial couples we meet on an antebellum-era plantation. In the first act of the play, which is only the second Broadway show with an intimacy director on staff (the first was last summer’s revival of Terrence McNally’s ‘‘Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune,’’ which Warden also worked on), revolves around taboo sexual encounters between each couple. Later — a spoiler — we learn that the antebellum scenes are role plays practiced by contemporary couples undergoing an outlandish experimental therapy. The second half of the play is spent dissecting the racial and sexual dynamics displayed in the first.
Blankson-Wood was in athleisure for rehearsal, but during the show he would be wearing shiny black boots and a pair of Calvin Klein briefs, his chest covered in sweat. From atop the wagon, he tried a line. ‘‘Get on your knees and open your mouth, close your eyes and let your tongue dance around,’’ he ordered in a loud voice. As he spoke, he dropped into a low, suggestive crouch.
He paused, straightened. ‘‘Is that stupid?’’ he asked.
Blankson-Wood shifted. The actor James Cusati-Moyer, playing Dustin, got on his knees and crawled forward, eyes closed. ‘‘Can you guide him slightly?’’ Warden asked. Blankson-Wood improvised a ‘‘tisk-tisk’’ sound against the back of his teeth, the way you’d call a cat. It was delicately, compellingly dirty, and the production staff sitting around the edges of the room made sounds of instinctual approval. ‘‘Ooh! Yes!’’ Warden said.
‘‘Someone in London actually did that to me on the street,’’ Blankson-Wood said. The room groaned.
Warden confirmed with Cusati-Moyer that he was O.K. being summoned by that particular noise.
 Before he and Blankson-Wood became entangled on the wagon, there were a few lines of sparring dialogue, and Cusati-Moyer thought it would feel natural to counter Blankson-Wood with a single step in his direction during one of his lines. Warden thought he should stand his ground. The decision would help set up the rest of the scene, which told a story about how racial hierarchies might dissolve, recongeal and then rear up monstrously again over the course of a single sexual encounter. ‘‘Any specific turn or subtle movement affects everything,’’ Cusati-Moyer said later.
In Susan Sontag’s 1967 essay ‘‘The Pornographic Imagination,’’ about Restoration-era literary pornography, she writes that obscene literature is not all merely obscene: Instead, explicit scenes ‘‘carry with them something that touches upon the reader’s whole experience of his humanity — and his limits as a personality and a body.’’ As the scene between Gary and Dustin crescendos, Dustin licks Gary’s boot while making throaty, encouraging ‘‘urm-hrm’’s of approval. The sound at once conveys the maker’s own pleasure and meanwhile is an energetic performance of enjoyment for a partner. That specific tone of voice, its texture of both private and performed pleasure, is one I don’t think I’ve ever seen deployed onstage before. It is a big part of what makes you feel, as an audience member, that Dustin loves Gary, wants him to feel enjoyed.
Warden began training to be an intimacy coordinator in 2017 after reading about a fight choreographer named Tonia Sina who had spent the last 14 years developing a set of protocols for what she termed ‘‘intimacy for the stage.’’ Sina began her thinking while completing graduate studies in movement coaching for theater, and she honed it in subsequent years working with students at university programs and as a consultant for professional theater companies. She, Siobhan Richardson and Alicia Rodis, the inti­macy coordinator now at HBO, founded Intimacy Directors International in 2015.
On set, intimacy coordinators reserve the power to stop a simulated sex scene after too many takes or to veto a particular move if it hasn’t been properly vetted and discussed with the performer. An intimacy coordinator is the one who makes sure a set is closed before a scene begins, ordering crew out so they aren’t milling around within eyeshot, which used to be common. Before now, Rodis told me, costume and makeup artists often served as de facto intimacy coordinators — they are still the ones who glue on pubic wigs and hold out robes for actors — and she says people in those roles often approach her to confide their gratitude that a set of duties they’ve long performed on the fly, like pulling actors aside when they are clearly uncomfortable, or even, in the case of one costume designer turned intimacy coordinator, speaking up to directors themselves, have finally been formalized and given a name.
Workshops also teach specific technical skills related to realistic portrayals of affectionate touch: A recent trainee named Mitchell McCoy, one of only a handful of male intimacy coordinators in the field, which is primarily dominated by women, most of them white, said one memorable lesson was about how emotion tends to manifest in the hands. If you ‘‘don’t know how to handle someone in a physical capacity,’’ he said, touch tends to be constrained to finger pads. He demonstrated a dispassionate, there-there pat on the edge of the table. If motivated ‘‘more from the heart,’’ touch tends to incorporate the palm. If sexually motivated, touch might include pressure through the hand’s heel.
The specifics of every scene tend to differ so much from project to project, however, that it’s more common to employ a more flexible problem-solving approach than to import isolated moves whole-cloth. An intimacy coordinator’s most specialized skill is less a technical trick you could teach in an hour and more a way of talking and describing movement to elicit a particular quality of response. This is extremely difficult to do well — a bit like being an advanced teacher of dance or yoga combined with being an astute and savvy coach. What do you say to an athlete midgame, in a moment of tension or uncertainty, to get his or her body to move differently, better, with more nuance?
Pace uses simple vocabulary terms when instructing the actors on how to perform — like ‘‘circles,’’ for what someone might do with his pelvis, or ‘‘visible power shift,’’ for switches in position. The body moves more realistically when it is responding to descriptive language, it turns out, than it does while being cued with the words for sex positions. If this sounds counterintuitive, picture a director telling an actor to ‘‘make it a little sexier’’ — which is about what the director sees, not what the actor feels — versus an intimacy coordinator instructing her to walk more slowly and deliberately, or to close the distance between her body and her scene partner’s.
When it comes to depiction itself, intimacy coordination doesn’t lead to markedly different visual treatments of sex: A director’s vision, and a network’s restrictions, are still paramount, and intimacy coordination is designed to help fulfill whatever a director’s visual and dramatic goals for a scene might be. On HBO’s ‘‘Euphoria,’’ for example, a series about teenagers grappling with various forms of addiction and abuse, this season intimacy coordinators helped facilitate unflinchingly graphic depictions of sex performed by very young actors; on FX’s ‘‘Pose,’’ about the gay and transgender ballroom community, they facilitated a love scene between two H.I.V.-positive characters that was groundbreaking in its subject matter but shot in the tastefully banal way of most cinematic intercourse, in a quick-cutting, nipple-grazing montage. I sometimes wondered, though, whether having a sex-positive, consent-educated, inspiringly unafraid person toting nipple covers in many skin shades might eventually have some palpable effect on how intimacy looked by the time it reached a viewer. Intimacy coordination creates choreography specific not only to a director’s vision but also to a role, taking into account how both the character and the actor playing her might feel. If Hollywood stories are indeed moving away from those told largely by cisgender white men, that shift seems as if it would inevitably be hastened by the presence of a professional whose job it is to suggest subtler revelations about the physical and psychological experiences of sex.
 Her background in casting makes her primarily attuned to the way actors define a scene, and as a result, she says, she approaches writing loosely: ‘‘My first thought is like, what’s fun, what’s funny?’’ Before shooting, Rodis, newly hired to coordinate the show, reviewed the script. Her questions, posed to help make the scene look more realistic — ‘‘How is this touch or physical act deepening the narrative?’’ — made Blichfeld question why she needed that sex act. What did it reveal about the characters? Ultimately, she said, she realized she didn’t need it: It was extraneous to the story, and she came up with something else — a close-cropped make-out scene — before the actors even got to set. Some intimacy coordinators even hope that they might participate in script writing in the future; Pace offers consultations on postproduction.
Mouth corners twitching, the two actors, Chace Chester and Malaika Wilson, who are 20, stood to assume their embrace. Chester, who previously studied acting at the prestigious Baltimore School for the Arts, later said he had never actually kissed anyone onstage before. When he first heard about the discipline, he was ‘‘confused,’’ he told me.  After being cast in the production, ‘‘I thought I would be comfortable with it,’’ he said. It wasn’t until he was standing there in front of Wilson that he realized he had no idea what to do with his hands.
‘‘You should have both hands come around the bottom rib height,’’ McCoy told him. To Wilson, he said, ‘‘If you’re both O.K. with it, slide your right hand downstage over the left trapezius, basically coming up to the back of his neck.’’ McCoy asked them to try holding the pose for 10 seconds. ‘‘So basically coming into sort of like the awkward high school dance hug.’’ They stood primly, then broke away. ‘‘Awesome!’’ he said.
For half an hour they kept practicing, rocking back and forth into a tableau of a kissing position and out again. The process was comically incremental, but the inching progress had a soothing effect. Music wafted from down the hall, and the atmosphere lightened. The mood between the actors seemed at once calm and energized, the way real intimacy can be. ‘‘If you’re like, ‘This is weird, humans don’t do this quite often!’ that’s totally O.K.,’’ McCoy said.
