VW, Daimler and BMW sell more cars in China than anywhere else and many already cooperate with Huawei — a dependency Beijing is not shy to exploit.
BERLIN — Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and Premier Li Keqiang of China settled into the back seat of a driverless Volkswagen van, fastened their seatbelts and went for a spin around a disused airport landing strip in central Berlin.
Germany, like all of Europe, is under tremendous pressure to ostracize Huawei by the American government, which fears that the Chinese company is a Trojan horse that would allow China’s government to spy on or control European and American communication networks. The pressure remains even after President Trump signed an initial trade deal with China on Wednesday.
“The West should have a joint solution to 5G because we view the world the same way,” Richard Grenell, the United States ambassador to Germany, said on Thursday in an email.
For months, German lawmakers have danced around the issue of whether to effectively exclude Huawei from the bidding process. The issue is expected to be debated in Parliament again in the coming weeks. As a decision approaches, Ms. Merkel has found herself caught between worried German automakers, who accompanied her on a dozen junkets to Beijing, and her own wary intelligence community.
Ms. Merkel, steward of the pro-business Christian Democratic Party, met on Thursday with lawmakers from her party and urged them to find a solution that would settle the dispute.
Ms. Merkel is opposed to banning the Chinese company.
“Car companies gather loads of personal data from the drivers of their cars, and they face an enormous risk of an angry public outraged to find their data used by the Chinese Communist Party,” said Mr. Grenell, the United States ambassador.
“If we ban Huawei, the German car industry will be pushed out of the Chinese market — and this in a situation where the American president is also threatening to punish German carmakers,” said Sigmar Gabriel, a former German foreign minister and vice chancellor.
Audi, the luxury car unit of Volkswagen, announced a “strategic cooperation” with Huawei on developing autonomous driving technology during Mr. Li’s visit to Berlin last year. Daimler, 9.9 percent owned by Chinese investor Li Shufu, uses Huawei high-performance computing. BMW and others partner with Huawei on research and development.
German carmakers deny that their dependence on Chinese sales has turned them into advocates of Chinese interests.
