Conflicting statements, crossed signals and mixed messages have left the president and his top officials scrambling to explain his mission and goals after the death of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani.
WASHINGTON — If even the Pentagon does not know whether it is coming or going in Iraq, it might be hard to blame the rest of the world for being a little confused about President Trump’s strategy for the Middle East.
Mr. Trump has long said that he likes to be unpredictable and sees that as a strength, meaning he can take enemies by surprise, as he did in taking out perhaps the second-most important figure in Iran, one with much American blood on his hands. But it leaves allies guessing just as much as adversaries, making it a challenge to build support for Mr. Trump’s decisions.
Michèle A. Flournoy, a former under secretary of defense under President Barack Obama who turned down a chance to serve as deputy defense secretary for Mr. Trump, said the chaotic nature of the current foreign policy stemmed from an “impulsive, inconsistent” president without a functional national security process that would ensure that “second- and third-order consequences” were fully considered.
Administration officials dismiss questions about conflicting messages, saying that Mr. Trump’s strategy in the Middle East has been built on protecting American interests.
But unlike Mr. Obama or especially President George W. Bush, who gave long, comprehensive speeches explaining their approaches to the wars of the Middle East, Mr. Trump rarely takes the time to lay out his thinking in any depth. Instead, he offers Americans edgy tweets or clipped sound bites in short encounters with reporters, leaving it to others to outline his strategy, although he plans a statement of his own on Wednesday morning.
Until now, the main person doing any explaining since the strike on General Suleimani has been Mr. Pompeo. Vice President Mike Pence is scheduled to give a speech on Monday describing the administration’s Iran policy at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, a group that has led opposition to the Tehran government.
Mr. Pompeo has been pressed to explain the reasons behind the attack at this time given that General Suleimani has been responsible for the deaths of American soldiers in Iraq going back many years. Asked on Tuesday to elaborate about the “imminent” attack he previously described, Mr. Pompeo instead shifted to General Suleimani’s past actions, citing a rocket attack by forces tied to Iran on an Iraqi base that killed a United States civilian contractor.
“So if you’re looking for imminence, you need look no further than the days that led up to the strike that was taken against Suleimani,” Mr. Pompeo said.
“I have gotten no report from the commander saying we have had a material impact on the ability to engage ISIS,” Mr. Esper said.
The broader questions still center on Mr. Trump’s larger plans for the Middle East. He has veered between pulling out and building up, denouncing the disaster of American involvement in the region since Mr. Bush’s invasion of Iraq in 2003 one moment while threatening a new war against Iran if it misbehaved the next.
He lost his previous defense secretary, Jim Mattis, after abruptly deciding to withdraw forces from Syria, then ended up keeping some troops there anyway. He later stunned America’s Kurdish allies by pulling troops from northern Syria, allowing Turkey to push the Kurds out of the territory. And the last time he authorized a strike against Iran — in retaliation for downing an unmanned American drone — Mr. Trump abruptly called it off with 10 minutes to go.
Even Mr. Trump’s best friends in the region are trying to figure out where he is headed at this point. The president met secretly in the White House on Monday with a top visiting official from Saudi Arabia and talked on the phone with Qatar’s emir, neither conversation disclosed by the White House until reported by the other countries.
