Women in Chile, Brazil, Argentina and elsewhere know: Stopping violence against women starts with politics and power.
This performance, which quickly went viral, was created last year by the feminist collective Lastesis in Valparaíso, Chile, and is based on the work of the Argentine-Brazilian anthropologist Rita Segato. The lyrics describe how the state upholds systematic violations of women’s rights, through institutions such as the judiciary and the police. It’s not just that members of those institutions simply disregard the complaints — looking the other way, doubting the victims — but that they are often the perpetrators themselves. “This oppressive state is a macho rapist,” the chant goes.
The choreographed dance begins with a driving drum beat, as the women do a side-to-side movement and stomp out the rhythm with their feet. Many verses speak universally about the violence against women: They mention rape, femicide, impunity for the killers. “And it’s not my fault, not where I was, not how I dressed,” they shout, as if collectively rebuffing the same old forms of victim-blaming.
The performance also makes references to police abuse in Chile, and by extension in neighboring countries. Part of the choreography includes squatting down, hands behind the head, a common search procedure still performed in many Latin American countries: Police officers and prison wardens often force women — sometimes even children — to squat, naked, in order to do a body cavity search.
But “Un violador en tu camino” is way more than its Latin American specificities. This is why it has spread so far and so quickly. It speaks about something that is true in too many countries — not only Chile, Argentina or Brazil. “The rapist is you,” the women repeat here and everywhere, either pointing to a courthouse, to the police headquarters or to the presidential palace. They mean that violations against women are not isolated events, not merely connected to interpersonal relations, but rather, essentially political. Activists point a finger at institutions that facilitate gender-based violence by systematically dehumanizing women and promoting ideologies to keep them under control.
For proof that this is really a global political issue, look to Turkey, where the police broke up a performance of the song in Istanbul and confiscated the activists’ megaphone. Six women were arrested for supposedly insulting the president and degrading the institutions of the state. In a separate incident, courts issued arrest warrants for 25 women who protested in Izmir, while nine were detained. “Turkey has become the only country where one has to have immunity to stage this protest,” said a lawmaker, Sera Kadigil, as she and other colleagues staged a version of the protest in the parliament.
It should come as no surprise that female representatives make up only 17 percent of the Turkish parliament and 11.8 percent of the ministerial positions. The country ranks 130th out of 153 countries in the World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Report for 2020.
Here in Brazil, we face similarly depressing statistics. Activists here have added a couple of verses to the lyrics of “Un violador,” saying: “Marielle is present. Her killer is a friend of our president.” These refer to Marielle Franco, a Brazilian City Council member who was assassinated in 2018, and to the fact that President Jair Bolsonaro has ties to both of the suspects in the killing. (The investigation is ongoing.) In Brazil, women occupy 15 percent of the lower house seats and 9 percent of ministerial positions.
According to the 2020 Global Gender Gap Report, the largest gender disparity in the world still lies in the sphere of political empowerment. I dare say that’s where everything else begins. Only 25 percent of the 35,127 global parliamentary seats are taken up by women, a figure that drops to only 21 percent at the ministerial level. In nine of the 153 countries the forum examines, women are not represented at all. Over the past 50 years, 85 countries have had no female head of state.
It is no wonder that women from Chile, where the song was created, are demanding gender parity for a forthcoming constitutional convention. There will be no justice for women as long as we are kept out of the political process. There won’t be any hope of equality. The rapists will continue while most of us stand powerless outside courthouses, police stations and presidential palaces, furiously pointing at them, to no avail.