Opinion|When Will Companies Finally Step Up to Fight Climate Change?
Microsoft and BlackRock have made positive moves. But there’s still a lot of money to be made in green tech.
Is a “decarbonized” future possible?
That’s what Microsoft promised it would aim for when it pledged this week to go carbon negative by 2030. It added that it would attempt by 2050 to “remove from the environment all the carbon the company has emitted either directly or by electrical consumption since it was founded in 1975.” Also on deck: a $1 billion climate innovation fund.
The Microsoft announcement was preceded by a more surprising one from BlackRock, the world’s largest asset manager, with $7 trillion under its management. Larry Fink, the chief executive, said in his annual letter to investors that climate change would be a prime focus of the company’s investment decisions. Despite the fact that BlackRock continues to be a major investor in coal, oil and gas companies, he said that the company would begin to step away from certain carbon investments.
That’s trillionaire, with a T.
But in the same way that tech ignores the benefits of diversity — which many studies have shown to be a key signal of a successful organization — it continues to ignore the benefits of green tech. The amount of investment and innovation aimed at green technology remains stubbornly low compared with other tech sectors; most of the high-profile investments come from the likes of Bill Gates and Elon Musk.
I still do not get why Silicon Valley largely scorns green tech — except that perhaps it is a lot harder to get right than offering a new app in which teenagers can do dance-offs.
It’s a big mistake. Recent reports outline a multitrillion-dollar opportunity in the years ahead in a variety of areas, including battery storage, urban mobility, renewables, software and artificial intelligence to help us understand climate data, the food production ecosystem and even the way we construct our buildings, which is a surprisingly major contributor to the greenhouse-gas problem. So, too, fashion sustainability, since clothing has a life cycle of waste.
With so many roads to pursue, it’s been vexing to see that a lot of the focus from tech companies has been around direct air-capture of carbon — a kind of Ghostbusters approach of sucking up the baddies. That’s all well and good, but it only ameliorates the problem with creative cleaning-up rather than by solving it at the source.
The clean energy opportunities are legion, especially as cities and states show more commitment to fighting climate change than the Trump administration. Localities are setting energy targets for many services they deliver, all of which will require vendors with creative solutions.
And as governments increase their support for electric vehicles, which could make up a significant part of passenger car sales in the next 20 years, there is a greater demand for innovation in batteries and storage, as well as in charging solutions that are faster and more efficient.
That topic is coming up more frequently with the most unexpected of leaders. For example, in a recent meeting I had with the Starbucks chief executive, Kevin Johnson (who was a longtime Microsoft executive), the main line of discussion was around tech solutions to climate change. While banning plastic straws is all well and good, Mr. Johnson sees a bigger role in bolstering his company’s bottom line by focusing on sustainability (and also on the health of his workers).
So, this week at the economic forum in Davos, Switzerland, where a big focus was on the existential threat to humanity posed by climate change, it was more than depressing to see the climate change denier in chief, Donald Trump, attack what he called “prophets of doom,” presumably referring to activists like Greta Thunberg, who was also in attendance.
And if it takes Mr. Trump’s unruly ranting to get our greatest minds focused on stopping our environmental suicide, so be it.
