Politics|Pete Buttigieg Once Led in Iowa. Can He Get His Groove Back?
With three of his top rivals pinned down at the Senate impeachment trial, Mr. Buttigieg has seized the opportunity to camp out in the state, largely below the radar.
BURLINGTON, Iowa — With less than two weeks to go, Pete Buttigieg has a strategy to make up lost ground before the Iowa caucuses, one with echoes of the last Democratic president who carried the state by campaigning everywhere with a promise to mend divisions.
“Now is the season for us to bring hope back into style,” Mr. Buttigieg said in Orange City. He laid down variations of the line at stop after stop: “I’m asking you to summon the sense of hope,” he said in tiny Harlan.
Rather than turning off voters with its presumption, the line brought down the house, even as many in the crowd — like all Iowa Democratic crowds these days — said they were still undecided ahead of the Feb. 3 caucuses.
With three of Mr. Buttigieg’s top rivals pinned down at the Senate impeachment trial, and a nasty skirmish between Senator Bernie Sanders and former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. over Social Security grabbing headlines, Mr. Buttigieg has seized the opportunity to camp out in Iowa, largely below the radar, exuding the nonaggressive vibe he embraced at the recent Democratic debate in Des Moines. His most visible appearance before the caucuses may be a town-hall-style event on Fox News planned for Jan. 26.
There is some evidence his discipline in not attacking his Democratic opponents — or even President Trump — may be paying dividends.
Charnell Sanders, who collected a Buttigieg yard sign at his rally in Pella on Monday, said she had voted for Mr. Trump, but now regretted it and planned to caucus for Mr. Buttigieg. Her husband remains a Trump supporter, and she does not want strife over the president in her marriage. “I like that Pete doesn’t attack President Trump so much as the other candidates do,” said Ms. Sanders, a clerk at a college.
While Mr. Sanders and Senator Elizabeth Warren scrabble for the progressive Democratic base, Mr. Buttigieg is showing up mainly in counties that voted for Mr. Obama before flipping to Mr. Trump. A two-day, seven-stop itinerary this week through southeast Iowa took him to multiple Obama-Trump counties with Representative Dave Loebsack, the congressman who represents the region and has endorsed Mr. Buttigieg.
Mr. Loebsack recalled in an interview that he had supported Howard Dean in the 2004 primary, when a personal feud between Mr. Dean and Richard A. Gephardt in the weeks before the caucuses destroyed both candidates. “That was a terrible way to go,” he said.
The latest state poll by The Des Moines Register and CNN, in mid-January, showed a reversal of Mr. Buttigieg’s surge last fall. From November to this month, he fell back nine percentage points, the largest drop of any of the top four candidates, who remained tightly bunched.
In two national polls released Wednesday, which found Mr. Sanders and Mr. Biden trading first and second place, Mr. Buttigieg came in fourth and fifth. CNN showed Mr. Buttigieg with 11 percent support from Democrats and Democratic-leaning independents, and Monmouth had the former mayor at 6 percent.
A strand of conventional wisdom is that Mr. Buttigieg peaked too soon. Given the large role that grass-roots organizing plays in the caucuses, however, that may be overly glib.
Mr. Rosman, a farmer, said that his preferred candidate was Ms. Klobuchar but that Mr. Buttigieg could be a second choice — an important factor if Ms. Klobuchar does not gain a threshold of support in her caucus and voters must pick another candidate. “He kind of reminds me of the last president we had, almost,” he said, in a nod to Mr. Obama.
Mr. Ferguson, an Air Force veteran, said Mr. Buttigieg was one of his final few choices — “but Donald Trump is on that list, too,” he added.
Mr. Ferguson, who drives a school bus, said he liked how Mr. Trump had handled the economy as well as his order to kill a top Iranian general. “As vulgar as he might sound at times, and as coarse and undiplomatic,” he said, “my life continues to improve. So what do I have to complain about?” He illustrated the limits of Mr. Buttigieg’s appeal to wavering supporters of the president.
As Mr. Buttigieg spoke, people applauded lines that gently swiped at Mr. Trump. Patriotism, he said, “isn’t about chest thumping or throwing military parades for the president.” The crowd loved it. Mr. Ferguson, the commander of the local American Legion post, kept his hands pinned at his side.