For new folks: Welcome! Gyms are often big and loud and full of sweaty bodies. It’s very weird!
Happy New Year, runners! Even if you’re like me and prefer to run outside, for a lot of us, gyms are a big part of our fitness picture, and right now, the gym is very crowded.
So I have some advice about the gym, whether you’re a regular or someone going to the gym for the first time — or the first time in a long time.
For new folks: Welcome! Gyms are often big and loud and full of sweaty bodies. It’s very weird! But you’re here for a reason, and we want you to stay.
To start, don’t feel as if you have to try all the equipment, because that will only get you hurt. There’s nothing wrong with fiddling around with the weights and machines for 20 minutes or so, then calling it a day. But keep it safe. Ask if the gym has a personal training program (which is probably discounted at the start of the year) or group classes. We also have a series of guides to help you get started, including those for how to start working out, getting strong, a 9-minute strength workout and, of course, how to start running.
You don’t need to spend hundreds of dollars on new workout clothes with the latest high-tech fibers to fit in. When I started seriously running and working out, I wore all cotton and guess what?  While things like sweat-wicking clothes and Bluetooth headphones make my gym time a better experience, they’re not mandatory.
So wear whatever workout clothes you have, then figure out what might make your gym time more pleasant. You could even use the promise of rewarding yourself with new gear as motivation: If I stick to my gym routine for two weeks, I am going to buy a new workout top, or reusable water bottle, or whatever you think might help you out.
For my fellow gym rats: Yes, it’s crowded, and yes, new people are getting a feel for what the gym has to offer, which means they might get in your way. Gyms are intimidating for those who don’t go there often, so be kind, courteous and welcoming. Remember when you first started going? Keep that in mind these next few weeks. And if crowds really aren’t your thing, here are 5 cheapish things for a home gym, which can sub in until crowds subside (as part of my home gym, I also have a batting tee in the basement. It’s great for working out frustration and my core).
Get to know your gym’s rules. Maybe they set time limits on machines, or ban certain items of clothing, so it’s not a bad idea to brush up on what your gym requires as part of your membership.
Be clean! That means wiping down your machine after you’re done with it. Also, don’t spit in the water fountain. Yes, I have to say this because I’ve seen it so many times.
Don’t interrupt anyone’s workout. Even if you think you’re being kind, stopping someone during their workout is just rude. It can also come off as creepy. Unless someone is in mortal danger, let them do their thing. If you have concerns that someone else’s workout is putting other people in danger, let a staff member know. That’s their job, not yours.
Don’t take pictures of other people working out. Not only is this inappropriate, but it could get you in big trouble. In 2016, the model Dani Mathers took a photo of a 70-year-old woman in the shower area of an LA Fitness and posted it on Snapchat with the caption “If I can’t unsee this then you can’t either.” She lost her radio job and faced criminal charges (she was sentenced to one month of removing graffiti in Los Angeles).
Don’t talk on your phone while working out. If you must take a call, step into the gym’s lobby or another area designated for cellphone use. Not only are calls rude for others who are trying to work out, but I once overheard some very sensitive information because the guy on the next elliptical decided to take a conference call. (Not to mention: What could it possibly sound like to other people on the call? It can’t be good).
You can check your phone, but don’t do so to the point that you monopolize a machine, especially when a gym is crowded. I have completed workouts in the time some people sit on one machine because they’re looking at their phones. It’s not good use of your time, and it’s not respectful of other people working out.
Your smartphone should not be used as a speaker. If you want to listen to something while you work out, that’s great — and that’s why headphones and earbuds exist. Don’t subject everyone else to your preference (this applies to running races, too).
What tips do you have to offer new, or longtime, gym goers? Let me know: I’m on Twitter @byjenamiller.
“Planet Money” also did a great piece in 2014 about how gyms build their business model on us not showing up. That might be the inspiration you need to prove them wrong.
Run Well and Happy New Year!