Opinion|Why Did Alan Dershowitz Say Yes to Trump?
Why Did Alan Dershowitz Say Yes to Trump?
Serious constitutional scholars don’t accept his defense of the president in the Senate impeachment trial.
Mr. Harper is a lawyer.
Any lawyer in private practice can generally say no when asked to take on a case. So why did Mr. Dershowitz say yes to Donald Trump and agree to represent him in his Senate impeachment trial?
But on Sunday, Mr. Dershowitz was acting as one of Mr. Trump’s lawyers when he said to George Stephanopoulos that abusive or obstructive conduct is not impeachable and that an “actual crime” is required. And although the evidence demonstrates that Mr. Trump has committed crimes, Mr. Dershowitz asserted that, unless those crimes are explicitly stated in articles of impeachment, they cannot lead to Mr. Trump’s removal from office.
Mr. Tribe likewise debunked Mr. Dershowitz’s argument that the president could not be impeached for “abuse of power,” noting, “No serious constitutional scholar has ever agreed with it.” Among those scholars is the Republicans’ designated constitutional law expert, Jonathan Turley. He testified before the House Judiciary Committee that impeachment could result from conduct that was not technically a criminal act.
Mr. Dershowitz is an expert on civil liberties and criminal law and procedure, not constitutional law generally. Facing widespread criticism and trying to reconcile his 1998 statements with his new position, he now says that Congress doesn’t need a “technical crime” to impeach, but there must be “criminal-like” conduct, or conduct “akin to treason and bribery.” To the extent his earlier statement “suggested the opposite,” he retracts it.
Such sophistry might be rhetorically pleasing to Mr. Dershowitz, but his 1998 view is still the correct one. And the articles of impeachment against the president plainly satisfy Mr. Dershowitz’s newest standard too.
I’m not suggesting that Mr. Dershowitz is corrupt. But he doesn’t seem to be protecting the Constitution or fighting for anything that looks like justice.
