Mr. Evans had prosecuted Mr. Flowers, a black man, in six different trials for the same crime. All either ended in mistrial or convictions overturned on appeal, and Mr. Flowers was released on bail in December.
For decades, Doug Evans, a white district attorney, was dogged in his prosecution of Curtis Flowers, a black man, for a 1996 quadruple murder in Winona, Miss., even as the case collapsed six times in mistrials or convictions that were reversed on appeal.
But it appears that Mr. Evans will not try Mr. Flowers for a seventh time after Mr. Evans moved to recuse himself from the case on Monday and hand it over to the Mississippi attorney general’s office.
A lawyer for Mr. Flowers, who was released on bail in December, said that the request would most likely be approved by the judge, Joseph H. Loper of Montgomery County Circuit Court, who could not immediately be reached on Tuesday. While the prosecution is still pending, supporters of Mr. Flowers said Mr. Evans’s recusal was a positive step in a case that has incited conversations nationwide about the fairness of the criminal justice system for minorities.
Robert McDuff, a lawyer for Mr. Flowers, said in a statement on Monday that he was pleased with Mr. Evans’s recusal.
Mr. Evans could not immediately be reached for comment on Tuesday.
Mr. Flowers, 49, has been accused of murder in the 1996 killings of four people in a furniture store in Winona.
In the first three trials, Mr. Flowers was found guilty by nearly all-white juries. Each of those convictions was overturned by the State Supreme Court. In the fourth and fifth trials, juries failed to reach verdicts.
The United States Supreme Court ruled in June that Mr. Evans had violated the Constitution by striking black jurors in Mr. Flowers’s sixth and most recent trial. His conviction was overturned, setting the stage for the possible seventh trial. In December, Mr. Flowers was released on bail — the first time he has not been behind bars in 23 years.
The reporters poked holes in the forensic evidence prosecutors used and raised questions about an informant who said Mr. Flowers had confessed to him.
In November, the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund and the MacArthur Justice Center filed a federal class-action lawsuit against Mr. Evans, accusing him of racial discrimination. The lawsuit claims that Mr. Evans and his prosecutors, since 1992, have used peremptory strikes against black jurors 4.4 times more frequently than with white jurors.
