In a first for the country, an active-duty South Korean soldier faced a military panel that decided whether she was fit to serve after a gender-reassignment operation.
Rights groups have long complained about unclear guidelines on the issue, citing cases where transgender people exempted from military service were later sued on charges of faking their gender identity to avoid the draft. Some transgender people voluntarily join the military but hide their identity to avoid harassment and abuse from fellow soldiers. Others are forced to serve after failing to convince conscript officials of their identity.
The South Korean military does not have specific regulations on what to do with those who have gender-reassignment operations while in service.
Sergeant Byeon, who is in her 20s, joined the military in 2017. The Center for Military Human Rights said the sergeant had undergone hormone therapy and other treatments before having a sex-change operation abroad last year while on leave. She wanted to continue to serve as a career soldier and asked a court to be legally recognized as a woman.
A military-run hospital, where the sergeant had checked in for post-surgery treatment, said that she was handicapped and could be discharged from the army because of the loss of genitalia from the surgery.
But the military pushed its own discharge panel to make a final determination on Sergeant Byeon’s fitness. The panel decided on Wednesday that she was not fit to serve.
Human rights groups have said the military needs to be more welcoming to transgender people. After decades of low birthrates, South Korea has had increasing difficulty finding enough recruits to fill the ranks of its 600,000-member military. But South Korean society harbors a deep bias against L.G.B.T. people, despite increasingly vocal support in recent years.
Gay and transgender soldiers in the military have long complained of discrimination and abuse. Gay men and lesbians are not barred from service, but they have been subject to investigations by military officials.
