Tennis|‘I’m Better Than That,’ Serena Said. But Her Competition Is Better, Too.
‘I’m Better Than That,’ Serena Said. But Her Competition Is Better, Too.
A third-round loss in the Australian Open marks an uncharacteristic faltering for Serena Williams, the best player of her era. Is the end close?
Yet her quest to secure that record-tying singles title remains just that: a quest, and her three-year, circuitous route back to the highest peaks of tennis — difficulties with childbirth; a confrontation with a chair umpire at the United States Open that set off debates about women, power and race; the surging tide of younger contenders — has arrived at a crossroads.
And so now the inevitable questions come about her next chapter, at a time when a number of tennis’ titans are aging and quitting. Williams said after the loss that she has no intention of stopping. Still, it is unclear whether the unimaginable day of a Serena-less world of sports closer or if this is yet another setback on the path to a momentous comeback befitting her aura, something on the order of Tiger Woods’s victory at the Masters last year.
“You can never count her out because she’s Serena, but it’s increasingly getting more difficult,” said Chris Evert, the ESPN commentator and 18-time Grand Slam singles champion, in an interview late on Friday night.
It was easy, perhaps too easy, to view Friday as a changing of the guard, with former No. 1 Caroline Wozniacki heading into retirement after her third-round defeat to Ons Jabeur, and with the American 15-year-old Coco Gauff recording her most significant victory yet by upsetting No. 3 seed Naomi Osaka, the defending champion.
And yet her 6-3, 6-4 triumph was as much about Osaka’s shortcomings, as it was about Gauff’s talent.
The power gap has indeed closed with Williams’s opponents, although her first serve does remain a singular weapon, but only when she places it properly. Against Wang, Williams landed just 56 percent of her first serves.
Still, the intimidation factor has also diminished and the bonus points that go along with it. Unlike last summer, Williams converted just one of six break points against Wang Friday.
You could even see it earlier this month in Auckland, New Zealand, where Williams won her first tour title since her comeback and struggled to overwhelm lower-ranked players like Christina McHale from the baseline. Her loss to Wang was Williams’s earliest loss at a hardcourt Grand Slam tournament since the 2006 Australian Open, where she was beaten in Round 3 by Daniela Hantuchova.
