Monday: Fans across Southern California mourned Kobe Bryant.
Word of Kobe Bryant’s death ricocheted around a mist-shrouded Echo Park Lake, where the usual Sunday mix of joggers, food vendors and residents of a tree-shaded homeless encampment reacted with utter disbelief.
Fans showed up in droves to pay their respects at Staples Center, to toast the Los Angeles Lakers legend, to light candles, to cry and to pray.
The tributes to Bryant rolled in from around the country on Sunday after the news broke that he had been killed in a helicopter crash along with his 13-year-old daughter, Gianna, and seven other people.
But the shock of Bryant’s death at 41 hit particularly hard in Southern California, where people across geographic, economic and cultural divides were united for the day — in grief.
Although Bryant was a global celebrity who transformed the N.B.A., fans said he always felt like a true local.
Mr. Epiceno showed me a Dodgers tattoo on one forearm, and a tattoo that read “Rams” on the other. On his back, he said, was his Lakers ink.
A lifelong Angeleno, Mr. Epiceno said he admired Bryant’s efforts to help the poor in Los Angeles and to work in struggling communities.
But he said he also looked forward to Bryant adding to his basketball legacy: He had hoped Bryant would someday return to the Lakers as coach.
In Fullerton, the manager of a Mexican restaurant told The Daily Pilot about the carnitas and flan Bryant would order to take back to his family in Newport Coast. Bryant would stand in line like any other patron, the manager told the paper.
On a phone call from Ocean’s Eleven Casino — a no-frills poker room in Oceanside, where conversation was quickly dominated by the crash — the former University of Michigan basketball coach Bill Frieder told me he was devastated to hear about the death of Bryant, whom he’d known to be generous with his time.
But then he heard Bryant’s daughter, too, had died. It was an added sting he struggled to put into words.
Mr. Frieder, who lives in Del Mar, had seen Gianna Bryant play in the San Diego area. Even at 11 or 12, the girl seemed on track to be as good as her father, easily outshining teenage boys on the court.
Suzi Farajiani, 34, talked to my colleague Louis Keene near the crash site in Calabasas. She told him she remembered the day Bryant was drafted.
Later in the day, at Staples Center, Miriam saw women in gowns and men in suits arriving for the Grammy Awards blend into the crowd of fans in jeans and purple and gold jerseys.
The Los Angeles County authorities said Bryant and his daughter were two of nine people killed in the helicopter crash, including the pilot. John Altobelli, a longtime baseball coach at Orange Coast College; his wife, Keri; and their daughter Alyssa were also killed, according to university officials.
The authorities said it could take several days to recover bodies from the crash site.
Bryant and his daughter were on their way to a sports academy where he coached her team.
“Tonight is for Kobe,” Lizzo announced as she opened the Grammy Awards. Here is what happened at the Grammys.
For decades, Bryant defined the Lakers. And he shaped their future.
Bryant wrote a poem, which led to an Oscar-winning short, “Dear Basketball.” Here’s the back story.
Eric Garcetti, the mayor of Los Angeles, said on Twitter that City Hall was lit in purple and gold starting at 8:24 p.m. in honor of Bryant and the other victims of the crash.
Share your memories: If you have a favorite memory of watching Kobe Bryant on the court, or if you encountered him in the community, share with us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Please send us your full name, age and where you live and we may publish your note.
