San Francisco’s Joe Staley was a track star and a tight end. Kansas City’s Eric Fisher was as skinny as a wide receiver. A small program built them into blind-side monsters.
MIAMI — Turning to his left and looking to make a play, Nick Mullens tried to flip a screen pass in a meaningless December game between the San Francisco 49ers and the Denver Broncos in 2018, only to have Shelby Harris, a defensive tackle for the Broncos, knock the pass off its trajectory.
As the ball hung in the air, Joe Staley saw his opportunity.
Staley, the longest-tenured player on the San Francisco 49ers and a six-time Pro Bowler at left tackle, knew exactly what to do in that situation: knock the ball down. But instead of doing the right thing, Staley snatched the ball, spun to his left and plowed forward — and was tackled for a 5-yard loss. He then rose to his feet and celebrated as if he had scored a game-winning touchdown.
The 49ers won that game, improving to 3-10, but Coach Kyle Shanahan suggested that Staley might be in line for a fine, adding that the play had revealed a certain character flaw in Staley, then 34.
Of course, Staley, who will be protecting quarterback Jimmy Garoppolo’s blind side against the Kansas City Chiefs in the Super Bowl on Sunday, was not always an offensive lineman. When he arrived at Central Michigan in 2004, he was a 230-pound tight end who had been a track star at Rockford High School in Michigan. And even after the Chippewas asked him to bulk up and play tackle — a process that saw Staley gain around 75 pounds — he retained much of his agility and burst.
When told about that comment, Kittle concurred.
Staley came first, after being recruited as a tight end and then starring as a tackle. He put in countless hours with the team’s strength coach, Paul Longo, and that helped lead San Francisco to select him with the 28th pick in the 2007 draft. At the time, he was the highest draft pick in Central Michigan history.
A few years after Staley left campus, Fisher arrived as an unheralded left tackle who stood 6 feet 7 inches but weighed only 225 pounds. Fisher, who described Staley as an inspiration, bulked his way up to 306 pounds before the 2013 N.F.L. combine, and was rewarded for that effort when Kansas City selected him with the first overall pick in the draft — making him just the fifth offensive lineman in the draft’s 84-year history to receive that distinction.
Plas Presnell, who spent 31 years as an assistant coach, recruiter and football operations manager for Central Michigan’s football program, said it was no coincidence that Staley and Fisher had gone through such radical transformations during their years in Mount Pleasant. As a Mid-American Conference program that did not have the recruiting machines of college football’s heavy hitters, Central Michigan had to look for players who had the frame for a position, even if they were still lacking the necessary bulk.
The methods by which the players bulked up, however, were different.
Staley described a painstaking approach to adding 25 pounds a year, which involved going to some extremes.
For Fisher, who arrived at college skinnier than many wide receivers, the change in size had more to do with access to Central Michigan’s meal plan than any sort of well-orchestrated effort.
In a league that grapples with obesity problems, particularly among retired players, tales of young men making a concerted effort to gain the weight of a full-size punching bag opens up a larger question of what happens after they stop playing football.
Joe Thomas, a retired left tackle who starred for the Cleveland Browns, said he had added 70 pounds to his natural frame to compete at the pro level. The thing he had most looked forward to about retirement, he said, was the ability to eat only when he was hungry, and his transformation over the last two years could serve as something of a model for both Staley and Fisher after their playing days. He is more than 50 pounds lighter since leaving the N.F.L. after the 2017 season.
While Fisher said he believed his weight had been added in a natural way and that he didn’t struggle to maintain it, Staley — the track star who once ran the 200 in 21.9 seconds — said that he still felt like a smaller man who had to endure food he didn’t love in order to maintain bulk.
Dropping weight would undoubtedly be good for his palate, and for his long-term health, but he showed his cards a bit by adding that if he were to lose that weight, he could probably just play tight end instead.
Staley’s Time to Shine?
Staley and Fisher praised each other in interviews ahead of Sunday’s Super Bowl, and said they kept in touch thanks to their Central Michigan connection. The parallels between them have continued, as the remarkably durable players struggled with injuries this season, only to round back into Pro Bowl-worthy shape in time for the playoffs.
But in an evenly matched game between superb teams, any element of surprise could be the difference between a win or a loss — which inspired a question to San Francisco’s players about whether Staley, in a season that set a record for receiving touchdowns by 300-pound players, could contribute in the passing game if the 49ers needed him.
Nick Bosa, San Francisco’s star rookie at defensive end, offered Staley’s 40-yard dash time off the top of his head, and Garoppolo brought up Staley’s time in the 200, saying he would not be surprised by any of his left tackle’s athletic feats.
But Presnell, who has known Staley for nearly 20 years, said the only thing missing was opportunity. Asked if Staley would catch a ball thrown his way, Presnell was emphatic.
“There is no doubt,” he said.
