Pro Football|Have You Seen This Trophy?
Have You Seen This Trophy?
We tried tracking down the holy grail of American sports memorabilia — the Brunswick-Balke-Collender Cup, given to the first pro football champions — which has been missing since 1920.
AKRON, Ohio — Here you see a precious 100-year-old trophy. It is made of sterling silver, lovingly created for a team championship, and first presented at a prominent gathering inside an old-world hotel.
Shaped like a cup, the award has handles, which made it easy for the gleeful recipients to hoist it overhead. Their achievement? Winning the first N.F.L. championship, in 1920.
The N.F.L. has no idea where the Brunswick-Balke-Collender Cup is. The archives of the Pro Football Hall of Fame in Canton, Ohio, contain the original, typewritten minutes of league meetings that authenticate the existence of the Cup, named for the early-20th century sporting goods company that donated it. But the trail goes cold by 1921.
The only known photo of the Brunswick-Balke-Collender Cup.
At the meeting, the owners voted to thank the Brunswick-Balke-Collender company for presenting the league with, as the meeting minutes called it, “a loving cup” that would go to the association’s champion every year. According to newspaper accounts, throughout the inaugural season, the cup had a place of honor in the meeting site, the auto dealership owned by Ralph Hay, who also owned the A.P.F.A.’s Canton Bulldogs.
Asked if his father kept any mementos of his time linked to the genesis of the N.F.L. — like, say, a silver loving cup trophy — Hay laughed loudly.
O.K., now we were getting somewhere.
Jeff Modlin, another of Nied’s five grandchildren, who lives in Lake Forest, Ill., inherited pictures of the cigar store interior. Alas, the Brunswick-Balke-Collender Cup is not front and center, or in the background, of any of those pictures. Modlin also inherited a football-shaped gold fob, a popular jewelry item in the 1920s that would have attached to a watch chain, which was awarded to each of the 1920 Akron Pros and owners.
Ranney, who played football at the University of Akron, stayed involved with Nied until their football team began to falter on the field and at the gate in the mid-1920s, when the duo gave up their N.F.L. franchise. Ranney became a county engineer and a leader in local Democratic Party circles. He retired to Florida, where he died in 1970.
Another grandchild, Elaine Roy of Lakeside Park, Ky., had a different theory.
Brunswick-Balke-Collender, primarily based in Chicago and Cincinnati, had been a major manufacturer of billiards tables and other sporting goods in 1920 and later played a leading role in the midcentury bowling boom in America. Today, what is left is Brunswick Corporation, whose products are marine related. Fortunately, the company has a resident historian, Joe Newell, who remembers a foreman at the company’s Kansas City, Mo., plant asking in 1960 about what had happened to the N.F.L.’s first championship trophy.
Kendle, the archivist at the Hall of Fame, suggested that the trophy could have made its way to the 1921 A.P.F.A. champions, the Decatur Staleys in Illinois, even if the league meetings never mentioned it. The team was named for A.E. Staley, the owner of a prominent starch company whose football franchise eventually became the Chicago Bears.
So, in the end, as the Super Bowl of the N.F.L.’s 100th season approaches, I have not found the holy grail of America sports memorabilia.
Look at the image of the Brunswick-Balke-Collender Cup.
