The president met twice in 10 days with donors who went on to become key players in Rudolph W. Giuliani’s Ukraine pressure campaign.
The recording shows the presence of Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman at a gathering of President Trump’s donors in April 2018, and attended by Ronna McDaniel, the chairwoman of the Republican National Committee.
A lawyer for Lev Parnas, the former associate of President Trump’s personal lawyer Rudolph W. Giuliani who has offered to testify at the impeachment trial, released a new recording on Thursday of Mr. Trump meeting in April 2018 with a small group of donors at his private club in Florida.
The recording documented the presence of Mr. Parnas and his business partner, Igor Fruman, at the club, Mar-a-Lago, with the president, the first of two such donor gatherings they participated in with him that month. They met with him again 10 days later, on April 30, at his Washington hotel.
Mr. Trump has sought to distance himself from the two men, who would later become integral players in Mr. Giuliani’s effort to pressure Ukraine into announcing investigations that could help the president’s 2020 re-election campaign.
The release of the recording came a day after Mr. Parnas traveled to Washington to rally support for calling witnesses — including himself — at the impeachment trial.
In the recording, Mr. Trump can be heard discussing his polling numbers, the 2018 midterm elections and a range of policy issues of interest to the guests, including immigration and the war in Syria. The exchanges offered another window into the president’s interactions with his top financial supporters — and, in one case, his openness to their concerns about a high-profile element of his foreign policy.
The event was apparently recorded by Mr. Fruman on his phone. In October, federal prosecutors in New York charged Mr. Parnas and Mr. Fruman with campaign finance violations, including what officials said were efforts to mask their involvement in a $325,000 donation to a pro-Trump fund-raising committee.
The event at Mar-a-Lago was organized by the Republican National Committee and the National Republican Congressional Committee, and was attended by Ronna McDaniel, the chairwoman of the national committee, and Pete Sessions, a former chairman of the congressional committee who was then a member of Congress from Texas.
Ms. McDaniel greeted Mr. Parnas and Mr. Fruman familiarly, in the manner of a politician who shakes the hands of thousands of people whose acquaintance she may — or may not — have previously made.
A spokesman for the Republican National Committee dismissed the greeting as insignificant.
It was at that event that Mr. Parnas met Mr. Sessions. The two men developed a relationship over the following weeks and months, records show. They would eventually discuss removing the United States ambassador to Ukraine at the time, Marie L. Yovanovitch, which became a focus of the impeachment trial.
Mr. Parnas’s lawyer, Joseph A. Bondy, had released another recording on Saturday of the donor dinner held 10 days later in Washington, at which the president discussed Ms. Yovanovitch with Mr. Parnas, Mr. Fruman and other donors.
Among those acknowledged at the April 20 meeting in Florida was Brian Ballard, an influential lobbyist who is a top fund-raiser for Mr. Trump and the Republican Party.
Five days before the event, Mr. Ballard registered to lobby for a United States-based Syrian opposition group called Citizens for a Secure and Safe America, which paid his firm $350,000 in 2018 and 2019. He recommended that the group’s leaders take their case against President Bashar al-Assad directly to Mr. Trump by paying to attend a fund-raising event, according to a report in The Wall Street Journal last year.
Rim Al-Bezem, a Pennsylvania cardiologist who is the president of the Syrian opposition group, donated a total of $18,800 to the Republican National Committee and its Senate campaign arm. In an interview, she said she raised additional money from other Syrian-American activists.
As a result, she and an associate secured invitations to the April 20, 2018, Mar-a-Lago round table, which came a week after Mr. Trump ordered airstrikes against Syrian research, storage and military targets to punish Mr. Assad for a suspected chemical attack that killed more than 40 people.
Dr. Al-Bezem and her associate assured the president that Syrian-Americans were thankful, but also pushed Mr. Trump to take a harder line against Mr. Assad.
Four months later, Dr. Al-Bezem raised an even more acute concern at another round table with Mr. Trump — this one benefiting the Mike Braun’s campaign for Senate in Indiana, to which Dr. Al-Bezem donated $1,000. Mr. Assad’s military and its Russian allies were preparing to launch an attack on Idlib province, the lone remaining major rebel stronghold in Syria, Dr. Al-Bezem told the president, urging him to intervene.
Days later, Mr. Trump tweeted a warning to Mr. Assad and his allies against “this potential human tragedy,” which his top officials echoed in a pressure campaign. Mr. Assad did not attack, and Mr. Trump credited Dr. Al-Bezem with drawing attention his attention to the issue.
“I wholeheartedly believe that President Trump’s intervention had averted that attack,” Dr. Al-Bezem said in an interview on Thursday. She rejected the suggestion that her donations paved the way for Mr. Trump to hear her concerns.
