Dignitaries from across the globe gathered to remember the anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz.
As dignitaries from scores of western nations met in Jerusalem to remember the liberation of Auschwitz 75 years ago and express their resolve to combat anti-Semitism, the invocations of the past were as often aimed at scoring present-day geopolitical points as at sounding the alarm about a resurgence of bigotry and anti-Jewish violence.
The president of Germany, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, said his country now resists “the poison that is nationalism.” Then he hauntingly cited the attack last fall on a synagogue in Halle, Germany.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, like Mr. Pence, did not let the opportunity pass to urge world leaders to follow the United States’ example in confronting Iran.
“The tyrants of Tehran that subjugate their own people and threaten the peace and security of the entire world, they threaten the peace and security of everyone in the Middle East and everyone beyond,” he said.
The unusual gathering, with streams of royals and republican rulers all but shutting the Holy City down under high security, comes before Monday’s anniversary of the 1945 liberation of Auschwitz, the infamous Nazi death camp in Poland where some 1.1 million people perished, most of them Jews.
Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, angered that Mr. Putin was given a speaking slot but he was not, stayed home. But their dispute bled over into a memorial book printed in advance of the commemoration. Mr. Putin has sought to portray Poland as a perpetrator rather than a victim of the Holocaust, claiming the Polish ambassador to Berlin had lauded Hitler’s effort to rid Europe of Jews.
Mr. Putin had a busy schedule on his day trip. He unveiled a monument in Jerusalem’s central Sacher Park to the victims of the siege of Leningrad, a grisly 900-day national trauma that cost the lives of hundreds of thousands of Russian civilians.
And he cheered Israelis by hinting broadly that Russia would soon release an Israeli-American woman who was given a long prison sentence last year after several grams of marijuana were found in her checked bags while she was changing planes in Moscow.
The Palestinians were not invited to the Holocaust commemoration, but they were not merely watching from the sidelines. Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority, met with President Emmanuel Macron of France late Wednesday, and with Mr. Putin Thursday evening.
Still, those meetings paled next to what some critics of Mr. Abbas said was the embarrassment of so many leaders visiting Israel, after President Trump in 2017 recognized Jerusalem as its capital.
Prince Charles was to meet with the Palestinian leader in Bethlehem on Friday after visiting the Church of Nativity, and before a stop in East Jerusalem at the Mount of Olives, where his grandmother, Princess Alice, is buried.
It was left to Rabbi Israel Meir Lau, who at age 8 was liberated from Buchenwald, then rose to become Israel’s chief rabbi and chairman of the Yad Vashem Council, to bring the proceedings back to earth in the end.
Katie Rogers and Mohammed Najib contributed reporting.