The former national security adviser shared his unease with the attorney general, who cited his own worries about the president’s conversations with the leaders of Turkey and China.
WASHINGTON — John R. Bolton, the former national security adviser, privately told Attorney General William P. Barr last year that he had concerns that President Trump was effectively granting personal favors to the autocratic leaders of Turkey and China, according to an unpublished manuscript by Mr. Bolton.
Early Tuesday, the Justice Department’s spokeswoman, Kerri Kupec, posted a statement on Twitter disputing aspects of Mr. Bolton’s account.
A spokesman for the National Security Council declined to comment on Mr. Barr’s conversations with Mr. Bolton. In a statement on Monday, Mr. Bolton, his publisher and his literary agency said they had not shared the manuscript with The Times.
Mr. Bolton wrote in the manuscript that Mr. Barr singled out Mr. Trump’s conversations with Mr. Xi about the Chinese telecommunications firm ZTE, which agreed in 2017 to plead guilty and pay heavy fines for violating American sanctions on doing business with North Korea, Iran and other countries. A year later, Mr. Trump lifted the sanctions over objections from his own advisers and Republican lawmakers.
Mr. Barr also cited remarks Mr. Trump made to Mr. Erdogan in 2018 about the investigation of Halkbank, Turkey’s second-largest state-owned bank. The Justice Department was scrutinizing Halkbank on fraud and money-laundering charges for helping Iran evade sanctions imposed by the Treasury Department.
Mr. Erdogan had been making personal appeals to Mr. Trump to use his authority to halt any additional enforcement against the bank. In 2018, Mr. Erdogan told reporters in Turkey that Mr. Trump had promised to instruct cabinet members to follow through on the matter. The bank had hired a top Republican fund-raiser to lobby the administration on the issue.
For months, it looked as though the unusual lobbying effort might succeed; but in October, the Justice Department indicted the bank for aiding Iran. The charges were seen in part as an attempt by the administration to show that it was taking a tough line on Turkey amid an outcry over Mr. Trump’s endorsement of its incursions in Syria.
Details in a coming book by the former national security adviser are threatening to derail Republican senators’ plans for a speedy acquittal.
Today: A Times investigation reveals a firsthand account from John Bolton directly linking President Trump to the quid pro quo at the center of the impeachment. Maggie Haberman and Mike Schmidt on what that could mean for the final phase of the Senate trial.
Mike, Maggie, remind us when the discussion of John Bolton as a possible witness in the impeachment process starts.
Bolton’s former aide, that’s Fiona Hill, testified yesterday before House impeachment investigators.
— and preoccupations with what was going on inside the White House.
This is something that Fiona Hill said when she was talking about John Bolton, the former national security adviser.
Basically he said, you go and tell Eisenberg that I am not part of any drug deal that Sondland, the U.S. ambassador to the European Union, and Mick Mulvaney are cooking up.
— I didn’t want to participate in this drug deal that these administration officials were doing.
The term “drug deal” here refers to the Ukraine probe that they were trying to initiate.
Right, and that was his way of referring to this pressure campaign against Ukraine to start investigations into Democratic rivals.
Correct. So we’re learning these different things, but we’re not hearing from Bolton.
We’ve got six people having four conversations in one sentence, and you just told me this is where you got your clear understanding.
— was that the House was only really talking to people who were sort of outside the president’s inner ring.
Ambassador, you weren’t on the call, were you? You didn’t listen in on President Trump’s call and President Zelensky’s call?
You’ve never talked with Chief of Staff Mulvaney?
You never met the president?
This is what I can’t believe, and you’re their star witness. You’re their first witness.
A few of the witnesses dealt with the president directly, but many of them were simply relaying what was going on inside the White House.
So Bolton becomes an even more tantalizing figure. He’s in the center of juicy tidbits coming out of the inquiry. He may be on poor terms with the president. It all seems to make him a perfect witness.
He’s someone who Republicans trust. He has a long history in the Republican Party, and we were hearing then that he had these concerns. So what was it that he saw? What was it that he could add? He was in the room with the president. What did the president tell him?
So Maggie, what efforts are made by House impeachment investigators to get Bolton to testify, to get him to just spill the beans?
Because they were concerned that it was going to be a protracted legal battle. They were very consumed with trying to wrap this all up quickly. In hindsight, a lot of Democrats say, at least privately, they think that that was a mistake. They think that they should have actually tried to get him to come there.
Right. So he does not end up testifying before the House.
No. Bolton never spoke before the House and didn’t indicate that he really wanted to at the time. He just said that he would not cooperate with this request for testimony. So they sent over the articles of impeachment without having a witness like Bolton, somebody who had a direct conversation with the president, where the withheld military aid for Ukraine was tied to the president’s desires for investigations. There were just people who were speculating on motives or had heard things secondhand, but there was no one with a firsthand interaction with the president.
O.K. So that brings us to November.
Right, and so we get to November, and John Bolton is starting to make noises, like he has something to say and he’s willing to share it. And we learn on November 10, that one place he might be planning to share it is in a book that he’s planning to write about his time in the White House.
So it was a pretty odd situation. You had House investigators that wanted Bolton to talk. Bolton sort of signaling that he has something to say. And then the news that he’s writing a book that you presume is going to have some Ukraine details in it. So who’s going to get to that information?
Right. So in this situation, what do you two do as reporters to try to figure out what he knows and maybe what he’s put in this book?
So the House inquiry is over, but there’s all this secrecy around this book. We knew it was coming. We had heard Simon & Schuster would be putting it out. They wouldn’t even confirm that. We were scratching around with people who might know. And as we were trying to do this, Bolton then says, on January 6 — after not complying with the House efforts to get him to testify — he says that he would be willing to testify in the Senate, if there is a subpoena. It seemed like he was trying to do a dance, where he was trying not to make Senate Republicans angry at him, when he’s worked with them for years. And he needs them to back him, as he’s embarking on this post-White House life and trying to sell a book. But also trying to look like he was doing the right thing and not just making it about the book. And it was really hard to decipher what his motives were.
As reporters, there is nothing that galvanizes us like a high-profile public figure in a major story saying, I have important information, but I’m not going to tell. And he’s essentially out there doing that — putting the bait for reporters to try and get to the bottom of what’s in the book.
So we did what we normally do when we are handed some kind of bait, which is we continued to try to figure out what was there and what was in it. And whether it would include some damaging information about the president. Or whether it would include some exculpatory information and would be something that the president’s folks could even point to and say it would help him. We just, we didn’t know, but we kept scratching.
Right. If the one great unanswered question was what Bolton knew, then the most obvious thing is to find out what is inside the book.
That’s right, and we kept scratching and looking, and then we found out what was in the book, and it was quite damaging to the president.
Brand new reaction this morning from a bombshell New York Times report on John Bolton’s upcoming book.
A trial that seemed to be on a steady and speedy path to certain acquittal has been hit by a seismic shock.
So what did you learn was actually in this book?
The biggest thing that is in there is that Bolton writes about a conversation that he claims to have had with President Trump in August of 2019, where he pushed the issue of this withheld military aid with the president. And the president suggested he didn’t want to end the aid freeze until Ukraine turned over materials that he wanted in connection with investigations into Democrats, who he thought had harmed him in 2016.
So Bolton is having a conversation — he recounts in this book — with President Trump in which Bolton says, hey, Mr. President, I want to talk about this financial freeze on military aid to Ukraine, presumably in the context of Bolton wanting to end it.
Bolton pushed this conversation with the president, because he, along with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, had been trying to get the president for weeks to end the freeze and turn the aid over, arguing that it was necessary for Ukraine to defend itself against Russia. And so Bolton raised this issue to test where the president was, and the president met him back by saying he didn’t want to end this freeze until materials that he wanted were turned over in relation to investigations into Democrats he thought had damaged him.
Wow. Democrats, including Joe Biden.
Democrats, including Joe Biden and his son Hunter Biden.
So Bolton is confirming in this account that President Trump articulated — correct me if I’m wrong — a clear quid pro quo that explained why he was holding up the security aid to Ukraine. That it was in return for Ukraine investigating his Democratic rivals, like Joe Biden, and that of course is the central claim of the articles of impeachment. And what Bolton seems to be saying here is that that central claim is accurate, and there’s now a firsthand account of it from the mouth of the president himself.
— that there was no connection between security assistance and investigations.
— that the aid and the investigations were not linked.
— the pause on security assistance was distinct and unrelated to investigations.
So this directly contradicts the way the president’s own lawyers talk about the impeachment.
Correct, or at least it undercuts their main argument, which is that there was not a connection between what the president wanted and releasing this aid.
Am I right, Mike and Maggie, that this is as close to a smoking gun as it gets in a case like this?
Maybe, but throughout the Trump presidency, we’ve learned similarly explosive disclosures, and the president has been able to weather them politically. So yeah, in a normal time, would the news of the president’s most recent national security adviser directly implicating him in a question that is at the center of an impeachment hearing be a smoking gun? Sure, but Trump has shown an ability to endure things like this that gives me reticence to say, yeah, that’s a smoking gun. Because when you say smoking gun, built into that is an assumption that the end would be near.
I’m with Mike on that. I think that we are a ways away from knowing what this means. And as our colleague Peter Baker wrote today, it could end up being like when the “Access Hollywood” tape came out in 2016 in the campaign. And the big prediction was that this was going to be the end of Donald Trump, this was going to be the end of his campaign, and it obviously did not go that way. So we just don’t know yet.
Well, what has been the reaction to this reporting, especially in the Senate, where the trial is well underway and where the question of calling witnesses is very much still alive?
So we’re coming into the home stretch of the trial. And the question of whether Bolton will testify has still not been resolved.
The story comes out, and there’s increased pressure on Senate Republicans, those moderate ones who may be willing to go along with the Democrats. How much does this story move them?
And Maggie, what’s the answer?
So far, we are seeing the same moderates who have said they want witnesses before still say they want to hear from Bolton. So that’s Mitt Romney.
Four of you need to say yes. Do you think there are four votes?
I think it’s increasingly likely that the other Republicans will join those of us who think we should hear from John Bolton. And whether there are other witnesses and documents, well, that’s another matter. But I think John Bolton’s relevance to our decision has become increasingly clear.
Susan Collins of Maine is another person who has said this is another factor that points to why there should be witnesses. But two other possible votes for witnesses, one is Lisa Murkowski of Alaska. Andother is Lamar Alexander, who the White House is watching very closely to see what he’ll do. They have been more circumspect about whether they think our story changes anything. And so far, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell is trying to tell everybody to stay cool and just see how this plays out.
I mean, there will be people hearing this — hearing that the national security adviser to the president observed him saying something that directly implicates him in this impeachment case — and will ask, why would any deliberative body sworn in as jurors not want to hear from that person? What would be the justification for not hearing from Bolton in this moment?
So one thing that has come up from the senators in the last several hours is they’re saying, if this was so important to hear from Bolton, why didn’t the House subpoena him?
There’s nothing new here that John Bolton didn’t know before the House managers rested their case and stopped calling witnesses, and they never chose to call John Bolton.
And you’re going to hear that, I think increasingly, if you don’t see a move toward witnesses. That’s going to be an argument that senators are going to point to.
Why are we doing your work for you? That part was in the House.
And at another level, the reason why these senators are not going along with calling Bolton is that Trump doesn’t want that to happen. And they have been in lockstep with Trump for most of this.
So the justification is keep the president happy.
I think the justification is you have a lot of senators who are facing elections in their own states, and the base likes Trump. And in some states, like Lamar Alexander’s state, they want him to be loyal to Trump. And so those are the concerns that they’re measuring, — is do they let themselves be looked back on in history as turning away from evidence, which some people will say they did. Or do they say, voters don’t really want me casting that vote, and they decide to stick with the president’s desires.
So how has all of this actually landed inside the White House?
Well, the White House as a whole wasn’t happy about hearing about this. But for at least some of them, it wasn’t a surprise, because the White House had been given a draft of this manuscript about 3.5 weeks ago from John Bolton for a standard review process to look at classified information and whether there is any in the book.
So that means at least some folks in the White House have had a sense of what Bolton would testify to in the impeachment investigation.
If he testified.
Wait. So does that mean that the president’s lawyers, including those who are currently defending him in the Senate trial, that they knew what John Bolton had written and knew what John Bolton had experienced, and then continued to make a case to the public that is quite contradictory to what Bolton is saying happened in this book?
We don’t know the extent to which the manuscript, or the details about it, were circulated. But what we do know is that in the past several weeks, there has been a concerted effort by the president to stop Bolton from testifying. He’s made public statements about this.
The problem with John is that it’s a national security problem. You can’t have somebody who’s at national security. And if you think about it, John, he knows some of my thoughts. He knows what I think about leaders. What happens if he reveals what I think about a certain leader and it’s not very positive, and then I have to deal on behalf of the country? It’s going to be very hard. It’s going to make the job very hard. He knows other things, and I don’t know if we left on the best of terms. I would say, probably not. And so you don’t like people testifying when they didn’t leave on good terms. And that was due to me, not due to him. And so we’ll see what happens.
And he has said it privately to aides.
So my final question is, if John Bolton has something to say — and it feels like he does — and the world wants to hear it, senators want to hear it, House impeachment managers want to hear it, we all want to hear it. And it feels like he has an obligation to the Democratic process to say it, why doesn’t he just find a way to say it? Go on Fox. Go on CNN. Have a news conference. Why hasn’t he taken any of those opportunities?
It’s a great question, and there’s nothing preventing him from doing so. If he wanted to issue some kind of a statement or say something publicly that didn’t violate executive privilege with the president, he could do that. He has yet to do any of that, and it’s not really clear why.
But you know what, if John Bolton went on television right now and said everything he would testify to, unless he was subpoenaed to appear at that trial or if the comments from him were put into evidence, then it couldn’t be considered by the lawmakers. This is a trial, where evidence is brought forward. And if there is not enough votes to bring that evidence in, then it doesn’t matter whether he stands out on the highest point in town and says everything he knows. It only matters whether it’s entered into the record in the Senate.
Maggie and Mike, thank you.
Here’s what else you need to know today. On Monday, as it sought to contain the coronavirus, the Chinese government broadened its quarantine to more than 50 million people and said that it would spend at least $9 billion to stop the outbreak. The U.S. government said it was organizing an evacuation of American citizens out of the epicenter of the illness in Wuhan. And the pharmaceutical company Johnson & Johnson said it would begin developing a potential vaccine against the virus, joining several government agencies seeking to do the same. As of Monday night, the coronavirus had infected nearly 3,000 people and killed more than 80. That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.
Mr. Bolton’s statements in the book align with other comments he has made since leaving the White House in September. In November, he said in a private speech that none of Mr. Trump’s advisers shared the president’s views on Turkey and that he believed Mr. Trump adopted a more permissive approach to the country because of his financial ties there, NBC News reported. Mr. Trump’s company has a property in Turkey.
Mr. Trump has repeatedly praised dictators throughout his presidency. Last year, he said, “Where’s my favorite dictator?” as he waited to meet with President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt, The Wall Street Journal reported.
Mr. Trump’s soft spot for authoritarians dates at least to his presidential campaign, when he praised Saddam Hussein for being “good” at killing terrorists and suggested that the world would be better off were Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the deposed Libyan dictator who was killed in a violent uprising in 2011, “in charge right now.” Mr. Trump then suggested the ouster of both men was ultimately worse for the Middle East because the Islamic State had filled the void.
Mr. Trump declared himself “a big fan” of Mr. Erdogan as they sat side by side in the Oval Office last fall after Mr. Trump cleared the way for Turkish forces to invade Syria, though he warned Mr. Erdogan behind the scenes against the offensive.
Of Mr. Xi, Mr. Trump has been similarly effusive. When the Chinese Communist Party eliminated term limits, allowing Mr. Xi to keep his tenure open-ended, Mr. Trump extolled the outcome.
Mr. Xi had personally asked Mr. Trump to intervene to save ZTE, which was on the brink of collapse because of tough American penalties for sanctions violations.
Lifting the sanctions on ZTE, a Chinese telecommunications giant that also serves as a geopolitical pawn for its government, most likely helped Mr. Trump negotiate with Mr. Xi in the trade war between the two countries. But Republican lawmakers and others objected to helping a Chinese company that broke the law and has been accused of posing a national security threat.
Mr. Bolton’s reputation for muscular foreign policy was always an odd fit with Mr. Trump, who often threatens excessive force but rarely reacts with it. Mr. Bolton was pleased when Mr. Trump withdrew from the nuclear deal between Iran and six world powers, including the United States, that the Obama administration had entered into. Other Trump advisers had urged him against it.
But Mr. Trump’s lack of action after Iranian aggression against the United States rankled Mr. Bolton.
Mr. Bolton’s book has already netted significant sales. Shortly after the disclosure of its contents on Sunday night, Amazon listed the book for purchase. By Monday evening, it was No. 17 on Amazon’s best-seller list.
