Bob Parsons and David Neeleman each built successful businesses in competitive industries by offering exceptional experiences, not chasing wealth.
After selling the company and amassing a net worth of $2.7 billion, he now runs various companies that include PXG, a high-end golf club manufacturer; the exclusive Scottsdale National Golf Club in Arizona; several motorcycle businesses; and a commercial real estate portfolio.
Mr. Neeleman has since founded two other airlines, Azul in Brazil and a yet-unnamed United States airline that is expected to begin flying next year.
I wanted to see what could be learned from them, but I also wanted to understand how their success came about. Neither of their ventures was based on creating a new industry: There were more airlines than there are today when JetBlue started, and Mr. Parsons said the domain registration market was full of registrars when he got into it.
Mr. Parsons, 69, half-jokingly attributes his success to not technically passing the fifth grade. When the nuns at his Catholic school in Baltimore held him back, he skipped out of summer school and lined up with the sixth graders that fall, to the bafflement of the nuns. They let him stay.
It’s a quirk Mr. Parsons reminded his mother of when he appeared on the Forbes wealth list. “I called and said, ‘Mom, I know guys who passed the fifth grade and aren’t on the Forbes list,’” he said.
The turning point for GoDaddy was a racy Super Bowl advertisement in 2005 that spoofed the previous year’s Super Bowl halftime show, when the singer Janet Jackson had her famous “wardrobe malfunction.” The ad, which featured a woman in a tight GoDaddy tank top, was supposed to run twice, but Fox pulled the second airing. The ensuing controversy jolted GoDaddy into the public conversation and made it the go-to registrar for domain names.
Mr. Neeleman, 60, who struggled with dyslexia and attention deficit disorder in school, grew up working with his siblings in their grandfather’s convenience stores in Utah. It instilled in him the value of customer service.
At his first airline, Morris Air, he bought a machine called a fog buster to lessen delays for planes in the winter, he said. “If you shot it in the air, it crystallized the fog and turned it into snow,” he said. That allowed the planes to take off.
After a brief stint at Southwest Airlines, which bought Morris Air, Mr. Neeleman began plans to start JetBlue.
Some studies found that entrepreneurs became better at running each successive venture, but in many industries, the one who sticks it out the longest often prevails, said Professor Jensen, who has started three businesses.
That was what happened with GoDaddy, Mr. Parsons said. The company had tried various strategies before it landed on selling domain names in the hopes of driving business to the software it was developing. Instead, domain names became the core business.
With JetBlue, Mr. Neeleman credited his brief stint at Southwest for showing him how an airline could take advantage of tax laws and financing programs to buy new planes and still be profitable.
The three factors typically at play for a successful entrepreneurial venture are a demand in the marketplace, a well-developed idea and luck, said Karl T. Ulrich, vice dean for entrepreneurship and innovation at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Parsons said the unifying theme of his various ventures had been to create an experience. With his first software company, he offered better customer service than competitors; with GoDaddy, he built a buzz around the company’s commercials.
With his current businesses, he has focused on creating a premium experience in branding. PXG, which releases its third generation of popular and expensive irons this weekend, has carved out a niche for high-performance golf clubs that can be independently measured. But the brand also has a cultlike following among die-hard golfers.
At Scottsdale National, Mr. Parsons has limited the membership to 145 people. People interested in joining need to send in an application just to visit, which costs $30,000. If Mr. Parsons and his wife, Renee, get along with the prospective members, they can join — for a $300,000 initiation fee and annual dues of $60,000.
Successful entrepreneurs are, by design, people who see their slice of the world differently. If they didn’t want to improve their industry, they would be content working for an existing company like everyone else.
