Republicans made last-minute changes to their proposed rules to placate moderates, but they held together to turn back Democratic efforts to subpoena documents.
WASHINGTON — A divided Senate began the impeachment trial of President Trump on Tuesday in utter acrimony, as Republicans blocked Democrats’ efforts to subpoena witnesses and documents related to Ukraine and moderate Republicans forced last-minute changes to rules that had been tailored to the president’s wishes.
In a series of party-line votes punctuating 12 hours of debate, Senate Republicans turned back every attempt by Democrats to subpoena documents from the White House, State Department and other agencies, as well as testimony from White House officials that could shed light on the core charges against Mr. Trump.
The debate between the House impeachment managers and the president’s legal team stretched into the early hours of Wednesday morning in a Senate chamber transformed for the occasion, with Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. presiding from the marble rostrum and senators sworn to silence looking on from desks piled with briefing books. It was the substantive start of the third presidential impeachment trial in American history.
“They are addressing the world’s greatest deliberative body,” he said.
Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. had a warning for the House impeachment managers and the president’s lawyers as both sides debated the proposed trial rules.
I think it is appropriate, at this point, for me to admonish both the House managers and the president’s counsel in equal terms to remember that they are addressing the world’s greatest deliberative body. One reason it has earned that title is because its members avoid speaking in a manner and using language that is not conducive to civil discourse. In the 1905 Swain trial, a senator objected when one of the managers used the word pettifogging — and the presiding officer said the word ought not to have been used. I don’t think we need to aspire to that high a standard, but I do think those addressing the Senate should remember where they are.
On its face, the prolonged debate was about the rules and procedures. But it set the stage for a broader political fight over Mr. Trump’s likely acquittal and will help shape the 2020 campaign.
Democrats were laying the groundwork to argue that the trial was rigged on Mr. Trump’s behalf and to denounce Republicans — including the most vulnerable senators seeking re-election — for acquiescing. Republicans, for their part, insisted that the Senate must move decisively to remedy what they characterized as an illegitimate impeachment inquiry unjustly tarring the presidency.
Standing in the well of the Senate, the Democratic House impeachment managers urged senators to reject proposed rules from the majority leader, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, that would delay a debate over witnesses and documents until the middle of the trial, with no guarantee that they would ever be called.
But Republicans were unpersuaded and, just before 2 a.m. Eastern, voted along party lines, 53 to 47, to ratify Mr. McConnell’s trial plan. As adopted, the resolution would pave the way for oral arguments against Mr. Trump to begin as soon as Wednesday.
They rejected 10 other amendments by the same margin. An 11th Democratic proposal, to lengthen the timetable for the prosecutors and defense to file trial motions, gained the support of one Republican, Susan Collins of Maine, but still failed.
At the heart of the trial are charges of abuse of power and obstruction of Congress approved last month by the Democratic-led House. They assert that Mr. Trump used the power of his office to pressure Ukraine to announce investigations into his political rivals, withholding as leverage nearly $400 million in military aid and a White House meeting. The president then sought to conceal his actions from Congress, the charges say, by blocking witness testimony and documents.
Mr. Trump’s legal team argues that the charges are baseless and amount to criminalizing a president’s prerogative to make foreign policy as he sees fit. In a break with most constitutional scholars, they also claim that the impeachment was unconstitutional because the articles of impeachment do not outline a specific violation of a law.
But on Tuesday, the debate focused principally on what would constitute a fair trial.
Mr. McConnell also received a sharp reminder about the limits of his power to control an inherently unpredictable proceeding.
Under pressure from Republican moderates, he was forced early in the day to make some last-minute changes to the set of rules he unveiled on Monday, which would have squeezed opening arguments by both sides into two 12-hour marathon days. Mr. McConnell’s rules also would have refused to admit the findings of the House impeachment inquiry into evidence without a separate vote later in the trial.
The compressed timetable was in line with a White House request to quickly dispense with opening arguments so that Mr. Trump’s team could complete his defense before the weekend.
But Ms. Collins, Rob Portman of Ohio and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, among others, objected privately to those provisions, which they believed departed too much from procedures adopted unanimously for the 1999 trial of President Bill Clinton and could further expose Republicans to accusations of unfairness.
The objections were raised at a closed-door luncheon just before the trial was to begin, according to aides familiar with the conversation. Mr. McConnell rushed to submit a revised copy of the resolution — with lines crossed out and changes scrawled in pen in the margins — when it was time for the debate.
When the resolution was read aloud on the Senate floor, two days had been extended to three and the House’s records would be automatically admitted into evidence, though Mr. McConnell inserted a new provision that would allow Mr. Trump’s team to move to throw out parts of the House case.
The last-minute reversal underscored the influence of a small group of moderate Republicans in the narrowly divided Senate whose interests and demands could prove decisive in a more formal debate over witnesses and documents to come.
Half a world away, Mr. Trump sought to use the global stage at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, to project confidence about his standing at home. He swatted away questions from reporters about the trial, instead bragging about the strength of the American economy under his leadership.
But in the Senate chamber, Mr. Trump’s lawyers replayed many of his most frequent and personal grievances, accusing Democrats in only slightly more lawyerly terms of conducting a political search-and-destroy mission.
“It’s long past time that we start this so we can put an end to this ridiculous charade and go have an election,” said Pat A. Cipollone, the White House counsel.
The historically rare debate was rendered even more unusual by the traditional Senate rules that prohibit senators from speaking on the chamber floor for the duration of the proceedings and instead empower the House managers and White House defense lawyers to debate the proposals. The effect was that on the trial’s first day, the Senate chamber split cleanly into partisan factions, with the managers siding with Senate Democrats and Mr. Trump’s lawyers taking the place of the Republicans.
Mr. Cipollone rose first, delivering a brief statement urging senators to support Mr. McConnell’s proposed rules and accusing Democrats of seeking to use the Senate to complete their sloppy investigative work.
Democrats, who came armed with slick digital slides and video clips to drive home their arguments, spent hours detailing the factual record compiled by the House investigation and cataloging the witnesses and thousands of pages of highly relevant documents Mr. Trump had succeeded in withholding. Senators facing such a grave decision as removing a president, they argued, have a responsibility to try to push all the facts to light.
Just an hour or so before the trial began, the seven House managers submitted one final written rebuttal to arguments put forward against their charges by Mr. Trump’s lawyers. In 34 pages, they rejected the lawyers’ assertion that abuse of power was not an impeachable offense and that Mr. Trump had acted legally when he ordered administration officials not to appear for questioning in the House or provide documents for the impeachment inquiry.
Locked in silence for much of the day, senators were able to talk only before the proceeding began or during brief breaks. Speaking to reporters on Tuesday morning, Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, denounced Mr. McConnell’s rules as deeply unfair and skewed toward Mr. Trump.
How just a few Republican senators had a key role in determining the scope, and the likely future, of the trial of President Trump.
Today, the Senate votes to adopt the rules that will govern the rest of the impeachment trial. Julie Davis, on why they were not the rules that Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell had originally wanted. It’s Wednesday, January 22.
[GAVEL] The Senate will come to order. The chaplain Dr. Black will open the Senate with prayer.
So on Tuesday, Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell opens the Senate for this first day of the official impeachment trial.
The Senate’s process will draw a sharp contrast with the unfair and precedent breaking inquiry that was carried on by the House of Representatives.
He has spent weeks decrying the House impeachment inquiry as completely partisan and unfair.
Finally, some fairness. On every point, our straightforward resolution will bring the clarity and fairness that everyone deserves.
Today’s vote will contain some answers.
— today we’re going to find out whether that’s possible.
And then Chuck Schumer, the Democratic leader, gets up to make his speech.
The McConnell rules seem to be designed by President Trump for President Trump.
And it’s like they’re on different planets. He essentially says, Mitch McConnell is pushing for this process that’s completely unfair. There’s nothing fair about this. It’s completely skewed toward President Trump and what he wants to see in this trial, which Schumer says is basically a cover up.
If the president is so confident in his case, if leader McConnell is so confident the president did nothing wrong, why don’t they want the case to be presented in broad daylight?
On something as important as impeachment, the McConnell resolution is nothing short of a national disgrace. This will go down, this resolution, as one of the darker moments in the Senate history, perhaps one of even the darkest.
What exactly are these two men really bickering over here?
The structure for this impeachment trial should track with the structure of the Clinton trial. We have a precedent here.
— don’t worry. This is going to be modeled on exactly the same rules that were adopted unanimously in 1999, when Bill Clinton’s impeachment trial was about to begin. And Democrats have essentially been waiting to see what that looks like. Is that actually going to be the case? And for a long time now, we have expected to see a copy of this resolution. And it’s not materializing.
Leader McConnell has still not come up with his proposal. That’s unheard of.
And as the senators are debating these rules, and Schumer is demanding to see what Senator McConnell is going to propose, comes the deadline on Saturday evening for the White House to make its first filing in the impeachment trial. And the president’s lawyers lay out basically what they’re going to argue in this trial. They call on the Senate to “swiftly reject” these impeachment charges — that’s a quote from the filing — and acquit the president. Because the charges themselves are without foundation and, in fact, would weaken the office of the presidency if the Senate agreed to remove him for these charges.
A member of the president’s legal team, Alan Dershowitz, professor emeritus at Harvard Law School, also the author of the new book “Guilt by Association.” Professor Dershowitz, thank you for joining us.
So your position that President Trump should not be impeached, even if all the evidence and arguments laid out by the House are accepted as fact.
The vote was to impeach on abuse of power, which is not within the constitutional criteria for impeachment, and obstruction of Congress.
— the impeachment charges do not actually allege any violation of a law. There is no crime here. Abuse of power, they say, in the way that House Democrats have framed it, is essentially criminalizing the president doing his job. Number two, they say all of the findings that came forth in the House impeachment inquiry — the whole inquiry itself — is essentially fruits of a poisoned tree. That Democrats had a political vendetta against President Trump and decided to impeach him at all costs. And so anything that was uncovered, anything they unearthed in this inquiry is, by definition, illegitimate, and can’t really be considered as part of an impeachment proceeding. That it’s not really a constitutional thing, because of the way Democrats conducted the inquiry. And so shortly after the president’s legal team files its brief, Senator McConnell finally comes out with this draft of the resolution that he is going to offer to govern the procedures for the trial.
For the rules.
For the rules, exactly. And it looks a lot like the kinds of ground rules that the president’s team would want, based on what they’ve said in their filing.
— in the Clinton trial.
— the trial rules for Bill Clinton’s impeachment. Under those rules, each side had 24 hours to argue their opening case, and could use as many days as it would take to do that. In the Clinton trial, that meant three days on each side. This resolution specifically limits the time frame to two days for each side. So, yes, you can have 24 hours but you’ve got to finish your argument within two days.
Why is that significant, one day?
Well, it means if you’re going to compress it into two days, it means first of all, very long days. Because you’re starting at 1:00 p.m. And if you’re dividing 24 hours into two days, that’s 12 hours. You’re going to 1:00 a.m. That means a lot of these arguments unfolding at hours when most people are in bed and not watching or listening, which may be the point. And secondly, it means a much faster trial overall. It lets the President’s defense put up their case much quicker. But it also means that the entire opening phase of the trial is basically over by the end of the week, and we’re on to potentially a vote the following week.
So longer days, shorter trial, clearly a benefit for the president.
Right. Secondly, there was another key difference here. And that was that instead of just admitting the House impeachment inquiry findings into evidence at the outset, which is what they did in the Clinton trial, this set of rules would say: We’ll print all of the materials that the House impeachment inquiry produced and distribute them to senators. But actually, they will not be entered into evidence at the beginning. And in fact, they won’t even be considered until after we decide whether we’re going to hear from witnesses, until after we decide whether we’re going to hear new evidence not presented in the House inquiry. And only then will it be subject to a vote, whether or not to enter the House impeachment inquiry’s findings into evidence.
So even the facts established by the House inquiry — even the transcripts of interviews — they’re all up for debate in these rules laid out by McConnell for the Senate trial.
The Senate will convene as a court of impeachment.
O.K. So that’s the situation on Tuesday, as the Senate convenes.
If there is no objection, the Journal of Proceedings of the trial are approved to date.
The Senate convenes at 1 o’clock in the afternoon as an impeachment court, with Chief Justice John Roberts presiding from the dais, with the House managers at a table to his right and President Trump’s legal team at a table to his left. Chuck Schumer and Mitch McConnell are at their lecterns on either side of the aisle.
Mr. Chief Justice.
For the further information of all senators, I’m about to send a resolution to the desk providing for an outline of the next steps in these proceedings.
— the clerk stands up and begins to read the resolution.
Which we, of course, pretty much know already.
Right. McConnell’s office put out a copy of it on Monday night. So I pretty much thought I knew what was in it. I was sitting at my desk, watching this on TV and kind of listening out of one ear.
— for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours over up to three session days.
So more like the Clinton scenario.
Right, more like the Clinton rules. And there was another big change that I think we all missed when he first read it out loud.
Materials in this record will be admitted into evidence, subject to any hearsay, evidentiary or other objections that the president may make after opening presentations are concluded.
McConnell dropped this idea of waiting until the trial is well underway to have a vote on whether to admit the House impeachment inquiry findings into evidence.
This went back to the Clinton rules, where they’re admitted into evidence at the outset.
Right. I mean, this is a genuine surprise on the floor of the United States Senate, at a moment where everything seems highly orchestrated to avoid any surprises. So what explains this last minute surprise roll back to the old Clinton rules?
Well what explains it, I found out not long after, was that their Senate Republicans had gathered for lunch just before the trial got underway, in a room in the Capitol not far from the Senate floor. And during that private discussion, Susan Collins from Maine and Rob Portman from Ohio, two of the more moderate senators in the center of the Republican conference, said, we’re going to have trouble with this. We think this goes too far.
And they raised it with Senator McConnell. And Lamar Alexander, we’re told, was also not entirely pleased.
And I think it became clear very quickly to Senator McConnell that he was not going to have, potentially, the votes to push this through if he kept the rules the way they were. And so he literally, with lines marked out by pen and handwriting scrawled in the margins, he changed it.
[LAUGHS] Wow, but just didn’t announce it.
But didn’t announce it until the clerk started reading.
And, Julie, what’s your understanding of the motivation for Susan Collins, Rob Portman, Lamar Alexander, to speak out and oppose McConnell on the rules that he first proposed?
These are senators who are deeply concerned about having a trial that appears to be fair.
Each of us will take an oath, an oath that I take very seriously, to render impartial justice.
They want to make sure that they’re not seen as going along with a process that people are going to dismiss as a partisan exercise.
You have consistently said you want to be careful in what you say about this, because you’re in a role of a juror. Given that, you must be sharing the concern of Senator Murkowski — that Senator McConnell out there saying we’re going to be lockstep with the White House — is going to cash some aspersions on this whole process.
I have heard Democrats like Elizabeth Warren saying that the president should be impeached, found guilty, and removed from office. I’ve heard the Senate majority leaders saying that he’s taking his cues from the White House. There are senators on both sides of the aisle, who, to me, are not giving the appearance of and the reality of judging this in an impartial way.
I’m struck, and correct me if I’m wrong. Susan Collins is up for re-election, and faces a pretty tough re-election this fall up in Maine. I have to imagine that on some level this may be about something as simple as winning re-election in a moderate state.
Well, Senator Collins takes great offense at that suggestion. I can tell you firsthand. But there is no question that she is facing a huge re-election challenge. There’s no question that she’s under immense pressure. She knows that she already has the reputation among Republicans as kind of a Benedict Arnold, and someone who is insufficiently loyal to Trump. She knows that she has a reputation among progressives as someone who always kind of flirts with breaking from her party, but never actually follows through or seldom does. So she is really in a bind here. And she’s also a person who was there for President Clinton’s trial. She’s an institutionalist in the Senate, in a lot of ways. And it is very important to her to have this be consistent with the way they did things back then. Because it’s hard enough to make this decision in the kind of political vice that she’s in, without it looking like the process itself was broken.
I don’t want to get too deep inside the head of a tactician in the Senate. But I’m wondering if it’s possible that Mitch McConnell is giving these moderate Republicans a victory on the rules in order to fend off a bigger and far more consequential break over an issue like allowing witnesses to come on the stand — witnesses like John Bolton, witnesses like Lev Parnas, this associate of Rudy Giuliani. In other words, I’ll give you this, but don’t ask for more.
I think there could be some of that going on here. Mitch McConnell is a very shrewd strategist. He understands, better than anyone, the political bind that some of his members are in. And he knows that the process could be the most important thing to keep his Republican conference in line behind him. That as long as they feel like they have input and that this is fair, that he can sort of keep them in the fold. But the minute they start feeling like it’s not, the minute he starts having a big problem. And so sometimes it’s better to sort of propose something that seems really out there and let your moderates rein you in a bit, and allow the public to see that they’re playing that role, than to have them sort of not get any public credit for actually influencing the debate.
O.K. So McConnell bends to the pressure that he’s feeling from the likes of Susan Collins, and delivers this pretty significant concession to the Democrats. Are the Democrats satisfied with this?
The House Managers, on behalf of the House of Representatives, rise in opposition to leader McConnell’s resolution. Let me begin by summarizing why.
Their argument here is that this inquiry was totally different than the Clinton inquiry.
The issue in the Clinton trial was not one of calling witnesses, but of recalling witnesses. All of the key witnesses in the Clinton trial had testified before the grand jury or been interviewed by the F.B.I., one of them dozens of times. And their testimony was already known.
In that case, you had a White House who was willing to furnish witnesses, willing to furnish documents, and cooperated, even if not always willingly or happily, with the independent counsel who was investigating the case.
Here, none of the witnesses we seek to call — none of them — have testified or been interviewed by the House.
In this case, Democrats point out, the White House blocked everything. They blocked witnesses. They refused to turn over even one page of documents. And so they say this issue of witnesses has to be decided up front, that the Senate has to affirmatively pledge to hear from witnesses. Because otherwise, there can’t be a fair trial. And that argument just is not flying with Republicans, even with the moderates who want an opportunity down the line to consider hearing from witnesses. But they’re not going to break with precedent either and promise upfront that that’s going to happen.
The Democratic leader is recognized.
Mr. Chief Justice, I send an amendment to the desk to subpoena certain documents and records from the White House. And I ask that it be read.
So that’s why Democrats immediately start to bring motions on the floor, to change the rules to allow more new information to come out as part of this trial. They start offering proposal after proposal.
— to subpoena White House documents, subpoena State Department documents.
The Democrats feel like the more they can spotlight the process of the trial and make it clear that it’s all subject to a vote, and these few Republican senators may hold the key to whether the American people hear some of the information that they didn’t get to hear during the House impeachment inquiry, the better off they are. Because either it’s going to result in more information coming out, or it’s going to result in a lot more political pressure and maybe political damage to the Republicans who stay in line.
So at the end of the day, it feels like just about everything in this stage of the impeachment trial is really about these three or four, maybe five moderate Republican senators, and pushing them if you’re Democrats. Every single day, trying to rattle them on this question of whether the trial is unfair, whether this is a cover up, making sure that message reaches their district. And for Republicans, to do everything possible to accommodate their needs, make them feel like this is a fair trial, make them feel like this is fine. That’s really what this trial is about now.
Right. And so everything that comes up in terms of rules, in terms of how to go forward about this trial, has to be looked at with an eye toward what is going to pass muster for this small group of Republicans that is not automatically bought in to the process.
In the early hours of Wednesday morning, Senate Republicans were poised to adopt McConnell’s revised rules for the impeachment trial after rejecting repeated attempts by Senate Democrats to change those rules to include new witnesses and documents.
In remarks, Senator Schumer praised the moderate Republican senators and appealed to them for additional help.
The public is realizing how unfair leader McConnell’s resolution is. And they are telling Republican senators to change it. We’re very glad they moved to three days instead of two, so we won’t be hearing arguments at 2:00 in the morning. It’s good they admitted evidence. But the real test will be witnesses and documents. Will our Republican senators put pressure on McConnell so that we really have witnesses and documents produced either now or after the arguments are made?
Here’s what else you need to know today. On Tuesday, medical officials said that a mysterious virus that began in China, where it killed at least nine people, has now appeared in the United States.
A man in Washington state, who had been traveling in China, became the first confirmed U.S. case of the illness, known as the “coronavirus.” As a result, several major U.S. airports in New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco have begun screening travelers for the virus.
Inside the chamber, Mr. Schumer forced votes on demanding documents and compelling testimony from four current and former Trump administration officials who were blocked from speaking with the House: John R. Bolton, the former White House national security adviser; Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff; Robert B. Blair, an adviser to Mr. Mulvaney; and Michael Duffey, a White House budget official.
Each time, Mr. McConnell moved to kill the proposal before it could be considered, and was sustained by unified Republican support. At one point, he offered to short-circuit the debate to speed up the votes, but Democrats who want a full account of Mr. Trump’s blockade on record declined.
Even after Tuesday’s changes, Mr. McConnell’s proposal makes way for potentially the fastest presidential impeachment trial in American history, particularly if the Senate declines to call witnesses.
Only two other American presidents have stood trial in the Senate for high crimes and misdemeanors. Andrew Johnson was impeached in 1868, and his trial took the better part of three months, featuring testimony from dozens of witnesses and extended periods for discovery, before he was ultimately acquitted by just a single vote. Mr. Clinton’s trial lasted five weeks, included testimony from just three witnesses and resulted in an overwhelming acquittal.
Without witnesses, Mr. Trump’s trial could conclude by the end of January. If senators ultimately do call witnesses, that timeline could stretch weeks longer.
Catie Edmondson and Emily Cochrane contributed reporting.