This morning, a couple stood outside my window, arguing.
The expressive power of language is undiminished, but human communication is in constant flux and ought to be understood, this book argues, as “a snapshot” of a time, place and particular community of speakers. Even the simplest words alter with time. “Adder,” “apron” and “umpire,” for example, were originally “nadder,” “napron” and “numpire.” Bird used to be “brid,” and “horse,” “hros,” transpositions of letters that later became the norm. “Empty” used to be “emty” — a transformation that reveals physics at work, according to Shariatmadari. “The simple mechanics of moving from a nasal sound (‘m’ or ‘n’) to a non-nasal one can make a consonant pop up in between” — in this case, the “p” sound we hear.
Our bodies drive these changes, as do our yearnings for status and belonging. Members of a community in Papua New Guinea were found to have flipped the masculine and feminine gender agreements to distinguish themselves from the neighboring tribes, with which they shared a language. A study of Martha’s Vineyard in the 1960s found that longtime residents were unconsciously adopting an accent to separate themselves from summer visitors.
To speak about language is always to speak about power. There is the power of linguistic innovation, which is often met by the powers of stigma and contempt, of racism and class prejudice. Perhaps no dialect has come under more hysterical attack than African-American Vernacular English (AAVE). In the book’s strongest section, Shariatmadari reveals how little the so-called guardians of the English language understand about English, let alone the particular innovations of AAVE, which linguists have described as a rule-bound language that has given us at least one new verb tense.
The scope of “Don’t Believe a Word” is impressive. It pauses to consider what modes of communication can tell us about the working of the brain, its role in communal violence in India and whether some languages are genuinely richer, more expressive or efficient. Shariatmadari is an earnest writer — clarity, not style, is his priority — but the quirks of human and animal speech are strange and alluring enough to leaven the narrative. Who knew that dolphins had accents?
Nor does this book explore some of the knottier questions it so tantalizingly dangles. How does language shape (or even impede) our understanding of Brexit and climate change? Shariatmadari also introduces Noam Chomsky’s point that most human speech is internal and exists as thought, but doesn’t wrestle with what we know (what we can know) about its evolution. Are the shape and structure of our thoughts as prone to rapid reinvention as verbal and written communication?
In providing the reader a foundation in rudimentary linguistics and its history, Shariatmadari is perhaps prompting — even inducting — us into thinking through such issues ourselves. I can echo my agitated neighbor: I am glad to have had this conversation.