Business|New E.U. Trade Chief on a Quest to Fix Relations With the U.S.
New E.U. Trade Chief on a Quest to Fix Relations With the U.S.
Some people think Phil Hogan’s blunt style will be an advantage in dealing with the Trump White House. He is making his first official trip to Washington this week.
“The current state of E.U.-U.S. relations isn’t good, and I don’t think it’s likely to get better anytime soon,” said Peter Chase, senior fellow at the German Marshall Fund of the United States in Brussels.
“He is probably the right person for this moment,” Ms. Santos said.
On Tuesday, there was a sign that the United States and Europe were still capable of cooperating. Mr. Hogan, Mr. Lighthizer and Kajiyama Hiroshi, the Japanese minister of economy, trade and industry, said in a joint statement that they would work together to tighten international rules on government subsidies and forced transfer of technology.
The statement was clearly aimed at China, which is often accused of propping up its companies to give them an unfair advantage over foreign competitors, and of forcing foreign companies to share sensitive technology in return for permission to operate in China. The three countries also agreed to work together to reform the World Trade Organization, a key objective of the Europeans.
“Politics is about personal relationships, and Phil understands that,” Mr. Conlon said.
The two men said they would work to reduce tariffs to zero and eliminate regulations that hindered trans-Atlantic trade. The European Union and the United States are each other’s largest trading partner, and there is general agreement that both sides would benefit from lower trade barriers.
The Europeans accuse the United States of crippling the W.T.O. by blocking appointments of new members to a crucial panel that hears appeals in trade disputes. The panel effectively ceased to function in December when several members’ terms expired.
“We have asked the U.S. to engage with us, and they have refused to do so,” he said.