As Britain’s withdrawal from the European Union becomes a reality, some people are celebrating and others are mourning. But for most, it seems, it is a time for recuperation and healing.
LONDON — When Britain leaves the European Union at 11 p.m. on Friday, some will be celebrating and others will be mourning. But for most people interviewed this week around the country, it seems to mark a time for recovery — from years of wrangling that has upended the political system and sometimes strained the country’s social fabric.
“Voting in the election was one of the hardest decisions of my life,” said Madeline Shaw, 42, a social worker from the southern port city of Southampton. She said she had almost always voted for the opposition Labour Party, but switched to the Conservatives this year because they promised to deliver Brexit.
Nothing has divided Britain quite like the question of Brexit. Those in favor are adamant that cutting financial and legal ties with the European Union and taking back control of immigration will allow Britain to reclaim its sovereignty and prosper. Those who want to remain feel an impending sense of loss at the prospect of being excluded from the bloc, its economic benefits and influence in the rest of the world.
The tension between the two camps is visible in the port town of Boston on the east coast of England, which has both Britain’s highest proportion of Eastern European immigrants and one of its largest majorities for Brexit.
Around 13 percent of the town’s 65,000 people were born elsewhere in Europe, according to the 2011 census, and Boston’s European population has continued to grow over subsequent years.
A Polish handyman from the town, who did not give his name for fear of damaging his business, said that many of the anxieties Boston residents had over immigration were inflated and not representative of reality.
Boston residents were reluctant to talk about Brexit on a recent cold and rainy day — “There’s more to this town, there’s more to this country” one pensioner said. But reflecting on the past three and a half years, many of them said that the “Remain” movement’s reluctance to honor the result of the 2016 Brexit referendum felt like the biggest threat to the country’s democracy.
“I do worry about the divides that have arisen from Brexit, but I fear that we would have seen unrest if the Brexit decision had been reversed,” Mr. Lewis said.
Young Britons, who see Brexit as a major threat to their future, criticize older generations for being out of touch with their needs as the terms of the country’s relationship with its European neighbors are hammered out.
“I am concerned about the people who carry the perspective that as long as issues of the country aren’t harming them personally, they can remain uninformed and uninvolved,” said Eden Reyhanian, an 18-year-old student at a school in North London.
Oscar Redgrave, a 17-year-old student in Shrewsbury, Western England, who started a pro-European Union campaign group for young people, said one of the most worrying aspects of Brexit was how it had pushed racism and discrimination into the mainstream.
But Mr. Redgrave is still hopeful that Brexit might be one day be reversed. He hopes for an overhaul of Britain’s electoral system, which critics say favors larger political parties.
