Facing the brunt of scrutiny in the United States, Chinese-Americans have also scrambled to help friends and family in China.
Amy Lee-Ludovicy’s children and their classmates were supposed to be on a chartered bus into New York City on Friday morning, destined for a visit to Chinatown ahead of the Lunar New Year celebrations.
But on the eve of their departure, Ms. Lee-Ludovicy, a native of Hong Kong, got some jarring news: The school district was canceling the trip, worried about the Wuhan coronavirus that has spread across Asia — though there have so far been only two documented cases in the United States.
She and her husband, Bruce, said the decision, in the midst of the outbreak, seemed to be rooted in a new and unfounded fear of Asians.
Dozens of people in 22 states are now being monitored with possible signs of the virus, with cases confirmed in Washington State and Illinois.
For people in the United States with close ties to China, the Wuhan outbreak has brought unexpected worry, disappointment and scrutiny. Some in the Chinese-American community have had their Lunar New Year holiday plans waylaid, as travel schedules for the coming week and beyond get interrupted.
A couple tested positive after returning from vacation in Hawaii.
Some evacuees are wondering why they aren’t being tested on bases.
Through messages on the WeChat messaging service, Chinese-Americans have a personal window into the fears and uncertainty spreading through the Wuhan region.
The virus, which emerged in December, has now spread to other countries. But the majority of the nearly 1,300 infections reported, and all 41 of the deaths from the illness, have been in China. Authorities shut down transportation out of Wuhan, hoping to contain the spread of the virus, and have since expanded the lockdown to other cities, covering a total population of about 35 million.
The Lunar New Year celebration often sends families traveling within China and around the globe. Mr. Shi said the illness had disrupted some of those plans, keeping families apart.
Long Wu, a 68-year-old retiree in Pasadena, Calif., said she had bought tickets to fly back to China in March. But she has now canceled her plans.
Jack Huang, a 76-year-old businessman in Rowland Heights, Calif., said he was worried about how easily the virus could spread in the United States.
“I am really hesitant on meeting clients coming in directly from China, especially hearing about the mass quarantines,” Mr. Huang said.
In New York, Ms. Lee-Ludovicy said her children had been excited at the prospect of the field trip to Chinatown, planning to go with a group of other students who are studying Mandarin.
With the trip canceled, Ms. Lee-Ludovicy said, she and her family planned to drive to the celebrations on their own.
But she worried that her two children, a daughter in middle school and a son in high school, were facing discrimination in ways they had not before. And she wondered what other students were taking away from the experience.
In Flushing, the streets and storefronts this week were lined with vendors selling Chinese wall hangings and red envelopes decorated with images celebrating the Year of the Rat. Hurrying through the crowds was a woman with a brown fur hat and a white paper face mask in search of masks for her relatives in Fujian Province.
Ms. Zheng, 68, said she was worried that her family in Fuzhou, Fujian — though far from the epicenter of the outbreak — could be in danger.
At the fifth pharmacy she visited, Ms. Zheng finally found surgical masks for $2. She bought five.
Scenes like this unfolded across Chinese enclaves around New York. Some store managers said wholesalers were not able to keep up with demand.
Daniel Xu, a pharmacist and manager at Starside Drugs in Flushing, said a customer came in on Monday and completely bought out his stock.
“All of a sudden we were out, and then hundreds of people started coming in asking for face masks,” Mr. Xu said. He said they restocked as much as they could before their distributor started rationing.
Mr. Xu is partnered with Jointown Pharmaceutical Group, based in Wuhan, and has been working to help colleagues in China secure sources of much-needed protective gear for medical caregivers there — surgical face masks, coveralls, eye shields and other medical coverings, including caps and shoe covers.
On Thursday, he was in his basement office, juggling phone calls, social media and email to organize efforts from various donor groups, including the Association of Chinese American Physicians.
Mr. Xu had already secured free shipping through a Chinese airline, he said, and was working on an official channel with the Hubei Province Red Cross to accept and distribute donations of supplies. Struggling to find suppliers, he was brokering deals with factories and importers to secure supplies that had originally been bound for overseas superstores. But resources were still scarce.
“Now China has to borrow from America,” he joked.
On the West Coast, June Liao, the owner of a baby formula export company based in Los Angeles, had amassed 20,000 masks from various sources to donate to Wuhan via the Red Cross. She set up two growing WeChat groups that have collectively raised $48,000 in under 24 hours, she said.
In Washington State, Mr. Shi said he and a handful of others, working as part of a group called the United Chinese Americans of Washington, have established a team to coordinate help. He has ordered 100 masks online. But in the meantime, he has been buying from stores, reading the labels to ensure the masks offer what he deemed to be sufficient protection.
In his WeChat app, he called up a bulletin from officials in Wuhan describing what was needed. While he was not sure if private shipping to China would get through the quarantines, he was hopeful that aid groups would be able to bring in the supplies they are managing to gather.
Angela Chen contributed reporting.