A decades-old campaign that knew how to talk to teenagers persuaded millions of them to never start smoking. Can it now persuade them never to misuse opioids?
Ms. Rosenberg is a co-founder of the Solutions Journalism Network, which supports rigorous reporting about responses to social problems.
Here’s how far he’d go: He lies down under the car. Then he kicks out the jack.
A similar ad shows a woman taking off her seatbelt and deliberately crashing her car. In another, a man breaks his hand with a hammer. In another, a man slams his arm in a door. Together, those comprised the first national ad campaign in America aimed at preventing opioid misuse.
They came from the Truth Initiative, the organization that was behind truth ads that helped bring about one of the most important public health victories in American history: In 1996, 34 percent of high school seniors had smoked a cigarette in the previous month — the same as in 1975. But by 2019, less than 6 percent smoked.
Now truth ads are being focusing on opioid abuse. There’s a relationship: More than 70 percent of opioid users also smoke, and there is evidence that smoking can prime the brain for other addictions.
Can the strategy work again? Let’s look at what the group did right in its antismoking campaign.

That threat works well to encourage adults to quit smoking. But it doesn’t prevent teens from starting. For many adolescents, the danger is a lure; they smoke to rebel against preachy adults. To them, the consequences are decades away, and teens are immortal.
One California advertisement portrayed tobacco executives in a smoke-filled room, cackling maniacally as they plot to replace 1,100 customers who quit smoking every day — “Actually, technically, they die,” one says.
That was in 1998. Over the next two years, teen smoking in Florida fell by 17.5 percent.
Florida was one of the first states to sue tobacco companies. When a nationwide settlement was reached, part of the money created a national truth campaign. It copied Florida’s strategies and hired its people. And it enjoyed the same success.
Of course, truth ads were only one part of this victory. States and cities raised their cigarette taxes. Indoor smoking vanished. But the ads were crucial.
Those truth ads still target adolescent smoking. New teenagers are minted every year, so the campaign never ends. It also makes “Ditch Juul” ads that show teens creatively demolishing their vaping equipment.
Surveys about the truth ads show that 80 percent of teenagers recognize the brand. And the organization knows what works. A review of published studies in 2014 concluded, “Youth are more likely to recall and think about advertising that includes personal testimonials; a surprising narrative; and intense images, sound and editing.” That’s Joe S. from Maine, all right.
Adolescents know about the misery of addiction — and addiction and overdose at 20 are scary in a way lung cancer at 60 is not. “But there is a lack of understanding and awareness of how easily you can become addicted,” Ms. Koval said.
Some adolescents start using opioids because their friends share. For others, the beginning is pain medication. Getting a prescription in high school after knee surgery or wisdom teeth removal is associated with a 33 percent higher chance of misusing opioids later in life.
Last year, a truth video titled “Treatment Box: Rebekkah’s Story,” won an Emmy. In it, Rebekkah, then 26, started using opioids at 14 after a cheerleading injury. The ad showed her detoxing — minute by minute. The video was projected into a clear glass bedroom-size box in Times Square. Passers-by watched Rebekkah’s pain.
A new ad series, “Best Day," has a relatable “it could be you” message, said Margie Skeer, associate professor at Tufts University School of Medicine. It’s graduation day, or signing day for college sports, or a basketball awards assembly — but the happy teens explain that on this, their best day, they see their futures as bleak: that the pain of adult stress or a sports injury will lead them to opioids, then addiction, and finally to overdosing. “My mom will bury me with my cleats,” one girl says.
It’s too soon to know if these ads reduce youth opioid misuse. A test of the Joe S.-style ads found that people who saw them were significantly more likely to agree that someone like them could become dependent on prescription opioids.
To receive email alerts for Fixes columns, sign up here.