‘BETTER JEOPARDY!!’ at Upright Citizens Brigade Theater Hell’s Kitchen (Jan. 17, 7:30 p.m.). The “Jeopardy! Greatest of All Time” tournament was mighty popular, but Noah Forman thinks the classic game show could still use some upgrades. Watch him put the improvisers Connor Ratliff and Kristen Acimovic, the Andy Kaufman Award winner Dru Johnston and the stand-up Alison Leiby through the trivia wringer as they grapple with even more rules and obstacles than merely forming their answers into questions.
‘THE BOB ROSS CHALLENGE LIVE!’ at Caveat (Jan. 18, 7 p.m.). In 2018, Micah Sherman and Mark Stetson started a series of YouTube videos in which they dared other funny people to emulate Ross, the host of the PBS series “The Joy of Painting” known for his preternaturally calm voice and his “happy little trees.” Their ultimate goal has been to raise money for the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society (Ross, as well as Stetson’s father, died from lymphoma). Now they’re trying it in front of a live audience, with Janeane Garofalo, Josh Gondelman, Rebecca Vigil, Mia Jackson, Tarik Davis and a surprise guest attempting to copy the brush strokes in one of Ross’s classic painting tutorials.
‘THE FINISHED BASEMENT COMEDY HOUR: A BENEFIT FOR HUMANS OF ADDICTION’ at the Gutter (Jan. 17, 8 p.m.). The host of this fund-raiser, Dan Wilbur, and his fellow Ohioans Brendan Eyre and Jasmine Pierce, who writes for “Saturday Night Live,” are commandeering the Spare Room at this bowling alley in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, to benefit Humans of Addiction, an Ohio-based online project. The more you donate, the greater your chances to win raffle prizes. The proceeds will benefit efforts to help turn this project into an offline, real-life network of storytellers who will work to destigmatize addiction.
IMPRACTICAL JOKERS at Radio City Music Hall (Jan. 18, 4 and 8 p.m.; Jan. 19, 8 p.m.). Brian Quinn, James Murray, Joe Gatto and Sal Vulcano began their comedy careers together on Staten Island as the Tenderloins, which they still call themselves, but you likely know them better from the show “Impractical Jokers” on TruTV, where they’ve been pranking one another since 2011. (Their 200th regular-season episode premieres in February, a little more than a week before their TV program comes to the big screen.) Catch the local stops of their “Cranjis McBasketball World Comedy Tour” while tickets last.
‘2020 VISION: THE NEXT CELEBRITY PRESIDENT’ at Improv Asylum (Jan. 23, 8 p.m.). If the current crop of presidential candidates doesn’t razzle-dazzle you enough, or you just want a respite from actual politicking, then this new monthly showcase of comedians portraying celebrities seeking the highest office in the land may suit your needs. Andrea Lopez, who impersonated Kourtney Kardashian last summer on NBC’s “Bring the Funny,” will debate Tristan Griffin as Ice-T, Rachael Burke as Taylor Swift and Corey Gibbs as Tracy Morgan.
