Hours after an article described an unpublished manuscript by his former national security adviser, President Trump rejected John Bolton’s account.
Democrats have been pushing the Republican-led Senate to allow new witnesses, including possibly Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff, who played a key role in the Ukraine pressure campaign. There were few signs by the end of last week that any Republicans would vote with Democrats on the matter.
But Mr. Bolton’s account about Mr. Trump’s motivations for freezing the military aid appeared to further sway at least two Republican senators — Mitt Romney of Utah and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska — to consider hearing new testimony.
“I think it’s increasingly likely that other Republicans will join those of us who think we should hear from John Bolton,” Mr. Romney told reporters on Monday.
Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina and one of the president’s biggest supporters in the Senate, said if Democrats call witnesses, Republicans should be able to as well. Republicans have been clamoring to hear from Mr. Biden and his son about their ties to Ukraine, which Mr. Trump has called corrupt.
By Monday morning, Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, and Mr. Graham had pressed the White House for an explanation of Mr. Bolton’s account.
Stephanie Grisham, the White House press secretary, said that Mr. Bolton's manuscript was provided to the National Security Council and edits to it had not been seen or made by anyone else in the White House.
Fred Fleitz, Mr. Bolton’s former chief of staff, called on him in an opinion piece for Fox News to immediately withdraw the book from the publisher.
In his manuscript, Mr. Bolton describes an effort that he had made, along with Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper, to push Mr. Trump to release the aid. Mr. Bolton said he also spoke with Attorney General William P. Barr about his concerns over the parallel diplomacy with Ukraine led by the president’s personal lawyer, Rudolph W. Giuliani. Mr. Barr, whom Mr. Trump mentioned in his July phone call with Mr. Zelensky, has tried to distance himself from Mr. Giuliani and the Ukraine matter.
Bob Driscoll, a lawyer for Mr. Mulvaney, disputed Mr. Bolton’s account and said Mr. Bolton was merely trying to sell his book, which is set to be released in mid-March.
