Health|Many in China Wear Them, but Do Masks Block Coronavirus?
Many in China Wear Them, but Do Masks Block Coronavirus?
They may help, but experts say it’s more important to wash your hands.
Chinese authorities have encouraged people in the city of Wuhan to wear surgical masks in public to help curb the spread of the new coronavirus.
The question is: do they work?
Many infectious disease specialists say the cheap disposable masks, which cover the nose and mouth, may help prevent the spread of infections if they are worn properly and used consistently.
But there isn’t much high-quality scientific evidence on their effectiveness outside health care settings, experts say. Most of the best studies, which are randomized controlled trials, focused on how well surgical masks protect health care workers in hospitals from picking up infections from sick patients, and found that consistent use of them helped.
Because surgical masks aren’t fitted or sealed, they leave gaps around the mouth, “so you’re not filtering all of the air that comes in,” she said.
The masks will, however, block most large respiratory droplets from other people’s sneezes and coughs from entering your mouth and nose, said Dr. Amesh Adalja, an infectious disease physician at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. Coronaviruses are primarily spread through droplets, he said.
Dr. Mark Loeb, an infectious disease specialist at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, said a study during an outbreak of the SARS coronavirus found that any type of protection — whether a mask or a respirator — reduced the risk of infections in health care workers by about 85 percent.
“The most important message was that the risk was lower if they consistently used any mask,” he said.
There is general agreement that infected patients who wear surgical masks are less likely to spread infection to others. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has instructed hospitals to ask any patients who have a fever or respiratory illness, have recently traveled to Wuhan, or have come in contact with someone who has traveled there, to wear a surgical mask. The C.D.C. also recommends that health care workers wear a respirator, which filters out more particles than a mask, when they are around such patients.
The risk of becoming infected with the coronavirus in the United States — where there is only one confirmed case — is “way too low to start wearing a face mask,” said Dr. Peter Rabinowitz, who is co-director of the University of Washington MetaCenter for Pandemic Preparedness and Global Health Security.
But washing hands — frequently and before eating — is universally recommended. Hand sanitizer is effective against respiratory viruses. Experts also recommend washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, rubbing the hands together and ensuring all parts of the hands — the palms as well as the back of the hands — are washed.
