What is the effect of U.S. detention policy on immigrant families?
A family divided by immigration authorities struggles to reunite.
“Darlin” is a powerful 16-minute film by Isabel Castro touching on themes of hope, determination and courage in the face of the unknown. It profiles one Honduran family in the months after they were separated by U.S. detention policy. We follow Darlin, a young Honduran mother living in Texas, and her first-grade son Hamilthon as they live for months suspended in limbo not knowing when or if their family will be reunited again.
What can we learn from their story? What can it tell us about U.S. immigration policy?
3. An additional challenge | Respond to the essential question at the top of this post: What is the effect of U.S. detention policy on immigrant families?
On a hot July evening last year, I found myself in a parking lot at a detention complex in Texas. There was an outcry over the Trump administration’s policy of separating immigrant families at the border, and when I’d heard that there was a mom who needed a ride after being released, I’d volunteered to drive her. The facility was running about three hours late, and it was really hot. A security guard in a golf cart circled the perimeter of the facility. He reprimanded me for taking a photograph on my phone. I got back into my car and blasted the air-conditioning.
When the detainees were finally released, family members sprinted to each other to embrace. Kids were crying. And finally, I saw Darlin, the subject of the short film above. She wandered around clutching a folder of paperwork, looking tired and confused. She didn’t have any family there to meet her; her partner, Jefry, and son, Hamilthon, were still in government custody. During the drive to Houston, we made small talk about her nearly two-month stay in detention after arriving from Honduras. When we stopped to eat dinner, she hardly touched her food.
Darlin, 26, is just three years younger than I am, and we easily built a friendship. Documenting things helps me understand them, and in an attempt to understand a government policy that was incomprehensible to me, I asked if I could film her. She agreed. While she waited for her family to be released from custody, she did my hair and we talked about dating and my dog and she gave me cooking tips. I tried to understand her family’s legal process and explain what was happening. Despite my English fluency and legal network, I was still often confused by the maze of court appearances and legal jargon. I wasn’t able to tell her whether things would turn out O.K.
Almost three months later, she was finally reunited with her family, and I left. I thought I would feel relief. Instead, seeing them together had made me hold my breath longer, more deeply. I realized then that they had only made it to the starting line of a long, arduous and volatile legal process that is difficult to predict or prepare for.
Now they wait. Darlin and I keep in touch over the phone and social media. She’s pregnant. Hamilthon is in school. Darlin misses her mom. Jefry is waiting for authorization to work. Jefry’s next court hearing is in one week, and Darlin is waiting to hear about hers. We’re all suspended, still holding our breath.
