The chairperson called the meeting to order by banging a selfie stick against a rustic drum.
Ms. Norman is an actor, a comedian and a writer.
The chairperson called the meeting to order at 6 p.m. by banging a selfie stick against a rustic drum. In addition to numerous rank-and-file members, the YouTube Caucus, Flat Tummy Tea Association and Always on Expensive Vacation Council were in attendance.
At 6:05 p.m., roll call of union officers was given. Last meeting’s notes were read and ratified. At 6:15 p.m., complimentary hair care vitamin gummies were distributed courtesy of the Committee for Maintaining Damaging Beauty Standards.
The skills training ended with a group exercise on how to make it appear like you are about to eat a giant sloppy hamburger while still looking hot.
At 6:52 p.m., roles were assigned for the coming picket action to be waged on the Department of Education, following its recent decision to bar the use of social media in public schools. The union body then rehearsed the chant to be used at the picket (“Kids Should Get to Scroll in School, Ads Can Be a Learning Tool!”).
At 7 p.m., a selfie recess was officially granted to the Beauty Blogger representative who had earlier inquired. This sparked a domino effect among rank-and-file members, and motions for a recess extension were granted 17 subsequent times.
Toward the end of the recess, the union member Miranda Sings raised a complaint about increasing bureaucratization of the union body, citing concerns that perhaps “the leadership was not sufficiently interested in advancing class struggle.” Many members were still taking selfies so the issue was tabled.
At 8:59 p.m., once most cellphone batteries and portable ring lights had died, the results of the union’s most recent collective bargaining agreement were announced. Notably, this year’s agreed-upon contract enjoyed a significant increase in #healthcare, #pension and #wages!
Simone Norman (@whysimonewhy) is an actor, a comedian and a writer based in Brooklyn.