Millions of animals, many found on no other continent, may have perished, and Australians are taking care of survivors.
Susan Pulis, who runs a wildlife shelter, had rallied her friends to pack the animals in blankets and baskets and take them to safety on the coast. One friend gutted her downstairs bedroom to house five of the kangaroos. Ms. Pulis has kept the youngest joeys in quilt pouches in another’s living room.
To protect Australia’s wildlife, rescuers like Ms. Pulis, who fled the forest for the coast late last month, are battling immense changes to the country’s landscape on a tiny scale. They cannot save Australia’s wildlife on their own, but their work is reinforcing scientists’ judgment that intervention will be increasingly necessary to protect animals on a hotter, more fiery planet.
The task for others has been more grim. One woman told the Australian Broadcasting Corporation that she was checking the pouches of dead kangaroos for joeys and marking the ones without them so that other searchers would not have to repeat her efforts.
For Ms. Pulis, evacuating her few animals — which had already been rescued, some of them more than once, from starvation, dog attacks and car accidents — was simply part of life.
“It’s a holocaust,” Ms. Pulis said as she drove toward her home on Monday for the first time since blistering heat brought through a ferocious fire front.
Cool weather and rain have since brought a reprieve. But smoke still hung in the air. As she reached the track leading to her property, Ms. Pulis began to cry.
At her property, Ms. Pulis tended to the stressed and dehydrated kangaroos she had been forced to leave behind. She gave each an injection to relieve their pain — they had most likely hopped so frantically away from the burning forest that they had injured themselves — and refreshed their water, which was contaminated by ash.
On Saturday, as yards-high flames threatened her property for a second time, Ms. Pulis’s friend Jason Nicholson defended it with a hose and hundreds of gallons of water.
Isabella Kwai contributed reporting from Nowra, Australia, and Damien Cave from Sydney.