At first, I didn’t understand why I was asked to review “Uncanny Valley,” Anna Wiener’s memoir about working for Bay Area start-ups in the 2010s. Wiener reports on technology for The New Yorker; I’ve only written about technology to say that I think social media is very bad. I’m much more interested in metafiction than metadata, not least because I’m confident I can explain what metafiction is.
But when I started reading, I realized that former liberal arts majors who halfheartedly resist the app-enabled future — mainly through willful ignorance and sweeping complaints — are the intended audience for this book. Wiener was, and maybe still is, one of us; far from seeking to disabuse civic-minded techno-skeptics of our views, she is here to fill out our worst-case scenarios with shrewd insight and literary detail. It isn’t that those of us with skill sets as soft as our hearts don’t need to know what’s going on in “the ecosystem,” as those “high on the fumes of world-historical potential” call Silicon Valley. It’s more that everything over there is as absurdly wrong as we imagine. “Tone = DOOM,” I wrote in the margins, and that was before an up-and-coming C.E.O. introduces Wiener, a new hire, to his favorite dictatorially motivational phrase: “Down for the Cause” (DFTC).
Unfortunately, she is also susceptible to tech bros’ clear-skinned optimism and willing to hypothesize the presence of humanity in places where it has gone the way of The Dodo (by which I mean the viral-animal-video website that claims to advocate for animals through the promotion of “visually compelling, highly shareable” content). She comes across an article about an e-reading start-up promising “to bring a revolution to book publishing” — one of several proposed “Netflix for books” projects that have thankfully failed to achieve Netflix-level success. Despite suspecting “a lot of fine print,” she finds herself intrigued as much by the possibility of a not-so-bleak future for the publishing industry as by the prospect of making more than $30,000 a year (no benefits). After a “series of ambiguous and casual interviews,” she accepts a three-month trial position, to the consternation of her publishing friends, who see the e-book start-up as the enemy.
Yet for every “rationalist” who says things like “But, for the sake of argument, what if we limit our sample to white people?” she also meets an earnest, talented person who is almost certainly not evil, maybe. On “a microblogging platform,” she picks a fight with a start-up founder whom she sees arguing that books should be shorter so people can learn faster; in response, he invites her to lunch. They become unlikely friends, and he becomes “one of the youngest self-made billionaires.” Another friend, a software developer, claims to have leaked a set of documents that served as “an indictment of undemocratic activity perpetrated by the very rich.” So much around her is heady and amazing, and not only because she takes MDMA sometimes. Meanwhile, tragic ironies — “a search-engine giant down in Mountain View,” “the social network everyone hated,” a C.E.O.’s assertion that “big data was a hot space” — continue to accumulate in the background. Talking to a “digital-rights activist” while working for the data analytics start-up, Wiener asks him, tentatively, “Do you think I work at a surveillance company?” By this point, a “National Security Administration contractor” had long been in the news for leaking classified information. The activist replies that he thought she’d never ask.
It’s possible to create a realistic portrait of contemporary San Francisco by simply listing all the harebrained new-money antics and “mindful” hippie-redux principles that flourish there. All you have to do after that is juxtapose them with the effects of the city’s rocket-ship rents: a once-lively counterculture gasping for air and a “concentration of public pain” shameful and shocking even to a native New Yorker. Wiener deploys this strategy liberally, with adroit specificity and arch timing. But the real strength of “Uncanny Valley” comes from her careful parsing of the complex motivations and implications that fortify this new surreality at every level, from the individual body to the body politic. By the end of the book, she shows that technologists are not interested in “systems” thinking only because it can fix what’s broken; they are “settling into newfound political power,” with armies of trolls now serving as foot soldiers in what founders call a “war” for market share.
Being skilled at deconstruction is a disadvantage for a customer-support specialist hoping to find “meaning” in her work, and for a millennial who values moving through the world with a clear sense of right and wrong. For a writer, though, it’s a pickax, and we’re living through a gold rush, as they might say in San Francisco.