With its star, Lupita Nyong’o, in awards contention this season, a look at the clothes that helped tell the story.
You could watch Jordan Peele’s “Us” a dozen times and still not catch all of the symbolism, references and ideas tucked in it. Yes, scissors are clearly a thing, but what’s with that tuxedo T-shirt?
The movie, ostensibly about a family, the Wilsons, hunted by its doppelgängers, is something of an awards contender. Its star, Lupita Nyong’o, is up for a Screen Actors Guild Award on Jan. 19 for her haunting portrayal of a mother with a painful past and a demented double speaking in a creepy voice. But performance is only one piece in this cinematic puzzle (now streaming on HBO). If you look closely, you’ll see that some of the narrative threads are woven right into the costumes — the tops in particular.
Here is a look at a handful of the clothing choices in “Us,” with Peele explaining what they mean to the film.
Visually, Peele wanted a shirt for him that would contrast with the “Jaws” top Jason also wears. It’s like an arrow facing downward, as opposed to “Jaws,” an arrow facing upward. “This reflects the central battle between the monster rising up and those going down,” he said.
Jason wears a “Jaws” shirt in one key scene partly because of Peele’s admiration for Steven Spielberg’s 1975 thriller.
“It could always be an argument for the best movie ever made,” he said. “One of the reasons it resonates is because it’s able to scare us, with this great feeling. It doesn’t bum you out, but it’s terrifying. To find that combination is special."
Peele said that the shirt is a perfect representation of the theme of darkness rising from below, a shadow that can’t be seen at first but is imminent.
He had to get Spielberg’s permission to use the image. “He gave me his blessing and specified the design that he wanted for it,” Peele said.
Shirts from the influential American punk band Black Flag show up more than once. The first time is in an early boardwalk scene that takes place in 1986. Then later, in a present-day sequence, one of the Wilsons’ twin neighbors wears the band’s tee as a cutoff. But the shirts aren’t just a celebration of punk.
Rabbits keep popping (hopping?) up in the movie. The opening credits play over a shot of cages full of rabbits against the wall of what looks like a classroom. And rabbit motifs adorn the apparel of the Wilsons’ daughter, Zora, played by Shahadi Wright Joseph. Why?
Zora also wears a green short-sleeve hoodie that just says “tho” on it.
Peele also mentioned there’s a symbolic connection with Jason and how a magician pulls a rabbit out of a hat.
“We went a little rabbit crazy,” he said.