Everyone involved wants a quick resolution, but they have to be wary of setting precedents that could harm the monarchy.
LONDON — Prince Harry and Meghan’s shocking announcement that they plan to become part-time royals caused a painful rupture in his family. But it has also forced Buckingham Palace to confront the changing nature of British royal life as the era of Queen Elizabeth II moves toward a close.
Meghan, also known as the Duchess of Sussex, flew to Canada alone after the announcement to care for the couple’s eight-month-old son, Archie, who was staying there with a friend. Her hasty departure suggested that, however the palace chooses to respond, things are not going to return to normal.
While Friday’s meeting was aimed at easing the crisis and finding a new arrangement for Prince Harry and Meghan, people with ties to the palace said it would have broader implications. Whatever concessions or stipulations Buckingham Palace agrees to could potentially be applied to other members of the family, since the royal family has always been guided by precedent.
Private secretaries for the queen, Prince Charles, Prince William, and Prince Harry all took part in the session. Prince William had a particular interest, one person close to the palace said, because his younger children, Princess Charlotte and Prince Louis, will face the same predicament as his brother — unlikely ever to sit on the throne, but still highly-visible members of the family.
Prince Charles, the longtime heir and Prince Harry’s father, has taken charge of the response to the crisis, much as he did last November after his brother, Prince Andrew, gave a calamitous interview to the BBC about his dealings with the disgraced financier, Jeffrey Epstein. Under pressure from Prince Charles, the queen essentially stripped Prince Andrew of his official duties.
Prince Charles has long spoken of his desire to streamline the family during his reign, raising questions about how many members would continue to carry out official duties or receive funding from the state.
The queen, 93, has already reduced her public schedule. With the banishment of Prince Andrew and the self-exile of Prince Harry, the number of royals who shoulder the family’s heavy schedule of charity events, diplomatic ceremonies, and hospital visits would dwindle to a small, possibly overburdened, circle.
For all the bruised feelings, experts on the royal family said they did not expect the queen to lash out against the duke and duchess. Unlike Prince Andrew, who was an increasingly peripheral figure, Prince Harry and Meghan, along with Archie, have come to symbolize the family’s future — global stars, with a multiracial family that has appeal throughout the British Commonwealth.
At Friday’s meeting, Prince Harry and his wife were represented by their chief of staff, Fiona Mcilwham, who served as ambassador to Albania and is viewed as a rising star in the British diplomatic service. Senior members of the family typically draw their top advisers from the ranks of diplomats. Clive Alderton, the private secretary to Prince Charles, served as ambassador to Morocco.
Their similar backgrounds and pedigrees could help the advisers smooth out the ruffled feathers between their bosses. But the Sussexes have served notice that they are willing to go outside the normal channels. There were rumors Friday that Prince Harry would soon leave to join his wife in Canada.
As the spectacle has unfolded in days of breathless headlines, there are emerging cultural fault lines, which break in the same way as the fraught national debate over Brexit. Tabloids like the Daily Mail and the Sun, which championed leaving the European Union, have tended to be more critical of Prince Harry and defensive of the monarchy, as have pro-Brexit papers like the Telegraph.
Left-of-center papers like the Guardian, which opposed Brexit, have tended to be more sympathetic to Prince Harry and his American wife, even if they season their coverage with disdain for the entire royal enterprise.
Marina Hyde, a columnist at the Guardian, drew a parallel between Prince Harry and King Edward VIII, who abdicated the throne in 1936 rather than give up his dream of marrying a divorced American woman, Wallis Simpson. The couple, she wrote, probably had little choice but to make an end-run around the queen.
