In a video, we retraced Kobe Bryant’s route before the crash that killed him and eight others to try to understand what might have happened.
A deeper look at the route of Kobe Bryant’s helicopter before it crashed to understand how such an accident could occur.
This is the flight path of the helicopter carrying Kobe Bryant and eight others, which crashed near Los Angeles. It’s a common route, spanning an area well-traveled by aircraft every day. So we wanted to understand how, despite this, such an accident could occur. Using a chartered helicopter, flight tracking data and images from the day, we’ve re-traced the flight path to examine the conditions that may have led to the crash. The helicopter took off from John Wayne Airport in Orange County. Its destination, another airport near the sports academy, which Bryant owned. The first half of the flight is uneventful. The terrain, here in the Los Angeles basin, is flat. That makes it relatively easy to navigate, even in overcast weather. Bryant, himself, made the trip routinely. On the day of the crash, the weather in this area is fine. There’s four miles visibility. Within 13 minutes, the helicopter passes by downtown Los Angeles, passes Dodger Stadium and begins to enter the San Fernando Valley. The terrain begins to rise. That day, air controllers tell Bryant’s pilot to stay in a holding pattern over the city of Glendale. They circle for more than 10 minutes, as other air traffic is cleared. It’s around this time that a retired pilot on the ground happens to film the helicopter overhead. We can see in the footage that the sky is considerably overcast. The pilot received special clearance to continue on in the low-visibility weather … … and flies into the San Fernando Valley, following the freeway system along the edge of the foothills. We can see the densely populated terrain is still low and flat. The weather for our chartered flight is clear, but images from the day of Bryant’s flight show that visibility has become extremely limited. One reason: If we pause and pull up, we can see that the Pacific Ocean is just on the other side of these hills. Cold, moist air coming off the water, and hitting the mountains, can quickly form thick and low cloud cover. With a lower ceiling and higher mountainous terrain, there’s now a much smaller path to safely fly. Roughly three minutes before the crash, the helicopter begins flying along Highway 101. It’s a common route. The highway is a distinct landmark that’s easy to follow, and it runs through a low point in the foothills, making it easier for pilots to stay below cloud cover. Bryant’s pilot had requested “flight following,” where controllers track an aircraft to help the pilot during rough conditions. Just before the crash, the ground controller tells the pilot he’s too low for tracking. The pilot radios that he’s climbing to avoid the cloud layer. The helicopter quickly gains altitude. At about 2,300 feet, it turns away from Highway 101, and crashes into the side of a hill. We don’t know why the pilot took this final turn. The debris field is around 500 feet long. Investigators said that the helicopter may have missed clearing the top of the hill by 20 to 30 feet. They still haven’t determined a cause for the crash.
LOS ANGELES — For celebrities and the rich of Los Angeles, the helicopters that constantly whir above the city are a glitzy status symbol.  For almost everyone, including the conductor who once walked offstage during Mahler’s Symphony No. 8 when a helicopter buzzed above the Hollywood Bowl, they can be a hated nuisance.
That the basketball icon Kobe Bryant’s brilliant and complicated life came to an end in a fiery crash on a hillside in the Santa Monica Mountains on Sunday seemed to only underscore the ubiquity of the helicopter in this sprawling and traffic-choked metropolis.
Back in his playing days, Mr. Bryant, 41, had a routine. Wake up in Orange County, hop a helicopter to downtown Los Angeles, work out, shoot baskets, then get home in time to pick his daughters up from school. And then it was back to the arena to suit up for that night’s Lakers game.
Mr. Bryant, of course, was not the only celebrity in this city filled with them to embrace the helicopter as a preferred mode of transportation. Clint Eastwood and Harrison Ford fly their own choppers, and Brad Pitt and Madonna are also known to zoom around the city by helicopter. Private, taxi-like services like Blade have prospered, allowing the merely wealthy, not just the ultrawealthy, to loft above it all.
At other tragic turns in the modern history of Los Angeles, there too was a helicopter. In 1994, a news helicopter tracked the slow-moving white Bronco carrying O.J. Simpson, showcasing the city’s fascination with freeway police chases, a phenomenon that has only heightened in the age of social media. Two years earlier, helicopters showed the nation, and the world, a city on fire during the riots after the acquittal of police officers in the beating of Rodney King.
In some cities, the whirling of a helicopter overhead can provoke dread — an indication that an emergency is unfolding. In Los Angeles, helicopters are a buzzing soundtrack to city life: news crews charting traffic backups or the crowds on the beach; firefighters moving in on a fast-moving brush fire; the police surveilling a crime scene or pursuing a suspect; or a wealthy tycoon on the way to an important meeting.
The ability to rise above some of the worst traffic in the country has become not just a status symbol but a necessity “for a certain class of wealthy Angeleno who use helicopters to escape the tyranny of the 405 freeway and the downtown gridlock,” said D.J. Waldie, a Los Angeles native who has written about the city’s helicopters and is best known for “Holy Land,” his memoir of suburbia.
In the neighborhoods of South Los Angeles that are distant from the glamour of Newport Beach, where Mr. Bryant lived, the sound of the helicopter is sometimes a sinister reminder of the Los Angeles Police Department’s history of abuses in those communities.
Patrol helicopters from the department’s Air Division — the largest police helicopter fleet in the country — assist officers on the ground, blaring spotlights down streets and into backyards to search for suspects at night.
Hip-hop artists from Tupac Shakur to Kendrick Lamar have decried in their lyrics the circling “ghetto birds” that are ubiquitous in parts of Los Angeles. “Why oh why must you swoop through the hood / Like everybody from the hood is up to no good?” Ice Cube asks in “Ghetto Bird,” released in 1993.
“Every homie has had a helicopter experience,” the Rev. Gregory Boyle, who runs Homeboy Industries, a nonprofit group that helps former gang members escape the street life, wrote in a text message.
José Richard Avilés, who works for the city’s Department of Transportation, said he did not realize that a constant stream of helicopters was uncommon until he attended college in Minnesota.
For local television news stations, helicopters are a necessity to do the job, whether following a police chase or doing traffic reports.
The air above Brentwood was abuzz on Wednesday as a stream of helicopters — mainly from the Fire Department, but also from TV news stations — circled a burning 25-story building.
During one police chase, Ms. Tur recalled, more than a dozen helicopters seemed to be hovering at once, “like something out of ‘Apocalypse Now,’” she said.
Mr. Bryant’s last flight on Sunday took him from Orange County north to Burbank and across to Calabasas, where the helicopter went down amid thick fog.
On Tuesday, a New York Times reporter retraced much of the route of the flight, taking off from John Wayne Airport in Orange County, a journey that offered the sort of sweeping views of greater Los Angeles that can be so compelling to television viewers.
The city from the air is a panorama of big-box stores and ranch houses, glinting with turquoise pools and bristling with palms and Italian cypress trees. A bird’s-eye view of the city takes in schools and golf courses, dry riverbeds and warrens of self storage spaces.
The airspace above the city is a bustling place all its own, with helicopters at John Wayne veering away from the flight path of departing passenger jets, small planes towing advertising banners down the coast and air traffic controllers issuing clipped instructions to keep everyone in their aerial lanes.
“It’s just a very dynamic place,” said Chuck Street, executive director of the Los Angeles Helicopter Operators Association, who logged more than 25,000 hours in the air for local radio and television stations before retiring.
Reporting from 1,000 feet in the air, he said, enabled him to create an audible tapestry of the dense, diverse, rapidly changing city his listeners were navigating below.
In a metropolitan area of well over 13 million people, spread over a vast landscape from the San Gabriel Mountains to the Pacific Ocean, the helicopter view of Los Angeles, some suggest, is a uniquely manageable way of looking at the city.
It was a view of Los Angeles that Mr. Bryant had frequently, and it was his last.
Tim Arango, Dave Philipps and Louis Keene reported from Los Angeles, and Julie Bosman from Chicago.