Sean Dorsey explores masculinity in “Boys in Trouble” at New York Live Arts, but the power of his message loses its steam in this rambling work.
Is the choreographer Sean Dorsey really the first established openly transgender artist in the dance world? Mr. Dorsey is an important figure in the field, but by no means the only one; in terms of grants and awards, his San Francisco company, now in its 15th season, has made strides. And in November, he celebrated an unequivocal first: Wearing a T-shirt that read “I [heart] Being Trans,” he became the first openly transgender artist to land on the cover of Dance Magazine.
As always, the work matters, and the two-act piece, “Boys in Trouble” that his company, Sean Dorsey Dance, brought to New York Live Arts on Sunday as part of its Live Artery series, was unremarkable and unsophisticated. (It continues through Tuesday.) A highly emotional rumination about the toxic side of contemporary masculinity, “Boys in Trouble” looks at the struggle to fight, adhere to and ultimately rebrand what it means to be masculine.
But as “Boys in Trouble” attests, he did. Joined by four dancers who stand in their own spotlights in a pyramid formation, Mr. Dorsey leads the cast in unison steps: turns with head circles and spiraling arms that scoop through the air alongside the audible (and tedious) sound of their breath.
As it continues, the flow of Mr. Dorsey’s choreography — aerobic, athletic and on a loop — doesn’t disguise its colorlessness. With its vignette-heavy approach and swooping, full-bodied movement, “Boys in Trouble” feels reminiscent of socially-minded dance-theater works of the 1990s as it veers between dancing passages (often accompanied by voice-overs) and rambling sections dense with live dialogue. Mr. Dorsey’s drawn-out delivery, with its melodramatic pauses, undercuts the weight of what he has to say.
“Boys in Trouble,” which explores things like white privilege, body-shaming and race, is sharpest when Mr. Dorsey and his dancers get personal. One of the more affecting moments is a duet between ArVejon Jones and Will Woodward that explores the pleasure of two black men loving each other. They have a theatrical ease that is missing from other sections.
