Our roundup of the news stories and features about young people that have recently appeared across sections of NYTimes.com.
Here is the December edition of Teenagers in The Times, a roundup of the news and feature stories about young people that have recently appeared across sections of NYTimes.com. We publish a new edition on the first Thursday of each month.
For ideas about how to use Teenagers in The Times with your students, please see our lesson plan and special activity sheet, both of which can be used with this or any other edition.
Beacon High School Is Half White. That’s Why Students Walked Out.
More than 300 students at the selective public high school, one of New York City’s most prestigious, protested its admissions policies.
A curriculum called “Food Ed.” encourages high school students to think about the way nutrition intersects with culture, the environment and farming.
First-generation, low-income students are commandeering one of the college’s historically elitist eating clubs.
Nearly 27,000 children in Ohio were removed from their homes last year, many because of the opioid crisis. More than a quarter were placed in the care of relatives.
A video shows the boy in severe distress. He was discovered by his cellmate, not immigration officials, as they originally claimed.
The harsh, black cover of the book, which memorializes 37 people killed at the country’s schools last year, is meant to spur action.
The Swedish teenager who inspired a global movement is returning home, as admirers and critics weigh in.
Michelle Obama urged the 16-year-old climate activist to “ignore the doubters” after the president’s comments.
“Young black people are making suicide attempts and dying by suicide at record high rates,” states this Opinion essay.
Research shows that Generation Z is the first in which women are more likely than their male peers to be engaged in politics. Here’s what some of them told us.
The spelling bee announced the changes after an eight-way tie this year. Fewer spellers who pay their own way will be accepted, and some financial aid will be available.
She told police she had set up the kidnapping because of her “overprotective” mother, an official said.
The workers were electrocuted by a loose cable over the weekend, raising questions about labor conditions at the franchise.
A writer followed a Navajo high school basketball team for a season. Here is a tale from one road trip.
LeBron James Jr. hit the go-ahead shot for his California high school team against St. Vincent-St. Mary, his father’s alma mater.
Demographics suggest football should be dying in Mercer County. Instead it’s booming and producing state champions.
One of the biggest myths about the beauty myth is that it’s female. Adolescent boys suffer from unrealistic beauty standards, too.
The brains of fit, young athletes dial down extraneous noise and attend to important sounds better than those of other young people.
Tomi Adeyemi’s sequel to “Children of Blood and Bone,” the once-canceled, now revised “Blood Heir” and more books that will get readers talking.
Students take challenges along when they spend a semester abroad and need to be prepared to take care of themselves in a new setting and a new language.
Be a sportscaster. Make a glitter jar. Get a pet. Whether or not you rely on strategies like these, the central advice is to listen more.
One was in “Game of Thrones.” One is still in high school. They all act and play instruments. And in a new show they portray scrappy Dubliners creating a band.
How did eye shadow become the most sought-after item on high schoolers’ wish lists?
Sophia Takal’s film isn’t particularly scary, but it has plenty on its mind.
‘A German Youth’ Review: Lights, Camera, Guerrilla Tactics?
The documentary traces the origins of the Red Army Faction with a dizzying assemblage of archival footage.
Three young women shoppers in three countries talk about what they buy, where they buy it and why.
“John Mulaney & the Sack Lunch Bunch” on Netflix doesn’t condescend to his 8- to 13-year-old co-stars or the youngsters it’s aimed at.