Our reporters have been on the ground documenting the disaster as it unfolded, whether interviewing evacuees or following firefighters.
Australia’s Volunteer Firefighters Find It Hard to Pause, Even for Christmas: Thousands were working extended shifts to battle relentless blazes, raising questions about whether the country could continue to rely on an unpaid force.
‘It’s Going to Be a Blast Furnace’: Australia Fires Intensify: Calling for evacuations along the southeastern coast, officials said the coming days would be among the worst yet in an already catastrophic fire season.
‘Nowhere Else to Go’: Some Defy Warnings to Flee Australian Fires: The authorities warned of potentially worse conditions ahead, but some residents wanted to protect their homes. Others feared that fleeing would be more dangerous.
The Springs Ran Dry. Then This Australian Town Burned: People in some lush rural places thought the blazes would never reach them. On New Year’s Eve, as firestorms swept through, they were proved wrong. “I’ve run out of tears,” one resident said.
How Rupert Murdoch Is Influencing Australia’s Bushfire Debate: Critics see a concerted effort to shift blame, protect conservative leaders and divert attention from climate change.
‘Armageddon Is Here’: Australian Readers Share Their Wildfire Experiences: Readers told us how they were coping.
How the Confrontation Between the U.S. and Iran Escalated: Here’s how the situation developed over the last two weeks.
Video Shows Ukrainian Plane Being Hit Over Iran: The Times has obtained video of the moment a Ukrainian airliner was hit minutes after takeoff from Tehran.
Iranian Missile Accidentally Brought Down Ukrainian Jet, Officials Say, Citing Early Evidence: Western intelligence found that Iran was responsible for the plane crash, indicating that the deaths of the 176 people aboard were a consequence of the heightened tensions between Washington and Iran.
Confrontation in Congress Looms Over Iran Conflict: Both President Trump and Iranian leaders signaled their willingness to end hostilities.
