An exhibition at the Centre National du Costume de Scène in France considers the dialogue between the stage and the runway.
MOULINS, France — Soft jersey bathing suits, molded on the body, fitted pink cloche caps framing the face. These were Coco Chanel’s simple yet revolutionary designs for the Ballets Russes’s “Le Train Bleu” (1924), a dance about gilded youth at the seaside, doing calisthenics and playing tennis and golf.
Chanel was just one of a star-studded artistic team: The scenario was by Cocteau, the front curtain by Picasso, the choreography by Bronislava Nijinska and the score by Darius Milhaud. But in choosing Chanel to design the costumes, Diaghilev, as so often, broke new ground.
“Chanel was the first couturier to create costumes for the stage,” said Philippe Noisette, the curator of “Couturiers de la Danse,” an exhibition that continues through May 3 at the Centre National du Costume de Scène, or National Theatrical Costume Museum, here in the Auvergne region of France. Sportswear, Mr. Noisette noted, was a relatively new category of clothing, and Chanel’s practical, stylish designs both surprised and inspired her audiences in this early crossover moment between ballet and fashion.
Mr. Noisette said the themes were “a skeleton” that allowed him to weave together images from ballet, contemporary dance and fashion shows and to juxtapose different epochs and innovations. Each section groups a breathtaking array of costumes by established designers like Balmain, Dior, Givenchy, Yves Saint Laurent and Karl Lagerfeld alongside pieces by a younger generation, including Iris van Herpen, Rick Owens, Gareth Pugh and Hedi Slimane.
But what looks good on a runway doesn’t necessarily translate directly to the stage. Dance costumes have to conform to the specific needs of the performers, choreography and theater, which even the most sophisticated couturier may have to learn.
Couturiers who sustain creative relationships with choreographers get a chance to learn those mechanics. Beyond its four themes, the exhibition also has sections devoted to specific choreographer-designer collaborations: Jean-Paul Gaultier and Régine Chopinot; Issey Miyake and William Forsythe; Gianni Versace and Maurice Béjart; and the eclectic design choices of the choreographer Daniel Larrieu.
After a walk through the exhibition, Mr. Noisette talked about some of the costumes — what they reveal about fashion and innovation and how they speak of dance in its time. Here are edited excerpts from that conversation.
This dress by On Aura Tout Vu was created for “L’Enfant et Les Sortilèges” (2016), choreographed by Jeroen Verbruggen for the Monte Carlo Ballet. Jean-Christophe Maillot, the director of that company, has a history of commissioning fashion designers, including lesser-known ones. These designers, who are Bulgarian and Portuguese, “combine a whimsical eccentricity with a real couture finish and detailing,” Mr. Noisette said.
With the “Loss” costumes — some fantastical like this one, called “The Fish,” some plain and practical — Mr. Miyake tested his idea of making garments that would retain their form, but also create organic shapes as the dancer moved in space. “When Miyake heard how much the dancers loved wearing the costumes, he thought to himself that there would be a good chance the public would feel the same,” Mr. Noisette said. In 1994 Mr. Miyake introduced his successful line, Pleats Please.
This dress, by Maria Grazia Chiuri for Dior, is the newest costume in the exhibition, made in 2019 for the ballerina in Sébastien Bertaud’s “Nuit Blanche” for the Rome Opera Ballet. “This dress is a perfect example of couture in dance, due to the perfection and simplicity of its cut, and the detail and subtlety of its embroidery,” Mr. Noisette said.
