Five former Connecticut players dressed for the national team’s exhibition game against their alma mater.
HARTFORD, Conn. — The length of the Connecticut women’s basketball dynasty occasionally comes as a shock even to those most responsible for it.
The relationship between the U.S.A. Basketball team and the UConn women’s program, which has won a record 11 N.C.A.A. titles, has long been a cozy one. Nine of the Olympians in U.S.A. Basketball history played for Connecticut.
But the connection has rarely been so illuminated as it was on Monday night at the XL Center, where five former Connecticut players — Bird, Diana Taurasi, Breanna Stewart, Tina Charles and Katie Lou Samuelson — dressed for a U.S.A. Basketball matchup against their alma mater.
Team U.S.A. won the exhibition, 79-64, but any separation between the two sides felt incidental. When the U.S.A. Basketball roster was announced, home-team level cheers greeted the former Huskies, with Taurasi narrowly edging out Bird and Stewart in decibel level, and the familiar “Louuuuuuuuu” ringing out for Samuelson.
Adding to the sense of reunion, the 2009 and 2010 national championship teams were introduced before tipoff.
The game also included tributes to Kobe Bryant and his 13-year-old daughter, Gianna, who both died Sunday in a helicopter crash near Los Angeles. The former Lakers star was known to attend UConn games with Gianna, who played basketball and had vowed to reach the W.N.B.A. someday.
The Bryants had become friends with Coach Geno Auriemma and many UConn players, including Stewart, who said Bryant was one of the first people to reach out to her when she got hurt in Europe in April. Stewart honored the pair, as well as the seven others killed in the crash, by writing their names on her shoes.
UConn had flowers on its bench in front of a No. 2 jersey for Gianna. The coaching staffs also wore ribbons in gold and purple, the Lakers’ colors.
Before the start of the game, the teams huddled together at midcourt for a 24-second moment of silence. After the tip, the U.S.A. team took an eight-second backcourt violation and then the Huskies let the 24-second shot clock expire. Those were Bryant’s jersey numbers with the Lakers.
The game was Stewart’s first since she ruptured her right Achilles’ tendon months ago. On the familiar floor, Stewart promptly sank a 3-pointer on her first shot attempt. The crowd cheered the road team.
Those were the only points Stewart would score in her 17 minutes on the court, but her comeback had started.
Stewart said before the game that being on the national team reminded her of her time at Connecticut.
Likewise, Auriemma said he had gained a lot from his eight years as head coach of the national team, and his nearly 30 years in one role or another with U.S.A. Basketball.
Auriemma said he thought if it were up to the former UConn players, they would stay with U.S.A. Basketball until they were 60.
While Monday’s game served as an exhibition, it also tested Connecticut, which is 18-1 and ranked fourth in the country. The Huskies are in the middle of a brutal stretch that began with a loss against Baylor, now ranked No. 2, on Jan. 9 and that will include a game against third-ranked Oregon next Monday and one against top-ranked South Carolina a week later.
So even as Auriemma expressed amusement that some of his players had tried things that simply wouldn’t work against Bird the way they would against a typical college guard, he said he was happy with what his young team was learning.
