Doctors reset Helen Obando’s DNA in an effort to cure her of a painful genetic blood disorder. She’s the youngest person to receive the treatment.
Meet Helen Obando, a shy 16-year-old who likes to dance when her body isn’t ravaged by the debilitating symptoms of sickle cell disease. The genetic blood disorder can cause strokes, organ damage and intense pain that can feel like glass running through her veins.
After a lifetime of pain and potential permanent damage to her body, Helen had the opportunity to receive a breakthrough experimental treatment at Boston Children’s Hospital that would make her the youngest person in the U.S. to have her DNA reset in an attempt to cure her sickle cell disease.
The outcome of her gene therapy could help determine how an estimated 100,000 people in the U.S. and millions more around the world are treated. Sickle cell disease most commonly affects people from sub-Saharan Africa, and about 1 in 500 African-Americans have the blood disorder, the most commonly inherited blood disorder in the U.S. But some people with the disease have southern European, Middle Eastern or Asian backgrounds or, like Helen, are Hispanic. For decades, attention and money for research have not matched the scale of the problem.
Why has it taken so long for the scientific research community to push ahead with promising therapies for sickle cell? And now that new drugs and gene therapies are advancing, who will pay?
“The Weekly” follows Helen and her family as they navigate a world of hospital visits, chemotherapy and desperate uncertainty.
Helen assumed she would always live in pain, and tried to hide her disease. Now, she is like every other teenager, able to run and dance and jump in a swimming pool.
A simple DNA fix changed her life. Helen’s treatment put an end to organ damage, eliminated her increased risk of stroke, ended frequent pain crises, and life-threatening infections. She no longer has to spend days, weeks or even months in the hospital.
The result of Helen’s therapy could have huge implications for sickle cell patients across the United States. By studying what happens to Helen, scientists might be able to cure thousands of people.
Helen Obando at home in Massachusetts before she was admitted to Boston Children's Hospital for a five-week stay to receive a breakthrough genetic treatment that had never been performed on a patient so young.
The first step in the gene therapy process was to collect Helen’s stem cells. After taking a drug that forced her stem cells from her bone marrow into her bloodstream, this machine collected Helen’s blood — a painstaking seven-hour process. A different machine separated the stem cells, the essential ingredient in gene therapy.
We invited other people with sickle cell disease to tell us about their experiences. We spoke to patients as young as 9 and as old as 61 in the Chicago area whom we met through the Sickle Cell Disease Association of Illinois. We used peel-and-stick wallpaper in Helen’s favorite colors to create a living room-like set for interviews with patients, including Elijah Powell.
Victor Tadashi Suarez, our director of photography for this episode of “The Weekly,” at the shoot in Chicago.
Helen, Haylee and their family moved to Mesa, Ariz., from Massachusetts to make a fresh start. Helen is a junior in high school, where she’s taking honors classes and has joined the school dance team. She’s thrilled at how easily she’s picking up the combinations. Doctors and researchers in Arizona and at Boston Children’s Hospital will monitor her condition for 15 years.
