A debate of how much blame the government bears for the downing of a Ukrainian jetliner threatens to destroy a moment of national solidarity.
The American killing of a legendary Iranian general seemed for a moment to sweep away months of violent protests against corruption and misrule, drowning it all in nationalist outrage.
The United States, Canada and other Western governments concluded that Iran’s own missile defense systems accidentally shot down the plane, but Tehran continued on Friday to dismiss the crash as a mechanical failure that happened to occur just as Iran was bracing for a potential American airstrike.
The plane crash is only the latest in a series of deadly episodes for which Iranian critics have blamed their government. Fifty-six people were killed Tuesday in stampede in a narrow side street during a funeral procession for the military leader, Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, in his hometown, Kerman.
As many as 600 others were killed this fall by security forces suppressing antigovernment protests. The demonstrations, which began over a sharp increase in gasoline prices, turned into protests about corruption and self-dealing by the authorities in Tehran. The protesters said Iran’s government had plunged Iran into an economic crisis even before American sanctions began to bite.
Some complained about the absence of official mourning for those who died on the plane. Pictures of General Suleimani had sprung up everywhere, memorials for him went on through the night, and mosques erected small shrines in his honor. But there were no public condolences or flags at half-staff to honor those who died in the plane.
How does Iran view the U.S. killing of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani? We spoke with several Iranians to get their perspective on a figure both celebrated as a war hero and criticized as a symbol of repressive security apparatus.
In the aftermath of the killing of Iran’s top military commander by a U.S. airstrike, Iranians poured into the streets in mourning. This display of public support for a military official was one of the largest the country had ever seen. Qassim Suleimani was a controversial figure. He was heralded as a war hero but also stood as a symbol of Iran’s powerful and repressive security apparatus. Outside the country, he’s blamed for the deaths of over 600 U.S. soldiers. We wanted to see what Suleimani’s death means for people inside Iran. Some people we spoke to asked to remain anonymous, for fear of speaking out against the government. Even as some people spoke out against Suleimani, there was a unifying factor: anti-American furor. Tensions between Iran and the United States are nothing new. But the U.S. killing of Suleimani is an unprecedented chapter. Many Iranians are concerned that they will be the ones stuck in the middle of this conflict.
For many, the crash has an added poignancy because the plane was carrying many of Iran’s best and brightest. A large number of the passengers were graduates of top science and engineering schools headed for fellowships, graduate school or teaching jobs in Canada. Fourteen were graduates of Iran’s elite Sharif University of Technology, a top supplier of M.I.T. and Stanford recruits.
In the heat of the recent clashes with Washington, though, other Iranians insisted that the United States was as much to blame for bringing down the passenger jet as for killing General Suleimani.
