The head of the Transportation Security Administration said that the yearslong uptick was “deeply troubling.” A vast majority of the firearms were loaded, the agency said.
The airports where the most firearms were found in 2019 were at three major hubs: 323 at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International, 217 at Dallas/Fort Worth International, and 140 at Denver International.
“It’s not like it’s unknown to the average public that you’re not supposed to carry a gun on the plane,” he said.
Professor Price, who trains airport staff nationwide on security issues, said improved technology could be detecting more firearms. He said generations increasingly unfamiliar with Sept. 11 may not be as concerned about the dangers of weapons on airplanes.
In many cases, people simply forget they have the firearms in their bags.
“They just toss it in a bag and it just lives there,” he said.
Travelers are allowed to transport firearms in their checked baggage if they are “unloaded, packed in a locked hard-sided case,” the T.S.A. said in its statement. Passengers should then bring the case to the check-in counter and tell an airline representative that they want to travel with a gun.
The agency has for years warned against not following those rules, often using some of the extreme items found in passengers’ luggage to remind the public about airport security rules.
The T.S.A. found a missile launcher in a man’s checked luggage at Baltimore-Washington International Airport in July, for instance. He had told the authorities that he was an active member of the military and wanted take the missile launcher home with him to Jacksonville, Tex., as a souvenir from Kuwait. The weapon was confiscated.
Not all firearms are caught. In January 2019, a Delta Air Lines passenger carried, by accident, a loaded gun through a security checkpoint at Atlanta’s international airport. The passenger later discovered the firearm and alerted the authorities, who met the plane when it landed in Japan.
In 2017, a shooting at an airport in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., highlighted the issue of guns at airports after a gunman retrieved a weapon from his checked bag, opened fire and killed five people.
Federal rules allowing guns to be checked at airports have sometimes caused confusion among passengers traveling to cities with strict firearm regulations. Some visitors to New York City, for example, have been arrested upon checking guns for return flights home, unaware that they cannot legally possess guns in the city without a city gun permit.