The initial deal between the United States and China is eclipsed by several others in size — including one negotiated under his administration.
False. When the United States reached a preliminary trade agreement with Mexico in 2018, President Trump inaccurately lauded it as the “maybe the largest trade deal ever made.” He used a similar description while signing the initial trade agreement with China on Wednesday. It was also not true.
Under this agreement, China committed to purchasing an additional $200 billion worth of American goods and services within two years and to stop forcing American companies to hand over valuable intellectual property to Chinese firms. The deal also leaves in place tariffs on almost two-thirds of American imports from China, and more than half of Chinese imports from the United States. Critics also faulted the deal for failing to address issues like China’s subsidies to its state-owned enterprises.
Mr. Trump has characterized the agreement as the first phase in ongoing negotiations, so the size and breadth of the final product remains to be seen. But for now, the China deal is smaller than even the United States-Mexico-Canada agreement. Trade between the United States and its two neighbors totaled $1.4 trillion in 2018, compared with $737 billion between the United States and China.
Several other agreements eclipse both pacts.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership, which included the United States, Canada and Mexico, as well as nine other Pacific Rim countries, would have represented nations with 40 percent of global gross domestic product. It was effectively killed by Mr. Trump three years ago.
The European Union signed a trade agreement with Japan in 2018, covering a quarter of the global economy. The European Union itself is a single market, and trade between members totaled about $4 trillion in 2017.
The Uruguay Round of trade talks that culminated in 1994 created the World Trade Organization and involved 123 countries that accounted for 90 percent of international trade. It now includes more than 160 economies — including China, which joined in 2001, to Mr. Trump’s repeated criticism — and affects nearly all global trade.
