Most of us fear that the company will continue to take a hands-off approach to policing its platform. And that’s exactly what it plans to do.
Nobody writes a blunderbuss of an internal post at an internet company without wanting it to be read widely and leaked, least of all a top executive at the most scrutinized company in Silicon Valley.
Which is why the memo from Andrew Bosworth, a key adviser to Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, that somehow got out into the wild, is worth parsing. Dated Dec. 30, Mr. Bosworth’s memo became public last week, just before Facebook announced how it will handle political advertising in this presidential election year.
In short, not much will change at Facebook; it will continue to have a hands-off approach to political ads. Facebook’s plans, moves that were signaled in Mr. Bosworth’s ruminations, boil down to one basic idea: Dear consumer ensnared in our digital panopticon, you might want to fashion a homemade shiv right about now because you are on your own in this prison of hate speech and dangerous lies we built.
Too harsh? I suppose I could give soft claps to Facebook for tweaks to make its political ad storehouse more transparent — a boon for those who have time to fuss with a complex dashboard (presumably the same folks who fix their own cars and such) — and for offering tools to let consumers see fewer of these ads (more do-it-yourself!).
But this is the same tiresome ruse that Facebook leaders have used many times: pushing away responsibility for the ugly parts of their inventions onto the rest of us and conflating different, complex concepts — like paid ads versus free speech — in order to … well, I am not sure why.
And it’s all perfumed with the faint odor of undeserved victimhood that Facebook executives apparently feel for being so maligned, even as they continue to benefit extravagantly from sucking all of our data into their maw, and even though they do less than they should to contain some of the damage of social media that they are so clearly responsible for.
Mr. Bosworth, whose well-known nickname is Boz, personifies the most jolly version of this, presenting himself through pugnacious and often amusing tweets as the blunt one at the company, ready to drop the real truth on the media and other critics. He delights in pointing out the small mistakes that journalists make that undercut their larger and correct points about how Facebook has let society down by running the world’s most important communications medium with too little care. Often, in his big bouillabaisse of words, he is a little right and a little wrong, making his pronouncements difficult to understand.
His latest post checked all these boxes, with a once-more-unto-the-breach tone as he assessed how to deal with the godlike power of the company going into the 2020 presidential election.
Yes, Boz actually compared Facebook to a powerfully magic royal elf in “The Lord of the Rings” series — in this case, Galadriel, who refused to take the ring of all power because, while she might do good with it, she might also eventually do evil. Dum, dum, dum!
Thus, better to do nothing, as Boz wrote with a rather dramatic flourish, noting with faux-agony that he too was bereft that Facebook helped President Trump achieve victory in 2016. But rather than acknowledge any manipulation of the platform by Russians, Boz argued — which is also now the gospel at Facebook — that Mr. Trump’s success was all due to his campaign’s “unbelievable work” in using digital ad tools like a boss.
Except that what most people fear is a Facebook that continues to take a hands-off approach to a platform that always seems to be running amok somewhere, well beyond whatever microtargeted ads Mr. Trump’s brilliant campaign staff runs.
Facebook’s lack of significant action to police political ads is in contrast to recent moves by the two other important platforms, which are either outright banning those ads (Twitter) or severely restricting how they are presented (Google). Facebook is the only platform that really counts in this space, so what it has decided is what will be the oxygen of the 2020 race.
There is a fair debate to have on the issue of microtargeting — which essentially allows for the slicing and dicing of a message into the tiniest bits, for potentially very narrow groups of users. Some feel microtargeting lets small and more marginalized political voices find their audience in a cost-effective way, since they cannot afford pricier mediums like television ads. Others think that microtargeting allows the powerful to plant millions of lies in the specific ears of the those who are easy to manipulate. Both are true, but by not better policing the practice, Facebook certainly creates an atmosphere of chaos, especially for those interested in more transparent and truthful debate.
Honesty may never be possible, according to Facebook, since the company has opted to keep allowing our elected officials to lie like a rug online. This is an astonishing abrogation of responsibility by the company, although if you have watched it do this same kind buck-passing over the years, it is no surprise.
Leaving aside the fact that nothing can be heard any longer with all the noise Facebook has created, let me translate one bit of that for mere mortals who do not have the power Facebook wields with the glittering weapons it has also invented: It really means warts for all.