Free food disappears fast, which is why you have to think strategically and trust no one.
My manager is a nightmare. Name anything that exhibits the worst of bad management and she’s done it, including presenting my ideas brazenly as her own. Recently, I did a favor for a co-worker — not a personal favor, a work favor. As thanks, she surprised me by bringing in a box of fancy mini-pastries — two dozen! — for me and to share with my team.
Aside from my horrible manager, I like the company, and I don’t want to quit. What, if anything, could I have done so this kind of thing doesn’t happen again? I am furious.
Gifts shouldn’t have stipulations. If I’d been you, I probably would have joked to the pastry-giver: “To share? Yeah, right!” And then, while everyone was chuckling, wordlessly placed the pastries in my desk drawer for consumption by me alone. THEY’RE MINI.
I’m not a doctor, but I am highly critical of everyone around me. I have been blessed in my career to have worked alongside multiple people who expended so much effort cultivating an air of mysterious unknowability and fearsome ambition, I could only conclude that they wanted colleagues to conclude they were psychopaths. I blame prestige television and the early-2000s vampire boom for glamorizing psychopathic tendencies. The sad truth is that most people are not charming enough to be psychopaths. I include your manager in that group.
 Is it possible she felt that she, as supervisor, had delegated the work favor to you, and that this was her thanks for effective management? This interaction is so strange and specific I cannot conceive of what a second instance of “this kind of thing” might be, let alone envision the conditions that would result in such events becoming recurrent.
I’m relieved this incident did not make you want to quit a job you like, where you apparently are liked or at least appreciated by your co-workers. You will be happier if you keep your interactions with and thoughts about your manager to a polite minimum, and focus on (1) those aspects of work you enjoy and (2) your favor-driven cultivation of generous supporters.
I teach at a large university where instructors are expected to upload students’ final grades in a centralized online system at the end of each semester. I have no problem with this simple data entry task and see it as a routine part of my job. What concerns me are the instructions that accompany it: “Please note, instructors should be using IE (Internet Explorer) to avoid any potential issues.” What is “Internet Explorer”? I don’t have this on my computer. In violation of the policy, I’ve been successfully uploading grades using programs that are not “Internet Explorer” without incident. But my success makes me all the more puzzled by the instructions. Should I try to get “Internet Explorer”? Or continue on in violation of policy?
Internet Explorer is a discontinued web browser introduced by Microsoft in 1995, and the best course of action would be to never think about it again for the rest of your life.
I ran your concerns by a browsers expert at The Times to confirm there was no specific security reason for you to use Internet Explorer for this task, and the first thing he said after waking up in the hospital from the heart attack your question induced in him was that you are in fact more likely to expose yourself to security vulnerabilities by using Internet Explorer, which Microsoft is no longer actively developing.
Whatever you’ve been doing is perfect.
Caity Weaver is a writer for the Styles section and The New York Times Magazine. Write to her at workfriend@nytimes.com.