With the two Democrats set to face off Tuesday night in their next televised debate, they now find themselves in the most tense standoff of the Democratic nomination fight: Mr. Sanders insisting he did not make the explosive remark, which risks alienating many Democrats, and Ms. Warren saying on the record that he did make the comment.
Ms. Warren, in a statement on Monday night, said that Mr. Sanders made the remark at a two-hour meeting in December 2018 where they discussed the 2020 election and “our past work together and our shared goals,” in particular defeating President Trump.
Internally, the Sanders campaign was roiled by Ms. Warren’s statement, which seemed to catch several staff members off guard.
Her statement represents a startling break in the Warren-Sanders relationship, which has largely been cordial and mutually beneficial. The two are both leading candidates in Iowa, where they are fighting for a similar voter slice, and the back-and-forth will most likely animate not only Tuesday night’s debate but the jockeying among the liberal groups and activists who are aligned behind either candidate.
Ms. Warren’s advisers insisted that she had no intention of making this private meeting a public spectacle. However, after Mr. Sanders’s team forcefully denied the reports, some advisers said they believed she had no choice but to offer her account firsthand.
Mr. Sanders, in his statement earlier on Monday, said it was “ludicrous” to think he would have made such a comment.
The people familiar with the 2018 meeting, who were briefed on it shortly after it took place but were not authorized to speak publicly, said Mr. Sanders offered the comment while giving his assessment of the coming race. In relaying to Ms. Warren the challenges he thought her campaign would face, he said not only that President Trump would weaponize sexism, but also that such attacks would preclude a woman from being elected, according to the private accounts.
Larry Cohen, a longtime friend and adviser to Mr. Sanders, had said earlier Monday that Mr. Sanders told him about the meeting after it happened and that he did not believe the report.
“Everything I know about Bernie Sanders for 30 years tells me he would never speak like that, let alone to a woman he admires tremendously,” Mr. Cohen said.
Faiz Shakir, Mr. Sanders’s campaign manager, had called on Ms. Warren Monday afternoon to refute the accusation.
The existence of the meeting has been public since shortly after it happened in December 2018. The New York Times reported shortly after the meeting took place that Ms. Warren had sought it “as a courtesy,” and that neither party had tried to gain the other’s support or discourage the other from running. But the two senators were the only people in the room, and all reports of what was said had been secondhand.
The full political impact of the controversy could hinge on what happens during Tuesday’s debate in Des Moines. Up to this point, Ms. Warren and Mr. Sanders have focused their attacks on more moderate rivals, a consequence of their friendship and a desire to not damage the party’s left wing.
However, tensions between the two campaigns — and among their most fervent supporters — have increased in recent days. One well-respected poll from The Des Moines Register and CNN placed Mr. Sanders and Ms. Warren as the top two candidates in Iowa, with Mr. Sanders leading the pack.
Beyond how the candidates grapple with the issue is the matter of how exactly it’s perceived — as a sexist gibe by a candidate whose 2016 campaign faced complaints from female staff members, an 11th-hour smear by a candidate who has lost ground or some combination of both.
Late Monday, Representative Tulsi Gabbard of Hawaii, another Democratic presidential candidate, wrote on Twitter that she had also met with Mr. Sanders before announcing her bid.
Democracy for America, a prominent progressive group, expressed alarm on Monday at the growing tensions.
Sydney Ember and Maggie Astor contributed reporting.