The Learning Network|Would You Consider Serving in the U.S. Armed Forces?
Do you know anyone who has served in the United States Armed Forces? Have you ever considered enlisting?
Today, the U.S. military is an all-volunteer force, with about 1.2 million active-duty troops. But increasingly, new recruits come from a small demographic group. Is it healthy for our democracy? Is it fair?
The sergeant in charge of one of the busiest Army recruiting centers in Colorado, Sgt. First Class Dustin Comes, joined the Army, in part, because his father served. Now two of his four children say they want to serve, too. And he will not be surprised if the other two make the same decision once they are a little older.
“Hey, if that’s what your calling is, I encourage it, absolutely,” said Sergeant Comes, who wore a dagger-shaped patch on his camouflage uniform, signifying that he had been in combat.
Enlisting, he said, enabled him to build a good life where, despite yearlong deployments to Iraq and Afghanistan, he felt proud of his work, got generous benefits, never worried about being laid off, and earned enough that his wife could stay home to raise their children.
“Show me a better deal for the common person,” he said.
But for now, rates of military service remain far from equal in the United States, and the gap may continue to widen because a driving decision to enlist is whether a young person knows anyone who served in the military. In communities where veterans are plentiful, teachers, coaches, mothers, uncles and other mentors often steer youths toward military service. In communities where veterans are scarce, influential adults are more wary.
Would you consider serving in the U.S. armed forces? Why or why not? Does reading the article affect your view?
How would you describe your views and attitudes toward the military? Do you see military service as an important patriotic duty? Or are you skeptical or critical of the military? What experiences have shaped your views?
What do you see as the benefits and drawbacks of enlisting? Are you drawn to the qualities of Army life that Sergeant Comes describes, such as the “camaraderie, stability and generous health, education and retirement benefits”? Or, are you fearful of long deployments in dangerous places like Iraq and Afghanistan?
What is your reaction to the disparities in Army recruitment across the country? Do you think it is wrong that Fort Bragg provided more than twice as many military enlistment contracts as Manhattan, even though Manhattan has eight times as many people?
Does your community or school encourage and support military service? For example, does your school have Army recruiters or an R.O.T.C. program. Does it encourage students to take the military’s aptitude exam? Would you like to see more or less of a military presence at your school?
Requiring everyone to serve in some fashion, other than those too physically or psychically impaired, would be a profoundly democratizing action. In time, it might even encourage more civilized political discourse in this atomized land, by putting young people in proximity to those with roots in different ways of life and thinking. It’s harder to sneer at the “other” after you’ve both shared a life-transforming experience.
Do you think all Americans should serve in the military, or do you believe that it should continue as an all-volunteer force? Why or why not?
