Tuesday: Count ’em. (Or don’t. There are a lot.) Also: A California Green New Deal, and John Baldessari.
On Friday, we took a close look at one of the highest profile laws to take effect in California at the start of the year, aimed at giving consumers new rights to know what personal data companies are collecting and how they’re using it.
But at the beginning of the year, lots more laws officially went into effect. Hundreds of them.
As I’ve mentioned, we’ll dig into some of the more complicated new rules in coming weeks.
The state’s new rent cap, a major step meant to address the housing crisis, is one of those.
And Mark Baldassare, the president and chief executive of the nonprofit Public Policy Institute of California, told me that in addition to the aforementioned consumer privacy law, there are a lot of unsettled questions about the rollout of the state’s landmark gig labor law.
Just recently, a federal judge temporarily blocked that law, known as Assembly Bill 5, from affecting more than 70,000 independent truckers. But freelance journalists and photographers won’t be temporarily exempted.
“It’s a controversial law that passed and people are just beginning to learn some of the unintended consequences,” Mr. Baldassare said.
If someone is barred from having a gun in another state, they’re not allowed to have one in California, either.
Californians must have health insurance, according to a new individual mandate, essentially replacing the Affordable Care Act mandate eliminated by the Trump administration. Penalties won’t go into effect until 2021, however.
Starting in 2021, the state will have to have a standardized system for issuing, tracking and, in some cases, reviewing medical exemptions from vaccinations. But starting on Jan. 1, doctors who issue five or more exemptions in a calendar year will be subject to review.
Although it wasn’t approved in 2019, the state’s minimum wage increased to $13 an hour for employers with 26 or more workers and $12 an hour for employers with fewer. Lots of cities also bumped up their minimum wages.
If you want to read more, The Los Angeles Times put together a helpful comprehensive interactive. Or, if you prefer, CalMatters made this series of one-minute explainer videos for some of the new rules.
Before he appeared on “The Simpsons,” before he was recognized around the world as a leading conceptual artist and builder of Los Angeles’s contemporary art scene, John Baldessari was a child in National City, just south of San Diego, where he was raised by parents who grew their own fruits and vegetables and composted waste. His father was a salvage dealer.
That, he once explained, made it tough for him to throw anything away.
It was a way of seeing that informed much of the rest of his decades-long career.
Mr. Baldessari died last week at home in Venice at age 88. Here’s more about his life and legacy.
