Weather: Enjoy it. Today is expected to be sunny, with a high near 50. Tonight, there’s a chance of rain.
Alternate-side parking: In effect until Monday (Martin Luther King’s Birthday).
Now its flagship store operates in Midtown Manhattan and sells things like $4,000 rings that spell the word “love” in small diamonds and $165,000 gemstone necklaces. (One $2.475 million engagement ring weighs as much as a bullet.) And for decades, it was inside a 10-story fortress on Fifth Avenue.
Last weekend, Tiffany had to empty that store for a long-planned renovation.
But first, it had to relocate its valuable merchandise to a temporary location a few steps away. Cue the security.
The company assigned 30 security officers to oversee the transfer. New York City police officers stood outside. A tent was erected outside the temporary store’s entrance.
The company kept a lookout for any unusual mentions online, and employees were told not to post messages about or photographs of the move on social media, my colleague James Barron reported.
All that security was a reminder that Tiffany has been the victim of a number of headline-making thefts. Some were swift, some were armed and all were brazen.
Two armed robbers tied up a couple of guards, bypassed the alarm system and escaped with more than $1 million in jewelry, and the videotapes that recorded the crime. The stolen loot included about 300 necklaces, bracelets, watches, rings and earrings encrusted with diamonds, rubies, emeralds and other gems.
The thieves “appeared to know much — perhaps improbably much — about Tiffany’s security,” The Times reported.
A man and two women fled the store with $300,000 in rings, earrings and bracelets after “taking advantage of a momentarily distracted sales clerk,” The Times reported.
A man in a blue pinstriped suit placed a blue overcoat on a counter. A few minutes later, when he went to pick it up, “he leaned a little further than was necessary,” The Times reported. He then grabbed a choker with rubies and diamonds from inside the counter and ran out of the store. It was worth $45,000.
A woman somehow managed to swap a $7,500 diamond she was wearing for a store-owned one worth $19,800.
Before Tiffany had shatterproof windows, a couple of men smashed a window and took $163,000 in jewels.
At most museums, people aren’t allowed to touch or move the art. Eating it is definitely off limits.
But a new edible exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art pushes those boundaries, and adds frequent grocery trips to the museum’s agenda.
The “fruits, vegetables; fruit and vegetable salad” exhibition by Darren Bader, which opens today and is on view until Feb. 17, is exactly what it seems: Fruits and vegetables are displayed on pedestals. Then, after some preparation, the almost over-ripened produce is made into a salad served to guests.
Visitors can view the salad assemblage in the museum’s kitchen via a screen in the gallery.
The production repeats at set times on Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays.
Anyone familiar with Mr. Bader’s work knows the unconventional is commonplace in his art.
When compared with his previous artwork, the salad is reasonably low key. In the past, he has released goats inside a gallery and injected a piece of lasagna with heroin.
“It’s one of those things that kind of captures the imagination,” Christie Mitchell, a senior curatorial assistant at the Whitney, said about the exhibition, which she organized.
It’s Wednesday — eat your vegetables.
It was Friday evening, and my Brooklyn-bound Q train was crawling across the Manhattan Bridge.
I had my head down in a book, making every effort to get through the slog of another slow and crowded commute, while trying to distance myself mentally from the stressful workweek that had just ended.
As the train inched along, an orange light coming through the train’s south-facing windows caught my attention. I peeked up from my book and was met with the usual landmarks: the Brooklyn Bridge, the Lower Manhattan skyline, the Statue of Liberty in New York Harbor.
These world-class sights were drenched in the glow of a roaring orange sunset. In moments, everyone on the train was either staring, pointing or scrambling for their phones in hopes of snagging a picture before the train dipped off the bridge and back underground.
The train came to a halt.
It was my first time riding the subway that I ever noticed people being grateful for a train delay. We all had just a few more moments to enjoy the view.
