Fund-raising numbers for the fourth quarter of 2019 show an unusually high number of viable campaigns. Waiting for the winner: President Trump and his huge war chest.
A flood of money rushed into the presidential race in the last three months of 2019, producing an unusually large number of Democratic candidates with the resources to battle deep into the 2020 primary calendar, all vying for the right to face an incumbent president boasting his own enormous war chest.
The five strongest Democratic fund-raisers are expected to report over $115 million raised in just the final quarter of the year, and they join two self-funding billionaires who are pouring their fortunes into expansive advertising campaigns.
Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont is pacing the Democratic field, announcing on Thursday that he had raised $34.5 million in the last three months — the largest sum of any Democrat in any quarter so far. Pete Buttigieg, the former mayor of South Bend, Ind., collected $24.7 million, and former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. raised $22.7 million, his best showing of the year. Senator Elizabeth Warren said early Friday she had raised $21.2 million, a slight decrease from the previous quarter.
In a sign of how widespread the money windfall was, Andrew Yang, the former entrepreneur who was unknown nationally a year ago, raised a striking total of $16.5 million in the fourth quarter — more than Mr. Biden had managed in the third.
Whoever emerges from the fractious Democratic primary will face a financial powerhouse in President Trump, who leveraged the impeachment fight of recent months to shatter his previous fund-raising records, collecting $46 million in the fourth quarter, his campaign said Thursday. He enters 2020 with $102.7 million in cash on hand.
While Mr. Trump is stockpiling cash for the general election, Democrats are expected to spend tens of millions of dollars in the coming months taking aim at one another in an intensifying primary fight. And with an uncommonly high number of well-funded candidates in a surprisingly fluid race, party leaders are bracing for an extended nomination battle, especially if the first four states to vote in February deliver a split verdict.
“Put your seatbelts on, because I do expect we’re in for a protracted race to the finish line,” said Representative Hakeem Jeffries of New York, a member of the House Democratic leadership.
The fact that so many candidates can simultaneously raise so much money is a testament to the rising power of small, online donors in presidential politics. Mr. Sanders and Ms. Warren combined to raise more than $160 million in 2019 while refusing to hold any traditional fund-raisers with large contributors. And Mr. Biden credited his recent fund-raising uptick to increased online support, which doubled from the previous quarter.
“This is going to go on for a while,” Mr. Copeland added.
Awaiting the top Democratic contenders in March is the billionaire former mayor of New York City, Michael R. Bloomberg. Though he is skipping the first four states, Mr. Bloomberg has already spent nearly $140 million of his fortune on television ads, according to the ad-tracking firm Advertising Analytics, mostly in the Super Tuesday states that will vote in early March and other states that will follow.
The scope of Mr. Bloomberg’s spending is staggering: He has reserved more in TV ads, $37 million, in the first days of January than the fund-raising leader, Mr. Sanders, had collected in the final three months from more than 1.8 million contributions.
The high number of candidates with significant resources — the billionaire Tom Steyer is filling the airwaves in the four early states with ads, as well — has stirred early worries that the party could go all the way to its July convention without a nominee, which would drastically truncate the window to focus on combating Mr. Trump.
Mr. Jeffries said it was crucial for the party to coalesce around whoever emerges, whenever it happens.
For the second consecutive quarter, Brad Parscale, Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, declared the incumbent to be building a financial “juggernaut” for the general election. His $102.7 million war chest will be supplemented by tens of millions of dollars more in the coffers of the Republican National Committee, which Mr. Trump functionally controls.
Together, Mr. Trump’s re-election campaign and the Republican National Committee raised roughly $125 million in the third quarter, and a Trump campaign official said on Thursday that their combined total for the fourth quarter would be even larger.
But Democrats were heartened that, collectively, their campaigns far surpassed the total of Mr. Trump’s re-election campaign; the full field of 14 candidates will more than double the president’s take, signaling the intense desire in the party to win back the White House.
The full picture of the financial race will not become clear until Jan. 31, when all the candidates must file their fund-raising reports with the Federal Election Commission. How much money the Democratic candidates actually have in the bank to spend in the closing stretch is an even more significant metric of their viability so close to votes being cast; notably, no Democrats have voluntarily disclosed that information.
Still, Mr. Sanders enters 2020 with a clear financial advantage over his primary rivals: His treasury allows him to buy additional television ads in the early states — he purchased new airtime in New Hampshire on Thursday — and to invest in staff in Super Tuesday states like California, where he had already dispatched 80 staff members as of December.
Mr. Sanders’s strongest month of the year was December, when he raised more than $18 million from more than 900,000 contributions, and he particularly benefited from a rush of donations in the final two days of the year. He can also keep raising cash online without spending days off the trail doing fund-raisers.
Mr. Biden had entered the fourth quarter with nearly $25 million less in cash on hand than Mr. Sanders. His campaign manager, Greg Schultz, wrote in a memo Thursday that the campaign would “always be playing from behind in the cash race” because Mr. Biden did not transfer funds to his presidential bid from other campaign accounts (as did two of his top rivals, Ms. Warren and Mr. Sanders).
Mr. Biden’s campaign said it had received a financial boost from Mr. Trump’s impeachment; the average amount of money it raised online per day, it said, more than doubled during the House’s impeachment inquiry compared with previous weeks. But despite his greater success online, Mr. Biden will continue to hold fund-raisers into January, with events in the coming days in New York City, Philadelphia and Washington.
Mr. Buttigieg’s campaign out-raised Mr. Biden’s for the third consecutive quarter, and it raised roughly $76 million in 2019, compared with about $60 million for Mr. Biden. What began as a bare-bones operation now counts more than 500 staff members nationwide, with 65 field offices in early voting states, according to a memo on Wednesday from Mr. Buttigieg’s campaign manager, Mike Schmuhl.
Patrick Healy and Matt Stevens contributed reporting from Concord, N.H.