The officials appear reluctant to attend an annual hearing after last year’s testimony revealed splits with the White House on key issues and angered President Trump.
WASHINGTON — Representative Adam B. Schiff, the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, issued invitations on Thursday to intelligence agency leaders to testify publicly in an effort to head off an attempt to move their yearly hearing on global threats behind closed doors.
As intelligence agency staff members have negotiated with House and Senate officials about this year’s hearing, the intelligence community has made plain that its leaders prefer the testimony be classified and take place behind closed doors.
Congressional Democrats have said that the intelligence officials must testify at least partly in public. On Thursday, Mr. Schiff wrote to the acting director of national intelligence, Joseph Maguire, inviting him to testify in both open and closed sessions on Feb. 12.
“The hearing provides an opportunity for I.C. seniors to provide an unclassified, yet important broad understanding of how threats have evolved and what the nation can expect in the year to come,” Mr. Schiff wrote, using an abbreviation for the intelligence community.
Both sides are still discussing the timing and format of the hearings, a spokeswoman for Mr. Maguire said. Politico first reported the push to avoid any public intelligence hearings.
If the intelligence officials ultimately object to public testimony, they could still issue their annual worldwide threat report. It has all of the same insights, but issuing it without testifying about it would allow the leaders to avoid the kind of cable television news clips that aggravated Mr. Trump last year.
The annual hearing is one of only a few opportunities to hear from intelligence officials. The C.I.A. director, Gina Haspel, gives few speeches and no public interviews. Mr. Trump has not nominated a director of national intelligence to replace Dan Coats, who stepped down in August, and Mr. Maguire has testified publicly only once — in a charged hearing last fall in front of Mr. Schiff’s committee about his handling of the whistle-blower complaint that revealed the president’s campaign of pressure on Ukraine, which prompted impeachment proceedings.
The whistle-blower, a C.I.A. officer who lodged his complaint with the intelligence community inspector general, has further increased tensions between the White House and the intelligence community.
Last year’s threat report and hearing demonstrated sharp disagreements between the agencies and the White House on North Korea, Iran and other issues. The report also found that under the current administration, traditional foreign alliances had been strained, prompting American partners to seek new relationships.
After the hearing, Ms. Haspel and Mr. Coats were summoned to the White House, where they argued that the news media had improperly characterized their comments and the threat report.
While intelligence officials are anxious to avoid a repeat of last year’s hearing, many current and former intelligence officers have questioned the wisdom of a public hearing at all. They have argued that even discussing unclassified assessments of threats reveals too much to American adversaries.