Mary Lou Guizzo puts us through our paces.
WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — I hope you are in good shape, because Mary Lou Guizzo’s puzzle is going to try to knock you out.
29A: The abbreviation LITH stands for LITHuania, which was once a Soviet Socialist Republic, or S.S.R.
31A: This seems like as good a time as any to remind online solvers that yes, we know that the word ANO means something completely different from AÑO. In general, online crosswords do not recognize diacritical marks, so please consider this an apology for the lack of tildes.
44A: Is it a noun or a verb? The word “stand” in “Stand in a mall” could hint at hanging out, but in this puzzle it hints at a KIOSK.
12D: The focus here is on the word “long.” Ichthyology is the study of fish, so the answer to the clue “What has a long history in ichthyology?” would be EEL, one of the longer fish in the sea.
24D: Prediction: This clue/answer pairing, NO TV for “Timeout alternative,” will strike young solvers as either funny or confusing, because I’m not sure that many of them even realize that television sets are for watching shows. Many of them stream entertainment on their smartphones and tablets. But yes, back in the day, taking away your TV time was definitely a blow.
60D. Yes, hi, I looked up what a PUT bet was, and didn’t understand what I was reading at all. Maybe someone who gambles can explain it in simple terms for people like me.
Ms. Guizzo offers us a set of five theme entries, all of which were most likely originally drawn from the sport of boxing, but are now phrases in the American lexicon that have different meanings.
For example, at 17A, the answer to the clue “Engaged in foul play” is HIT BELOW THE BELT. Similarly, “‘Oh, now they’re really going to fight!’” at 36A is synonymous with the phrase THE GLOVES ARE OFF. You might have to spar with the puzzle to find the rest, but I have faith in you. You won’t THROW IN THE TOWEL.
My original thought when I submitted this puzzle in August 2018 was that it might be used on Boxing Day. That did not happen, so I’ll put it out there for anyone who needs some fighting words. Just remember: “When the Going Gets Tough, the Tough Get Going.” I know, wrong sport, but hope it works for you and you enjoyed the puzzle.
On a more personal note: This puzzle is being published at a time when I am facing a challenging medical condition, so I’m going to use this opportunity to crowdsource for your prayers and positive thoughts. I thank you all from the bottom of my heart.
Love, prayers and positive thoughts coming your way, Mary Lou.