In Dispatches, our international correspondents tell highly visual stories that say more about the places they cover than the day’s news.
As a native German, Katrin Bennhold was familiar with some of her compatriots’ penchant for walking around topless at lakes and beaches. But near the end of summer in 2018, while riding her bicycle to The Times’s Berlin bureau through Tiergarten, Berlin’s equivalent of Central Park, Ms. Bennhold was surprised to discover people tanning completely naked in the middle of the park.
A year later, she shared her amazement about this cultural facet, and what it means to Germany and its people, in an article known as a Dispatch.
Every day, The Times’s international correspondents and reporters keep readers apprised of the major news from the places they cover: stories about migration and its impact, elections and their consequences, protest movements, and geopolitical conflict.
The dying tradition of clay drinking water pots in Myanmar reflects, among many other things, a changing society. Following a winemaker in his backyard vineyard and a person on his dog walking routine in Austria reveals the impact of hard European borders on border town residents.
Dispatches are a reinvention of this storytelling, with several noteworthy changes: Visuals are now central to these stories, which are nearly always conceived with photos, video and design in mind, and they can be on the news.
Looping drone video provided perspective of the immensity of the landscape surrounding a Russian village swallowed by sand, while weeks of photographing and recording video of a protest site in Khartoum, Sudan, resulted in a gorgeous, illustrative portrayal of life following the toppling of the nation’s longtime dictator, Omar Hassan al-Bashir.
Dispatches, editors said, are also a chance to experiment with forms of storytelling, with more voice in the writing than typically found in the rest of the international report. They might be told in chapters, or in analytical vignettes that read as if they are straight from a reporter’s notebook.
In certain circumstances when reporters feel that their experience helps inform their understanding of a story, they might write in first person, as Ernesto Londoño, The Times’s Brazil bureau chief, did when profiling the Brazilian drug kingpin Marcelo Pinheiro Veiga, who was being held in a prison in Asunción, Paraguay.

The most important thing when writing Dispatches, according to Jason Horowitz, The Times’s Rome bureau chief, is that these articles have a narrative arc.
When writing about the Barcolana, the world’s largest regatta, he was sweating at the last minute over the realization that there was no conflict driving the narrative. And then, the weather changed.
