New York|Harvey Weinstein Says His Judge Is Biased. His Judge Disagrees.
Harvey Weinstein Says His Judge Is Biased. His Judge Disagrees.
Mr. Weinstein said the judge in his rape trial should recuse himself after suggesting in court that the film producer could end up in jail.
Harvey Weinstein’s request that the judge presiding over his rape trial in Manhattan step aside was rejected on Thursday, ending an early salvo in the film producer’s attempts to mount an aggressive defense and cast doubt on the high-profile proceedings.
Mr. Weinstein’s lawyers had accused the judge, Justice James M. Burke, of being biased when he suggested earlier this week that Mr. Weinstein might end up in prison for the rest of his life for repeatedly violating an order not to use his cellphone in the courtroom.
On Tuesday, court officers noticed Mr. Weinstein using at least one cellphone in the courtroom, in violation of a standing order by Justice Burke.
Mr. Weinstein’s lawyers quickly seized on what they described as evidence of bias and demanded on Wednesday that the judge withdraw from the case. In a hastily written filing, the lawyers argued that Justice Burke had apparently prejudged the trial’s outcome, assuming that Mr. Weinstein would be convicted and thus would be eligible for life in prison.
In court on Thursday, Justice Burke roundly rejected the request, noting there was nothing “prejudicial or inflammatory” for scolding a “recalcitrant” defendant for repeatedly ignoring his own order.
The legal tiff, which escalated rapidly from a texting incident into an attempt to remove a judge from a major case taking place in his own courtroom, suggests just how high tempers are running at the trial and gave a preview of the tough, leave-nothing-on-the-table tactics that Mr. Weinstein’s team of lawyers may continue to use during the proceedings.
Mr. Weinstein cannot appeal Justice Burke’s decision to not recuse himself at the moment, but defense lawyers could contest the ruling in a post-trial appeal.
The trial began on Monday, but opening statements are not expected for at least another week. This week, the defendant’s lawyers and prosecutors from the Manhattan district attorney’s office have been weeding through a large pool of potential jurors, who have been called to the 15th-floor courtroom 120 people at a time.
Jury selection was still in what Justice Burke referred to as the “pre-screening" phase on Thursday. Panelists were being asked basic questions about scheduling conflicts and whether they believed they could be impartial despite the enormous publicity surrounding the case. More extensive questioning is likely to begin next week.
Mr. Weinstein is charged with raping one woman in a Midtown Manhattan hotel in 2013 and forcing oral sex on a second woman in his TriBeCa apartment in 2006.  He faces the possibility of life imprisonment on the latter charge.
Four other women are expected to testify about their allegations that Mr. Weinstein sexually assaulted them. Though those incidents are too old under the state statute of limitations to be the basis of additional criminal charges, prosecutors have won permission to use them to help establish what they believe is a pattern of predatory behavior.
Jury selection in Mr. Weinstein’s trial is likely to be of paramount importance, given that the facts are in dispute and are highly susceptible to interpretation. On Monday, the difficult task of picking the jury was further complicated when prosecutors in Los Angeles announced new charges against Mr. Weinstein — a move that could easily taint the pool of potential panelists.
In their motion to Justice Burke, the defense asked for a “cooling-off period” following the California charges. The judge’s remarks on Tuesday made jury selection even more challenging, said Mark Bederow, a New York criminal defense lawyer.
