PARIS — The French writer Gabriel Matzneff never hid the fact that he engaged in sex with girls and boys in their early teens or even younger. He wrote countless books detailing his insatiable pursuits and appeared on television boasting about them. “Under 16 Years Old,” was the title of an early book that left no ambiguity.
With changing attitudes toward sex and gender equality, France toughened laws against sex crimes in 2018 and also extended the statute of limitations for prosecution — raising it to 30 years, up from 20 years — allowing victims to press charges until the age of 48. The new law, which is not retroactive, would not apply in the case of Ms. Springora.
In the days leading up to its publication, her book, “Le Consentement,” had already compelled many in France to try uncomfortably to position themselves in the face of a problem that had never been hidden.
The former host of France’s most famous literary television program struggled to explain why he and other guests — except, tellingly, the only non-French invitee — laughed with good humor at Mr. Matzneff’s preferences for minors. Most of his longtime champions have remained silent, though a few still came to his defense, including the former book editor of Le Monde.
France’s culture minister, Franck Riester, said that he supported Mr. Matzneff’s victims and announced that the government would review a writer’s allowance given to him — an abrupt shift in the government’s position. In 1995, long after Mr. Matzneff had written about his past, the minister of culture at the time awarded him the Order of Arts and Letters.
So far, however, Ms. Springora — now 47 and the head of the publishing company Julliard — is the only one of his victims to have spoken out. After hesitating for years, she told the French news media, she decided to break her silence after being outraged that a literary prize, the Renaudot, was awarded to Mr. Matzneff in 2013.
In “Le Consentement,” Ms. Springora recounts being seduced at the age of 14 by the famous writer, who was then in his 50s. 
She also relates the depression and other psychological problems she suffered from the relationship, and the years it took her to recover.
Mr. Matzneff was one of the leading writers to advocate the legalization of sex with children. In “Les Moins de Seize Ans," or “Under 16 Years Old,” he writes, “To sleep with a child, it’s a holy experience, a baptismal event, a sacred adventure.” First published in 1974, it was republished in 2005.
Thinkers on the left, like Michel Foucault, Roland Barthes, Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, spoke in defense of the practice, or came to the defense of men accused of engaging in sex with people below the age of consent in France.
Libération, the newspaper co-founded by Sartre, championed pedophiles as a discriminated minority and ran personal ads by adults seeking children for sex.
The newspaper ran “revolting” articles about pedophilia into the 1980s, and its staff included activists who fought for the right to engage in “sexual relations with children,” its editor, Laurent Joffrin, acknowledged in an editorial this week, adding that the publication now opposed the practice.
Tolerance of it was not limited to the left.
For years, though less aggressive than Libération, Le Monde, the centrist newspaper, published a weekly column by Mr. Matzneff and articles defending those accused of having sex with underage partners, including one in 1977 that was signed by Sartre, de Beauvoir and Barthes. While the right attacked pedophiles, some of its leaders were close to Mr. Matzneff.
Pierre Verdrager, a sociologist and author of “L’Enfant Interdit,” or “Forbidden Child,” a book on the politics surrounding pedophilia in the 1970s, said that what united its defenders was the belief that France had an “aristocracy” that was not bound to ordinary norms of conduct.
While the ordinary French appeared revolted by the apologists, writers were considered part of this elite and were even expected to engage in acts of moral transgression, Mr. Verdrager said.
Among Mr. Matzneff’s longtime supporters, a few, like Josyane Savigneau, the former book editor of Le Monde, have defended him in public. “The witch hunt continues,” she wrote on Twitter.
“We are all the intellectual and moral products of a country and especially of a time,” he said, adding that he regretted lacking the “words that were needed” in interviewing Mr. Matzneff.
