We’re covering a key impeachment vote in Washington, Harvey Weinstein’s lawyer and Spike Lee’s groundbreaking role at Cannes.
Britain, France and Germany on Tuesday formally accused Iran of breaking the 2015 agreement that limited its nuclear program — a first step toward reimposing United Nations sanctions. But they insisted that there was still time for Iran to come back into compliance.
Iran’s recent breach of the limits that the agreement had placed on its uranium enrichment has raised fears that it could be close to building an atomic bomb. London, Paris and Berlin want to prevent that via diplomatic means while also keeping the United States on their side.
But striking that balance could be difficult, partly because American officials believe the sanctions they imposed on Iran after the U.S. left the nuclear deal — and which Tehran wants lifted as a precondition for fresh talks — are working.
Another angle: A key Democratic senator said on Tuesday that at least four Republicans in the Republican-controlled chamber would break ranks to support a measure — prompted by the American killing of Tehran’s top general — that would force President Trump to win congressional authorization before taking further military action against Iran. It will likely face a presidential veto.
Yesterday: President Hassan Rouhani of Iran called for a special court to examine the recent downing of a Ukrainian passenger jet by the Iranian military.
Closer look: Security camera footage verified by The Times shows that two missiles fired 30 seconds apart took down the plane, killing all 176 people aboard.
Democratic debate: At the first U.S. Democratic presidential debate since President Trump ordered the killing of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani of Iran, six candidates clashed over America’s role in the Middle East.
The U.S. House of Representatives is expected to vote today to send articles of impeachment against President Trump to the Senate — a key procedural move that will usher in the third presidential impeachment trial in American history.
The vote comes a day after House Democrats released a tranche of previously unseen records detailing how Mr. Trump’s associates pressured Ukrainian officials to investigate his political rivals. The records add pressure on Republicans to include witness testimony and additional documents at Mr. Trump’s Senate trial.
But Mitch McConnell, the Senate’s majority leader and top Republican, plans to put off a debate over calling witnesses until after the trial begins next week.
Go deeper: John Roberts, the chief justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, will likely preside over President Trump’s impeachment trial in a largely ceremonial capacity. But even that carries risks for him, our veteran court reporter writes.
One likely focus of a NATO military chiefs meeting in Brussels today: A contentious proposal by the United States to greatly reduce its forces in West Africa.
The American effort is part of a wider push to better counter Russia and China. And the Trump administration wants European allies, particularly France, to help more in the battle against extremist Islamist organizations like Boko Haram, the Islamic State and Al Qaeda in the Maghreb.
Related: President Trump also seems to want NATO to do more in the Persian Gulf to help contain Iran, but the alliance’s members may not heed his call. “Very few of the allies trust him and will not follow blindly the most anti-NATO president in seven decades,” an analyst said last week.
Pope Benedict XVI had promised to remain “hidden to the world” when he retired in 2013. But he “turns out to be bad at hiding,” our correspondents write, and has repeatedly chimed in throughout the pontificate of his successor, Pope Francis.
“From the Depths of our Hearts,” a book co-written by Benedict that is to be published in France today, is the former pope’s latest foray into public life. And it makes a firm defense of priestly celibacy just as Francis faces a critical decision on whether to lift the restriction on married priests in remote areas.
Francis is the one with the power to promulgate dogma, but Benedict, 92, is the first pontiff to resign since the 15th Century. Many observers say that having two living popes — especially ones with vastly different visions for the church — confuses the faithful.
Art imitates life: The theologically fraught relationship between the two living popes has been fictionalized in “The Two Popes,” a film starring Anthony Hopkins as Benedict and Jonathan Pryce as Francis. John Malkovich also plays pontiff in “The New Pope” on HBO.
Long before allegations against Harvey Weinstein set off a global reckoning over sexual harassment, Donna Rotunno, above, was building a career as a criminal lawyer with an unusual specialty: defending men accused of sex crimes.
Now Ms. Rotunno is drawing scrutiny from some women’s rights advocates for defending Mr. Weinstein himself in a high-profile rape case. But she argues that the cultural pendulum in the #MeToo era has swung too far — to the point where many of her clients are considered guilty until proven innocent.
U.S. fuel spill: An airplane making an emergency landing in Los Angeles on Tuesday dumped jet fuel on six schools, including at least one where students were playing on a playground.
Striking dancers: Members of the Paris Opera Ballet, who stop working at age 42 under French law, are among those taking part in nationwide demonstrations against President Emmanuel Macron’s pension reform plan.
Spike Lee at Cannes: This year, the acclaimed American director will become the first black person to lead the Cannes Film Festival jury in its 73-year history.
Snapshot: A school in rural Venezuela that has no food or books. The country’s president, Nicolás Maduro, has abandoned basic government functions across the country as he shores up his power in the capital.
Cook: Oat milk chocolate pudding is equal parts comfort and romance.
Read: A new collection of writing by the literary critic James Wood includes pieces on Chekhov and Virginia Woolf.
Go: Jimi Hendrix fans can find pieces of his legacy across London, 50 years after he last lived there.
Smarter Living: Is your child shy? NYT Parenting has a guide on when to help, when to step back and when to worry.
For nearly six years, residents of the English village of Blackhall Colliery would sometimes find neat bundles of cash amounting to 2,000 pounds, or about $2,600, on their sidewalks.
This week, the police there revealed that two people who wished to be known only as good Samaritans were the source of the anonymous charity.
In ancient times, Samaria was located in the northern part of where Israel is today, between Galilee and Judea, and is part of today’s West Bank.
Actual Samaritans exist there today. They number around 800 and practice a religion closely related to Judaism, but they reject the idea of Jerusalem as their central place of worship.
• We’re listening to “The Daily.” Our latest episode is about the escape of Carlos Ghosn, the former Nissan chief.
• Here’s today’s Mini Crossword puzzle, and a clue: Autograph (four letters). You can find all of our puzzles here.
• Readers of the news want to know more than just the story: They want to know why it’s being told, who is telling it and how it came together. That’s one of 10 themes that emerged in a Times research team’s conversations with readers last year.