Readers discuss whether the former national security adviser might defend the president. Also: Iranian cultural sites; war fears among the young; online hate; legal help for tenants.
Is it a coincidence that John Bolton, immediately after the assassination of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, agreed to testify in the impeachment trial? It is reported that such testimony would be damning to the president, but is that necessarily so?
As we all know, Mr. Bolton has long advocated military action against Iran. Now that President Trump has initiated a direct attack, isn’t it more likely that Mr. Bolton would make every effort to defend him against removal?
Now that John Bolton, the former national security adviser, has announced that he will testify if subpoenaed by the Senate in its impeachment proceedings, it is up to Mitch McConnell to subpoena him. If Mr. McConnell decides he does not wish to hear what Mr. Bolton has to say, perhaps Mr. Bolton would agree to appear before the House of Representatives Intelligence Committee in a “Phase 2” of its impeachment inquiry?
White House officials are tying themselves in knots trying to say that President Trump did not say he would consider attacking cultural sites in Iran. Even though he said it.
I was 7 years old on Sept. 11, 2001. Unlike many of my generation, I remember my parents’ stories of the Vietnam War. In this context, the stories always carried a certain weight of immediacy and the possibility of repetition.
In one vivid tale, my mom recounted the story of a friend who was drafted on the cusp of his 26th birthday, leaving his wife and infant and returning in a flag-draped coffin. I am now 26 years old.
Young people are right to fear war. It touches young people and their families with devastating consequences. While I understand the desire of parents to ease their children’s fears, I also sense a false dichotomy: Either surrender to the hype or dismiss it entirely.
To forge a better future, I encourage these young people to instead master the skills that our leaders have not. Rather than letting the hype control our reaction, we must build true resilience, reason, courage and empathy to face circumstances beyond our control.
It is true that certain hateful memes or labels may be deemed not hateful because of new uses or contexts, and that platforms should be careful in classifying content as hateful. But the vast preponderance of hate on the internet is immutable, consisting of racist, anti-Semitic, homophobic and other forms of online hate not subject to second-guessing.
A much greater concern than re-evaluating a small category of online content is the failure of internet platforms to do all they can to live up to their promises of a hate-free environment.
In U.S. eviction cases, 90 percent of renters don’t have the means to access legal representation, while 90 percent of landlords do. To help curb this trend, we need to implement a big, but simple, solution nationwide: a tenant’s right to counsel. This would level the playing field for tenants facing eviction.
In cities with a right to counsel, like Philadelphia, lawyers help keep renters in their homes. They enter payment agreements with landlords. They negotiate to have repairs made, so tenants don’t have to withhold rent. By doing so, they prevent homelessness, saving cities millions of dollars in the cost of social services.
It’s time to promote fairness and adopt right to counsel nationwide.
Ms. Garland is the managing attorney of the Housing Unit at Community Legal Services of Philadelphia. Mx. Marshall is a staff attorney at Community Legal Services of Philadelphia and the director of the Philadelphia Eviction Prevention Project.