Opinion|What if Trump Gave Alaska to Putin?
What if Trump Gave Alaska to Putin?
Republicans seem to think no president’s misbehavior could ever be bad enough to warrant removal.
President Trump and Senate Republican leaders seem to be planning a rushed, sham trial with no witnesses and limited evidence. This reminds me of a trial I once monitored of a Chinese journalist in Beijing: The proceedings were held in a majestic court building with high ceilings, plush courtrooms, crisp microphones and attentive security officers, all overseen by solemn judges — everything a justice system might want, except justice.
McConnell’s grim determination to see no evidence and hear no witnesses is particularly hypocritical because in 1999, during the impeachment trial of President Bill Clinton, he did favor allowing witnesses. “It’s certainly not unusual to have a witness in an impeachment trial,” he said then.
Newly invented? Abuse of power was central to the discussions of impeachment at the Constitutional Convention. Alexander Hamilton said that impeachment was the remedy for “the abuse or violation of some public trust.” It was also the basis for articles of impeachment approved by the House Judiciary Committee against both Clinton and Richard Nixon (the full House rejected that article against Clinton, and Nixon resigned before a full House vote).
Trump and his supporters simply make assertions without regard to reality. This is an echo in the impeachment domain of the 16,241 false or misleading statements Trump made in his first three years in office, by the count of The Washington Post.
For example, Trump’s backers insist that impeachment and conviction require a violation of a particular criminal statute, even though most scholars agree that that is not the case. Indeed, one early impeachment was of a judge who presided while drunk, which was not a violation of criminal law.
We all recognize that a president has the right to pardon criminals, but suppose he pardoned hackers in exchange for “investigating” the Bidens? Or what if Trump announced that he would pardon every Republican bank robber?
Or suppose Trump fawned over Vladimir Putin to the point of returning Alaska to Russia?
Note to Alaska senators Lisa Murkowski and Dan Sullivan: Your thoughts, comrades?
Do we really think that there should be no checks on a rogue president as he handed Alaska over to Putin — or Florida to Spain, while we’re at it — or even as he pardoned streams of Republican bank robbers? Must we tolerate an out-of control ruler who engages, in the words of the Declaration of Independence, in “a long train of abuses and usurpations”?
That’s the kind of system that we rebelled against in 1776, no?