Beyond the beach in the Hawaii capital, where new takes on traditional dishes, in-depth local history museums and a kitschy cocktail (or two) are on the itinerary.
For many travelers, Honolulu is just a stopover en route to Maui or Kauai, with a goal of avoiding the overtouristed maze that Waikiki has become. In 2018, nearly 6 million travelers arrived by air to the island of Oahu, up 16.2 percent in five years. But there is still plenty to do and see in the multicultural capital while skirting the edge of the crowds: Museums shed light on historic Hawaii; chefs offer updated takes on traditional ingredients; and bars concoct new versions of kitschy aloha cocktails. Because many things cost more than on the mainland, it can be paradise at a price. Still, there are ways to experience today’s Honolulu beyond the beach and without busting the budget.
The struggle between the traditional and the trendy is evident here, amid signs of gentrification and poverty. Within Chinatown’s gridlike layout, you can spot a few examples of the low-rise Italianate brick or white stucco and corniced buildings that predate a devastating fire in 1900. Admire the colorful neon marquee at the refurbished 1922 Hawaii Theater. Take in the colors and tuberose-heavy scents at lei stands where floral necklaces are still strung by hand and note the steamed bun sign at Char Hung Sut where hand-formed dumplings are sold earlier in the day at about $1 a piece. See street signs in English and Chinese characters, but also the living evidence of the city’s homeless population. Don’t be deterred, though. Chinatown offers a glimpse of the culture that developed after migrants, originally recruited in the 1850s to work in sugar plantations, left those jobs to open their own businesses.
Venture beyond kitschy key chains in the ubiquitous Waikiki souvenir stands to find Honolulu’s active crafts scene at the South Shore Market, a sort of mini-mall housing boutiques, art exhibitions and even a family-owned sweets shop selling macadamia “snowball” cookies and chocolate-dipped mango. Pick up cotton sarongs at Kealopiko; handcrafted jewelry made with found items like shark teeth, sea glass and sunrise shells edged in 24-karat gold at Flotsam & Co.; and greeting cards drawn by local artists at Mori, where you also might spot some vinyl by Dick Dale or Maryanne Ito, among the eclectic offerings.
