Politics|Joni Ernst Asks if Impeachment Trial Will Turn Iowa Caucusgoers Against Biden. They Answer.
MUSCATINE, Iowa — Senator Joni Ernst of Iowa, a Republican, wondered aloud about her Democratic constituents as they wrestled with a final decision before the looming Iowa caucuses, particularly those considering supporting former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.
After sitting through hours of arguments in the impeachment trial of President Trump on Monday, where his legal team focused on how Mr. Biden’s son, Hunter, had nabbed a lucrative position on the board of a Ukrainian energy company, Ms. Ernst addressed reporters in the basement of the Capitol.
Mr. Biden responded to Ms. Ernst’s comments head-on, presenting them as proof that Mr. Trump’s team was using the impeachment trial to try to hobble his candidacy.
By late afternoon Tuesday, his team had sent a fund-raising email from his campaign manager with the subject line “Hey Senator Joni Ernst, let me answer your question directly.” The campaign also released a digital ad highlighting Ms. Ernst’s comments and accusing Republicans of spreading “lies” about Mr. Biden.
The impeachment trial of Mr. Trump has paralyzed Washington and frozen much of the fluid 2020 Democratic field in amber, commanding nonstop news media attention and tethering the four senators in the race to Capitol Hill. But talk of impeachment has been largely absent from the campaign trail in Iowa in the final stretch before the state’s caucuses, including at Mr. Biden’s events.
Ms. Ernst was first elected to the Senate in 2014 in a victory that helped the Republicans take control of the chamber. As she gears up for her first re-election battle this year, she has the built-in advantage of running on the same ticket as Mr. Trump, who carried Iowa in 2016 by nearly 10 points, even after Barack Obama won the state twice.
So, could a shot from Iowa’s junior senator, launched from a microphone in the bowels of the Capitol in Washington, put the polarizing impeachment process in the minds of Democratic caucusgoers in Iowa?
The answer, as Mr. Biden campaigned in Iowa on Tuesday, seemed clear.
“She’s just mouthing everything that the president is saying,” said Donna Cantrell, 70, who came to see Mr. Biden in Muscatine. She plans to support him next week and said the president’s attacks would not persuade her otherwise.
Michael Wehner, 66, was similarly unmoved. He said he had been leaning toward supporting Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, but was impressed by Mr. Biden.
“I don’t think much about anything Joni Ernst says,” he said. The scrutiny of Hunter Biden did not give him any pause, he added.
Interviews with a half dozen Democratic county chairs in Iowa similarly cast doubt on whether impeachment would be on the minds of caucusgoers as they decide among the Democratic candidates.
Sue Dvorsky, a former chairwoman of the Iowa Democratic Party, argued that Ms. Ernst’s comments would hurt her in the election by energizing the Democratic base.
As for Mr. Biden, she said that Mr. Trump’s attacks had both accentuated the Biden campaign’s argument that the president worries about facing him in a general election and offered a clear preview of how the president would attack him.
Ms. Ernst, who also sent a fund-raising appeal based on her Monday remarks, offered a different take on Twitter on Tuesday. She wrote that Mr. Biden “thinks my comments prove his point” regarding Mr. Trump.
As the impeachment proceedings have ramped up, Mr. Biden has been hammering the argument that he is the candidate Mr. Trump fears most.
Kevin Gleaves, who came out to see Mr. Biden, appeared eager to follow the former vice president’s instructions — at least in part.
The Iowa Senate race is crucial to Democrats’ hopes of retaking the Senate. Theresa Greenfield, the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee’s preferred candidate in the primary, wasted no time capitalizing on Ms. Ernst’s remarks.
“Sounds like you’re focused on the wrong election, Senator,” she tweeted Monday evening alongside a call for donations.
Thomas Kaplan reported from Muscatine, and Nick Corasaniti from Des Moines. Maggie Astor contributed reporting from Des Moines, and Katie Glueck from Chicago.