With the government in control of the production, “the emotion” of Tuesday’s session was missing, said Chris Wallace of Fox News.
CBS blinked first.
NBC held out longer, but by 5 p.m., ABC was the last traditional broadcast network still in breaking-news mode. Die-hards could turn to cable news for their fix.
In television terms, the opening hours of Mr. Trump’s trial — only the third in American history, and the second of the mass-media era — did not exactly make for visually compelling viewing. For Republican Senate leadership, that was by design.
The result: Audiences were introduced on Tuesday to the constricted, lo-fi view of the Senate floor that will be ubiquitous on the nation’s TV screens in the coming days.
Election nights have their interactive maps and whiz-bang graphics. State of the Union coverage features high-definition reaction shots of senior government officials, generating the occasional iconic moment — think Justice Samuel Alito mouthing “Not true” when President Barack Obama criticized a Supreme Court opinion on campaign finance.
But the trial of a sitting president? On Tuesday, the small-screen vista was limited to artless shots of House impeachment managers and Mr. Trump’s lawyers at their lecterns, with an occasional overhead glimpse of the chamber thrown in.
Squint, and you may have been able to make out an individual senator or two.
The anchor Chris Wallace, commenting as part of Fox News’s analyst team, pointed out what viewers were missing.
MSNBC, whose prime-time opinion shows are a gathering space for liberals, acknowledged the restricted views with some subtle trolling. Attentive viewers might have noticed a graphic in the upper-left corner of the MSNBC screen, noting that the trial footage was provided by “Capitol Hill Senate TV”: the government, not a news outlet.
CBS gave national affiliates the option of picking up a feed of the trial from CBSN, its streaming-only news channel, after 3 p.m. Its Washington-based evening newscast opened with an extended segment on the trial, with the anchor Norah O’Donnell interviewing four of the House impeachment managers.
Journalists for print organizations faced their own hurdles on Tuesday.
As promised by Republican Senate leadership, reporters were herded into roped-off areas in the Capitol hallways as senators entered and left the chamber, a significant change from the free access that journalists there usually enjoy.
When Manu Raju, a CNN reporter, tried to interview two Republican senators — Susan Collins of Maine and Cory Gardner of Colorado — about the trial’s rules, the lawmakers ignored him and walked on. On an ordinary day, Mr. Raju would have followed them. On Tuesday, he was stuck in a press pen behind gold stanchions and maroon velvet ropes.
Reporters also had to submit to an extra layer of security screening to get to a balcony that overlooks the Senate floor, a requirement added expressly for the president’s trial.
“Having a police officer standing between reporters and the Senate chamber we’ve had unfettered access to for more than 200 years is extremely frustrating,” Sarah D. Wire, a Los Angeles Times reporter, said on Tuesday, echoing frustrations voiced throughout the Capitol press corps.
Photographers’ movements in the Capitol were restricted, too, resulting in limited opportunities to capture images of lawmakers on a momentous day.
Senate officials cited security concerns as the reason for the added restrictions, noting the presence of Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. as the trial’s presiding judge. Michael Steele, a former Republican Party chairman and an MSNBC analyst, offered his own hypothesis.
