David Pollack, a.k.a. Taxi Dave, settled behind a microphone last weekend in the TriBeCa studios of WOR-AM (710) for his taxi-themed talk radio show, which has become popular with New York City cabbies and other listeners at 8 p.m. Sunday nights.
“This is Taxi 101,” Mr. Pollack said in a Bronx accent, before a deep-voiced recording, the show’s opening promo, kicked in.
Mr. Pollack, 60, has spent his life driving yellow cabs and then working in other areas of the industry, including “The Taxi Dave Show,” a blend of bluster, humor and outrage.
The latest of several taxi-themed shows Mr. Pollack has had over the years, it is now in its third year on the air.
This night, he had several guests in the studio, including William Guerra, 61, from Queens, a case study in how taxi medallions have plummeted in value since the popularization of Uber.
There was also Tom O’Connor, 85, a retired cabby whose claim to fame was driving for 50 years in Manhattan and never receiving a traffic ticket.
During the hourlong show, Mr. Pollack made industry announcements, including vehicular recalls, a coming rally for livery drivers and a reminder not to drink and drive — for this, he cracked open a soda for a homemade sound effect.
He yelled. He ranted. He scolded his guests to stop stealing his show. He fumed about a simple oil change that wound up costing him $279, leaving his next guest, State Senator Tony Avella, Democrat of Queens, on hold.
Mr. Pollack publishes and edits The Taxi Insider, a monthly trade paper whose current issue has two photos of Mr. Pollack on the front page.
He also works for the Melrose Credit Union, on Queens Boulevard. Mr. Pollack runs the Taxi Action Center there, working as a fixer for medallion owners and drivers, and lately as a therapist.
Melrose is a major lender for taxi medallions, and Mr. Pollack buoys aggrieved medallion owners watching their investments plummet as the yellow cab industry takes a beating from Uber and other app-based ride-hailing services.
“I had medallion owners coming in here ready to jump off bridges, and I had to calm them down,” he said.
Mr. Pollack, who grew up in the Bronx, said his father and grandfather were indeed New York City cabdrivers, not to mention an uncle and some cousins as well.
Mr. Pollack insists the “born in a cab” story is true — in his father’s cab, rushing his mother to Bronx-Lebanon Hospital.
By the time Dave was 7, Dad was giving him driving lessons in his 1962 cab, and taking him to the local taxi drivers’ credit union.
After Stuyvesant High School, he attended Lehman College in the Bronx, but he began driving a cab and dropped out. His favorite time was driving late weekend nights in the 1970s, with New York in all its seedy glamour.
This, he recalled, included Rick James smoking a joint in his cab, and Mick Jagger telling him to turn up a Grateful Dead song. Andy Warhol once signed a slip of paper with an infinity sign and told Mr. Pollack to save it, which Mr. Pollack did not do.
A Grateful Dead enthusiast, Mr. Pollack would use his yellow cab to follow the band on tour, he said. For years, he bought surplus cabs and painted them black, for personal use.
Mr. Pollack, who has two daughters, said the radio show kept him going after he lost his wife to cancer a year ago.
In the radio station last weekend, he finished the show and answered his phone. It was his mother, and Mr. Pollack put her on speakerphone.
