A man claiming to have been traveling with one of the Oregon protesters during an encounter with the police, Mark McConnell, posted on Facebook that the protester, LaVoy Finicum, “charged” at the police before he was shot.
Mark McConnell, who says he was travelling with Robert “LaVoy” Finicum when he was shot and killed and other militia members arrested, posted an account of the incident to Facebook on January 27. McConnell says the vehicles they were traveling in were pulled over, and that Finicum’s vehicle subsequently sped off, with police in pursuit. He cites two people who were in Finicum’s vehicle, Ryan Payne and Shawna Cox (both of whom were among the reported arrested), as having told him that, after Finicum’s vehicle sped off, they encountered a road block. At this point, the truck hit a snow bank, McConnell says. On leaving the vehicle Finicum, says McConnell, “charged after law enforcement.” He says Finicum was “not on his knees,” saying that was “a miscommunication” and that Finicum “went after” the police.
A man who claimed he was traveling with members of a protest group during a fatal traffic stop in Oregon on Tuesday said the man who was shot dead, LaVoy Finicum, had charged at police officers.
In a nine-minute video uploaded to his Facebook page, Mark McConnell said he was driving one of two vehicles carrying activists who had seized a federal wildlife refuge in rural eastern Oregon.
The Times could not independently verify that Mr. McConnell was indeed traveling with the group nor could it immediately confirm any details of his account with the authorities.
According to Mr. McConnell’s account in the video, Mr. Finicum became “rather heated” after police officers stopped the cars and detained most of the activists.
“They went to the ground. They were handcuffed. Next thing we know, LaVoy takes off — with his pickup and the other occupants,” Mr. McConnell said.
He said he did not witness the actual shooting, but he disputed that Mr. Finicum was on his knees or that officers went after him.
“He was not on his knees, he was none of that nonsense,” Mr. McConnell said.
Eight people, including the group’s leader, Ammon Bundy, were arrested during the encounter along Highway 395 outside Burns around 4:25 p.m., officials said. Another person sustained injuries that were not life-threatening.
The group seized the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge more than three weeks ago to protest the prosecution of two ranchers and said they planned to stay for years.
“LaVoy was very passionate about this, about the movement, about what we were doing up here,” Mr. McConnell said.