As it happens, millions of Americans are black according to the one-drop rule but don’t have any of the features that people associate with African ancestry. Lots of them ‘‘pass’’ for white. Many don’t, though. Walter White, the early-20th-century leader of the N.A.A.C.P., was able to travel the South investigating lynchings because, although his parents were ex-slaves, he ‘‘looked white.’’ His autobiography begins: ‘‘I am a Negro.  The traits of my race are nowhere visible upon me.’’ (In a bio­pic, he could have been played by, oh, Bryan Cranston.) ‘‘ ’Cause it’s swell to have a leader/That can pass for white,’’ wrote Langston Hughes, who with his ‘‘copper-brown skin and straight black hair’’ — his description — was himself taken for white during a trip to Africa and could have passed for Indian if he troubled himself to do so.
But your children’s biological parents identified themselves as Caucasian and Hispanic on the forms in the clinic. Given the way the term ‘‘Hispanic’’ works — Sammy Sosa, Cameron Diaz — the Hispanic parent could have had skin of almost any shade. And given what I said about passing, the Caucasian parent could have had African ancestry. Still, I take it that your kids aren’t ‘‘obviously black,’’ otherwise you wouldn’t be asking what to do. In these circumstances, because your husband is African-American, it seems to me there’s just no indisputably correct answer to the race question. The forms assume a simpler world than the actual one.
What to do? If your kids had dark skin, it might have been best to raise them as black. They would stand a fairly high probability of being thought of that way by strangers, and it’s still true that in our country, alas, you have to be prepared for racism if you don’t ‘‘look white.’’ Also, on the positive side, looking black gets you welcoming looks in places where you won’t get them if you don’t.
But let’s assume they don’t look ‘‘typically black.’’ Then there’s no good answer. I certainly can’t see any harm in raising them as black, though. They have a black father and black relatives, and they’ll be able to acquire whatever social markers of blackness there are in your particular community. Someone might insist that this was just plain wrong unless they have some actual African ancestry, insisting on the crazy one-drop rule. But adopted children often take on the ethnicity of their parents, so if you and your husband think of his blackness as in part cultural, he is surely entitled to pass it on to his children. Your kids will look just as black as Walter White.
Another option you mention would be to describe your kids as mixed race. That’s a label that’s gaining traction, and to the extent that people think of Latinos as a race (and some do), your kids are ancestrally mixed race as well as living in a mixed-race family. You say it isn’t an option on the school’s form. Tell them if you think it should be.
One option I’d be inclined to rule out, though, is saying the twins are Hispanic. The social meaning of being Hispanic has a lot more to do with culture (or, at the very least, a marked surname) than biological ancestry. So it would be strange to think of them as Hispanic without any cultural connection to Latin America or Spain.
The fact is that our system of racial classification is based, as I’ve suggested, on a mélange of falsehood and ignorance — with, no doubt, an occasional admixture of truth. It presupposes an extremely oversimplified picture of the relationship among ancestry, appearance, biology and culture. A lot of people have social circumstances and ancestry that don’t fit into it. If it were up to me, we would change the picture.
You’ve correctly identified the two countervailing arguments here. Information about a person’s psychiatric condition is, generally speaking, up to that person to control. When friends tell you about their mental health, a good default is to keep what they say in confidence. In the other direction, you could, as you say, help G better understand what is going on with E if you passed this information on. Ordinarily, the way out would be to get permission from E to explain things (or encourage E to do so). But your relationship has evidently passed the point where that is possible.
Still, it sounds as if G has already figured out the basic situation. She would just like more details. But in order to make sense of what has happened to their friendship, does she really need to know more than she does — that there’s a mental-health issue and that you aren’t at liberty to share details? ‘‘Depression’’ isn’t the most illuminating of labels. And one day G might find reassurance in the fact that you can keep a secret.