JERUSALEM — The United States and Britain have monitored secret drone flights and communications by the Israeli Air Force in a hacking operation dating to 1998, according to documents attributed to leaks by the former American intelligence contractor Edward J. Snowden.
Israel voiced disappointment but no great surprise at the disclosures, published on Friday by The Intercept, an online publication associated with Glenn Greenwald, who has collaborated with Mr. Snowden, and by the German newsmagazine Der Spiegel.
The disclosures raised the possibility of further strained ties between Israel and the United States, but the two close allies have traditionally had an understanding that they spy on each other despite pledging not to.
Israel has said it stopped spying on the United States after it employed the United State Navy analyst Jonathan J. Pollard as an agent in the 1980s. Mr. Pollard was released from a North Carolina prison in November after serving 30 years.
Yuval Steinitz, the minister of national infrastructure and energy, and a member of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s security cabinet, sought to play down the issue but also said lessons would be learned.
The Israeli daily Yedioth Ahronoth said that the National Security Agency in the United States and its British counterpart, Government Communications Headquarters, which monitor electronic and other communications, had decrypted Israeli communications on air force missions over Gaza, Iran and Syria.
The spy operation, under the code-name Anarchist, was run out of a base in Cyprus and also targeted other countries in the region, including Egypt, Iran, Syria and Turkey, according to The Intercept.
Israel neither confirms nor denies using armed drones, though a senior Israeli military officer was quoted as acknowledging their use in a secret United States diplomatic cable from 2010 that was published by WikiLeaks.
The United States Embassy in Israel did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Friday.
A spokeswoman for the British Embassy in Tel Aviv said it did not comment on intelligence matters, and there was no immediate response from the Foreign Office in London, Reuters reported.