 In architecture, the panopticon, a circular building designed so that everything can be seen from its center, was sometimes used for prisons. Then there’s the choreographer Jillian Peña, who, like a modern-day Panoptes, is obsessed by the notion of multiples. On Saturday afternoon, as part of the American Realness festival, Ms. Peña offered the premiere of “Panopticon,” in which one dancer serves as a mirror to the other. Unfortunately, it wasn’t the best reflection of her experiments in twinning.
Both judgments are true in this rehashing of Ms. Peña’s past explorations. As exacting as the synchronized movement strives to be, this airless work lacks detail; the dancers’ imprecision is a constant source of irritation, as are Christian Joy’s unitards, which sag in all the wrong places.
Later on Saturday, another premiere, by Keith Hennessy and Jassem Hindi, proved both passionate and tender. In “future friend/ships,” the two stage a defiant, poetic/political work, inspired by events in Syria, that gradually transforms chaos into hope. The audience sits onstage in the main theater as the artists, self-described news addicts, lay out a manifesto in which science fiction and friendship can lead to what they call Arab futurism.
Mr. Hindi offers musical accompaniment — at one point, he plucks an amplified wire running from the ceiling to an LP on the floor to produce an ominous drone — and sumptuous floral curtains dazzle as both backdrops and costumes. There are moments of loose-limbed dancing in masks and spoken homages to Middle Eastern notables, including the poets Etel Adnan and Nazik al-Malaika. The collaborators even pass out handmade posters of their subjects.
Another view of determination emerged on Monday, courtesy of the bold downtown choreographer Yvonne Meier. In “Durch Nacht und Nebel” (“By Night and Fog”), she keeps her audacious reputation intact, as well as her predilection for props. Here, they include a hefty mound of rubble, plastic eggs with baby dolls inside — she shoves them in her mouth — and Band-Aids. They cover much of Ms. Meier’s voluptuous, nearly naked body; as she shakes, they quiver, transforming her skin into scales.
Fearlessly morphing from one creature to the next — one transformation involved an orange bodysuit affixed with the plastic babies, and in another, she was coated in black paint — she exposed her aging body with aplomb. Is there nothing she’s afraid of? Ms. Meier, it’s been too long.