BEIJING — This past year has been a time of ups and downs for Judge Jiang Huiling and his 20-year quest for legal reform in China.
Judge Jiang heads a government research institute that is spearheading an ambitious remake of China’s legal system. With pride, he points to potentially significant changes unveiled over the past year that could lead to a fairer legal system, instead of the politicized structure that upholds the law in China today.
But Judge Jiang, 52, also knows that many people see the past year as a period of retreat, rather than advance, in China’s effort to establish the rule of law.
In December, for example, one of China’s most prominent human rights lawyers was tried for blog posts criticizing government policy, while another nationally known lawyer has been held incommunicado since August for trying to defend churches whose crosses are being removed from their steeples.
Even skeptics say that the changes are significant. Their centerpiece aims to make courts independent of local government. Currently, lower-level courts in China are overseen by the county government, whose party boss runs the courts as a wing of the government, like the police force or sanitation services. Local party secretaries appoint judges and often vet politically important decisions.
This structure makes it hard for ordinary Chinese to challenge abuses of power. Farmers suing a local factory for polluting their fields, citizens claiming police abuse, or residents objecting to having their homes expropriated — most of these cases are rejected outright by local courts and never heard. Only a handful are adjudicated in the plaintiffs’ favor.
These cases have been a constant thorn in the side of legal reformers. Known as “administrative lawsuits” (as opposed to civil or criminal cases), they were introduced in the 1980s as a way for citizens to seek redress against the government. By the end of the 1990s, there were hundreds of thousands of administrative lawsuits, including class-action cases brought by entire villages.
Alarmed, the government instructed courts to stop accepting such cases. By the mid-2000s, about 60 percent of these cases were rejected outright by courts, according to government statistics. Administrative lawsuits plummeted, causing a spike in petitioners — people who trekked to local or central government offices to appeal directly to the authorities.
Instead, for the past decade the government has emphasized “stability maintenance” programs. These bypass the legal system to resolve disputes through a variety of means, such as arbitration, paying off protesters or outright suppression.
The reforms would put all courts under provincial administration. Although this still means government control over the courts, the effect could be significant at the local level.
That is the view of Song Pengfei, the eldest son of a family of shepherds in Inner Mongolia. In 2004, the local government expropriated the family’s land and gave it to an investor. The family says it was supposed to get cash compensation, an apartment in the nearby city of Ordos and an annual subsidy. When they got only the cash, family members sued, but the cases were dismissed. Mr. Song’s brother then posted a government document online showing that such land expropriations were illegal. The young man was arrested and jailed.
Judge Jiang of the Supreme Court said he had been pushing for this separation of local government and courts for 20 years. Now, he said, the government has taken this step for the first time. “You can’t imagine how this feels for someone who has been working inside the system for this long,” he said.
Other measures are being tried as well. The government has set up two pilot projects to establish circuit courts, which allow judges from one province to hear cases from others, further reducing the risk of local influence. Dockets are also being made public for the first time, and 50 courts have been allowed to experiment with an “assessor” system that is similar to a jury.
Judge Jiang said these measures have the highest backing. The key government body that pushes reform in China, the shengaizu, has met 18 times over the past two years, and 13 of those meetings have been about judicial reform. The commission is led by President Xi Jinping, who has spoken of the need for a better legal system.
But another of the initiatives — professionalizing judges — illustrates some of the deep-seated challenges facing reformers. China has about 196,000 judges, but many are simply law school graduates with the responsibilities of administrative assistants. Even those judges who hear cases rarely have to make decisions; instead, the cases are sent to senior judges or Communist Party committees to decide. Now, the number of judges is to be winnowed down. and while their pay and autonomy is being increased, their decisions will be subject to greater review.
That has contributed to a massive outflow of judges. In the municipality of Beijing, for example, 500 judges have quit in recent years. Pay is a key issue. Salaries start at less than $1,000 a month, which judges say is far too low if they are now expected to actually adjudicate cases and be held responsible for their decisions.
Hu Min, who recently quit his job as a judge, said the measures were good but would take many years to carry out. In the meantime, he said, judges were being asked to be professionals in a system where judicial professionalism is almost impossible.
Discouraged by the Communist Party’s continued influence, he has branched out into selling Maotai liquor — a specialty of his home province of Guizhou. His law office in Beijing is stacked full of the boxes of the pungent liquor, which he takes out to tastings several evenings a week.
Like other reforms in China, the emphasis is on making the current system more efficient, rather than allowing a truly independent institution.
This contrasts with the early 2000s, a period of optimism about legal reform that gave rise to people like the blind self-taught lawyer Chen Guangcheng, or the “Rights’ Defenders” movement. Most of those people have since been silenced or arrested.
“There are deeper issues that these reforms might not resolve,” said Carl Minzner, a professor at the Fordham Law School and author of several papers on legal reform.