Playing for only the third time in 11 days and skating in their last game before the All-Star break, the Islanders had a chance on Monday to vault into the winter break in style.
Snowed out Saturday against the Philadelphia Flyers and benefiting from a light schedule, the Islanders appeared to have momentum on their side for their final game of January. But the Detroit Red Wings were decidedly better, scoring two quick second-period goals and holding on for a 4-2 victory at Barclays Center.
Perhaps it was the added game-day wrinkle of disrupted Long Island Rail Road service after the major weekend snowstorm, requiring players to drive or use car services to get to Brooklyn. Or maybe it was simply running into a solid Detroit team that has won seven of eight road games this month.
The former Ranger Brad Richards opened the scoring midway through the first period. The Islanders’ leading goal scorer, Brock Nelson, tied the game at 1-1 less than six minutes later. Justin Abdelkader and Danny DeKeyser scored 71 seconds apart in the middle period to break the game open. Luke Glendening added an empty-net goal at 19 minutes 15 seconds of the third to complete the scoring.
The Islanders had won three of their last four games in impressive fashion and had fired 48 shots against Vancouver goaltender Ryan Miller in a game they lost; that one ended in a shootout.
In the tightening Eastern Conference playoff race, the Islanders need every point as they battle the Rangers for position in the Metropolitan Division and try to fend off the Devils and the Pittsburgh Penguins, who are in close pursuit. The Rangers downed the Buffalo Sabres, 6-3, at Madison Square Garden on Monday to move to 3 points ahead of the Islanders into second place, though the Islanders have two games in hand.
The Islanders are 15-8-3 at Barclays Center, impressive in light of the topsy-turvy game-day routines with the entire team living on Long Island. In recent weeks, the team has returned to holding morning skates closer to home instead of traveling early to Brooklyn.
Aside from the captain John Tavares — the team’s lone All-Star representative this weekend in Nashville — the Islanders can generally savor their week off knowing that they are in playoff position with 35 games remaining, albeit 20 of them on the road.
Goaltender Jaroslav Halak (12-9-4) was not at his best, allowing goals by Abdelkader at 13:29 of the second period and by DeKeyser at 14:40.
Detroit goaltender Petr Mrazek made 27 saves and improved to 18-9-4.
Richards, who won the Stanley Cup with the Chicago Blackhawks last season after the Rangers had bought out his contract the previous summer, opened the scoring at 10:57 of the first period after a giveaway by Nikolay Kulemin while the Islanders were trying to kill a penalty. Richards intercepted Kulemin’s clearing attempt and sent the puck past Halak for his fifth goal of the season.
Nelson evened the score at 16:33 with his 19th goal off a slick pass from Tavares.
With the Islanders down by two goals entering the third, Mikhail Grabovski scored on a breakaway at 15:12 to make it 3-2. But that was all the team could muster in the waning minutes.
The Islanders (25-16-6) had extra time to prepare for the Red Wings, but Detroit played with more moxie to improve to 25-16-8, 3 points behind Florida in the Atlantic Division. Coming off a 5-2 pasting of the Ottawa Senators on Friday, the Islanders did not play with the same verve.
The Islanders continued to miss the injured top-pair defenseman Johnny Boychuk, who skated Monday morning but did not play in a ninth straight game. He is expected to return shortly after the All-Star break.
The Islanders resume play Feb. 2 at home against Minnesota.