Bill de Blasio on Monday announced that his administration was building and preserving housing affordable to poor and working-class New Yorkers faster than any of the city’s previous mayors ever had.
Come Friday, Mayor de Blasio’s drive to create 200,000 of those units over 10 years may hit a serious speed bump.
On that day, an obscure tax-break program the city has used to create thousands of such apartments is set to expire unless construction unions and real estate developers agree on the wages to be paid on future projects receiving the subsidy.
The odds of a deal coming together range from very unlikely to impossible, according to key officials on both sides of the bargaining table, although state and city officials were holding out hope for a last-minute compromise.
As with so many things in New York politics these days, at the center of the issue is the acrimonious relationship between Mr. de Blasio and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who upended an agreement that the mayor had negotiated to amend the program, known as 421-a.
That seems unlikely to happen.
Under the 421-a program, developers have for more than 40 years received substantial tax breaks for including subsidized apartments in what were otherwise luxury buildings. The program has long been criticized by housing experts as a giveaway to real estate interests.
But after negotiating with the Real Estate Board of New York, an industry organization, for a year and consulting with housing activists, Mr. de Blasio in May unveiled a major overhaul of the program. Under the mayor’s plan, any developer receiving a 421-a tax break would have to set aside 25 percent to 30 percent — compared with the previous 20 percent — of the affected project’s apartments for poor and working-class residents. The deal needed the approval of the State Legislature.
The mayor’s proposal garnered praise from housing activists, but drew immediate criticism from the city’s construction unions. They argued that any project receiving public subsidies should pay union wages, which have traditionally helped lift blue-collar workers into the middle class. While the construction unions work on most commercial and public works projects in the city, they have lost ground to nonunion contractors in the building of midrise residential towers.
The real estate board argued that paying higher wages would increase construction costs by 20 percent to 30 percent, resulting in either fewer below-market units or bigger subsidies.
Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat like Mr. de Blasio, sided with the unions, saying that any deal should include an agreement that workers on 421-a developments be paid union-level wages.
Mr. de Blasio’s proposal was revised as the Legislature debated the merits. But few lawmakers were eager to step between the mayor and the governor, or to be seen helping developers reap tax breaks. Labor unions and real estate interests are major sources of political donations, and, to complicate matters further, the debate was unfolding against the backdrop of federal investigations into two of the state’s top political leaders and their ties to certain developers.
In the end, the Legislature, at Mr. Cuomo’s behest, passed a short-term extension of the subsidy program in June. In an odd twist, the legislation said the program would be renewed if two private entities — the unions and the real estate industry — agreed by Jan. 15 on a public policy: to institute union-level wages on 421-a projects.
The parties, represented by John Banks, president of the real estate board, and Gary La Barbera, president of the Building and Construction Trades Council, struggled to forge a deal. Just before Christmas, they arrived at the outline of a compromise that union officials and real estate executives thought their constituents could support.
They proposed establishing an unspecified minimum wage for workers on 421-a projects, letting union contractors bid on any job and expanding the 421-a program to include condominiums as well as rentals. Condos, which generally yield higher profits, would be required to include apartments earmarked for residents of modest means and to pay construction workers union-level wages.
Mr. La Barbera relayed the idea to the governor’s office, according to three executives briefed on the talks who were not authorized to discuss them publicly. Aides to the governor swiftly rejected the compromise, because of the inclusion of condos in the program. That would require going back to the Legislature for approval, something the Cuomo administration did not want. The governor called Rob Speyer, a friend and the chairman of the real estate board, to convey the same message, the executives said.
Many developers and housing experts say any agreement between the unions and the real estate industry would probably need the Legislature’s approval anyway.
As of Tuesday, no additional meetings were planned.
Privately, city officials are pessimistic. They have also been reluctant to show support for any potential compromise out of fear that Mr. Cuomo would oppose it.
State officials, however, dismissed the idea that the program would simply expire. In time-honored fashion, one side or the other will blink at the last minute, these officials said, allowing for a compromise under which developers would accept smaller profits and unions would agree that only projects over a certain size would have to pay union wages.
In his State of the State address on Wednesday, Mr. Cuomo unveiled a $20 billion plan to create permanent housing for poor and working-class residents and supportive housing to address New York’s homeless population. He did not say how he would finance the initiative.
If the 421-a program expires, it could take at least a year for the full impact to be felt, because many projects are already underway by developers who hurried to qualify for the tax breaks before the landscape changed. On Monday, Mr. de Blasio said that the city had over the past two years financed projects that preserved or built a total of 40,204 apartments as part of his affordable-housing plan, 5,000 of them as part of the 421-a program.
Still, officials worry about the future.
The city’s Independent Budget Office issued a report this week indicating that union-level wage requirements would add $2.8 billion in costs to the mayor’s housing plan. The report found that in recent years similar wage requirements had added $45,000 per unit to the cost of building affordable housing.
