The priest, the Rev. Richard Gorman, is the director of prison chaplains for the Archdiocese of New York, with an office at the archdiocese’s headquarters in Manhattan. He lives in the northeast Bronx, where he has been chairman of Community Board 12, which weighs in on zoning and other matters, since the late 1980s.
Father Gorman stepped down from the board on Thursday.
“A lot of people are in disbelief,” he said.
Joseph Zwilling, the spokesman for the archdiocese, said that at least two accusers had come forward, and that investigators were waiting to talk to a third person. All of the alleged acts, he said, had taken place roughly 30 years ago.
Father Gorman is not permitted to publicly function as a priest until the case is resolved, the archdiocese’s notice said.
Michael Reck, a lawyer for one of the alleged victims, said the abuse had occurred when Father Gorman was a priest at St. Barnabas parish in the Woodlawn section of the Bronx in the 1980s. According to the allegation, when Mr. Reck’s client was 13 years old, Father Gorman transported him from his parish to another church building and sexually abused him there. The abuse was alleged to have happened only once, the lawyer said.
“He decided to come forward now because he was at a stage of his life where he was aware of the trauma and realized the perpetrator could still access children,” Mr. Reck said.
Murray Richman, Father Gorman’s lawyer, said, “I’m convinced that these allegations are not of a criminal nature at this juncture.” He added that he and the priest had been friends for decades. “He’s done a lot of good for people. It’s a real shame,” Mr. Richman said.
Father Gorman lives at the priests’ residence of Cardinal Spellman High School, Justice Sonia Sotomayor’s alma mater, where he once taught. He has been on medical leave for several months, and was informed in the last few weeks that he would be suspended from ministry, Mr. Zwilling said.
As community board chairman, he gained local attention by crusading against strip clubs and other sex businesses that sought to open in the area, developing close relationships with local law enforcement and battling to clean up local industrial waste sites, according to newspaper articles through the decades.
He also completed law school in the early 2000s, and worked on a canon law judicial panel for the archdiocese. He did not return a request to comment.