Alice Pasquini is challenging ideas of what street art and street artists should look like. Unlike your prototypical graffitist — who’s probably male and paints anonymously, often at night — Ms. Pasquini works during the day, out in the open, and signs her pieces with her real name, a choice that comes with considerable risks (she is facing vandalism charges in her native Italy).
Based in Rome, Ms. Pasquini often takes her street art to far-flung cities like Montevideo, Uruguay, and Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. Her work is distinguished by its warmth and the fact that her subjects — like children at play or a kissing couple — are drawn from life.
As Ms. Pasquini’s profile has risen, her street art has become more experimental. Last summer, she worked with the 3-D photographer Stefano C. Montesi to create a kind of interactive mural near a beach outside Rome, realizing a childhood dream to “go inside” a painting. Next month, her work will be at the Saatchi Gallery in London in a show about female urban artists.
Ms. Pasquini began illicitly painting on city walls while a student at Rome’s Academy of Fine Arts. “When I started to do graffiti, I never thought it would be something people would pay me to do,” she said. “Now street art is becoming fancy and fashionable but before it was something for losers.” The following conversation has been edited.
Graffiti is often political or angry, but yours is filled with tender scenes of families, children, lovers. What draws you to these rather sentimental subjects?
A. In a city landscape, we are taught to accept cynicism. It’s so difficult to talk about positive things like love without being banal and boring. That’s my challenge. The funny part is, in a country like mine, people are not shocked by a naked woman on advertising but they are shocked by graffiti representing maternity — like a woman breastfeeding or a pregnant woman. So normality has become the strange thing. I’m a woman, my style is very pictorial, and of course it’s different from the typical graffiti style, which depicts women like cartoons.
Q. Your subjects are real people who you find in the street?
A. What I paint in each city — the subject, the atmosphere — comes from sketches in my notebooks. It’s my way of digesting the culture creating something that’s specific to that place. But at the end of the day my subjects are very universal. I’m describing human feelings and interactions that could be understood from Moscow to Morocco.
Q. Graffiti is an Italian word. What kind of reputation does it have there today?
Q. Do you have your own set of rules for what spaces you can paint on?
