Bruce Springsteen’s “The River” tour is making a stop in SoHo. But don’t expect to hear live renditions of “Hungry Heart” or “The Ties That Bind.” This event, a photography exhibition, is all about the Boss’s iconography.
Since the 35th anniversary of the release of the album “The River” last year, Springsteen nostalgia has been strong. The images in “Bruce Springsteen: The River Collection,” on view at the Morrison Hotel Gallery, were taken from 1974 to 1984 and include a range of settings, if not looks. (The man loves his black leather, white T-shirts and plaid button-downs.) There are around 50 photographs, mostly black and white, although color makes an occasional appearance, as in a light-saturated image by Jim Marchese from a sound check in Lyon, France, in 1981.
The cameras followed Mr. Springsteen almost everywhere — into the studio, onto the wintry streets of his native New Jersey, into a phone booth and, of course, onstage. We see a seemingly startled Mr. Springsteen sitting atop the front of a rather slick-looking Corvette in Haddonfield, N.J., in an image by Frank Stefanko from 1978; holding his guitar in the air after a sweaty performance in a 1978 photograph taken by Lynn Goldsmith; and, with the E Street Band, posing for a 1979 group portrait titled “Lookin’ Tough,” by Joel Bernstein. in 1979. Other featured photographers include David Gahr and Neal Preston.
For you misers who missed the Boss’s concert Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden (a review is on Page 1), this show, running through Feb. 9, should be a small consolation.
Last weekend was a big one for outsider art, with the Outsider Art Fair and a major Christie’s auction of works by self-taught artists. This weekend such works remain in the spotlight, but on a smaller stage, in an exhibition at the City Reliquary in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
“Visionary Streetscapes” features work by Oscar Azmitia, Susan Brown, Chase Ferguson and Howard Schefflin, four self-taught artists affiliated with Pure Vision Arts, a studio and exhibition space catering to artists with autism and other developmental disabilities. The collaboration came about after one of the directors of the Shield Institute, which sponsors Pure Vision Arts, approached the City Reliquary about working with the studio’s artists.
This show includes art made with unorthodox materials (like vinyl records, floppy disks, cardboard) to depict the beauty of everyday life in New York City. Among the 60 individual works — including drawings, paintings and sculptures — are Mr. Ferguson’s mixed-media “Parking Meters” and “Mixed Vehicles,” a set of miniature taxis and buses; Mr. Azmitia’s untitled painted streetscapes; and Ms. Brown’s colorful evocation of the frenetic energy in Times Square.
“Visionary Streetscapes,” which opened last week and is on view through May 25, will have a reception (with a cash bar) on Saturday at 6 p.m.
