At a time when rent-stabilized tenants in New York City are enjoying a freeze in their rents, another group of regulated tenants — the dwindling minority in rent-controlled apartments — is facing an increase of up to 9.6 percent over the next two years.
The proposed increase has outraged advocates for the mostly older tenants in about 27,000 rent-controlled apartments in the city, but it is all but certain to take effect in January. In arriving at the increase, state officials said they were bound by a state-mandated mathematical formula that considers landlord costs like real estate taxes and operational expenses.
But the state, which updates rents every two years for rent-controlled apartments, does not consider factors like housing affordability and tenants’ income for rent-controlled units, which the New York City Rent Guidelines Board does when adjusting rents for rent-stabilized apartments annually.
Landlords say the system used by the state housing agency, the New York State Division of Housing and Community Renewal, is more fair. The property owners are still reeling from the city rent board’s unprecedented decision last summer not to increase rents for rent-stabilized units for one year, a decision Mayor Bill de Blasio had advocated in the past.
“What this illustrates is that when you stick to a formula that reflects the costs to owners, instead of playing politics, you come up with an increase,” said Jack Freund, executive vice president of the Rent Stabilization Association, a landlord group.
But at a hearing on the proposed increase held by state officials in Manhattan in December, many tenants complained that the increase would come at a time they will not receive a cost-of-living increase in their Social Security benefits in 2016. One by one, the tenants, many of them using walkers, pleaded for a break like the one given to rent-stabilized tenants.
Rent control is a form of rent regulation that applies to buildings built before February 1947 and whose tenants have lived in their units continuously since 1971. Rent-controlled units represent less than 2 percent of the rental stock, and are in decline. When a rent-controlled apartment is vacated, it either joins the rent-stabilization program if the building has six or more units, or is taken out of regulation altogether under certain conditions.
Stabilized apartments number more than one million and account for almost half of the city’s housing stock. In voting for zero increases in June, the city rent board members relied on research showing that while landlords’ operating incomes after expenses had grown for nine consecutive years, tenants experienced stagnant incomes and higher housing costs.
Rent-controlled tenants say they are just as aggrieved and also deserve relief. State Assemblywoman Linda B. Rosenthal, a Democrat who represents the Upper West Side and parts of the Hell’s Kitchen neighborhood in Manhattan, said the increases did not reflect current economic realities. She has proposed a bill to change the way the state calculates rent increases.
The median rent for tenants in rent-controlled units is $900 a month, census data for 2014 showed, and that of rent-stabilized tenants was $1,200 per month. But the median household income for rent-stabilized tenants was $40,600, while that of rent-controlled tenants was $29,000.
Both sets of tenants paid slightly more than 30 percent of their income in rent.
Owners of rent-controlled units need to apply for the increases, and state officials say less than half of them do. Owners say the paperwork is too laborious in cases in which the increase may translate into just a few dollars more a month or the building has only one rent-controlled unit. But the buildings must also be free of major housing code violations, such as those relating to basic services like heat and water, to be eligible for the rent increase.
Owners also said that oil costs were down and that that would help offset some of the rent increase. That is because tenants in rent-controlled units pay a fuel charge and the savings are being passed along.
But many of the tenants said that any increase would be a hardship.
Ms. Schreier said she was applying to a city program that allows residents 62 and older to freeze their rents at the current rate if they live in a rent-regulated apartment, have an annual income of no more than $50,000 and spend more than a third of those earnings on housing.
She said she had not been to the theater, a former treat, in two years, and no longer updates her prescription glasses.
