A United States Navy sailor apologized after he and nine others entered Iranian waters.
Iran’s state broadcaster, IRIB, has released photos and videos of the capture of 10 US Navy sailors in Iranian waters on January 12. The sailors, in two patrol boats, drifted into Iranian waters after a technical fault, US reports said. The sailors were released on January 13. Clips from the footage of the interception and capture of the US crew are included below. Two longer videos can be seen here and here. Another clip shows a US soldier apologizing for entering Iranian waters. “It was a mistake, it was our fault, and we apologize,” he says. He also tells the interviewer he believes his ship’s radar would have indicated that they had entered Iranian territory. IRIB’s news site posted download links to the videos. Given this fact and the nature of the footage, we consider the footage and pictures intended for public dissemination.
TAMPA, Fla. — The American sailors detained by Iran earlier this week made a navigational error that mistakenly took them into Iranian territorial waters, Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter said on Thursday.
In a formal acknowledgment that the Persian Gulf episode was the result of an error by the United States Navy, Mr. Carter said the crews of two American patrol craft were not on a clandestine mission and “obviously had misnavigated” when they came within a few miles of Farsi Island, where Iran’s Revolutionary Guards Corps has a naval base.
The 10 sailors on the boats did not report the navigational error to their superiors before they were taken by the Iranians, Mr. Carter said. “It may have been they were trying to sort it out at the time when they encountered the Iranian boats,” Mr. Carter said.
Mr. Carter addressed the episode at news a news conference here at the United States Central Command and in a television interview with Fusion. He declined to provide a timeline of the events Tuesday or explain what had caused the navigational error, saying that the sailors were still being debriefed and that there could be other factors that played a role in the episode.
“They were aware they should not get into Iranian territorial waters,” he said in the television interview.
Mr. Carter cautioned against reading too much into video that Iranian television has released of the sailors after they were detained, which showed a sailor apologizing for the episode. He said the video was being shown through the lens of the Iranian government.
“Obviously I don’t like to see our people being detained by a foreign military,” he said.
Along with interviewing the sailors, military investigators are looking at satellite data and have examined the boats. So far, they have found little evidence that the Iranians took significant pieces of equipment off them, according to Gen. Lloyd J. Austin III, commander of Centcom, who oversees American military operations in the Persian Gulf.
“They are going through inventories right now, for the most part all the gear that we deploy with was largely there when we got the boats back,” said General Austin, speaking at the news conference at Centcom headquarters alongside Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter had traveled to Centcom to meet with senior military leaders leading the efforts to defeat the Islamic State.
The defense secretary’s comments came as new details emerged suggesting that American officials realized soon after the episode that the two boats had inadvertently strayed into internationally recognized Iranian waters.
Iranian officials, a senior administration official said on Thursday, were “never provocative” in their interactions by telephone with their American counterparts as the episode unfolded. “This never entered the red zone,” the official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak publicly.
While Defense Department officials said that the Navy was conducting an investigation into the episode, they said it would be some time before a complete picture emerged.
According to these officials, the Navy first lost radio contact with the boats on Tuesday afternoon, and after the boats failed to make a scheduled refueling stop, the Navy sent search and rescue aircraft to look for them. GPS equipment on the boats showed the boats were in Iranian territorial waters. The rescue aircraft, an official said, also entered Iranian airspace, after first alerting the Iranian authorities that the two boats were missing.
Current and former Navy officials said Thursday that the seizure of the two boats reflected not just a major navigational blunder by the crew but possibly a serious lapse of oversight by more senior leaders at the Navy’s Fifth Fleet headquarters in Bahrain.
In the cramped international waters of the Persian Gulf — which the Americans call the Arabian Gulf, ceding nothing to Tehran — relations between the Navy and the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps have long been tense. Both sides routinely spy on each other, and incidents are not infrequent.
The Fifth Fleet maintains a presence in the Persian Gulf, including the aircraft carrier, and lately has had several episodes with Iran. Two weeks ago, Iranian vessels harassed an American carrier and a French frigate in the Strait of Hormuz, launching rockets that passed within 1,500 yards of the aircraft carrier Harry S. Truman.
The Revolutionary Guards have fast-attack speedboats with high-powered machine guns and torpedoes, and crews that in the past have employed guerrilla tactics, including swarming perilously close to American warships. In 2013, small Navy patrol ships engaged Iranian gunboats at least three times in international waters.