SYDNEY, Australia — Alongside the conventionally cuddly toy kangaroos, koalas and wombats that have long been sold in the Taronga Zoo gift shop here, a newcomer stands out: a fuzzy plush shark.
It’s bait for young visitors, of course, but it’s also a symbol of efforts to explore the softer side of these widely feared animals.
In September, the zoo unveiled an exhibit featuring a small group of Port Jackson sharks, a joint project with Macquarie University, where researchers are studying the social behavior of sharks to help battle the misconception that sharks are largely solitary creatures.
The secondary goal of the project is to elevate sharks’ social standing among humans — a concern that is particularly relevant here in Australia, where shark attacks are often the subject of sensational headlines and there are frequent calls for culling, despite the fact that fatal attacks happen only once a year on average in the country.
“More people die from falling off cliffs while taking selfies than from shark attacks,” said Culum Brown, an assistant professor at the Behavior, Ecology and Evolution of Fishes Laboratory at Macquarie, citing an apparently well-documented global statistic.
The project began four years ago after one of Dr. Brown’s students proposed investigating whether sharks engage in the same kind of social behaviors as humans — gathering together for the pure pleasure of others’ company, for instance. While some species of sharks, like hammerheads, are known to form large schools, there has been little research that looks at why: Is it a social thing, or are the sharks simply attracted to a particular resource?
Dr. Brown’s team tagged and released the sharks, using a combination of tracking tools. Passive integrated transponder, or PIT, tags, slightly larger than a grain of rice, hold electronics that allow them to act as lifelong bar codes that can be detected and read without the animal having to be recaptured. The tags were inserted into each shark via a small incision on the animal’s underside.
An acoustic tag attached to the fin of each shark sends out a ping each time it comes within about a third of a mile of an underwater receiver, or within about 30 feet of another tagged shark. Each ping is time-stamped, meaning it is possible to detect when a particular shark was at a particular location, and whether it came into contact with any other tagged sharks there.
During the initial tagging process, Dr. Brown’s team tagged 250 sharks in Jervis Bay with both PIT and acoustic tags. Last year, 38 more sharks were tagged. From the data analyzed so far, Dr. Brown found that the Port Jackson sharks tagged four years ago consistently returned to some locations. At first, it was thought they were coming together to breed, but Dr. Brown later discovered the sharks were of mixed ages and sexes, leading to another theory: that the sharks liked to dine together.
To rule out the possibility that the animals were attracted to the location itself rather than one another, Dr. Brown needed an artificial environment in which to observe them up close. So he reached out to a former student, Jo Day, who had studied social interactions in bottlenose dolphins and now worked as a research and conservation coordinator at Taronga Zoo.
While Dr. Day was enthusiastic about the possibility of creating a shark habitat there, zoo officials took some convincing —the zoo hadn’t had a shark exhibit for 25 years.
In September, Dr. Brown brought in 10 sharks, which immediately took to their new home — a pool 60 feet long, 10 feet deep and 23 feet wide, embellished with a waterfall and rock shelters at the bottom to replicate the kinds of spots where Port Jackson sharks gather in the wild. While the data has yet to be formally analyzed, early observations back the hypothesis that the sharks like being around one another.
In addition to the PIT and acoustic tags, the sharks in the pool had accelerometers attached to their dorsal fins, to measure their movement patterns in three dimensions. Three cameras were set up around the underwater viewing area, recording where the sharks swam and what they did. This allows the researchers to match the signature produced by each shark’s accelerometer to a particular behavior: swimming, resting, eating or mating. Once a kind of template is established, it will be possible for Dr. Brown and his team to determine not just where the sharks go once they are released back in the wild, but also what they are doing.
The response also pleases Dr. Brown.
