It’s not easy growing up a shy, sensitive, bullied, Dungeons & Dragons-playing child, the kind of friendless boy who hates sports, becomes a vegetarian and in college eats alone in the cafeteria, pretending to read a newspaper while dying inside.
All this is even less easy when your father is Hunter S. Thompson, the gonzo journalist, who was among the most charismatic men of his time. Thompson, the author of “Hell’s Angels” (1967) and “Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas” (1972), embodied the macho wing of the counterculture.
His idea of a good day involved guns, motorcycles, practical jokes, improvised bombs and a 64-color assortment of recreational drugs. These things rested on top of the whiskey and cocaine he steadily ingested, starting at breakfast, simply to stabilize his mood.
Thompson was not a Honda. He terrified his son. Juan F. Thompson’s memoir, “Stories I Tell Myself: Growing Up With Hunter S. Thompson,” is a calm book about a wild man. It’s a careful yet harrowing account of an offbeat childhood, and of a father-and-son relationship that grew very dark before it began to admit hints of light.
The author was an only child, born in 1964. He grew up mostly in Woody Creek, Colo., just outside Aspen, where his parents bought a rambling house known as Owl Farm on a large tract of land.
Woody Creek in the late 1960s and early ’70s was a kind of elite hippie paradise. It’s a scene I know a bit about, and here I must confess an interest in this memoir, because my wife’s family lived near the Thompsons and the families were close for a few years.
My wife’s family moved away in 1974. They feature only briefly and at the very start of this memoir, though there is a terrific photo of Thompson’s posse in an Aspen bar that includes my wife’s father. I’ve never met Juan Thompson; my wife hasn’t spoken to him in decades.
The parents of Woody Creek wanted what most parents want: excellent schools and even better dinner parties. Amid the good intentions it was a druggy, unruly, glamorous, nonconformist, heavy-drinking scene that left broken marriages and scarred children scattered in its wake. None were more tossed about than Juan Thompson.
The Thompsons never ate as a family. Juan’s father didn’t show up for important moments like concerts, graduations and birthday parties. Father and son did bond, somewhat, while cleaning guns or building fires. But Juan grew up desperate for his father’s attention, which he rarely received.
There is a bit too much therapy talk, for my taste, in this memoir. The author gets into yoga and EST and 12-step programs. There’s a lot of murmuring about acceptance and spiritual growth. But who am I to judge? My father didn’t like to get naked, almost every day, and sit on the porch firing large-caliber pistols while half out of his mind.
The most moving portions of this memoir come at the end. Juan helped care for his father when he had serious hip and back problems and his health began to fail. Hunter would go into life-threatening alcohol withdrawal during his surgeries. Juan writes that doctors gave him alcohol intravenously, but they couldn’t get the concentration high enough to help him.
There are terrible scenes. Hunter became nearly incontinent. He could barely walk. He could no longer write. He knew it was time to check out.
Unlike his life, Hunter S. Thompson’s final shot, with a .45, was surgical and precise. There was little blood, Juan thought, hardly any mess to clean up.