Deportations and violence have driven tens of thousands of people of Haitian descent from their homes in the Dominican Republic — while the world is silent.
At the far southeastern tip of Haiti, just outside the border town of Anse-à-Pitres, there was a farm. When the farmer’s grandfather bought the land years ago, he arrived with a cow that birthed twin calves. It was a sign of good fortune — a gift from God — so he named the land the “gift ranch,” or Parc Cadeau.
The property was delineated on the west by a partly paved road and on the east by the babbling Pedernales River, which marked the border with the Dominican Republic. In between was a grove of mesquite trees. Whenever money was tight, the farmer would cut down trees to sell as charcoal. But each tree he cut down made the farm less productive, which made money even tighter. Eventually there were almost no trees left, and the loose topsoil blew in dirt storms that kicked up with every gust of wind.
Last summer, people began to show up at the farmer’s mud-walled shack. They could speak Haitian Creole, but often with a Dominican accent. They said they had come from the Dominican Republic, where the government was planning to expel anyone of Haitian descent, by force if necessary. They told stories of vigilantes carrying machetes and axes. The threats reminded them of their grandparents’ stories of 1937, when Dominican soldiers massacred anyone living along the border they thought looked or sounded like a Haitian. “Every time there is a deportation, there is a massacre,” one refugee said.
The farmer said they could set up camp on his land. He figured they would move on or go back home soon. But the people didn’t move.  At bigger crossings farther north, many of the tens of thousands fleeing across the border went on to the Haitian interior. But in the far south, around Anse-à-Pitres, the chalky mountain roads are harder to cross, so the migrants set up camps just past the border.
They were dropped off by caravans of brightly painted Daihatsu trucks or came on foot, carrying pots, pans and mattresses, balancing suitcases on their heads. They built shelters with frames made of branches and covered them with whatever material they could find. One family made a wall out of a pair of XXL Levi’s jeans.  Someone found a huge purple-and-yellow vinyl poster bearing the smiling face of a Dominican congressional candidate and used it as a waterproof roof.
By fall, 2,000 people were living in the dirt in Parc Cadeau. The settlement had become large enough to split into two camps and permanent enough to produce community leaders, a wicker-walled church and a school. The farmer threw up his hands and went back to selling charcoal.
One morning in November, Peres Yves Jean and Mirlene Lamour sat at the entrance to their shelter in Parc Cadeau. The structure was of the same cardboard-and-sticks construction as their neighbors’. Lamour had found a comforter and sheets to make a roof; atop it, a doll’s head gazed up at the sky. The couple spoke softly to each other, the way people learn to when they live in places where they don’t want to be overheard.
Jean was 35, but he had the parched, worn voice of a man twice his age.  She liked to keep up her appearance, but it was hard to do in Parc Cadeau. The leopard-print scarf around her braided hair had begun to fray in the sun. Her fingernails bore the chipped purple remnants of a manicure applied long ago.
The subject of the conversation, as usual, was money. There was no work for Jean and Lamour in Anse-à-Pitres and certainly not in Parc Cadeau. Lamour had resorted to selling their possessions — the sheets, her plate, even her mirror — for food. The family had originally brought two mattresses for six people to sleep on. They had had to sell one. “I can’t hold on anymore,” she said, exhausted.
Their language was a blend of Haitian Creole and Spanish. Jean and Lamour were born in Haiti but had lived in the Dominican Republic most of their lives. In happier times, they told Haitian jokes to each other and danced to Dominican bachata on the radio. Their seven children were all born on Dominican soil — some literally on the soil, in a little palmwood cabin on a farm outside Los Patos, a town in the Dominican southwest. They had lived there until the previous spring, when the trouble began.
In the summer of 2015, as overloaded fishing boats capsized in the Mediterranean Sea, lines of displaced Syrians snaked north across Europe and the American presidential debates were consumed by arguments over refugee quotas and Latin American immigrants, the Dominican Republic became embroiled in a migration crisis of its own. But this was a different sort of crisis — one of the country’s own making.
People of Haitian descent make up by far the largest ethnic minority in the Dominican Republic, though estimates of their numbers vary widely, from half a million to more than a million, out of the country’s population of 10.4 million. Some were born there, some immigrated, others move back and forth along the mostly unmarked and unguarded border. They are all lumped together in the Dominican imagination as, simply, haitianos, and many of them make up an underclass that is the backbone of the country’s labor force, tending its farms, cleaning its floors, building its houses and skyscrapers, staffing its all-inclusive resorts.
Like ethnic minorities the world over, haitianos are frequent targets of discrimination. But what had been a simmering tension boiled over into a panic last June, when, after having at least temporarily stripped an estimated 200,000 Dominicans of Haitian descent of their right to citizenship, officials threatened to force thousands of haitianos over the border dividing the island of Hispaniola before the month was out.
Dominican immigration officials showed off the new buses and “reception centers” that would be used to process those who would be expelled. In a country with a history of sporadic violence against its Haitian minority — there are at least a few lynchings documented every year — these reports took on an ominous cast.
The crisis stemmed from a court case filed in 2008 by Juliana Deguis Pierre, a Dominican of Haitian descent whose local civil registry in the central Dominican province Monte Plata refused to issue her a national ID card. Deguis claimed the bureaucrats discriminated against her because she had dark skin and a Francophone name — markers of Haitian identity. The case eventually arrived at the Constitutional Court, a high court created in 2010 to interpret constitutional law. In one of its first major rulings, the court decided in 2013 that Deguis should never have been a citizen in the first place because her parents did not have enough documentation to prove legal residency before Deguis was born.
Using the same reasoning, the court determined that anyone born to undocumented immigrant parents was not a citizen — revoking for them the guarantee of birthright citizenship written into the Dominican Constitution in 1865. All those newly minted foreigners, as well as actual undocumented immigrants, were then ordered to register with the government in what became known as the “regularization plan,” or face expulsion. Nearly everyone affected was of Haitian descent. The 2013 ruling became known simply as la sentencia: the verdict.
Hard-line nationalists wanted the ruling enforced strictly. But President Danilo Medina — a moderate in the ruling Dominican Liberation Party — was wary of international criticism, not to mention threats of boycotts against the $8.3 billion Dominican tourism industry, which provides nearly one-sixth of the country’s G.D.P.
Without challenging the court’s decision, Medina announced a second plan in the summer of 2014, a “naturalization” process that would allow Dominican-born haitianos to apply for residency status, which would put them on a path back to citizenship. But by February, only about 64,000 people were being processed — a fraction of the country’s Dominican-born haitiano population. (The government says 55,000 of these people have had their citizenship reinstated; activists contest this claim.) The paperwork was left in the hands of a government agency whose chief, Roberto Rosario, had called local officials who issued birth certificates to people of Haitian descent “a group dedicated to destroying the fundamental documentation of dominicanidad,” or Dominicanness.
As international attention turned away, however, people of Haitian descent quietly began crossing Hispaniola’s divide. In some cases, they were removed by Dominican troops and immigration patrols, which have officially deported 14,000 people since the June deadline, according to the Dominican government. But far more have left on their own — some 70,000, according to the Dominican Republic’s director general of immigration. They have become voluntary migrants of the least voluntary sort, fleeing an atmosphere of fear and confusion created by ever-shifting laws, vague threats, byzantine registration programs and spasms of racial violence.
The roots of the Dominican crisis date back to 1930, when Gen. Rafael Trujillo, a petty thief and sugar-plantation guard turned military officer, became president of the Dominican Republic. Trujillo had risen through the ranks of the Guardia Nacional, a militia created by the United States during its 1916-24 military occupation of the republic. The United States’ main goals were to secure loan repayments, install an allied government and open the door for American-friendly industries, especially the export of sugar. The United States also wanted to permanently fix the border with Haiti, which had never been definitively surveyed. This would be relatively easy to do, the Americans figured, since the United States was also occupying Haiti at the time.
The Dominican Republic that Trujillo inherited was as poor as its next-door neighbor and still humiliated by the recent American occupation. To foster national unity, he promoted dominicanidad as the opposite of all things Haitian. Dominican scholars studied supposed physiological differences between Haitians and themselves, and students were regaled with tales of historical Haitian atrocities.
Like many nationalist concepts, dominicanidad required a degree of willful ignorance of how much Dominicans had in common with people on the other side of the border. Not only were there tremendous similarities between Haitian and Dominican culture, art, music, religion and even family names, but in many cases Dominicans and Haitians were literally the same people. For generations they had moved back and forth across the island, as the constantly shifting border moved around them.
But there was one key demographic difference: During the colonial period, there were fewer enslaved Africans in the Spanish-controlled eastern part of the island than the French-controlled areas to the west, and so more people in the east had mixed African and European ancestry. This distinction became central to Trujillo’s vision of dominicanidad. He encouraged Dominicans to prize their bodies and culture as more European than Haiti’s, and is said to have powdered his skin and bleached his hair to look whiter himself.
In 1936, Trujillo signed an American-brokered agreement to fix the border with Haiti. The following year, he sent soldiers to purge his newly marked territory of Haitians. Many thousands of Haitians and Dominicans — who were often difficult to tell apart after centuries of commingling — were killed. The massacre is still known among Dominicans as El Corte: the Cutting.
At the same time, Trujillo worked with Haitian elites and American businesses to bring thousands of Haitians to work as cheap labor in the Dominican sugar-cane industry. At first, most came on seasonal work permits, but many stayed, living in isolated communities in the cane fields.
Trujillo was assassinated in 1961 by members of his own military. Over the next few decades, the country settled into the uneasy equilibrium Trujillo’s contradictions had necessitated: Haitiano workers kept the Dominican economy humming, while elites and nationalist politicians exploited popular resentment to keep them underpaid and on society’s margins. That balance held until the Constitutional Court’s 2013 ruling.
Peres Yves Jean was born in Thiotte, a town in Haiti’s southeast, and arrived in the Dominican Republic as a child with his farmworker parents. Mirlene Lamour was born in Jacmel, 50 miles west of Thiotte, and moved with her family to the Dominican Republic as a teenager. She met Jean when they were both teenagers living near Higüey, a half-hour drive inland from the popular resorts at Punta Cana and Bávaro. Jean and Lamour’s first child, Alberto, was born near Higüey in 1998. The family moved to Los Patos and had a second child, Elise, two years later.
Los Patos is a hiccup of a town on the highway along the Barahona peninsula, far closer to the Haitian border than it is to Santo Domingo. Alongside a strip of shops and small hotels, a hill rises steeply to meet the low-flying clouds. On the hillside, farms are scattered throughout a dense forest, where the couple had a chance to establish a life of their own.
Jean built a sturdy palmwood house with a palm-thatch roof, and the couple planted a little garden to grow their own food. He says the landowner, a Dominican named Gabriel Feliz, gave them the patch of land and a tacit promise that he wouldn’t have them deported. In return, Jean planted pigeon peas, corn and squash on the farm. Lamour says she worked on the harvest and cleaned Feliz’s house and the rental cabanas the farmer had built, in hopes of attracting the few tourists who came to Los Patos for the pretty beach at the bottom of the hill. Jean says neither was paid for their work — that they were, practically speaking, sharecroppers.
By 1994, foreign pressure, domestic activism and a booming economy had created enough of an opening for haitianos that a black Dominican of Haitian ancestry, José Francisco Peña Gómez, became a serious contender for the presidency. But his candidacy mostly served to demonstrate that antihaitiano nationalism remained a potent political force. The incumbent president, a Trujillo protégé named Joaquín Balaguer, defeated Peña Gómez with TV ads implying that he practiced Vodou, commonly known as voodoo, and would hand the country over to Haiti.
Under the Dominican Republic’s Constitution at the time, being born in the country should have been enough to make Jean and Lamour’s first children Dominican citizens. But there were two exceptions to this rule: the children of diplomats and “those who are in transit.” For decades, Dominican officials had toyed with exploiting this loophole by redefining anyone who did not have legal permanent status in the country as being “in transit,” no matter how long they had lived there — a designation they knew would apply almost exclusively to people of Haitian descent.
In 2004, the Dominican Congress, riding a wave of antihaitianismo, passed such a law. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled that by denying birth certificates to Haitians’ Dominican-born children, the government had violated the universal rights to nationality and equal protection. But instead of softening the law, the government passed even harsher ones. In 2010, President Leonel Fernández convened a national assembly to draft a new Constitution, which formally excluded the children of people residing “illegally in the Dominican territory” from citizenship altogether.
By then, Jean and Lamour had five children: three boys and two girls. (They would later have two more girls.) The rapidly changing citizenship laws, which applied differently to nearly every child, would have been hard enough to navigate if the couple had been constitutional scholars instead of semiliterate farmworkers gleaning updates from rumor and the radio. When they learned of the registration programs announced in 2013 and 2014, they had no idea what to do. They feared that if they stepped forward as undocumented migrants, they could be deported. And what would happen to their children, all but one of whom — a newborn daughter — had no papers? Would they be left in the hands of government officials, overzealous border guards or vigilantes?
Some Dominicans began greeting their neighbors with a countdown: “Just a few months left, moreno!” “The buses are ready. You get ready, too.” On Jean and Lamour’s favorite radio station, Radio Independencia, commentators bantered between songs about the coming expulsions.
Peres Yves Jean told me that in March, a few weeks after the Santiago lynching, he was coming back from a day job when a khaki-colored truck stopped him on the road outside Los Patos. Deportations weren’t supposed to happen until the registration program had run its course, in June. But the men in khaki uniforms — most likely agents of the Specialized Border Security Corps, or Cesfront — didn’t seem to care. They asked him for ID. When he didn’t have any, they drove him 50 miles west to the border at Anse-à-Pitres, snapped a couple of mug shots and left him on the other side.
Jean says he waited until the truck disappeared from sight, then simply walked back into the Dominican Republic. He splashed across the shallow Pedernales River and trudged up into the green mountains, past cattle herds, fields of plantain trees and the rhythmically whooshing turbines of a wind farm, carefully avoiding the checkpoints manned by soldiers on the lookout for Haitians. After two days of walking, he reached the palmwood shack, where Lamour and the children were waiting, with no idea where he had gone. They rushed to embrace him. Then they gathered their things and left.
At first, Jean and Lamour thought they might be able to stay in the Dominican Republic, resettling somewhere far enough from Los Patos that they could avoid detection by the men who deported Jean. They went to Avila, a rural district near the Haitian border. That way, they figured, if the situation worsened, they could escape quickly. They tried to make a living by planting a crop of beans, but a severe regionwide drought withered the plants. They finally registered themselves in the regularization program. Confused about the rules and afraid of the authorities, they didn’t register their children.
As the June 17 deadline approached, rumors of impending violence grew louder. Dominican neighbors reminded Jean that it was almost time to go. One flashed a hatchet blade. Uncertain of what might happen to their children, Jean and Lamour finally gave up. Lamour’s mother, who felt confident she could register and stay, came from her home in the eastern Dominican Republic and picked up their 2-year-old daughter, Miliana — the only one of their children with serviceable documentation — and took her back east. Then the rest of the family set out for Haiti.
Jean and Lamour found a man with a truck. They asked him to take them and their few possessions through a clandestine border crossing north of Anse-à-Pitre, a shallow bend of the Pedernales River frequented by truckers and taxi drivers on both sides. They had only enough money to pay him to take them just past the river to the makeshift camp at Parc Cadeau.
In August, in the northwestern Dominican town Hatillo Palma, an accountant for the town council was raped, and she accused three unnamed haitianos of the crime. Soon after, a man of Haitian descent was hacked to death with a machete in the town. Several houses were destroyed, and hundreds of haitianos fled.
The episode signaled a new stage in the crisis: As the news of reprisals spread, so did the exodus. Across the country, haitianos loaded minibuses and trucks and headed toward the border. There they met deportees stepping off the Dominican Immigration Ministry’s yellow school buses. Together they walked through the concrete and metal gates into a country some of them knew only from their relatives’ stories.
Thousands more people of Haitian descent remain in the Dominican Republic, in legal limbo. According to the Dominican government, 240,000 people have registered under the regularization program to stay for one or two years, but a quarter of those people haven’t gotten their cards. The naturalization applications of other Dominican-born people are still being processed, which leaves thousands more who did not apply for citizenship at all and were accordingly stripped of it.
Those who already fled to Parc Cadeau were trying their best to live normal lives despite the circumstances. Because of the dirt storms, nearly everyone cooked on open fires inside the shelters. I heard about at least one shelter catching fire on each of the four days I was in the camp — usually during the evening meal, which was often the only one the residents ate all day. The week I visited, the Haitian Ministry of Health confirmed the presence of cholera in the camp, where people drank untreated water from the river and used the surrounding hills as a toilet. At a cholera ward in Anse-à-Pitres, I met a couple from Parc Cadeau whose 12-year-old son had just died.
The conditions were worse than anything I saw in the Port-au-Prince displacement camps after the 2010 earthquake, which attracted the attention — for better and for worse — of a flotilla of aid groups, nongovernmental organizations and foreign militaries, as well as the Haitian government. When it came to the people fleeing into Haiti, though, the same organizations did not seem to know what to do. “We’re dealing with a lot of ambiguity and doubt,” Brian Hansford, a spokesman for the United Nations refugee agency (U.N.H.C.R.), later told me.
On the most basic level, it was hard to figure out how to classify Parc Cadeau’s residents. Some might legally be considered refugees. Others could be dual nationals, or Haitians who returned home. Were these people the responsibility of the Dominican government? The Haitian government? The international system? Or were they entirely on their own?
Workers from some small aid groups, who were doing their best to bring food and hygiene kits to the camps, told me that the Haitian government was blocking efforts to bring further aid, claiming that doing so would encourage people to stay. Officials in Port-au-Prince, mired in a chaotic presidential election, have been content to trade accusations of blame with Santo Domingo. A July meeting of the Organization of American States, a regional organization, devolved into a shouting match. “Haiti came here to ask the Americas, on behalf of its founding fathers and in the name of morality, to urge the Dominican Republic to come back to reason,” Lener Renauld, Haiti’s defense minister, said.
The day after I left Parc Cadeau, I paid a visit to the presidential palace in Santo Domingo. The mansion, built on Trujillo’s orders in 1944, resembles a hybrid of the White House and the United States Capitol, rendered in tropical peach. Josué Fiallo, a spokesman for Danilo Medina, and Olivo Rodríguez Huertas, an adviser to the president, met me in a closet-size office for executive staff members behind a heavy wooden door.
Rodríguez, a practicing attorney and one of the architects of the naturalization law, wore a week-old beard and the wrinkled clothes of an academic (he teaches law at two Dominican universities). Fiallo was younger and suaver, clean-shaven in a tailored suit, an up-and-coming diplomat who studied at the London School of Economics and is active on Twitter, Flickr and Vine.
“Is it the ideal situation for everyone?” Rodríguez said of the citizenship policy. “No.” Still, Fiallo said, the government didn’t deserve all the blame. Problems with the registration program were a result of the “cultural practice among descendants of Haitians, in particular, to use nicknames,” he said. I asked about the lynch mobs in Hatillo Palma that caused hundreds to flee the town and hastened the departure of many more from across the country. “It’s a complicated place,” he said.
It was clear that Rodríguez and Fiallo had spent a lot of time navigating the tricky domestic politics that surround “the Haitian question.” There are many Dominicans who oppose the efforts to marginalize and shut out people of Haitian descent, including journalists who defy death threats to report critically on the crisis. Two of the 13 judges on the Constitutional Court itself wrote dissenting opinions in la sentencia, saying the ruling violated international law. Medina himself is a moderate within the Dominican Liberation Party. The naturalization program was his attempt to steer a course between the nationalists who secure his party’s right flank and the waves of international condemnation. It infuriated the human rights advocates who wanted la sentencia reversed, but it also enraged the nationalists, who called it treason.
Rodríguez and Fiallo compared Medina’s handling of the Constitutional Court’s decision to the way in which American conservatives were forced to deal with the legalization of same-sex marriage, or how Democrats had to make peace with Bush v. Gore. “It was the solution possible at that moment,” Rodríguez said.
Yet when I asked Rodríguez and Fiallo to explain what problem the constitutional changes, rulings and deportations were originally supposed to solve, they had no answer. The Dominican economy depends on Haitian labor. Unemployment is relatively low. Rodríguez and Fiallo kept stressing the importance of eliminating legal confusion and sorting out the status of the country’s undocumented people, but the programs seem to be creating more confusion than clarity.
To look for a specific problem the expulsion of the Dominican Republic’s haitianos is supposed to solve, however, is to miss the point. Many Dominican politicians adhere to an alternate and unsubstantiated modern history of the country, in which Haitian immigrants have been invading en masse, and in which their descendants were never supposed to be constitutionally entitled to citizenship in the first place. Yet there has been little evidence of a significant increase of people of Haitian descent in the Dominican Republic in recent years, and a University of Miami graduate student named Amelia Hintzen recently unearthed Dominican government memos from decades ago noting that, as one 1964 letter from the head of the national ID-card office put it, Dominican-born children of Haitian migrants are “Dominican citizens, because they were born on Dominican territory.” But as is often the case with national mythologies, calling this narrative into question seems only to further entrench it.
The Dominican media regularly reports on what it often refers to as a vast international “campaign against the Dominican Republic.” In July, a Human Rights Watch coordinator was detained at the airport after reporting that despite government claims, at least one Dominican of Haitian descent with valid documents was deported. Roberto Rosario, the government official charged with overseeing the registration of Dominicans of Haitian descent, has warned obliquely that an invasion in the guise of a “humanitarian intervention” might be on its way. In October, the Dominican consul in New York stripped Junot Díaz of a medal he had been given by the government, stating that the author “demonstrates he is anti-Dominican.” In 2014, shortly after the Constitutional Court’s ruling, the Dominican government paid $820,000 to the Washington law firm Steptoe & Johnson to lobby the United States Congress and respond to negative media, according to the Washington-based Center for Economic and Policy Research.
But in truth, the Dominican government has gotten off with the mildest condemnations. In July, Secretary General Ban Ki-moon of the United Nations raised the issue of denationalization and expulsion in a speech to Caribbean heads of state in Barbados, but only briefly, saying that he had “discussed this with the president of the Dominican Republic” and trusted there would “be further progress in resolving this matter.” The Organization of American States sent a fact-finding mission to the Dominican-Haitian border region in July. It returned with vague recommendations to improve the registration process, offer aid to the displaced and “facilitate dialogue” with the Haitian government.
The delicacy of Brewster’s position owes something to the fact that, nearly a century after the American occupation helped draw the border dividing Hispaniola, the United States government is still committed to fortifying it. Citing counterterrorism needs and the fact that the Dominican Republic and Haiti are conduits for cocaine bound for the United States, the United States helped create and train Cesfront, the border force that most likely deported Jean in March, and has provided biometric equipment of the sort used to process immigrants and deportees. It has given $44 million in military assistance to the Dominicans since 2010.
Early one morning in November, I went up the forested hill above Los Patos to the place where Jean and Lamour used to live. The farm would have been easy to miss if I hadn’t been looking for it. The deep tropical forest hid a treasure of coffee, flowers and fruit. Avocados and mangoes, fallen ripe off the trees, littered the hillside paths. If you listened hard amid the birdcalls, you could make out the sound of feet in rubber boots and the occasional swing-thwack of a machete.
Cheap labor was more important than ever. The same drought that killed Jean and Lamour’s bean plants in Avila had taken its toll on Feliz’s crops. He led the way through the forest, and I followed, tripping over roots in the rutted path. He reached into a clump of leaves and pulled out a handful of shrunken coffee cherries. The pigeon peas Jean helped plant before he left stood green and leafy in a clearing nearby. Feliz was waiting to see if they would be ready for the haitianos to harvest the next month.
“It’d never work anyway,” Feliz said of the government’s registration and deportation plans. “It was just for the politicians to make some paper. It didn’t change anything.” Then he excused himself to tend to his farm.
The woman’s daughter led me down a gravel road and up a dirt path to the couple’s house. The palmwood cabin’s door was padlocked. A black sandal with a silver-colored clasp lay on the dirt path leading to the house. Other than the sandal and a torn-up box spring leaning off to the side, there was no sign of the family that fled the property eight months before. The padlock that now hung on their door, the woman said, belonged to a Dominican who had since moved in.