ST. LOUIS — In a suburban school district that includes most of Ferguson and 10 other towns in northern St. Louis County, three of four students are black. Yet there have never been more than two black members on the seven-person school board at the same time. Does that mean the system of electing the board is racially biased?
In a lawsuit that went to trial in federal court here this week, the American Civil Liberties Union asserts that it is, raising questions relevant to elections in many other places that use the same sort of at-large voting process as the Ferguson-Florissant School District.
The suit argues that the district’s system of using at-large voting — where people across the district choose among the same group of candidates — discriminates against minority voters. A fairer process, the A.C.L.U. says, would be to create seven subdistricts, with candidates running in the areas where they live. Some of those subdistricts would be so overwhelmingly black in population that more blacks would be elected, the group contends.
The district asserts that black voters are better served by an at-large system because they represent about half of the area’s voting-age population. The district also notes that at-large voting is mandated by state law.
“African-Americans presently possess an opportunity to elect candidates of their choice,” Angela Gabel, a lawyer for the district, said in her opening statement before Judge Rodney W. Sippel of the federal Eastern District Court of Missouri on Monday.
The legality of at-large voting systems is being challenged in other cities, including Pasadena, Tex., and Yakima, Wash. The suits contend that at-large systems violate Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act, which prohibits voting practices or procedures that discriminate on various factors, including race.
Many challenges of at-large voting have come in places where whites are the clear majority. But in the Ferguson-Florissant district, the population is almost evenly divided, according to the most recent census data. Courts have not definitively ruled whether a violation of Section 2 is possible in places where blacks might not be in the minority, said Richard L. Hasen, a professor of law and political science at the University of California, Irvine.
The case “raises legal questions over whether, if it’s true that African-Americans make up a majority of the relevant population, whether a Section 2 remedy is possible,” he said.
Whether blacks outnumber whites in the district is in dispute. The A.C.L.U., using 2010 census data, contends blacks make up 48.19 percent of the voting-age population in the district, which is less than whites. The district, using 2013 American Community Survey data, asserts that blacks, at 48.94 percent, represent a slightly higher share of the voting-age population than whites.
Throughout the first half of the 20th century, municipalities sprouted across the suburbs north of St. Louis with the purpose of creating racially segregated communities, historians say. Berkeley, for instance, was incorporated in part so white residents could establish a school system separate from the district attended by the mostly black children in neighboring Kinloch, according to Colin Gordon, a University of Iowa historian who testified for the A.C.L.U. on Monday.
The courts ordered the Berkeley school district and others to desegregate in 1975, and the result was the creation of the Ferguson-Florissant district.
Like much of north St. Louis County, the Ferguson-Florissant district had a vast demographic shift in subsequent years. From 1990 to 2010, the white population in the district declined by nearly 60 percent and the black population increased by more than 81 percent, according to the school district’s trial brief.
Despite the rise in the black population, some communities in north St. Louis County have remained under primarily white control, an issue that became prominent after the fatal shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson by a white police officer.
Decades of past racist policies have hampered blacks’ access to the ballot box, the A.C.L.U. has argued, and weakened their strength in political organizing.
The A.C.L.U. has asserted that the predominantly white school board has not worked aggressively enough to address concerns of black residents, including the achievement gap between white and black students and the disproportionate disciplining of black students. The group says that some of the board members have been insensitive to the problems of black students, blaming family structure for the achievement gap, for instance.
In another dispute, residents loudly objected three years ago when the board, then all white, suspended the district’s first black superintendent, Art McCoy, without a detailed public explanation. Mr. McCoy later resigned.
Over the past 16 years, 24 black candidates have run for the Ferguson-Florissant school board in 12 elections, and only five, nearly 25 percent, have won seats, according to the A.C.L.U. During that time, 22 of 37 white candidates, about 60 percent, have won election to the school board.
But the school board argued that voters in the district had chosen black candidates in other elections such as the presidential and county executive races. They also point to the nearby Hazelwood school district, which is demographically similar to Ferguson-Florissant and also uses an at-large system. Four of the seven Hazelwood board members are black. The Ferguson-Florissant board has also hired a black superintendent, Joseph S. Davis, who started last year.
The Ferguson-Florissant board contends that the A.C.L.U.’s proposed districts would not help black representation. Of the seven subdistricts the A.C.L.U. has proposed, four of them would have a solidly black population. But the two current black members on the board would be lumped into the same district, a lawyer for the school board said.
Judy-Ferguson Shaw, who works with a high school in the district, said getting more blacks on the board, especially black men, was important for black students, especially in racially charged issues like discipline. Ms. Shaw, 65, said that changing the voting system was important to give more say to the residents of the southern part of the district, which is mostly black.
