Andrew Haigh narrates a sequence from his film featuring Charlotte Rampling and Tom Courtenay.
A couple (Charlotte Rampling and Tom Courtenay) face a hurdle in their lengthy marriage in the drama “45 Years,” written and directed by Andrew Haigh. The British filmmaker’s previous film, “Weekend,” looked at the the brief relationship between two men after a one-night stand. In a recent interview at The Times, Mr. Haigh discussed how those films were alike and his decision to follow up a gay-themed film with one on heterosexual characters. Here are excerpts from that conversation.
Q. The couple in your film has been together longer than you have been alive. What was compelling to you about telling that story?
A. My last film was very much about the beginnings of a relationship, the early flourish. This is like a bookend to that film. I’m interested in how we understand ourselves in our relatioships and how we define ourselves. Relationships are so important to all of us. So this film really felt like it got deeper into understanding that. As a person, I am totally obsessed with the choices and decisions we make in our lives and how they dictate the course of our lives. Seemingly random choices that we make end up definiing everything. This film is about two people suddenly being forced to look not only at their relationship, but also their whole lives and what has led them to this point.
Do you see relationships as being fragile, even ones this long-term?
No relationships are perfect. When they develop, there are things that have happened before in your life that you maybe don’t discuss. And there are always fault lines within every relationship. I believe it doesn’t take too much pressure to be placed on those fault lines for them to start cracking apart. We like to think we’re these strong people who can cope with everything. But I think the truth is we’re not as strong as we’d like to believe.

I think about those things. When I made “Weekend,” I certainly got pigeonholed as a gay filmmaker, which is fine. I’m quite happy to be called that. But it wasn’t a conscious decision to say, for my career, I must do something that isn’t gay. It was more like, this is really interesting to me. And in many ways, these films are very similar. They are dealing with similar aspects. It was interesting for me to do it in a different setting. I didn’t have to suddenly get into the mind-set of, what would it be like to be a straight man or woman in a relationship. The heart of “Weekend” is very universal. When you make something gay-themed, the gay element of it ends up overwhelming some of the things you’re trying to explore. It’s interesting to do something without that element because you feel like you can focus in more on the heart of the story.