It’s beginning to look a lot like — Valentine’s Day? Barely a month after launching his virtual luxury bakery From Roy with two Christmas panettones — one scented with candied orange and raisins, the other a less traditional chocolate-streaked loaf — the pastry chef Roy Shvartzapel has unveiled a third in honor of the holiday at his workshop in Los Gatos, Calif. The news is cause for celebration among Shvartzapel’s discerning devotees — many of the country’s most respected chefs among them. His domed wonders are unworldly in their featherweight texture: the tender crumb dissolves on your tongue, almost like cotton candy, were cotton candy spun from butter. They seem paradoxically rich and ethereal at the same time.
How does he do it? Maniacally. He’s been training for it like an Olympian. When he graduated from the Culinary Institute of America Hyde Park nearly 12 years ago, Shvartzapel “had three names on my dart board.” He vowed he would work for Ferran Adrià of El Bulli, France’s pastry mastermind Pierre Hermé and the American great Thomas Keller of the French Laundry. “I would get laughed at when I told fellow students that’s what I was going to do,” he recalls, chuckling.
The chef hit his targets — all three of them. It was during his time with Hermé in Paris that he first watched the Italian specialty being prepared for the holidays. Up until then, the Israeli-born, Texas-raised cook says his “only reference point for panettone were those spongy, gross things” — the weighty, mass-produced, everlasting hulks most of us here in the States are accustomed to regifting. As he observed the meticulous, all-hands-on-deck effort, Shvartzapel realized it was “a really time-consuming product” that brought everyone involved “a lot of anxiety.” And with that, he added a fourth name to his dart board: Iginio Massari, who, from his humbly appointed Pasticceria Veneto in Brescia, a small town outside of Milan, is considered the master of panettone.
Back in the U.S.A., he eventually landed the job of pastry chef at Cyrus restaurant in Healdsburg, where he started making panettone by himself. But it wasn’t until opening his own bakery, Houston’s Common Bond, in 2014 that he got serious about producing the sweet bread for commercial purposes and first received attention for it. After splitting from his partners there, he returned to the Bay Area, where, with the help of the branding team Base Design, he conceived of — and, in December, introduced — From Roy.
Maybe that’s why no one produces it commercially on a large scale here, Shvartzapel figures — and because, according to him, millions are sold globally per annum, he’s throwing down. He’s not just lobbying to make panettone big in America, he’s promoting it as “a year-round SKU.” He has a precedent. “There was a time, a few years ago, where you said ‘pie’ and people only associated it with the holidays.” Now, he points out, there are pies for every occasion. His newest offering combines raspberry, chocolate and pistachio. Chocolate-dipped strawberries are “generic and cheesy,” he explains. But switch up the berries, combine them with the nuts — a wonderful match for red fruit — and bake them into a souffled, golden-crowned confection, and “that’s how you win Valentine’s Day.” It may also be how you make someone fall in love with panettone.