When the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences unveiled 20 all-white acting nominees this month, the furor was immediate. The #OscarsSoWhite hashtag, created last year, returned in force, and there was talk of an Oscar boycott. Then, last week, the academy declared that it was doubling its diversity push and ending guaranteed lifelong voting rights.
This time, it was academy members’ turn to react in disbelief and outrage.
There is, among older academy members, genuine bewilderment in the wake of this tidal shift. Sidney Furie, an 82-year-old member, noted that it was his brethren who made Sidney Poitier the first black man to win best actor, in 1963, and named “In the Heat of the Night” (1967) best picture.
“The very people who voted for those Oscars are now being accused of being the roadblocks to the diversity the academy now seems committed to,” Mr. Furie wrote to the Bagger in an email. Valid, but part of the charge against the academy is how out of touch it is with contemporary black culture.
What many academy members — who, as a Los Angeles Times investigation found, skew heavily older, male and white — do not seem to fully grasp is the deep exasperation around the fact that white dudes continue to serve as Hollywood’s gatekeepers. At last count, about 2 percent of academy members were black, and an even lower percentage were Latinos. The (mostly male) members who publicly assailed the academy’s changes ended up underscoring the crux of the problem by making the issue, yet again, all about them.
Perhaps the reason #OscarsSoWhite found such traction this year — after years of critics and audiences lamenting the paucity of good roles for black, Asian and Latino actors — was that the whole world, at last, was really watching, in no small part because of the might of the Black Lives Matter movement, and the spotlighting of police killings of African-Americans.
Black lives matter, and so do the ways in which lives are represented on the big and small screens: They inform how we view each other, and ourselves. A few years ago, researchers found correlations between television exposure and self-esteem among black and white girls and boys. Television was linked to lower self-esteem among black and white girls and black boys; white boys, however, reportedly felt better.
It has been noted that the number of black acting nominees in recent decades has mirrored the percentage of blacks in the general population.
The same cannot be said for Latinos, who make up a greater proportion of the population, as Rubén Blades recently wrote, or for Asians.
But the representational proportionality of black nominees applies only to the acting categories. Let’s look at all of the awards the academy doles out, across all categories, and see how they break down by ethnicity. Let’s look at all the films Hollywood churns out and do the same: Few of the roughly 300 features eligible for best picture last year told stories from the points of view of women or minorities. Besides, we’ve been fed narratives from an overwhelmingly white male perspective since Hollywood began. Isn’t it high time for some alternate narratives, at the very least? Isn’t the purpose of art to jostle, broaden and challenge our worldview?
Unanswered is whether the academy’s rule changes and push to diversify can or will affect what films Hollywood makes and rewards. “The academy is going to lead and not wait for the industry to catch up,” Cheryl Boone Isaacs, the organization’s president, said. Yet disgruntled academy members say they are at the end of the sausage-making machine — (ain’t no flies on us!) — and merely adjudicating films already made.
In the outcry over the changes, dissenters have largely left alone, at least publicly, the board of governors’ pledge to double the number of female and minority members by 2020.
Most contentious is the academy’s new rule to weed out less active members, an effort that has precedents. In 1970, when Gregory Peck was academy president, several hundred members deemed inactive lost their balloting rights, too.
This time, the academy said that to retain the right to vote, a member had to have been active in the last 10 years, or had to have been nominated for an Oscar, or, after becoming a member, had to have worked in motion pictures at least once in three separate 10-year periods.
It is fair to surmise this measure will most negatively affect older academy members, especially women. Ageism is rife in Hollywood for both genders. Actresses in particular get fewer movie roles as they grow older, often making the jump to television, if they can, which, in the academy’s eyes, does not count as being active in motion pictures. Many people also only get into the academy when they’re nearing or in middle age, meaning that, barring an Oscar nomination, they need to prove they’re active until their 70s.
An alternate diversification fix might be to really throw open the academy’s doors. The television academy has more than 20,000 members, compared with the motion picture academy’s estimated 6,200 or so. But in an institution that values its elite status, such a dramatic expansion is unlikely to happen soon, if at all. That plays into what makes being in the academy so important to its members. It’s an honor, a privilege, a validation, and, until now, a secure foothold in a community that becomes ever more important as one’s career fades.
Ms. Boone Isaacs has said that those deemed inactive will still be academy members, able to attend screenings and the like, just not allowed to vote.
But being able to vote is the raison d’être of academy membership. Mr. Furie likened losing that perk to castration (using a more colorful term).
That’s a lot to lose indeed.