A 71-year-old grandmother sitting by herself on a subway car in Lower Manhattan.
A 30-year-old man walking down a street in the East Village, listening to music and enjoying a leisurely Saturday afternoon.
A 24-year-old woman heading to her job at Whole Foods in Chelsea.
All strangers. All slashed by men wielding knives or razors.
At least nine other men and women have been similarly attacked in recent months in a rash of slashings that has put many New Yorkers on edge.
Crime — even in this gentler New York City — is a part of life.
But a crime with no discernible motive besides rage and no particular pattern beside absolute randomness causes a particular kind of dread in a city where strangers often find themselves side by side in subway cars or on crowded sidewalks.
He acknowledged a recent uptick in these types of crimes, but noted that over all the subway was exceedingly safe. With nearly six million people traveling underground, fewer than seven crimes are reported on an average day.
When it comes to slashings on the subway, Chief Fox said, in about half of the cases there was some sort of dispute between the assailant and the victim before the attack.
But as was the case with the 71-year-old woman assaulted on Monday, there have been episodes in which there was “absolutely no prior contact,” he said.
“Those are particularly horrible,” he continued.
In the case on Monday, a suspect has been arrested.
Chief Fox said that in the wake of the recent attacks, the police were studying the trends and shifting officers.
The police do not categorize random slashings as a distinct crime, so it is impossible to know if the recent influx of reports of attacks represents a drastic increase in the number.
But just on Tuesday night there were two more seemingly random and separate assaults within an hour of each other.
Natalie Lewis, 29, and her sister were waiting for a train at the Atlantic Avenue-Barclays Center station in Brooklyn around 9:30 p.m. when, according to the police, she was bumped by a man.
They argued and later, as the train was pulling into the Eastern Parkway station, the man pulled an object — two feet long — from his bag and used it to attack Ms. Lewis.
“I will chop you up on this train,” he reportedly shouted.
At around the same time as that attack, a 32-year-old man was slashed in the face while he waited for a southbound No. 6 train at 116th Street and Lexington Avenue in Harlem.
At a Metropolitan Transportation Authority board meeting on Wednesday morning, Fernando Ferrer, the board’s vice chairman, said the authority was working with the police to respond to the attacks.
“They are redoubling their efforts on city subways,” Mr. Ferrer said of the police.
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton played down the idea that there was a copycat phenomenon at work. “Each one seems to have its own motivation when we make the arrest and we get into what was behind it,” Mr. Bratton said.
Despite the chilling nature of the attacks, Mr. Bratton did not seem particularly worried. “We always will have crime in the city,” he said, repeating a common refrain of his.
Last week, Anthony Christopher Smith, 30, was slashed on an East Village street in the middle of the afternoon.
The man sliced him up and down his face and neck. When he was done, the attacker did not even run, Mr. Smith said. He just walked away.
Francis Salud, 28, was arrested last week and charged in the attack.
Mr. Salud had been arrested in a knife attack in October, the police said, when he cut another man after an argument over a cigarette in the garden area at the back of Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan.
Mr. Smith’s shock at being set upon was matched only by his feeling of helplessness. Other recent victims echoed that sentiment.
Amanda Morris, 24, was cut by a stranger this month as she went to her job at Whole Foods in Chelsea. She posted photographs of her injuries on Facebook.
After the attack, Ms. Morris tried to think about what she could have done differently.
Across the city, people said they were aware of the reports of slashings and responded with a mix of resignation and wariness.
Lynn Marrapodi, 70, an artist, entered the Astor Place subway station in the East Village on Wednesday morning and stood with her back against the wall. It was a strategic maneuver.
