Ávila, Spain — I made the mistake of falling for a man who wants a wife. I should clarify that I do not mean he wants me to be his wife. Men don’t look at me and think I’d make good wife material. Maybe because of how much I swear. But I go to Berlin to see him, he tells me his future plans for marriage and family, and I understand that I am not compatible with those plans. Then I flee, to huddle in the backs of cathedrals, an impulse that I do not fully understand.
I am not Catholic, and yet I find myself drawn to the women saints. There is something about them that I admire. Maybe it is simply the lengths to which they went to avoid marrying. When St. Catherine’s mother said her hair would surely attract a good suitor, she cut all of it off. When St. Lucia’s pursuer said she had lovely eyes, she cut them out and presented them to him. (“What,” I imagine her asking him as he screamed. “I thought you said you liked them.”) Then there’s St. Olga of Kiev, whose feast day is my birthday. Emissaries came to her and suggested she marry their prince. She had them all buried alive.
After another disastrous visit with the man in Berlin, I got on a plane and came to Ávila, Spain, on a pilgrimage to St. Teresa, the 16th-century mystic nun and philosopher. The town was celebrating her 500th birthday with banners of her poetry and a whole year of events. She did not have to remove any body parts to stay unmarried, nor murder scores of men. She did have to defy her family, though. As well as what she thought she wanted out of life, which was love. But she had watched her mother slowly die through pregnancy after pregnancy, her body weakening with each child, and she saw that this was her wifely duty.
And yet during her life, she did not have an easy time being taken seriously by the church establishment. She lived during an era when criticizing the church’s riches could get you labeled a heretic and set on fire. The city of Ávila participated in such purges, in the town square now renamed for Teresa.
Her book “Life” got her called before the Inquisition to investigate whether her teachings lined up with the era’s strict orthodoxy. Many of her writings were radical, but she used charm to convince her inquisitors that she was harmless. “But what do I know, I am just a wretched woman.” She advocated for reform, and in her convents the emphasis was on piety, poverty and charity. And while her books were originally intended only for clergy and her fellow nuns, after her death they were published widely.
She wrote volumes, about the role of women, about compassion, about the power of art, about living through dark times. She was a philosopher, and yet even today she is rarely mentioned in philosophy survey classes and rarely listed with her brothers Spinoza, Descartes, Aquinas, Kant and others.
Likewise, St. Teresa, this woman who suggested the church return to a more humble state instead of flaunting its outrageous wealth, had her body broken up after her death and her parts wrapped up in gold and jewels. Her finger relic here in Ávila carries an emerald ring, and the rope she used to flog herself is encased in gold. She fought her whole life to be a brain, but with the church performing miracles with her bones she’s now back to being just a body.
Five hundred years after St. Teresa, and there are still very few models for women of how to live outside of coupledom, whether that is the result of a choice or just bad luck. I can’t remember the last time I saw a television show or a film about a single woman, unless her single status was a problem to be solved or an illustration of how deeply damaged she was. This continues even as more and more women are staying single longer and longer.
I’ve been single for the most part going on 11 years now, and so I have heard every derogatory, patronizing, demeaning thing said about single women. “There has to be someone for you,” a married woman friend once said exasperatedly after I recounted another bad date. Implying, unconsciously, that there must be one man somewhere on the planet who could stand to be around me for more than a few days at a time.
Every morning in Ávila, I walk from my tiny hotel room into the walled part of the city, where another St. Teresa statue stands on her pedestal, overlooking the gates. The town is small, so there is not much to do that isn’t spiritual contemplation or sitting in the sun with a cup of coffee and pastry. There are nuns about during the day, walking in twos, eating gelato and chattering away.
I’ve traveled with romantic partners before. I had a companion at dinner, so I talked to strangers less. I had someone reading the map, so I wandered down unmarked streets less. It felt cozy, both comfortable and confining.
I have wandered the streets of Ávila for two weeks now, and other than a stuttering conversation in my middling Spanish with the woman who sold me cava and sheep’s cheese, my communication has been online with my friends, mostly women, whom I met all over the world. And I wonder how fewer of them I would have met had I been traveling with the man I fell for. But then, if I had that man, I wouldn’t have felt compelled to come to Ávila at all.
St. Teresa’s poetry shows a woman who is desperate for meaning. She wants her sacrifices to mean something. “What do You want from me?” her poem refrains. I feel the question calling in me, too.
I leave the cold confines of the church to buy roses for St. Teresa, and I head back out into the world.