MELBOURNE, Australia — The Australian Open draw was announced Friday morning, and in her first official match since last September, Serena Williams will face an Italian player entirely different from the one who dealt her a stunning loss in the semifinals of the United States Open.
Williams was two matches from completing a Grand Slam when she lost to the slicing and the craft of the veteran Roberta Vinci. In the first round of the Australian Open, which begins Monday, the top-seeded Williams will face Camila Giorgi, an unrelenting see-the-ball, hit-the-ball basher.
Giorgi, ranked 35th, is the highest-ranked player Williams could have faced in the first round. But the draw has afforded Williams several breaks if she gets past that initial hurdle. The first seed she could face is 27th-seeded Anna Karolina Schmiedlova, a Slovak who has never reached the second week of a major. In the fourth round, where she could have faced Vinci or the surging Victoria Azarenka, Williams’s potential opponent is her close friend Caroline Wozniacki, the 16th seed, against whom she is 10-1.
In the quarterfinals, Williams avoided drawing her sister Venus and instead could face fifth-seeded Maria Sharapova, whom she played in last year’s final. Williams holds a 17-match winning streak against Sharapova and has an 18-2 career record against her. In the semifinals, if the seedings hold, Williams will face fourth-seeded Agnieszka Radwanska, against whom she is 8-0.
Although Williams pulled out of matches at the Hopman Cup exhibition last week because of lingering knee problems, she expressed confidence in her readiness to defend her title.
Azarenka, a two-time Australian Open champion, won the tuneup event in Brisbane last week and is considered by many to be the second favorite for the title behind Williams, despite her modest seeding at 14th. Azarenka, second-seeded Simona Halep, third-seeded Garbiñe Muguruza and eighth-seeded Venus Williams are in the bottom half of the draw and could not face Serena Williams until the final.
On the men’s side, the five-time champion Novak Djokovic arrives in Melbourne as an overwhelming favorite after compiling an 82-6 record last year that included 11 titles, three of them at Grand Slam events. He also reached the final of the French Open, the only major tournament he did not win.
Djokovic sent a message to the field by dominating Rafael Nadal, 6-1, 6-2, in the final in Doha, Qatar, last week. Djokovic opens against Hyeon Chung, a South Korean ranked 51st. Chung, 19, improved his ranking 122 spots last year by racking up wins at the Challenger level, but he has won only one Grand Slam match.
Djokovic would not face anyone who has won a major tournament until the semifinals, where he could face third-seeded Roger Federer, who opens his tournament against 117th-ranked Nikoloz Basilashvili of Georgia. Federer is one of the few players who does not have a losing career record against Djokovic; they are 22-22 against each other.
Second-seeded Andy Murray opens his tournament against the 18-year-old German Alexander Zverev, a stringy 6-foot-6 baseliner. Murray is joined on the bottom half by fourth-seeded Stan Wawrinka and the fifth-seeded Nadal, who could meet in the quarterfinals in a rematch of their 2014 final here, which was won in an upset by Wawrinka.
Lleyton Hewitt, 34, who has announced that this will be his final major tournament, opens against another Australian wild card, James Duckworth, before a possible second-round meeting against eighth-seeded David Ferrer.