CHICAGO — The job requires extensive management experience, the ability to deal with “significant distrust” and skill at addressing “highly publicized issues involving use of force.” It includes an unhappy work force, an angry public and a boss who is immersed in his own battles for survival. Federal investigators have begun sniffing around.
“I would say it’s the most challenging job, police chief job, in the country right now,” said Chuck Wexler, the executive director of the Police Executive Research Forum, which studies law enforcement policies. “You’ve got community issues. You have internal issues. You have a Department of Justice investigation. You’ve got political issues. You’ve got all the dynamics. You’ve got a combustible mixture.” The job opened last month after Mr. Emanuel fired Superintendent Garry F. McCarthy. The search for his replacement comes as officials try to regain the public’s trust after dash camera footage was released in November, showing the police shooting of Laquan McDonald, a black 17-year-old. Officer Jason Van Dyke was charged with first-degree murder in the 2014 shooting. The release of the footage touched off protests and drew attention to long-frayed relations between the Chicago force and African-American residents.
On Thursday, more footage may be released, this time showing the 2013 shooting of Cedrick Chatman, who was carrying a small box that officers said they believed was a gun. City officials, who had for months opposed releasing the footage, reversed course Wednesday and told a federal judge they were “working to strike the right balance between being as transparent as possible and protecting the judicial process.” Mr. Emanuel has borne much of the criticism, and his difficulties with blacks haven’t abated. Several African-American pastors have announced plans to boycott his annual breakfast in honor of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. on Friday.
The public’s frustration with the department and determination to influence the selection process were on display Tuesday night at a public meeting to solicit recommendations on the superintendent hiring. Some residents heckled members of the Police Board, an oversight panel appointed by the mayor, and said officer-involved shootings had eroded their faith in law enforcement. Many speakers said they did not trust the police, they did not trust the mayor, and they did not trust the process to select a new superintendent.
“The community needs to pick who the superintendent is, or it’s just going to go back to being business as usual, and all it is just a show,” said Ja’Mal Green, a protester who referred to the Police Board as “puppets” of Mr. Emanuel.
“I want to hear who the candidates are before they pick it so we have more feedback,” said Deanna Burrell, 38, a black resident of the South Side who attended Tuesday’s forum. Ms. Burrell said that she had seen “deep, embedded racism” in the police department and that she would like to see a black woman named superintendent.
Do You Want to Be Chicago’s New Police Superintendent?
The application to be Chicago's new police superintendent includes eight essay questions. Among the topics: accountability, use of technology and experience with matters related to terrorism.
Lori Lightfoot, the Police Board’s president, told the community members at Tuesday’s session that she expected a combination of current Chicago police officials, retired ones and external candidates to apply. The interim superintendent, John J. Escalante, has said that he is seeking the permanent position.
A hint of what is ahead for the next superintendent can be found in the application. Prospective superintendents are asked to answer, in essay form, questions about reducing shootings, using technology and addressing terrorism concerns.
The increased violence, Mr. Escalante said at a news conference on Wednesday, has taken a toll on officers’ morale.
“They are operating obviously with a greater public scrutiny that you can’t ignore,” Mr. Emanuel said.