NAPA, Calif. — San Francisco Bay, the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta and the watershed that feeds them make up one of the world’s largest estuary systems, a wildly varied tableau of beaches, river, creeks, grasslands and tidal marshes. Forty percent of the land in California drains into this rich ecosystem.
More than 20 years ago, the San Francisco Estuary Institute, a nonprofit scientific advisory group, began an ambitious effort to guide the restoration of this landscape. But the scientists there soon ran into a huge, unanticipated question: What should the restored terrain look like, and how should its natural systems function?
The natural ecology of the Bay Area was thoroughly demolished long ago, overrun by farms, cities and suburbs. There were few intact environments left anywhere in the region to serve as a guide.
“There’s a 150-year gap in our memory,” said Robin Grossinger, a senior environmental scientist at the institute. To fill that gap, he and his colleagues began to scour historical records of the bay and coast for clues to how the California landscape once looked.
The institute’s historical ecology program has since evolved into one of the largest and most successful efforts to restore an ecosystem by gathering evidence on how it once was. The clues have come from a range of sources: tattered diaries and journals left by trappers and pioneers, yellowed maps made by the first Spanish explorers and survey crews, early aerial photos and narratives recorded a century ago from native people who once lived there, and even pollen deposits and tree rings.
“There’s a ton of information out there,” Erin Beller, one of the institute’s three historical ecologists, said as she reviewed maps, photos and landscape paintings at the group’s offices. “It’s scattered, but it’s out there. We trawl dozens of archives to find that transformative data.” Pay dirt might be a journal entry about a “horse that fell into the river, for example, that gives us channel depth,” she added.
In a painstakingly complex process developed by Mr. Grossinger, the myriad data gleaned from thousands of historical sources are winnowed and fed into a geographical database, small bits that, like pixels, come together to create images of a forgotten landscape.
The institute gathers the research and then works with governments, private companies and other nonprofits to do the restoration. While there are other historical ecology projects — including the Welikia Project, which reconstructed the original ecology of New York’s five boroughs — none have served on-the-ground restoration the way this one has.
The goal isn’t just to make things look as they once did, here and there, but also to restore vanished ecological functions that will help the West Coast adapt to a changing climate, a tall order in a thoroughly urbanized environment.
“We’ve altered the landscape so deeply you can’t just plant trees,” said Letitia Grenier, a senior scientist with the institute. “We have to restore the hydrologic processes, the flooding processes.
One of the signature achievements of the estuary institute’s approach lies along the Napa River, which flows to the bay through the famous winemaking valley. When the river was straightened and deepened beginning in the early 20th century, its marshes and tidal flats were filled in.
Those features once absorbed and held periodic floodwaters. Turning the river into a deeper channel led to serious floods in downtown Napa, and the increased flow lowered the river bottom, incising banks as deep as 25 feet.
In 1999, Mr. Grossinger and his team decided that restoring the Napa River would require learning more about how it and the valley once looked and functioned. With hundreds of old photographs, maps and other sources, the ecologists managed to piece together a detailed portrait of the Napa as nature intended it.
A six-foot-long survey map from 1858 showed the river’s meanderings in rich detail. An early 20th-century photo of a woman washing clothes in the river revealed broad, shallow river banks, while an 1880 painting by Jules Tavernier portrayed seasonal wetlands with wildflower meadows and lush vegetation.
The historical study required 10 years and deeply informed efforts to restore the river, which, as it turned out, meant giving it more room to roam, though far from restoring its original course.
Some vineyard owners agreed to surrender land valued at up to $400,000 an acre so the river could reclaim it. The Napa County flood control agency built five miles of new marshlands and plains so that the river could flood along its course naturally instead of overwhelming the city of Napa.
“We’re trying to recover the natural flood control function of the river,” said Jorgen Blomberg of ESA PWA, a river restoration firm, who designed and guided the construction of many of the new features of the Napa River.
The project also created new ecological niches. No one knew there were once beavers on the river, for instance. But researchers at the institute found an entry in a fur trapper’s journal from 1833: “Found a few beaver,” it said, an assertion corroborated by references from historical studies.
So the rodents have been allowed to re-establish their dams, including one within view of downtown Napa. The dams will slow erosion and create deep pools, offering a nursery for young fish — some of them threatened — and helping rebuild the river.
“It’s amazing the wildlife that has come into this area,” Richard Thomasser, who heads watershed and flood control for the county, said recently as he looked out over the new marshes.
When completed over the next decade, some 30 miles of the Napa River’s main channel will have been enhanced and reclaimed.
The institute also is working on restoring the valley oak savannas, globally unique ecosystems. Long ago, the grasslands of Napa Valley were dotted with groves of towering, centuries-old valley oaks, which had broad canopies and pendulous branches.
The trees were almost completely cleared for farming. Mr. Grossinger estimates there were once 40,000 to 50,000 valley oaks and hundreds of groves; there are now only some 700 oaks and just one grove, on a farm named Oak Knoll, protected by its owner, the Lamoreaux family.
By studying that grove and gathering relevant historical records, including early aerial photographs and the accounts of visitors like Robert Louis Stevenson and the first Spanish ranchers, experts now have a strong sense of what an oak savanna was once like.
“A great variety of oak stood, now severally, now in a becoming grove, among the fields and vineyards,” Stevenson wrote in a travel sketch.
Restoring the savanna’s ecological function is a challenge in what is now a highly developed valley. But valley oaks are drought-tolerant, and may be able to survive a drier and hotter future.
That means it hosts hundreds of species, from pileated and acorn woodpeckers to scrub jays and pallid bats. Ms. Gardner’s group has planted 400 trees, and plans to plant 5,000 more in the next three years with the help of local schoolchildren.
The use of history to guide restoration has been so successful in the Bay Area that officials elsewhere in California have engaged the eco-detectives at the institute to search for clues to other vanished natural systems. Now there are more than a dozen other recording-gathering projects underway in places like San Diego and the Tijuana River.
