But critics said the report praised a development that will limit the amount of information individuals can obtain from companies and the government, frustrating their ability to prove their cases.
The chief justice’s report welcomed December’s adoption of major changes to the rules governing civil litigation in the federal courts, notably limits on the pretrial exchange of information that lawyers call discovery.
“I cannot believe that many members of the bar went to law school because of a burning desire to spend their professional life wearing down opponents with creatively burdensome discovery requests or evading legitimate requests through dilatory tactics,” Chief Justice Roberts wrote.
The change has not met with universal approval.
“This provision will be used to restrict a citizen’s access to the information that often is critical to establishing a grievance, whether it be a civil rights claim or an economic or personal injury claim,” said Arthur R. Miller, a law professor at New York University.
Suja A. Thomas, a law professor at the University of Illinois, said the new rules were too sweeping.
On the other hand, she added, the new rules may tie the hands of litigants like victims of employment discrimination. “These are cases where discovery is very important because employers have so much information,” she said.
Stephen B. Burbank, a law professor at the University of Pennsylvania, said the new rules were a poor fit for many lawsuits and will often prove counterproductive.
But Chief Justice Roberts said proportionality was a common-sense concept that should be embraced by lawyers.
But she said the Supreme Court in the last few years had “taken upon itself to reread rules rather than use that process,” notably by giving judges greater authority to dismiss cases soon after they are filed.
The court’s vow to the amendment process will be tested in its current term in three cases concerning a rule governing class actions, she said.
Chief Justice Roberts wrote that the amended rules represented important progress.
