PHILADELPHIA — A block from Drexel University, a glassy new rental building offers residents a roof deck with a heated saltwater pool, a fire pit and outdoor televisions — amenities that would make for a raucous college party, if college students could live there.
The Market Street apartments are among roughly 2,000 residential units that are planned or have recently opened in University City and are aimed at young professionals and graduate students. A local developer has also acquired eight rental buildings in the neighborhood since the summer, with plans to renovate those 600 units to attract more young professionals.
About half of University City’s 50,600 residents are between the ages of 20 and 34, and of the 75,000 jobs in the area, three-quarters of them are in health care and education, according to a report by the University City District. The jobs tend to command high salaries. From 2008 to 2013, the number of mid- to high-wage jobs increased by 80 percent, according to the report. So for employers looking to recruit young workers, an influx of luxury housing built a few steps from the office could win over a prospective employee who might have balked at a long commute.
Among the new developments around the country are Century Square, a 60-acre mixed-use project rising near Texas A&M University in College Station with 250 luxury rentals; a mixed-use complex with 453 luxury rentals opposite Arizona State University in Tempe that will break ground this spring; and a 15-story tower with 180 residential units that opened in December in Hyde Park, a few blocks from the University of Chicago.
For the universities, shiny new towers with playful amenities like shuffleboard, game rooms and dog runs make it easier to recruit young faculty members at no cost to the school, particularly in places like West Philadelphia, which lacks quality housing and has been plagued by poverty and crime for decades.
These apartments do not come cheap. At 3601 Market, a third of the units have rented since leasing began in August. Of the remaining listings, a 427-square-foot studio is $1,525 a month; a 698-square-foot one-bedroom with a balcony is $2,025 a month; and two bedrooms start at $2,749 a month. By comparison, the median rent in University City is $1,450 a month, according to the University City District’s report.
Otherwise, potential residents get skittish if they think that the halls might eventually get overrun with college students. “We’re not going to have bicycles hanging off of the balconies and we’re not going to have music blaring and kegs rolling down the hall,” said Lawrence Pobuda, a senior vice president at Opus Group, which plans to build luxury housing next to Arizona State University.
For the residents of Powelton Village, which abuts Drexel University, new market-rate housing means a reprieve from undergraduate housing, which to them translates to empty beer cans littering the sidewalks of the tree-lined streets. Powelton Village is a neighborhood of mostly Victorian homes, yet the homeownership rate was only 13 percent in 2010, according to a neighborhood report co-written by Drexel University.
The new development is having a ripple effect on the neighborhood. Last summer, Post Brothers Apartments, a local developer, began buying aging rental buildings with plans to renovate them. The centerpiece of the $95 million portfolio is Garden Court Plaza, a 146-unit Art Deco building at 4701 Pine Street. Apartments have parquet floors and crown molding, but kitchens and bathrooms need updating. As part of the renovations, the developers plan to upgrade an expansive green roof deck, adding croquet courts and outdoor grills. The developers also plan to restore the historic lobby and renovate apartments as leases turn over, raising rent to $1,900 a month for a one-bedroom, from about $1,200 a month.
