For a look at the damage that the plunging price of commodities — especially oil — is inflicting on the global economy, consider the plight of the venerable Freeport-McMoRan.
Freeport has long embodied the American swagger that conquered the West in the 19th century and enabled it to find significant copper and gold deposits in some of the world’s most remote regions. In 2007, flush from rising commodity prices, it bought Phelps Dodge, which traces its roots to pre-Civil War cotton traders and laid railroads on the American frontier. Its board, which has included a Whitney, a Rockefeller and Henry Kissinger, was long a who’s who of the corporate establishment.
The deal now looks like a major blunder. In December 2010, Freeport’s stock peaked at over $60 a share. This week it dropped below $4.
“The stock is trading like they’re going to file for bankruptcy,” said Paul Massoud, a mining analyst with Stifel Nicolaus who downgraded Freeport shares in August 2014.
Freeport is hardly alone in getting battered by plummeting commodities prices. Banks’ earnings this month have taken a hit as they have marked down the value of their loans to energy companies. Many of the world’s largest commodities producers, including oil-rich countries like Saudi Arabia and Venezuela, or corporate behemoths like the Swiss company Glencore, are suffering after borrowing large sums of money at ultralow interest rates during the commodities boom.
In previous price slumps, commodities producers cut back. But this time, many have continued to flood the market with oil and copper even at depressed prices, confounding many economists. One explanation is that they need to generate the cash to meet debt obligations. In its last quarter, Freeport actually increased its oil production and barely cut back on copper despite falling prices.
Now, Freeport, which is based in Phoenix, needs to reduce its heavy debt burden, which at more than $20 billion is more than four times the company’s current market value of $4.8 billion. Once an aggressive bidder for trophy assets, it now finds itself in the position of a desperate seller. It’s also cutting jobs and slashing capital spending, the lifeblood of any mining company.
James B. Stewart, on CNBC, reflects on conflicts of interest at Freeport-McMoRan and what conditions in the oil market mean for investors.
For its most recent quarter, Freeport reported a quarterly loss of $3.8 billion, bringing its loss for the first nine months of its fiscal year to $8.2 billion, mostly because of write-downs in the value of its oil and gas assets.
Under pressure from the activist investor Carl Icahn, who disclosed an 8.5 percent stake in Freeport last fall, Mr. Moffett, 76, stepped down as chairman late last month.
Still, however much Freeport is being battered by market forces beyond its control, it’s hard to feel too bad for the company’s management and shareholders, given how many of its woes seem self-inflicted during a woeful lapse in corporate governance standards.
A glut of crude oil on the markets is pushing the price of oil down to levels not seen since the global financial crisis.
Freeport’s chief executive, Richard Adkerson, was McMoRan’s co-chairman. Nine Freeport directors owned stock in McMoRan totaling about 6 percent of the shares. Freeport agreed to buy McMoRan for $2.1 billion — a 74 percent premium over its market price before the deal was struck. Mr. Moffett himself was paid $73 million.
Moreover, Plains owned 31 percent of McMoRan, enough to block any deal. Freeport eliminated that possibility when it bought Plains. And James Flores, Plains’s chief executive, who now runs Freeport’s oil and gas operations, was also a director of McMoRan. He made $200 million on the deal.
“Would it be possible to find out if anybody on the call from your side is not conflicted?” Mr. Hambro asked pointedly during the conference call.
Even now, Mr. Moffett hasn’t exactly been sent packing. He received a severance package valued at $79.4 million, according to company filings. He keeps the title of chairman emeritus and will be paid $1.5 million a year as a consultant. Mr. Adkerson remains Freeport’s chief executive.
There’s no easy way out for Freeport. The company earlier said it would explore selling all or part of its oil and gas assets, but given current market conditions, any sale would be at fire sale prices. With its stock so depressed, it doesn’t make sense to raise more money in the equity markets, and it would be hard pressed to borrow more, either from banks or in the debt market (where some of its bonds are already trading at distressed levels).
Freeport still owns what Mr. Moffett called its “trove of treasures” — the Grasberg gold and copper operations in Indonesia; the Morenci copper mine in Arizona; and majority stakes in the Cerro Verde copper mine in Peru and Tenke Fungurume, the largest copper mine in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Freeport recently valued its interest in Grasberg alone at $16.2 billion.
“There’s a lot of concern about the company’s long-term solvency,” Mr. Young of Macquarie said. “But they do have some valuable assets that could alleviate the pressure.” He said investors were anxiously waiting to see what strategy the company unveils next week.
