Until now, Ms. Anderson has not had an opportunity to repeat the scale and sensation of that concert in Australia. But at 11:30 p.m. on Monday, she will get that chance: Dogs and their owners are invited to sit on the red steps of Duffy Square while she performs music that, to passers-by in Times Square, may not sound like much because of the low frequency. Humans can tune in with wireless headphones — there are 350 total — that will be given out beforehand.
The occasion is the January edition of Midnight Moment, a series in which many Times Square billboards become a digital art gallery, if only for three minutes. The series, presented by Times Square Arts and the Times Square Advertising Coalition, has in the past included works by Andy Warhol, Björk and Yoko Ono. Ms. Anderson’s contribution is a three-minute cut of her documentary “Heart of a Dog” — a poetic visual essay about, among other things, the journey from life to the afterlife.
“Heart of a Dog,” which has been shortlisted for an Academy Award nomination, is about 75 minutes long and, with dreamlike fluidity, tackles a wide range of themes: mortality, love, art and even post-9/11 surveillance. The Midnight Moment’s three-minute edit, Ms. Anderson said, homes in on the bardo, the journey into the afterlife as depicted in “The Tibetan Book of the Dead.” Since the 2010 concert in Australia, her rat terrier, Lolabelle, a central character in the documentary, has died. So has Ms. Anderson’s husband, the musician Lou Reed, to whom the film is dedicated.
It’s even better that Ms. Anderson’s Midnight Moment includes the concert, Ms. Dobbin added; rarely does an artist’s work lend itself to performance. Like Ms. Anderson, Ms. Ono accompanied her art with a concert. In 2012, she took over the billboards with a music video of the song “Imagine” by her husband, John Lennon. At a time when a Mayan-predicted apocalypse was stirring popular fascination, she led a singalong of the song on Dec. 21, the day the world would purportedly end, in the same place where Ms. Anderson will perform on Monday.
