Dr. Herbert L. Abrams, a radiologist at Stanford and Harvard universities and a founder of International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, which won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1985 for its work in publicizing the health consequences of atomic warfare, died on Jan. 20 at his home in Palo Alto, Calif. He was 95.
The death was confirmed by his son, John.
In the late 1970s, Dr. Abrams became interested in the health implications of nuclear policy. “It began to dawn on me that these weapons of annihilation were being considered for use in the settlement of disputes between nations when I had honestly not thought that that was ever in the cards,” he told The Los Angeles Times in 1989.
Herbert Leroy Abrams was born on Aug. 16, 1920, in Brooklyn and grew up in Sheepshead Bay. His father, Morris, was an immigrant from Russia and ran a successful company that produced machinery and factory tools. His mother, the former Freda Sugarman, was also an immigrant from Russia.
After graduating from James Madison High School, he received a bachelor’s degree from Cornell in 1941. He earned a medical degree from Long Island Medical College (now the SUNY Downstate Medical Center) and completed his residency in internal medicine at Long Island College Hospital and Montefiore Hospital.
He completed a residency in radiology at Stanford University’s school of medicine in 1952 and two years later joined the faculty, eventually becoming the school’s director of diagnostic radiology.
For many years Dr. Abrams was editor in chief of the journal Postgraduate Radiology. He was the founding editor in chief of the journal Cardiovascular and Interventional Radiology. In 1967 he accepted a position as a professor and chairman of radiology at Harvard Medical School.
Dr. Abrams returned to Stanford as a professor of radiology in 1985 but spent most of his time doing research at the university’s Center for International Security and Cooperation. He was also a senior fellow at Stanford’s Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies, and a director for many years of Physicians for Social Responsibility.
In addition to his son, Dr. Abrams, who also lived on Martha’s Vineyard, is survived by his wife, the former Marilyn Spitz; a daughter, Nancy Abrams; three grandchildren; and three great-grandchildren. His older brother, Mason Adams, played Charlie Hume, the managing editor of the newspaper that was the setting of the television series “Lou Grant,” starring Ed Asner. Mr. Adams died in 2005.
In the 1990s, Dr. Abrams began to focus on medical issues involving the American presidency and executive decision making. That interest led him to write “The President Has Been Shot: Confusion, Disability, and the 25th Amendment in the Aftermath of the Attempted Assassination of Ronald Reagan” (1992).