On a late autumn day in 2010, Aaron Swartz, an open-information advocate and early partner at the website Reddit, sneaked into a basement closet at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and surreptitiously connected his laptop to the school’s high-speed Internet network. Using the school’s credentials, he gained access to JSTOR, a database of academic journals, and began to illegally download thousands of files. Once a promising entrepreneur, Swartz had eschewed the traditional Silicon Valley career path for an unorthodox campaign of radical public-interest activism. He believed that the five million documents behind the JSTOR paywall were a common good and that they needed to be liberated by guerrilla action.
Swartz’s caper was detected, and he was soon apprehended. The documents he downloaded were never released. On Jan. 11, 2013, facing 13 felony charges and a statutory maximum of 95 years in prison, Swartz hanged himself in his New York City apartment. He was 26 years old.
Drawing on blog posts, family interviews and other resources, Peters captures Swartz flawlessly. A child of privilege in a house full of computer technology, Swartz makes for a precocious teenage crusader, cultivating friendships with the lawyer and political activist Lawrence Lessig and the World Wide Web inventor, Tim Berners-Lee. Almost immediately, Peters sets up Swartz as a convincing agent of destiny.
Then — and this is unforgivable — Swartz disappears from his own book. For more than a hundred pages, his name is not mentioned once. Instead, Peters gives us an eclectic examination of the evolution of copyright law, a history of the publishing industry and a primer on the Internet. Swartz’s actions require context, of course, but the writer who promises a dispatch from the digital frontier and instead delivers a cribbed history of the Post Office Act of 1792 has surely lost his way.
The moment Peters returns to Swartz — playing a card game on the steps of the Supreme Court as Lessig argues a copyright case inside — the book comes back to life. Just 15, he acts as a sort of mascot for the open-information movement. Dropping out of school, he embarks on a campaign of self-education and, after a year at Stanford, drops out again to start his own company.
His colleagues remain in Silicon Valley to pursue their careers; Swartz returns to Boston to diagram the plot of “Infinite Jest.” Preferring the company of progressive activists to venture capitalists, he drafts research papers on congressional corruption and founds a political advocacy organization. Soon he’s taking direct action. The book excels as it nears its climax — Peters leads us through a foot chase, through Swartz’s accidental betrayal by his girlfriend and finally to his last supper at a Lower East Side gastro pub. He handles Swartz’s suicide and its aftermath with a delicate and respectful touch.
By the end of “The Idealist,” Peters has dropped the pretension of neutrality and taken up Swartz’s crusade. This is fine, I think — it wouldn’t be a good biography if it didn’t have a point of view. But in the final pages, as Peters dons the sports coat of the history lecturer and draws a lame comparison between Aaron Swartz and Noah Webster, he disappoints once again. It’s the whole book in microcosm: superb when it focuses on its subject, unnecessary when it veers away.