RECIFE, Brazil — So many distraught mothers stream into the infant ward clutching babies with abnormally small heads that the receptionist sends them outside, to see if they can find a chair to wait under the mango tree.
Roziline Ferreira took three buses to get here, grasping her 3-month-old son, Arthur, all the way. Tears swelled as she looked at him, recalling how the symptoms of the Zika virus had struck her during the second month of her pregnancy. How would she ever be able to care for him, she wondered? What kind of life would he have?
This poverty-stricken city near the Equator is at the center of a nightmarish health crisis that has set off alarms across the Western Hemisphere. Mothers began showing up at the Oswaldo Cruz Hospital with their affected babies as early as September, stunning doctors and leaving even the most experienced among them scrambling to figure out what was going on.
Once called a mystery disease, everyone in Brazil is aware of the Zika virus, which appears to cause microcephaly, or abnormally small heads, in babies.
Before last fall, medical reports of babies born with brain damage and unusually small heads — a condition known as microcephaly — were so uncommon in Brazil that only about 150 cases were registered each year in the entire country. Now Brazilian officials are investigating thousands of them, and they contend that the mosquito-borne Zika virus is the cause.
Virus specialists are racing to understand the connection, if any, between Zika and the rash of microcephaly cases in Brazil, an undertaking that international officials warn could take six months or more.
The Zika epidemic has spread much faster than science’s understanding of it. Researchers here believe that the virus made the leap from Polynesia to Brazil during the 2014 World Cup soccer tournament. Since then, as many as 1.5 million people in Brazil are believed to have been infected, and the virus has spread to more than 20 countries and territories in the Americas.
The most common symptoms are relatively mild, like fever and joint pain, and most people with the virus feel no ill effects at all.
But as Zika continued to spread across Brazil, particularly here in the northeast, doctors began to encounter a steady stream of women cradling babies with unusually small heads.
“I saw this dramatic increase in cases with my own eyes,” said Dr. Vanessa Van Der Linden, a neurologist in Recife who was among the first doctors to detect an increase in microcephaly cases last year.
She said she was shocked when the babies began appearing at the public hospital where she works, the Hospital Barão de Lucena, and at her private practice. Altogether, she has examined about 60 cases in the last six months, she said — 10 times the rate of cases she came across in previous years.
“I never witnessed anything like it,” Dr. Van Der Linden said.
She began suspecting a new cause for the microcephaly after testing the mothers for other possible factors, like toxoplasmosis, H.I.V. and rubella. None of the tests showed that these ailments could have been responsible, prompting researchers to examine the link to Zika.
“This is an emergency because the situation is unprecedented,” Dr. Van Der Linden said.
Dr. Rocha, at Oswaldo Cruz Hospital, said that she and her team had also examined about 10 times as many babies with signs of microcephaly as they normally would, turning Recife into a harbinger of what officials fear could unfold on a much broader scale.
Many of the mothers were already overwhelmed by poverty. Now they are grappling with an incurable condition that can involve seizures, impaired cognitive development, delayed motor functions, problems with speech and dwarfism.
Two months ago, Selma Alves de Oliveira, 38, gave birth to a daughter, Maria das Graças. It was her eighth child, inevitably increasing the strain on her and her husband, who farm beans and potatoes on a small plot of land near Recife.
But unlike her others, this child was born with microcephaly, requiring multiple bus rides or paying someone to drive them to Recife for medical care.
The full extent of the crisis is still far from clear. Reporting microcephaly became mandatory across the country only in the last few months, after officials documented the jump in cases here in the northeast. Brazilian officials said this week that reported cases of microcephaly had now climbed to 4,180 since October, a 7 percent increase from the previous tally last week.
Officials have examined more than 700 of the cases. In 462 of them, either no microcephaly was found, or it was caused by something other than an infection, like alcohol or drug abuse by the mother during pregnancy, a spokeswoman for the Health Ministry said.
So far, infections have been confirmed as the cause of 270 cases of microcephaly. Yet even in that group, the Zika virus was found in only six infants.
Officials warned against reading too much into that number, though, because the Zika virus has a very short period during which it can be detected properly.
“When an infant is identified as a suspect, the infection had to occur six to seven months earlier,” said Claudio Maierovitch, director of the department of surveillance of communicable diseases at Brazil’s Health Ministry.
“The chances of detecting it are tiny,” he said.
Officials are still investigating 3,448 other cases.
Even under normal circumstances, the Oswaldo Cruz Hospital, founded in the 1920s and named for the legendary Brazilian epidemiologist who led sanitation campaigns against the bubonic plague, embodies the challenges of the country’s public health system.
Waiting rooms lack air-conditioning. Weeds threaten to envelop a rusted swing set perched behind the infant care unit. Puddles of stagnant water where virus-carrying mosquitoes can breed persist along sidewalks.
Even so, Arlindo Batista, who manages the snack bar outside the ward for the babies with microcephaly, said he had been shattered by the influx of babies.
Faced with so many cases, doctors here in Recife say that Brazil needs to intensify its battle against the virus on many fronts, from expanding mosquito-eradication campaigns to developing a vaccine.
“It’s fine and it’s necessary to have an academic discussion about the statistics, but we’re here on the ground dealing with the increase in microcephaly cases,” Dr. Van Der Linden said.