LONDON — The police in Sweden, responding to accusations of a cover-up, said on Monday that they were investigating why the public had not been informed about sexual assaults by men reported to be migrants at a festival in Stockholm last summer.
In echoes of the scandal in Cologne, Germany, where the police are investigating scores of assaults, often involving asylum seekers, on New Year’s Eve, the Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheter reported over the weekend that a gang of migrant youths had groped young girls at a festival in August.
The attacks in Cologne have intensified the scrutiny of the assaults in Sweden, and even as Chancellor Angela Merkel’s spokesman, Steffen Seibert, said there was no excuse for revenge attacks against immigrants, a group of Pakistanis and a Syrian were targeted in Cologne on Sunday, The Associated Press reported.
The newspaper reported that it had seen a police memo from last summer that urged vigilance because there had been a problem at the festival the previous year “with young men who rub themselves against young girls.” It reported that the attackers were mostly migrants, including from Afghanistan.
According to the Swedish edition of The Local, a news website, teenagers told Dagens Nyheter that they had been groped last summer at the festival, which caters to 12- to-17-year-olds and whose 2015 program included performances by dancers and circus artists.
“As soon as you came out in the crowd, they began to grope,” one 15-year-old girl told Dagens Nyheter.
He denied there had been a cover-up, according to Swedish news reports, and he said that an investigation was underway.
Until recently, Sweden and Germany have been among the most welcoming countries toward immigrants.
Anxieties over immigration in Sweden intensified over the summer when a woman and her son were stabbed to death at an Ikea in Vasteras, and an asylum seeker from Eritrea whose request had been denied was charged with the crime. Several refugee centers have also been set on fire in recent months.
In Germany, a report presented to a committee of the North Rhine-Westphalia Parliament said that the police in Cologne knew they were overwhelmed on New Year’s Eve but did not ask for reinforcements. Had such a request been made, the report said, much of the mayhem that unfolded that night could have been avoided.