Citing German privacy laws, Volkswagen has refused to provide emails or other communications among its executives to attorneys general in the United States, impeding American investigations into the company’s emissions-cheating scandal, according to officials in several states.
Significantly, investigators say, Volkswagen’s actions limit their ability to identify which employees knew about or sanctioned the deceptions. Finding the people responsible for the cheating is important to the lawsuits: Penalties would be greater if the states and others pursuing Volkswagen in court could prove that top executives knew of or directed the activity.
He was one of several attorneys general to express dissatisfaction in response to inquiries from The New York Times.
Volkswagen in September admitted that it had installed software to cheat on emissions tests in 11 million diesel vehicles worldwide. A 48-state civil investigation is being led by a half-dozen states, including New York and Connecticut. Attorneys general in California and Texas are conducting their own inquiries of the company, which includes the Audi and Porsche brands.
When he was named chief executive shortly after the scandal broke, Matthias Müller said “My most urgent task is to win back trust” and promised “maximum transparency.” But opening up a company known for its insular culture has been a tall order.
German investigators are not making similar complaints about Volkswagen. Klaus Ziehe, a spokesman for prosecutors in Braunschweig, a city close to Volkswagen’s headquarters in Wolfsburg, said that under German law, prosecutors were allowed to carry out raids of Volkswagen’s Wolfsburg offices to gather possible evidence that could include email exchanges.
“We are not and do not want to be dependent on that which Volkswagen gives us,” Mr. Ziehe said in a written response to questions. At the same time, he said, the company had been working with German investigators.
Volkswagen, in a statement, said it could not comment on continuing proceedings.
Germany, a close ally of America, is known for strict privacy laws like its Federal Data Protection Act, which limits access to data, particularly outside the European Union. Similar issues with Swiss laws have also hampered American investigators in their pursuit of FIFA, soccer’s world governing body. Strains over data-sharing between the United States and Europe also emerged after the spying revelations linked to Edward J. Snowden, the former National Security Agency contractor.
Germany also has a history of refusing to extradite its citizens to the United States. Still, American investigators have dealt with German corporations for many years and often reach amicable settlements.
The United States, where the scandal originated, is seen as potentially conducting tougher investigations of Volkswagen than Germany, where the carmaker is one of the nation’s largest employers. Prosecutors in Braunschweig initially said they would conduct a formal investigation of Martin Winterkorn, V.W.’s former chief executive, but quickly backtracked.
The Justice Department, which filed a civil suit against Volkswagen this week, has not ruled out filing a criminal charge or targeting specific executives. A Justice Department spokesman declined to say whether it was facing obstacles in its inquiry.
Volkswagen has maintained that a small number of engineers and managers were responsible. None of the nine Volkswagen executives who have been suspended were members of the management board. But several, like Wolfgang Hatz, who headed engine and transmission development, reported directly to board members.
The revelations may raise questions about the commitment of Mr. Müller to cleaning house. He was a protégé of Mr. Winterkorn and has close ties to a number of the central figures in the investigation. He was V.W.’s head of product planning when the cheating took place.
In a tacit admission by Volkswagen that it needs to smooth relations with American officials, Mr. Müller will meet with Gina McCarthy, the E.P.A. administrator, on Wednesday at the company’s request, a spokeswoman for the agency said.
Officials at the office of the Texas attorney general had no immediate comment. The California attorney general’s office declined to comment.
The E.P.A., along with regulators in Canada and California, has also accused Volkswagen of installing devices to cheat on emissions tests on more vehicles than acknowledged, a claim Volkswagen disputes.
Germany has faced criticism in the past for laws that place a higher value on personal privacy than public interest. German laws may have prevented doctors from informing the German airline Lufthansa that one of its pilots, Andreas Lubitz, was undergoing treatment for depression. In March, Mr. Lubitz deliberately crashed a passenger jet operated by the Lufthansa subsidiary Germanwings in France, killing himself and 149 others.
That said, privacy laws have the potential to be misused by companies. “They frankly tie U.S. investigators’ hands, or even law firms doing internal investigations, in ways that, in my personal opinion, were not anticipated or expected,” Mr. Urofsky said.
Mr. Lawsky left the department last year, shortly after it was involved in a $2.5 billion settlement with Deutsche Bank over allegations that it had manipulated interest rates.
While he did not want to draw analogies to his own previous cases, Mr. Lawsky called such issues frustrating. Still, he said, investigators sometimes eventually find ways to get what they want — whether by getting the information from American computer servers, through negotiations with companies or in cooperation with foreign law enforcement.
