Now, newly obtained internal emails suggest the manipulation was both bold and broad, involving open exchanges among Takata employees in Japan and the United States.
The emails were among documents unsealed recently as part of a personal injury lawsuit against Takata and obtained by The New York Times. Takata said in a statement that the exchanges concerned only the formatting of data and were unrelated to defective airbags that are under recall.
Takata’s airbags, which can explode when they deploy, sending debris flying into a car’s cabin, have been linked to eight deaths in the United States and more than 100 serious injuries, prompting the recalls of almost 20 million vehicles. Regulators have said that millions more airbag inflaters may need to be recalled unless the company can prove that the propellant they use — ammonium nitrate — is safe.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration imposed a $70 million penalty on the Japanese supplier, also citing data manipulation, in November, on the day that Honda dropped Takata as a supplier of its driver and passenger airbags.
The emails referred to the testing of airbag inflaters, which contain the propellant.
Honda would not comment on whether the emails were examples of Takata misrepresentations. The automaker said that it had reached its conclusions after reviewing millions of internal Takata documents. But four airbag experts asked by The Times to review the emails said that they suggested an effort to misrepresent testing data.
“To have these kinds of offhand remarks shows that this is a systemic issue at Takata,” said Mark Lillie, a former Takata engineer and whistle-blower.
Takata’s practice of manipulating airbag test results dates to at least 2000, just as the company began to introduce a new type of inflater.
At first, Takata’s American engineers appeared to raise concerns about data manipulation.
An internal report prepared by American employees in November 2000, for example, detailed discrepancies in airbag test results sent to Honda earlier in the year. In several instances, “pressure vessel failures,” or airbag ruptures, were reported to Honda as normal airbag deployments, the report said.
“I cannot, in good conscience, fail to report these issues to you,” Mr. Schubert said, according to the memo.
But the newly obtained emails suggest that a year later, Mr. Schubert was urging his colleagues to manipulate the test data.
Specifically, the emails point to concern about tests conducted at an elevated temperature, the experts consulted by The Times said. Together with moisture, high temperatures are known to make ammonium nitrate more volatile.
In response to Mr. Schubert’s invitation — “Happy Manipulating!!!” — a colleague appeared to be more cautious. “If you think I’m going to manipulate, you really should try and get to know me better,” the colleague insisted. Yet he offered: “I would be willing to deviate for running slightly high” in tests at higher temperatures.
In a statement, Takata said that the emails were not examples of manipulation.
Takata previously said that it did not dispute assertions that it had manipulated test data but that any manipulation had been unrelated to the recalls. Mr. Schubert did not respond to a request for comment; in the past, he has referred all questions to Takata.
A spokesman for Honda, Chris Martin, reiterated that the automaker was “aware of evidence that suggests that Takata misrepresented and manipulated test data.” But he declined to comment specifically on the documents and said that Honda, which has been Takata’s biggest customer, would be in a better position to comment once a third-party audit of Takata’s test data, requested by the carmaker in November, was completed. Takata is also the subject of a criminal investigation by the Justice Department.
Chris Caruso, an engineer for General Motors and its parts supplier Delphi from 1979 to 2006, said that a bimodal distribution showed the parts being tested were not consistent — generally a requirement for meeting quality standards for automotive safety products.
Mr. Caruso, who now works as a safety consultant in litigation involving airbag issues, including lawsuits against Takata, said that bimodal distribution should result in the rejection of parts by the purchaser.
Linda Rink, a former senior staff scientist for Autoliv, another airbag manufacturer, and a longtime consultant for airbag manufacturers including Takata, cautioned that a bimodal distribution did not necessarily mean that the part in question was unsafe. And it was unclear from the emails whether the data in this instance was directly related to propellant problems or inflater fragmentation, she said.
Still, Ms. Rink said that any obfuscation of test results was a serious concern.
The documents were unsealed as part of a lawsuit brought by a Florida woman who was paralyzed after her Takata airbag deployed too forcefully during an accident in her 2001 Honda Civic in June 2014.
