REDDING, Calif. — Sprinting seven miles down a 9,000-foot mountain and then running back up to do it again may not appeal to even the most self-punishing of athletes, but Ryan Hall believes it is the kind of “experimental workout” that transformed him into the fastest American distance runner in history.
It is also the kind of extreme training that is now driving him to abruptly retire, two decades into an audacious career that produced national milestones — his time of 2 hours 4 minutes 58 seconds at the 2011 Boston Marathon is by far the fastest for an American runner — but never a victory in a major race.
Hall, 33, who was one of the last remaining hopes for an American front-runner in this summer’s Olympic marathon, is succumbing to chronically low testosterone levels and fatigue so extreme, he says, that he can barely log 12 easy miles a week.
Testosterone is vital for optimum athletic performance, but that hormone’s levels can drop over time with extreme training, similar to how some female runners or gymnasts experience decreased estrogen levels. Hall, who at 5 feet 10 kept his weight consistently at a spry 130 to 140 pounds, said he learned of his low testosterone levels when he turned professional after college, and initially managed to hit top times nonetheless.
Supplemental testosterone is a banned substance, but Hall would be eligible for a medical waiver if he wanted to try to boost his levels. He said he had decided against that because of potential side effects (including dependency and infertility) and ethical concerns (some athletes use testosterone illicitly as a performance-enhancing drug). Natural remedies like the altering of his diet and lifting weights have not restored his strength, he said.
Hall has generally forged ahead, aggressively, keeping his weekly mileage steadily above 100 miles and constantly pushing the boundaries of sustainability.
In retiring, he leaves behind an American track and field establishment in tatters from chronic allegations of widespread doping and internecine politics. There is a dearth of emerging talent. The top contender heading into the United States Olympic marathon trials is Meb Keflezighi, who is 40.
It is a striking contrast to 2001, when Hall was at the fore of a promising crop of high school runners, including Dathan Ritzenhein and Alan Webb, whose sub-four-minute-mile record in high school still holds. They were heralded as the future of American distance running.
Hall handled his career differently from many professional runners, avoiding Internet forums rife with gossip and critiques, which he dismissed as distractions from practicing and excelling at his sport.
His wife, Sara, also a professional runner and former teammate at Stanford, handles his social media accounts and helps serve as a filter between Hall and the world outside.
Hall began running when he was 13 and immediately stood out. He was a national champion in the 5,000 meters at Stanford and then flouted traditional career progressions by moving up to the marathon and its attendant high training loads almost right away, with characteristic bravado.
He achieved early success, setting the American record for a debut marathon at London in 2007 with a time of 2:08:24. He attributes his current fatigue problems to that early training load and to unconventional training strategies throughout his pro career. Before the 2012 London Olympics, for instance, he did three weekly workouts at world-record marathon speed — a 4:42 pace per mile — pushing each session for as long as he could.
It is impossible to know for sure whether Hall’s extreme approach helped or hurt his performance. Would he have run even better times if he had not demanded so much from his body? Or did he have to train that way to find his peak? Regardless, he was the rare American marathoner who challenged the sport’s dominant athletes from East Africa. His landmark time for an American runner was achieved in an uncommonly fast Boston Marathon field. On a course ruled ineligible for an official record, he led most of the race at blistering speed until he was beaten at the end and finished fourth.
Hall and Keflezighi established themselves as the best American marathoners of their generation. Training together in California, they developed a respectful rivalry.
In the 2014 Boston Marathon, when Keflezighi pulled away about 10 miles from the finish in what became a historic American victory the year after the Boston bombings, Hall said he worked with his fellow American Nick Arciniaga to slow the chase pack of East Africans, which could not catch Keflezighi in the final miles.
Hall faded to 20th place, in the last major marathon he finished, but said he embraced any consequences of risk in racing.
For the last five years, Hall has lived as an Olympian hermit, tucked away in a valley in the mountains of Northern California with his family, where they can be close to their church, a charismatic evangelical Christian fellowship. Still supported by Asics, he withdrew from formal coaching and team training altogether, beginning instead what he referred to as faith-based training.
The approach has drawn skeptical respect from his peers.
After initial success — he ran his fastest marathon right after starting faith-based coaching — Hall has finished short of his best times in every other race he has run since adopting the new training regimen. But he credits his strong religious faith with helping him endure the pain of athletic setback and, now, with easing his transition to retirement.
In October, the Halls adopted four sisters, ages 5 to 15, from an orphanage in Ethiopia, where they spent several months training last year. The girls did not speak English, so to prepare for the adoption, the Halls took Amharic lessons, practicing the language with their Ethiopian running partners.
Hall said fatherhood would be a major priority for him, along with volunteering for the Steps Foundation, a nonprofit he started with Sara, which engages the running community to fight global poverty by improving health.
For now, his main pursuit is coaching Sara, along with her other coach, Steve Magness, as she seeks her first Olympic spot at the marathon trials next month.
When Hall spoke of his retirement, he displayed his race jerseys, all immaculately preserved on hangers, unwashed, and with their racing bibs still attached. He looked triumphant as he assembled them, but then his mood seemed to shift.
