OVER the last two decades, more and more Americans have begun patronizing their local farmers markets. From 1994 to 2014, the number of farmers markets throughout the country increased almost fivefold. Many consumers frequent these markets because they believe that the foods they purchase there are healthier and safer than the same items sold at supermarkets, posing less risk of food-borne illness.
Yet no one really knows whether what is sold at farmers markets is less likely to make you sick. For one thing, the publicly available data on food-borne illness from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention are limited: Only the location where the food was prepared is available, and even that is not always recorded. You cannot use these data to link an outbreak or case of food-borne illness to the specific place where the food was purchased.
But that doesn’t mean that you can’t look for intriguing correlations. Two colleagues and I recently assembled a data set that matched the number of cases and outbreaks of food-borne illness with the number of farmers markets in each state and in each year for 2004, 2006, and 2008 to 2013.
As we will report in an updated version of an unpublished working paper released last summer, we found correlations that, in statistical parlance, are too robust to ignore. First, we found a positive correlation between the number of farmers markets per capita in a given state and in a given year and the number of reported outbreaks, regardless of type, of food-borne illness per capita in that state that year. Then, we found a similar positive correlation between farmers markets per capita and reported individual cases of food-borne illness per capita.
More interestingly, we found similar positive correlations between farmers markets per capita and outbreaks per capita of norovirus, a common cause of gastroenteritis. Likewise, we found a similar positive correlation between farmers markets per capita and outbreaks per capita of Campylobacter jejuni, a bacterium typically found in animal feces that is also a common cause of gastroenteritis.
Our analysis also uncovered a number of dogs that did not bark. We found no statistically significant relationship between farmers markets per capita in a given state in a given year and reported outbreaks or cases of salmonella, E. coli or staph.
Throughout our analyses, we controlled for those factors that remain constant over time for each state. For a case of food-borne illness to show up in our data, for example, the person who becomes ill must consult a doctor. That doctor then has to notify county health authorities. Finally, county health authorities have to notify the Centers for Disease Control.
States, however, vary in how assiduously they report food-borne illness to the C.D.C. Controlling for constant factors allows us to rule out the possibility that our results are driven by states that both are better at reporting food-borne illness and have more farmers markets per capita.
Similarly, our analyses control for income per capita and, because the consumers who shop at farmers markets tend to be more educated than those who do not, for the proportion of college graduates in each state and in each year.
My co-authors and I are applied economists, not farmers, food scientists or epidemiologists. It is important to emphasize that our findings are correlations and that correlation does not necessarily imply causation. Given available data and methods, we can’t say whether the rise of farmers markets has actually caused an increase in the number of cases and outbreaks of food-borne illness.
Farmers markets are now part and parcel of the American food landscape. The correlations we have identified certainly constitute an issue that farmers, distributors, vendors, consumers and academics should look into more closely. Though more research is needed to identify any possible causes, policy prescriptions could be as simple as encouraging patrons of farmers markets to wash their produce more thoroughly.