In this short documentary, a 17-year-old Syrian films an intimate portrait of life in her refugee camp.
Khaldiya why are you standing outside on your own? “I’m looking at the people coming and going.” Arriving at the gate changed a lot of things in my life. It was the first time I’d been in a crowded place like this. There were children screaming and crying. It was freezing cold. There was no sleep. There was no warmth. A lot of thoughts were going through my head. From that moment I just felt like a different person. I was able to overcome my shyness. Now I am another kind of girl. A courageous girl. A courageous girl. My siblings didn’t use to play with their hands. They would only play if they got a good toy. In the camp their lives completely changed. They started playing with their hands and singing their beautiful children’s songs. This is my sister Shahib, a little lady. She’s always pedaling her feet as if she were riding a bicycle. The nice thing about here is that the kids are always active. My siblings never wanted to do anything at home. What changed their minds in the camp? Honestly, I don’t know. I started to teach kids because I was deprived of education. And they shouldn’t also be denied. Our kitchen never used to be dark. But in the camp, our kitchen is always dark in the evening. There’s no light at all except what comes in from outside of the kitchen... the light of the caravans. In Syria, I used to be afraid. I needed the lights on in the kitchen. Here I can visit Marah at night with just a small lantern. And I am not afraid. In Syria it was from school to home until 8th grade. When I stopped in 8th grade I just stayed at home. But here we go to the center and we learn photography. We are more open-minded about life. In Syria I didn’t have a lot of friends except at school. We never hung out with people in the neighborhood. Here I have many, many friends. They learn from me, and I learn from them. My siblings, my mother, my father, and grandmother... My head has too much going on in it. Khaldiya, imagine yourself 20 years older. What do you think the older Khaldiya would ask the younger Khaldiya? Do you regret the things that you’ve done at this age? Do you regret what you did at 17? This is what I imagine even though it’s impossible... Marah and I are in something like college dorms, but not in the same room. We are studying on our own and we’re comfortable. We would have to be studying on our own, real far away from our parents. Then we could focus on our studying. When I am mad I automatically start filming and it doesn’t matter how it comes out as long as I am filming. Especially when I take the shots from weird angles. When I film I feel at ease because I love filming. When I film I feel I am someone very important.
When I arrived at the Za’atari refugee camp in Jordan three years ago, I was overwhelmed. My family left our village in the region of Syria where the revolution began, after the area was bombed. My mother and six younger siblings and I suddenly became eight of the world’s 4.5 million Syrian refugees, and we have been living with 80,000 of them in our camp ever since.
Life in a refugee camp was different from what I’d expected. While it is hard in many ways, it has challenged me to be stronger and more independent. Now I am sharing my experiences in this Op-Doc video, which I made through a media workshop at an activity center in the camp in 2014, working with a visiting filmmaker to film as much of my life as I could.
Before learning to film, I felt like there was a huge part missing in my life. The only thing that filled it for me was filming. Filming makes me feel accomplished. I used to be shy, but when I started learning how to film, and also realized that the image of a refugee camp can be distorted by portrayals by outsiders, I knew that I needed to overcome this shyness — to speak not only to the community around me, but to people in the rest of the world. I walk through my days with my camera always in my hand, and when I encounter a scene I think people would be interested in seeing, I film it — life as it is.
I’m filming from my own personal perspective. I live in the camp, I am within the camp, and I know the camp. An outsider will miss a lot of the deeper meanings because they haven’t felt what it’s like to live here.
Now I am trying to pass on what I’ve learned about filmmaking to younger girls in this camp. I want to show the rest of the world that even though we live in a refugee camp, and have different lives from others, we still have dreams and ambitions. We are creative. We strive to rise above our limitations and work toward our dreams. I feel it’s my responsibility not just to tell the world that truth, but to let people see it for themselves.
