After belting out the moody opening song of her new musical, “A Ride on the Irish Cream,” Erin Markey, her long hair swaying across a microphone stand in the rehearsal room, paused to give her band notes.
“I want it be sexier,” she said, less than a week before previews begin at Abrons Arts Center on Wednesday. Then she turned to Emily Bate, who, besides playing guitar, wrote the score with Ms. Markey and Kenny Mellman, to discuss the cue for her to start strumming.
No performer in downtown theater has done more to prove that point than Erin Markey, whose penetrating blue eyes have become her signature. In a fevered glance, she moves between seduction and terror, and with the rise of an owlish eyelid, she pushes gentle vulnerability into cartoonish ridiculousness. In an interview later that day, Ms. Markey explained that her burning gaze was born from insecurity.
Along with charismatic turns in adventurous plays, portraying roles ranging from a flamboyant football player in a show from the Half Straddle troupe to a sultry heroine in an obscure Tennessee Williams drama, Ms. Markey has developed a cult following as an alt-cabaret star with swaggering confidence and off-kilter sense of humor. Her shows are rooted in her life, often mixing jokes and songs with stories about her childhood and her relationship with her Midwestern family.
Last year she performed a cabaret show at Joe’s Pub that was, among other things, an oddball love letter to her father, the kind that described the four times she made him cry. At the Duplex, she mounted “Deleted Scenes from Fun Home,” a production that mixed stand-up comedy with reflections of seeing that hit Broadway musical.
“Irish Cream” is, however, far from your typical Broadway show. The culmination of two and a half years of development, it’s as hard to pin down as she is. She describes it as a memory play about growing up in Michigan, but it is just as much about her current life. Ms. Markey portrays a woman named Reagan who has an intimate relationship with a pontoon boat (which her dad bought when Ms. Markey was 2), played by the performer Becca Blackwell, who has been in a relationship with Ms. Markey for five years.
Some of Ms. Markey’s earliest memories of musical theater were from her father, a marketer in telecommunications who, for years, would loudly play the cast album to “The Phantom of the Opera” every night after work. Her mother worked part time as a medical assistant.
At the University of Michigan, Ms. Markey found inspiration in a class taught by Holly Hughes, the performance artist of N.E.A. Four fame. Ms. Bate, who met Ms. Markey in college, recalls one performance in which she portrayed a wailing baby. “She played it sexier than a normal baby and with those big, old dangerous eyes,” she said.
Once Ms. Markey graduated, she worked for five months in a strip club called Déjà Vu, a stint that she called a “master class,” helpful in developing her confidence and stage presence. She would return to those experiences in several shows, including the 2010 “Puppy Love: A Stripper’s Life,” whose title, like so much of her work, mixes sexuality with an oddly earnest childlike quality.
