Movies|Readers Respond: Oscars So White? Or Oscars So Dumb?
Readers Respond: Oscars So White? Or Oscars So Dumb?
#OscarsSoWhite or #OscarsSoDumb?
For the second year in a row, the Oscar ballot features only white contenders in the acting categories. Films depicting black lives were excluded from the best picture category.
As fury over the “whitewashing” of the awards erupted and the #OscarsSoWhite hashtag was revived on Twitter, The New York Times’s co-chief film critics, A. O. Scott and Manohla Dargis, and the critic at large, Wesley Morris, took part in a discussion about structural biases endemic to the movie industry.
In more than 1,000 responses to the critics’ exchange, readers joined the discussion, with some saying that the controversy reflects wider problems of race and diversity in the country. Other readers questioned the influence of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences as an infallible institution. Still, a large number of readers defended the nominations, rallying behind #OscarsSoRight.
Although Ms. Rampling was criticized for her comments, and she later said they were misinterpreted (a New York Times translation showed otherwise), the majority of Times readers were firmly in her camp.
For others, the ballot reflected a troubling reality — that Hollywood has a diversity problem.
Others preferred to keep the Oscar discussion focused on the performances and said the awards should be based on merit alone.
The conversation has undoubtedly drawn attention to diversity in Hollywood. Some readers took the opportunity to comment about the lack of Asians, Hispanics and women in film.
Many readers suggested it was a slippery slope and wondered where to draw the line.
“Should foreign film festivals take it perhaps a step further: require an equal amount of movies from Africa, Asia, Europe and the Americas? What about gender? A fair representation of gay, transgender and female directors and actors?” wrote H.G in Wyoming.
Other readers blamed the nomination process.
