Locked out of your car or home, you pull out your phone and type “locksmith” into Google. Up pops a list of names, the most promising of which appear beneath the paid ads, in space reserved for local service companies.
You might assume that the search engine’s algorithm has instantly sifted through the possibilities and presented those that are near you and that have earned good customer reviews. Some listings will certainly fit that description. But odds are good that your results include locksmiths that are not locksmiths at all.
They are call centers — often out of state, sometimes in a different country — that use a high-tech ruse to trick Google into presenting them as physical stores in your neighborhood. These operations, known as lead generators, or lead gens for short, keep a group of poorly trained subcontractors on call. After your details are forwarded, usually via text, one of those subcontractors jumps in a car and heads to your vehicle or home. That is when the trouble starts.
The phone number at Allen Emergency is now disconnected.
It is a classic bait-and-switch. And it has quietly become an epidemic in America, among the fastest-growing sources of consumer complaints, according to the Consumer Federation of America.
“I’m not exaggerating when I say these guys have people in every large and midsize city in the United States,” said John Ware, an assistant United States attorney in St. Louis, speaking of lead-gen locksmiths.
Many legitimate locksmiths contend that the solution should come not from law enforcement but from Google. Google says that it is working on improvements, and clearly the days are over when, as in 2009, a search for Manhattan locksmiths yielded a map so covered in red location dots it that looked like a bad case of the measles.
A Google spokesman said that the company worked hard to check bad actors and quickly removed listings that violate its policies.
But the company is still too easily tricked into listing lead gens, high up, even after years of redesigns and algorithm adjustments, critics say. Local service results have improved of late, but too many consumers are still getting ripped off because Google, the world’s biggest search engine, is perennially a step behind a group of sophisticated swindlers, according to experts in the field.
The flaws in the Google machine are well known to Avi, an Israeli-born locksmith, who asked that his last name be omitted from this story, citing threats by competitors. (“One told me there is a bounty on my head,” he said.) Avi has been at war with lead-gen operators for eight years. It’s like guerrilla combat, because the companies are forever expanding and always innovating, he said.
To demonstrate, he searched for “locksmith” in Google one afternoon in November, as we sat in his living room in a suburb of Phoenix. One of the companies in the results was called Locksmith Force.
The company’s website at the time listed six physical locations, including a pinkish, two-story building at 10275 West Santa Fe Drive, Sun City, Ariz. When Avi looked up that address in Google Maps, he saw in the bottom left-hand corner a street-view image of the same pinkish building at the end of a retail strip.
There seemed no reason to doubt that a pinkish building stood at 10275 West Santa Fe Drive.
Avi was skeptical. “That’s about a five-minute drive from here,” he said.
“That’s the address,” he said. He was pointing to a low white-brick wall that ran beside a highway. There was no pinkish building and no stores. Other than a large, featureless warehouse on the other side of the street, there was little in sight.
These ghosts don’t just game search results. They dominate AdWords, Google’s paid advertising platform. Nearly all of those ads promise “$19 service,” or thereabouts, a suspiciously low sum, given that “locksmith”-related ads cost about $30 or so per click, depending on the area.
In a search for locksmiths in Mountain View, Calif., home to Google’s headquarters, the first AdWords listing was 24hourlocksmithsanjose.net, which offered $19 service. Research into the company’s domain name revealed that it is owned by Yossi Assraf of Locksmith Advertising, in Portland, Ore.
Mr. Assraf also owns more than 800 other domain names, according to the website Whoisology, including 247westpalmbeach.com, 247locksmithlouisville.com, 247-locksmithcleveland.com, 247-locksmithjerseycity.com and so on.
Those have all the trappings of a lead gen. And, 247 Locksmith Advertising has an F rating from the Better Business Bureau, along with a list of nearly identical complaints.
Messages left for Yossi Assraf were not returned.
Recently, I sent Google the ad for 24hourlocksmithsanjose, as well as a screen shot of the fake Locksmith Force building and the names of about 20 other locksmiths that appeared to be lead gens. The company asked for a few days to look into the matter.
National data that could capture the scale of the lead-gen problem does not exist, largely because most of the complaints occur at the state level, by way of attorneys general, Better Business Bureaus and Yelp. Also, the sums involved are usually modest, so many people have no idea they have been swindled, or they know but don’t think it’s worth anyone’s while to contact the authorities.
Legitimate companies and the Associated Locksmiths of America, however, have been howling about lead gens since they first started popping up in the early 2000s.
The difference between people like Mr. Baldino and locksmiths sent by lead gens is not just a physical storefront; excellent locksmiths work out of cars and vans, too. Lead-gen locksmiths are essentially short-term hires, and their priority is not repeat customers. It’s quick cash.
Many of the locksmith lead gens are run by Israelis, and Avi learned their modus operandi by working for them. When he landed at La Guardia Airport in 2008, he wanted to work with computers, the field he had trained for in Israel. But it was the height of the recession, and he did not have many options.
A company in New Jersey, owned by an Israeli, hired him, gave him a week of training and told him he could keep 40 percent of every job. His instructions were to size up each customer and ask for as much money as possible. He quit, found an honest shop, eventually earned enough to open his own company and relocated to Phoenix.
Today, a well-oiled system keeps young Israelis flowing to the United States for locksmith jobs. Companies beckon on Israeli employment websites such as Maka (Hebrew for “score”). Among those currently hiring are Green Locksmith, Locksmith Garage, CT Locksmith and Mr. Locks. The latter, which claims its main office is in TriBeCa, promises that employees will earn as much as $4,000 a month and says it is looking for people “who are not afraid of new things.” Like many of these companies, Mr. Locks covers itself by stating — in Hebrew and on a site that caters to Israelis — that it is looking for United States citizens.
Many of the recruits later establish their own lead-gen operations, which then recruit more talent. This has increased competition and made deceiving Google an ever more esoteric pursuit. That was evident during a conversation with Roy Alverado, the owner of Locksmith Force, the company that created the fake pink building in Sun City. He insisted that he ran an authentic local business, with trained and courteous locksmiths.
As for that fake building: “We wanted to have a store in that area, but the rents were too high,” he said. He told a web design firm to create a building using Photoshop. Actually, all but one of the buildings are Photoshop creations, since Locksmith Force’s sole physical location is in Phoenix, Mr. Alverado said. The more buildings on the site, he candidly stated, the more people would believe they were calling someone who could show up at a car or house quickly.
A few months ago, he decided that he needed some help with search engine optimization. A company called Over the Top SEO showed up on the first page of an “SEO company” search, so he figured it was very good. Then he saw that the company was based in Israel. Mr. Alverado was sold. If he couldn’t beat the Israelis, he would hire them.
“We’re already seeing great results,” he said.
Even with the rise of Facebook and improvements to Apple Maps, Google is still the essential source of revenue for local businesses — 85 percent of all local search traffic reaches local businesses through Google, according to Mike Blumenthal, who writes a definitive blog on the topic.
In the interest of minimizing mischief, the methods Mr. Seely described will not be detailed here. But they involve chicanery with two platforms: Google My Business, essentially the company’s version of the Yellow Pages, and Map Maker, which is Google’s crowdsourced online map of the world. The latter allows people around the planet to log in to the system and input data about streets, companies and points of interest.
The most obvious symptom of abuse is a wild proliferation of lead-gen listings. Charles Eastwood, a locksmith in Phoenix, subpoenaed Acxiom, a data brokerage firm, as part of a lawsuit he filed against a group of purported lead gens in 2010. He wanted to know how many locksmiths were listed in Arizona.
Mr. Austin became a Regional Lead, the highest rank in Google’s Boy Scout-like badge system of incentives, a job — still unpaid — that required him to sign a nondisclosure agreement.
He was quickly locked in a struggle that seemed inspired by Cold War spycraft. Some lead-gen owners became Mappers themselves, hoping to stealthily protect their listings. They were essentially moles. One of them, who called himself Baton Sason, contacted Mr. Austin through a private detective.
“At first, he thought I was another spammer,” Mr. Austin recalled. When Mr. Sason realized that Mr. Austin was truly on Google’s side, he tried to win amnesty for his sites in exchange for help informing on his competitors. Mr. Austin played along for a few months, then deleted Mr. Sason’s sites too.
Initially, Mr. Austin regarded Google as a benign Goliath that cared about consumers and small businesses. But about 18 months after his campaign began, pessimism crept in. He realized, he said, that spammers were changing tactics much faster than Google was adopting countermeasures.
By the fall of 2012, Mr. Austin was disillusioned. He decided that the subtle approach to getting attention wasn’t working. So he did something obnoxious. In the middle of the Google Map of Los Angeles, he placed a marijuana grow house. Not a dispensary, which is legal.  Those are illegal. Then he highlighted the stunt on a Map Maker forum.
Today, Mr. Austin has the faintly bitter tone of a man who has left a cult, but he is cleareyed about why Google never seemed to respond quickly enough to spammers. It wasn’t a priority, he said. The company is dominated by software coders, and they want to solve the most interesting problems, or create the coolest products.
The justice system is the most obvious alternative to Google in the fight against locksmith lead gens, and in 2009, federal prosecutors in St. Louis went after three principals of Dependable Locks on charges of a variety of nationwide frauds. This was the most ambitious action ever taken against a suspected lead gen; postal inspectors had surprised the company by showing up at its headquarters in Clearwater, Fla., with a search warrant. Files were confiscated, employees were persuaded to tell all.
Little, it seems, went right after that. One defendant fled the country, according to prosecutors. In 2013, a federal magistrate judge recommended dismissing the case because the government had deported four witnesses, all of them former Dependable employees who might have helped the defendants. The judge also suggested that the case would be difficult for the prosecution to win because Dependable phone representatives usually added the phrase “and up” when quoting prices.
One of the prosecutors, Mr. Ware, the assistant United States attorney in St. Louis, respectfully disagreed with those findings.
One lesson of the Dependable case, which took years from inception to dismissal, is that the criminal courts are a terrible way to fight purported lead-gen locksmiths. Civil cases have fared no better. Mr. Baldino, the locksmith in Washington area, lost a case against Google and other directories in which he said the companies commingled legitimate and illegitimate players in listings. Last February, a Virginia state court found that Google had immunity under the Communications Decency Act, which extends to all information that does not originate with Google — “even when given notice that it has published false information,” the court concluded.
Apprised that Locksmith Force had been relegated to the Internet’s version of oblivion, Avi was in no mood to celebrate.
