CAMBRIDGE, Mass. — To make a good portrait, the photographer Henri Cartier-Bresson once counseled, “you have to try and put your camera between the skin of a person and his shirt.” It would be tricky for any portraitist, but especially daunting for Elsa Dorfman. Her camera is taller than she is, weighs as much as an N.F.L. linebacker and looks, from certain vantage points, like a 1970s liquor cabinet.
And yet for more than three decades, Ms. Dorfman has managed to make one of the world’s most unwieldy cameras, and one of the rarest — a 20-inch-by-24-inch Polaroid, one of only five originally made by the company here — into an instrument of such warmth, intimacy and latter-day bohemian spirit that her work has made her into a kind of folk hero in this tightly knit college town.
Over the last several months, Ms. Dorfman has been making it known to friends that she is trying to adopt something like a pose of total acceptance — she doesn’t know the Japanese word for it, or whether she’ll achieve it — toward retirement, at the age of 78. The main reason is that the film and chemicals she depends upon have not been mass-produced since 2008, when Polaroid, which had gone into bankruptcy years before, stopped making them. And the stockpile to which she has access is diminishing, despite post-Polaroid efforts by enthusiasts to keep the cameras running.
“It’s dwindling, and I’m dwindling,” she said.
But during a recent whirlwind tour of her home, archive, framing shop and the nearby portrait studio — through which more families, newlyweds, babies and recent graduates than she can count have passed — Ms. Dorfman didn’t seem like a woman about to take down her shingle. She stopped moving and telling stories only long enough to rifle through files and film. And while she now needs a little help wrestling the prints from her four-wheeled Buick of a camera, she still commands her studio, wearing a black apron and an implacable smile.
“She ran this camera alone for 30 years, which is kind of insane,” said Nafis Azad, director of photography for the 20x24 Studio, a privately held company that acquired Polaroid film stock and other materials for the big cameras in 2009. “Typically, two or three people run one of these things,” said Mr. Azad, who was in Ms. Dorfman’s studio one December afternoon, assisting with prints so large they felt less like photographs and more like sculptures made from photographic paper.
Ms. Dorfman — who began renting the camera for periods in 1980 and became its sole proprietor mostly, she says, because “I nagged Polaroid and I nagged them and I nagged them” — is among an exclusive group of photographers, including Chuck Close, Mary Ellen Mark, David Levinthal and William Wegman, to spend long periods with the camera, developed by Polaroid’s founder, Edwin H. Land, in the late ’70s to demonstrate the quality of his large-format film.
She came to photography relatively late, almost in her 30s, after a sheltered Boston upbringing that became what can only be described as a Zelig adulthood: a college year in Paris spent in the same hotel as Susan Sontag; a stint waitressing at the 1958 Brussels World’s Fair, where she was propositioned by the photographer Weegee (“I had no idea who he was!” she says); a job as a secretary for Grove Press in New York during the heyday of its obscenity battles and its ascendancy as a haven for Beat poets, who seemed to gravitate toward Ms. Dorfman like a mother soul.
It was at Grove that she met Ginsberg, who became a lifelong friend despite the fact that she was almost a teetotaler and he, at the time, a walking pharmacy. Their first encounter was inauspicious. “He went by my desk and asked, ‘Where’s the can?’ And I thought, ‘The can? What can?’ I’d never heard that before,” she recalled, rolling her eyes and chuckling.
What retirement will look like for her is anyone’s guess, though those who know her say it will probably mean only fewer pictures per year. During a recent photo session for this article, she received a call from a belly dancer in her 70s wanting her portrait taken, a request Ms. Dorfman could hardly refuse.
