In Donald J. Trump’s first television ad of the 2016 campaign, released last week, a photo of Hillary Clinton and President Obama flashes across the screen, followed by stark black-and-white images of the San Bernardino, Calif., attackers, Syed Rizwan Farook and Tashfeen Malik.
Donald J. Trump, the Republican presidential candidate, released his first TV spot Monday, repeating his call to “make America great again” and doubling down on his rhetoric against Muslims and immigrants.
In another ad released last week, Senator Ted Cruz’s campaign showed a swarm of insurance-commercial-ready actors rushing across a border, their sensible heels getting caught in the sand on their way to stealing American jobs. It was a deft political move on the Cruz campaign’s part — the ad implied the threat of Mexican immigrants without having to show them at all.
In the 2016 campaign, one thing candidates haven’t been afraid of is embracing fear, especially the fears they can stir up by exaggerating a threat posed by Muslims or by immigrants from Latin America. The intended audience for these ads — white people primed for such tactics — is taken for granted.
The ads are in many ways the direct descendants of a political advertisement from 1988 about a man named William Horton, who came to be known as “Willie.” While that ad didn’t end up deciding the election, it set the standard for race-baiting political ads for cycles to come.
Some background: In June 1986, while serving time in Massachusetts for the murder of a 17-year-old gas station attendant, Mr. Horton left prison on weekend furlough and never returned. Nine months later, he was tracked down by the police and convicted of stabbing a man and raping the man’s fiancée at gunpoint.
The ad that invoked this story, titled “Weekend Passes,” aired on a handful of news networks by a political action committee supporting George H. W. Bush for president in 1988. It was meant to imply that Mr. Bush’s opponent, Gov. Michael Dukakis of Massachusetts, was soft on crime.
Now, Mr. Dukakis readily admits he messed up by failing to defend himself against the ad. He says that not responding to the ad turned out to be “one of the dumbest decisions politically” that he ever made.
He said last week that he thought the ad was “particularly racist,” but feared that a counterattack would fan the flames.
“Somebody takes a shot at you, you really don’t want to dignify it by taking the guy on and making it even bigger than it was in the first place,” he said.
The story of Mr. Horton’s escape was already national news before the ad aired. On the floor of the House, Representative Newt Gingrich read news articles that criticized the Massachusetts furlough program, and by extension, Mr. Dukakis. Then, Al Gore indirectly brought up furloughs at a Democratic primary debate with Mr. Dukakis.
“If you were elected president, would you advocate a similar program for federal penitentiaries?” Mr. Gore asked him.
From there, it wasn’t hard for consultant Lee Atwater, a seasoned Republican pugilist, to seize upon the issue and create the ad attacking the Democratic nominee. The ad succeeded in painting Mr. Dukakis as soft on crime — never mind that at that time, furlough programs were common across the country.
Mr. Atwater eventually apologized for the ad, but the damage was done.
Ken Goldstein, a professor of political science at the University of San Francisco, said that by being played over and over on national news programs, the Willie Horton ad took on a second life.
The Willie Horton ad, then, is a clear example of how political debates can be won: through the precise, tactical application of fear, no matter the moral consequences. And that line of attack isn’t likely to die out anytime soon.
The debate surrounding sanctuary cities offers a more modern example of racially charged rhetoric like the Horton ad. In the 1980s, sanctuary city policies caught on around the country. The policies were intended to encourage people to report a crime, enroll their children in school, or go to the emergency room without the fear of being asked about their immigration status. There is evidence that sanctuary cities tend to be safer than non-sanctuary cities.
This past summer, the topic of sanctuary cities gained new political life among Republicans. In July, 32-year-old Kathryn Steinle was shot in San Francisco by Juan Francisco Lopez-Sanchez, an undocumented immigrant who had been deported five times before. Evidence suggests that the shooting was an accident, but that didn’t stop it from becoming politicized. After the shooting, both Mr. Cruz and Senator Rand Paul introduced bills to block sanctuary cities. Mr. Trump has called for a ban on sanctuary cities, saying he is the “only one who can fix” the situation, while Ms. Steinle’s brother complained that Mr. Trump politicized his sister’s death.
The Republican candidates’ implied reasoning here is that illegal immigrants pose a threat to city dwellers’ safety. John Sides, a professor of political science at George Washington University, said the rhetoric of the Willie Horton ad mirrors the rhetoric candidates have taken with regard to illegal immigration.
As humans, we tend to fear the wrong things, assigning more risk to scarier-sounding dangers and less risk to quotidian ones. We are more afraid of being in a plane crash than a car accident driving to work, even though the latter is much more likely to happen.
Depressingly, appealing to voters’ fears is often a savvy political strategy; a recent survey conducted by Chapman University found that nearly a quarter of Americans have voted for a political candidate out of fear. And reading the subject lines of some fund-raising emails, you’d think a $3 donation was the one thing standing between your favored candidate and his or her certain death.
When we allow one bad actor to color our entire opinion of a sweeping policy, be it furlough programs or sanctuary cities, that’s an example of the fear fallacy grinding into motion. We have a tendency to let our fears outweigh the level of risk they represent. And come election season, we see those fears laid bare, in a 60-second television spot.