MARION, Ala. — When Patricia Church, a 41-year-old warehouse worker, felt sick recently, she suspected that she had a cold. But she also feared something more deadly that has been going around this small, impoverished city: tuberculosis.
Marion is in the throes of a tuberculosis outbreak so severe that it has posted an incidence rate about 100 times greater than the state’s and worse than in many developing countries. Residents, local officials and medical experts said the struggle against the outbreak could be traced to generations of limited health care access, endemic poverty and mistrust — problems that are common across the rural South.
More than two dozen others have been infected but have not shown symptoms and can be easily treated. State officials expect that figure will increase as hundreds, and possibly thousands, more people are tested.
The authorities said the outbreak had spread so widely and lasted so long because patients had been reluctant to disclose their contacts to public health officials. Some of that is linked to suspicions that the health officials will report illegal activity to law enforcement, but it is also connected to worries of being ostracized, or at least stigmatized, in a community as small as this one.
Others suggested that the history of medicine in Alabama, including the notorious medical experimentation in Tuskegee, was hampering efforts to contain tuberculosis.
In 1932, the United States Public Health Service began a study of untreated syphilis that involved 600 black men in Macon County, Ala., which includes Tuskegee. The men, many of them sharecroppers who lived in poverty, agreed to participate in the study and received certain medical services for “bad blood.” But researchers failed to make complete disclosures about their work, and the men were not offered penicillin, which in 1947 became the recommended treatment for syphilis. In 1972, a federal panel found that the study was “ethically unjustified,” and the government ended it that year.
Many people in Marion, where about 63 percent of the residents are black, said they knew little about what had happened in Tuskegee, but they often said their wariness of medical professionals had been passed on through generations. Some said the dire nature of the tuberculosis warnings made them feel that they had little choice but to consult heath officials.
But they also said they believed that the authorities had not moved aggressively enough to contain the disease before it swelled into an outbreak in Marion.
The TB outbreak has implicitly reinforced Marion’s chronic divides of race and class, particularly because of a controversial plan to compensate people if they submit to blood screenings. With money from a federal grant, health officials in Alabama are offering residents $20 for initial tuberculosis testing, $20 for a follow-up visit and another $20 for keeping an appointment for a chest X-ray, if one has been recommended. Anyone who is found to have been infected can receive $100 for completing treatment.
Some Marion residents acknowledged that they would be tested only because of the financial incentive.
Screening incentives are not unprecedented, but they are usually tailored to far narrower groups, like people who lived in a homeless shelter at a certain time. Researchers said an offer to an entire city, no matter its size, was extraordinarily rare.
In other potential outbreaks, Dr. Chaisson said, people sometimes demanded testing, even if experts believed they had been at minimal risk for exposure.
The first days of incentivized testing brought extraordinary numbers to the squat Health Department complex, where someone had taped to the counter a piece of paper that read, in pink highlighter, “TB testing sign in,” above an arrow. Ms. Barrett said nearly 800 people were tested last week.
No one is certain of what will happen if the new testing effort fails. But Mayor Anthony Long said he already feared that the repercussions of the outbreak, whenever it ended, would linger.
