Throughout most of 2015, the administration of Gov. Rick Snyder told the residents of Flint, Mich., that their tap water was safe to drink. But emails released on Thursday suggest the state was concerned about its own employees’ exposure to the city’s water as early as January of last year, even arranging for purified water to be provided at a state office building there.
The emails depict an exchange that month between employees of two state departments that expresses concern about the water’s safety within the Michigan government long before Mr. Snyder acknowledged to residents in the fall that there was a problem.
The correspondence — between employees of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and the Michigan Department of Technology, Management and Budget — was obtained by a liberal advocacy group, Progress Michigan. The news was reported on Thursday by The Detroit Free Press.
Lonnie Scott, the executive director of Progress Michigan, accused the state government of valuing the well-being of its employees more than that of Flint’s residents.
“While residents were being told to relax and not worry about the water, the Snyder administration was taking steps to limit exposure in its own building,” Mr. Scott said in a statement.
State employees exchanged messages showing concern about the safety of the water at a state office building in Flint in January 2015, months before the Snyder administration acknowledged problems with the city's water.
The email exchange began on Jan. 9, 2015, when Jeanette Doll, an employee of the management and budget department, which oversees state buildings, wrote to Jennifer Wolf, an employee of the environmental department, to forward her a “facility notification” regarding the State Office Building in Flint.
The management and budget department had recently been told by city officials that the tap water no longer met safety standards, the document said. It wanted to reassure employees of the state office that it would provide coolers of purified water.
Ms. Doll sent the notification to Ms. Wolf with a question attached: Would the environmental department be able to determine by March 1, 2015, whether the tap water contained unsafe levels of trihalomethanes, or T.T.H.M., a by-product of chlorine that had been added to the water to kill coliform bacteria?
Senate Democrats denounced the Michigan government’s response to the Flint water crisis on Thursday as they announced they would seek $600 million in federal aid for the city.
Ms. Doll’s email was forwarded at least twice by environmental department employees, according to the email thread. One of the recipients was Stephen Busch, a district manager in the department’s drinking water division who was responsible for Flint.
“Steve, appears certain state departments are concerned with Flint’s WQ,” wrote Michael Prsyby, an engineer in the department, using an abbreviation for water quality.
Mr. Busch has since been reassigned within the department and has no role in resolving the water crisis, according to The Detroit Free Press.
On Friday, Mr. Snyder said in an interview with a Detroit radio station that he was unaware state employees in Flint had been given purified water starting in January 2015, The Associated Press reported.
The release of the email thread is certain to increase pressure on Mr. Snyder, who has been heavily criticized over the water crisis and the government’s response.
The problem began to emerge in 2014, when a state-appointed emergency manager changed the way Flint got its water, partly to save money. The city switched from Lake Huron water, processed and delivered by Detroit, to water from the polluted Flint River, on whose banks the State Office Building sits.
Residents began to complain about the color and odor of the water soon after the change but were repeatedly told the water was safe, until tests showed elevated levels of lead in the blood of the city’s children.
The lead began to seep into the water because of a lack of corrosion control and has remained present in the system even after the city switched back to Lake Huron water.
Mr. Snyder has said he is committed to fixing the problem but he has so far not said when it would be safe for Flint residents to drink tap water without using a filter. He has also declined to say when thousands of water service lines in the city that are made of lead would be replaced, a key step toward convincing the public that it is safe to drink from the tap.
Mr. Scott, of Progress Michigan, said Thursday that the emails suggested the state did not move as slowly as it at first appeared.
“Sadly, the only response was to protect the Snyder administration from future liability and not to protect the children of Flint from lead poisoning,” he said.