A man who fought his murder conviction while he was behind bars for 17 years and ultimately won an exoneration without a lawyer has reached a $3.75 million settlement with New York City.
The settlement, announced on Friday by Comptroller Scott M. Stringer, puts a dollar value on the time the man, Roger Logan, spent behind bars when he should have been free. By the time Mr. Logan walked out of court in June 2014, at age 53, his parents had died, his younger brother had died, and his daughters, young girls when he was imprisoned, had their own children.
Mr. Logan has also settled with New York State for $2.975 million, said Harold Baker, the lawyer who handled Mr. Logan’s civil claims after he was freed.
The law allows victims of wrongful convictions to bring a separate claim against the state, in addition to what they might file against the city (including individual police officers and prosecutors).
Mr. Logan was convicted of fatally shooting a man in a Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, vestibule in 1997, with the police and prosecutors alleging Mr. Logan murdered the man as retribution for the theft of a gold chain after a dice game.
He was cleared of the murder in 2014 after an investigation by the Conviction Review Unit of the Brooklyn district attorney’s office. After his exoneration, he notified the city he would sue. The comptroller’s office has the authority to settle claims before they are filed as lawsuits, and has been doing so frequently in wrongful-conviction cases and some civil rights cases. It has settled eight wrongful-conviction cases for a total of $41 million since 2014, according to comptroller records.
Under Ken Thompson, a Democrat, who became district attorney in 2014, Brooklyn’s Conviction Review Unit has cleared 17 men of old convictions, mostly murders.
The unit is examining all the cases involving a retired detective, Louis Scarcella, whose questionable methods were investigated by The New York Times. It has upheld 38 of those and moved to clear the convictions in 17 others so far, according to the district attorney’s office.
Mr. Scarcella worked on Mr. Logan’s case, and, after he heard about the scrutiny of Mr. Scarcella, Mr. Logan wrote the district attorney’s office from prison, asking them to revisit his conviction.
“He realized, ‘That’s the guy that came to my house, dragged me down to the precinct and forced me to sign a statement’ ” saying he was there at the time of the crime, Mr. Baker said.
Mr. Scarcella’s lawyers have maintained the detective did nothing to contribute to wrongful convictions in the cases being questioned.
All along, Mr. Logan said he was innocent. There had been a dice game and his chain was stolen, he said, but he had recovered the chain and he and the thieves let the matter rest.
Investigators and lawyers for the review unit did not have DNA results or newly uncovered evidence to help in Mr. Logan’s case. Instead, they reviewed prosecution arguments, witness statements and other records, and returned to the site of the crime, at 373 Chauncey Street.
As in several of the other flawed Brooklyn prosecutions, the government had relied largely on a single eyewitness.
The eyewitness, Aisha Jones, said she knew Mr. Logan from around the neighborhood; had seen him on July 23, the day before the murder, at a dice game; and had seen him throughout the day of the murder, July 24, from about noon onward.
She described how she saw Mr. Logan kick open the door to the Chauncey Street vestibule and start firing, and how she heard 10 shots in rapid succession. She said she ran upstairs to her apartment, and from her window, saw him finish shooting.
A lawyer in the Conviction Review Unit, however, saw something suspicious in the files. Ms. Jones was arrested on July 23. Looking into it, he found that the earliest she could have been released after the arrest was 7 p.m. on July 24.
That meant she could not have seen Mr. Logan at the dice game, nor throughout the day of the murder, and that could have made her entire identification of Mr. Logan inadmissible, lawyers with the unit said.
The lawyer and an investigator then spoke to four other witnesses. Two were the admitted gold-chain robbers, and they backed up Mr. Logan’s account. Only one of the four said he saw Mr. Logan at the crime scene, and that man said he did not see Mr. Logan shoot.
Finally, the lawyer and the investigator went to 373 Chauncey Street. The investigator mimicked the sound of 10 gunshots being fired in quick succession from the vestibule as the lawyer tried to run from the street to Ms. Jones’s apartment, which Ms. Jones claimed she did in time to see the final shot. They determined it was all but impossible to cover that distance in such a short time.