When Carol Sue Johnson, 73, wheels her silver Mazda S.U.V. out of her driveway in suburban Minneapolis, she doesn’t know how much money she will make driving for the ride-hailing service Uber, but she’s sure she will have an adventure.
Her passengers run the gamut, she said, from three visiting Chinese business executives who were surprised to see a female driver, to teenagers needing a ride to hockey practices or games.
Ms. Johnson is among a growing number of older Americans who are driving for Uber or its competitor Lyft to augment their retirement income. Some drivers say it is a great chance to be independent and earn extra cash on their own schedule. But others, including some drivers, say it is exploitation of older people who work as independent contractors, without any benefits, because their age means they have a harder time finding full-time employment.
Many retirees, like Ms. Johnson, drive part time, about 20 to 30 hours a week; others may drive full time, which in many ways takes them out of the fully retired category.
Drivers are in such demand that last July Uber and Life Reimagined, a subsidiary of AARP, the organization for people over 50, formed a partnership to recruit more people as drivers.
They are trying to tap into the 50-and-older work force, a segment that is growing steadily, according to an AARP report released last year.
As the population ages and more baby boomers challenge traditional retirement norms, the number of older workers should continue to rise. One reason is that many people are leaving the full-time work force with less money than they need to support themselves at a comfortable standard of living.
Uber, which surveyed drivers in 2014 and 2015, found that nearly one-fourth of its drivers were 50 or older.
Older drivers are prized because they usually own their own cars, have adequate auto insurance and, according to insurance statistics, have fewer crashes. Uber’s collaboration with Life Reimagined, a group that helps people navigate life transitions, provides access to the group’s 1.4 million members through online and in-person workshops. Through the alliance, Uber offers a $35 incentive for those who sign up to become drivers and drive 10 trips.
Molly Spaeth, a spokeswoman for Uber, said the company had enlisted nearly 600 drivers as of this month with its AARP collaboration.
Uber and Lyft — which said it did not track the ages of its drivers — and their supporters contend that on-demand employment lets companies provide work without the costly rights and perks like overtime pay and vacation time, that attach to full-time employees.
Besides, David Plouffe, an Uber board member, argued, most drivers work far less than full time. As many as half drive only 10 hours a week, he said in a speech in November, and 61 percent, or nearly two-thirds, have other job commitments.
But Uber does not break out the exact percentages of full-time and part-time drivers. Some drivers who work full time complain that in addition to not having benefits, they must work longer hours to earn a living wage, especially after Uber last year cut the rates it charges passengers.
Drivers in Seattle who belong to the App-Based Drivers Association, a group allied with the Teamsters union, won the right last month to negotiate pay and working conditions. That makes a lot of sense to full-time drivers like Musse Bahta, 42, who said he had to spend more time on the road since Uber lowered the per-mile fare to $1.35.
For most senior drivers, the biggest advantage is the extra income. Many of those who continue working after 65 do so because they would be too poor otherwise, according to a new report from the labor-backed Economic Policy Institute that found the current retirement system inadequate.
But driving for a ride-booking service, some retirees said, also can offer more than money.
“I love the freedom, the flexibility — and the cash coming in every week,” said Maureen Mahon, 59, who first saw an Uber advertisement on the side of a bus in Manhattan. Ms. Mahon, who lives in Brick Township, N.J., said she had been laid off twice in recent years from Wall Street, and has been driving intermittently since mid-2014.
Another attraction, compared to driving a taxi, is safety, since customers are screened and no cash is exchanged. So, too, is the opportunity for drivers to shape the job on their own terms.
That leaves him plenty of time to be active in his church. “Sometimes I go ‘ubering’ after our Wednesday morning fellowship meeting,” Mr. McPhail said. He is trying to persuade his wife, Kathryn, to become a driver when she retires from her insurance-related job.
In Minneapolis, Ms. Johnson says most of her earnings come from ferrying executives between the airport and major companies, like Cargill and General Mills, in the suburbs. At busy times, she can make around $40 an hour. Over all, she said, she works about 40 hours a month, grossing around $600.
