Paul Goldberg’s provocatively titled first novel, “The Yid,” is set in the Soviet Union and begins in late February 1953, just as staggering change is about to occur. Only a small part of what the book describes is a matter of record: Joseph Stalin died on March 5 at his dacha just outside Moscow. 
So Mr. Goldberg has written a book that revolves about Stalin’s final blow against the country’s remaining Jews. There is evidence for this, but “The Yid” is a novel, not a heavily researched historical document. More important, Mr. Goldberg comes up with a team of Yiddish-speaking jokester-superheroes who are at the heart of his story, and who make it their mission to avenge countless acts of anti-Semitism, both real and anticipated.
Mr. Goldberg, who immigrated to the United States from Russia in 1973, has drawn heavily on the lives of friends and relatives in Russia without making their presence as characters seem forced. One of the fierce fighters who remembers World War II comes straight from the imagination of author’s grandfather, whose name is used. So is that of his grandfather’s lover, a woman almost too glamorous and strong for Mr. Goldberg to have made up.
Many of the book’s characters are actors — divinely hammy ones, if that may be said about the Yiddish theater — who quote from “Kinig Lir,” the Yiddish version of Shakespeare’s “King Lear.” Mr. Goldberg was only a boy when his father introduced him to the play’s Yiddish translator. Even Mr. Goldberg’s knowledge of viciously anti-Semitic urban legends comes into play, and the book raises the myth of a Jewish girl arrested in Moscow in 1944 and accused of baking Christian blood into matzos. If Mr. Goldberg can get to the bottom of this vile story he would like to. In an afterword, he gives the address where the incident supposedly occurred and asks if anyone who knows anything about it can still come forward.
Such calumny and slow-brewing hatred are an essential backdrop for the events that “The Yid” describes. The novel begins with a middle-of-the-night raid on the apartment of Solomon Levinson, a longtime actor with the Moscow State Jewish Theater. This is a routine event for the 25-year-old Russian officer in charge of rounding up Levinson. But the young man, Lieutenant Sadykov, is unaccustomed to theatrical behavior. He has been expecting the clichéd Jew that Russian propaganda has made so familiar.
“Have you seen old Yids creaking down the street, going wherever it is they go, carrying mesh bags and, in their pockets, rolled up newspapers? With the pigmentation of youth wiped off their faces, they still look dark, bird-like, bleached angels ready to fly to God, or the Evil One?” This is what Sadykov expected, not the natty old fellow in the ascot who bows ceremoniously, “his left hand resting on a cane, his right making a slow, ceremonious spiral on the way to the floor.” It may be 2:37 a.m., but Levinson exclaims, “Dear friends, welcome!” What should have been a perfunctory hauling away becomes a garrulous encounter that ends with two blades protruding from Sadykov’s back. Levinson always did pirouette well and know his way around daggers.
Enter the next major cast member. His timing is stagily perfect, since Levinson needs help out of this jam. Levinson has a dead officer in his apartment and a Black Maria — the menacing vehicle in which he was to be hauled away to prison — parked outside. And who arrives to conspire with him? Friedrich Robertovich Lewis, a black American originally named after Frederick Douglass. But given a Yiddish nickname of iffy accuracy, he still prefers Yiddish a lot more than the lynching talk he heard growing up in Omaha. And he can curse in Yiddish much more creatively than Levinson can. These two waste a lot of time wishing each other plagues and ailments before figuring out how to make that Soviet corpse and car go away.
The group of principals grows, as “The Yid” follows the broad structure of a three-act play. Soon there is a core group determined to stop the deportation and pogrom that could become Stalin’s last gift to Russian Jews. Its members will change the course of history. But how? Since Mr. Goldberg enjoys a good philosophical detour, he fills the story with characters like Kogan, a surgeon who lost his medical credentials a year earlier when Stalin’s regime claimed to uncover a terrorist plot by Jewish doctors planning to murder good Russian citizens. (This humiliation really happened.) Kogan thinks about political-historial epidemiology and wonders whether Stalinism will subside when Stalin finally does.
“We’ll strike tonight!” the characters declare en masse at the end of Act II. Because, sure enough, “The Yid” is about Stalin’s worst enemy as well as his favorite prey. Mr. Goldberg fuses these characters and all that they suggest to Stalin — Paul Robeson for Lewis, Anna Akhmatova for one of the book’s women — into one hellish vision to haunt that dictator during his last hours on earth. So he gets one last gift, too.