UNDERWOOD, Iowa — With the Iowa caucuses just over a week away, the Bernie Sanders youth brigade is on the move.
Seven hundred college-age volunteers from across the Midwest and as far away as California are streaming into Iowa to help get the vote out. Organizers on Iowa campuses are reserving rooms to turn into phone bank centers, distributing campaign-provided toe warmers to the foot soldiers and playing Mr. Sanders’s spoken-word version of “This Land Is Your Land” to motivate them.
Ahead of Feb. 1, the day Iowa voters finally have their say, the Sanders campaign is activating “Go Home for Bernie,” a plan to dispatch a fleet of rental cars, vans and buses, if necessary, to carry students who are from Iowa back to their hometowns, where they will have maximum impact on the caucuses.
With his talk of free tuition, unabashed unhipness and calls for political revolution, Mr. Sanders has undoubtedly struck a chord with young people. But they are one of the least dependable constituencies in politics, and his campaign acknowledges that beating Hillary Clinton in Iowa will require harnessing their enthusiasm, overcoming their history of dismal attendance and replicating the 2008 turnout inspired by the historic candidacy of Barack Obama.
“We are working very hard to make that happen,” Mr. Sanders, a Vermont senator, said in an interview on Thursday. “That is exactly what we are focusing on right now to Election Day,” he added.
Of the 15,000 people in Iowa who have done at least one volunteer shift, 27 percent are 18 to 24 years old, and 32 percent are 25 to 34, according to the campaign. The campaign has at least one representative, essentially a precinct captain, on 38 Iowa college campuses, where students will spend the final days calling likely voters, holding caucus training camps and figuring out how to get the greatest number of supporters to the largest number of precincts.
Mrs. Clinton, 68, also has sought to appeal to young voters, setting up her headquarters in Brooklyn, starring in a Snapchat video saying “Just Chillin in Cedar Rapids” and rolling out endorsements from Katy Perry and Lena Dunham, who campaigned for Mrs. Clinton in Iowa. But it is Mr. Sanders who, like Mr. Obama before him, has captured the imagination of many young voters. This is despite Mr. Sanders’s being a 74-year-old with white hair who plays up the grumpiness of the social studies substitute teacher he once was.
Jared Freemon, 20, a junior economics and marketing major at Drake University in Des Moines, said he liked Mr. Sanders’s ideas about making public college free and providing health care for all, as well as the senator’s candor in talking about the injustices minorities face.
“I think he cares for people in America, so whether it’s immigrants, or people coming over our borders, or the black and brown populations here, I can tell that he really does want equality,” Mr. Freemon said.
In New Hampshire, where the primary will be held Feb. 9, Veri di Suvero, a student at Dartmouth College, said she also liked the senator’s proposals, but mostly just believed that he believed in the revolution he called for.
“Bernie Sanders is the most unproblematic old white man we’ve ever heard of,” she said.
In a New York Times/CBS News poll this month, Mr. Sanders held a commanding national lead among Democratic voters under 45, with 60 percent to Mrs. Clinton’s 31 percent.
Expanding the voting universe to include more young people is central to his strategy in Iowa and New Hampshire, where he has been faring well in polls. But as the race moves on to more diverse states, Mrs. Clinton is hoping those gains will be outweighed by her support among African-Americans and Latinos, two key Democratic constituencies with which she is performing strongly.
In counting on the young, Mr. Sanders is swimming against a strong current of history. Younger citizens tend not to vote; in 2000, for instance, when both parties had competitive races, only 9 percent of Iowa caucusgoers were under 30, according to researchers based at the University of Maryland School of Public Policy.
The exception came in 2008, when Mr. Obama made young people a key part of the Iowa coalition that propelled him to victory; that year, 19 percent of caucusgoers were under 30.
That was despite an early January caucus date, when many college students were on break. The Obama campaign had to persuade students from out of state to come back.
This year, Mr. Sanders has the opposite challenge. College students will be in school, but concentrated in precincts around the universities where he is already expected to do well. The Sanders campaign has to persuade students who come from other parts of Iowa to go back to their home precincts, where a few votes could be the difference.
The campaign is even looking past the college ranks and sending campaign literature to high school seniors who will be 18 by the general election, and thus qualified to caucus. It has also created a website, provethemwrongandcaucus.com, that dares disaffected kids to vote.
John Della Volpe, the director of polling at Harvard’s Institute of Politics, said Mr. Sanders’s pull among the young was about “being authentic,” and also about how he had reached out to them.
Before Mr. Sanders even announced his candidacy, he had a dedicated, loyal and voracious cadre of supporters online. Since then, led by its 24-year-old digital director, Kenneth Pennington, the campaign has sought to expand that online support — Mr. Sanders now has more Facebook fans than Mrs. Clinton — and turn it into volunteers, apps and dollars. Mr. Pennington and his staff interact daily with supporters on Reddit, Facebook, Twitter and Slack, the online chat-room software.
The campaign’s senior strategist, Tad Devine, said that over the next few days the campaign would roll out six-second Tumblr ads and send emails and texts to voters it had identified as college students. It will also begin a web advertising campaign about the “Go Home for Bernie” program that uses geographic targeting to reach mobile phones around the colleges.
