The artist Mark Flood plays curator this winter with “The Future Is Ow” at Marlborough Chelsea. The prophetically titled exhibition gathers together the most futuristic work of the Houstonian’s artist circle, which includes Chris Bexar, Paul Kremer, El Franco Lee II and Susie Rosmarin. Billed as a group show governed by a common interest in digital printing, it celebrates years of fruitful friendship both in and out of the studio — and the informal layout, which includes a mattress floor and plywood fortresses, is more reminiscent of a clubhouse than an exhibition. “I get the idea and the title for a show at the same time,” explains Flood, who has been collecting his peers’ work for decades. “I don’t think the future is going to look like a James Bond movie; I think it will be some shelter where everyone sits on the floor surrounded by art.” Here, a look at Flood’s brave new world.
Houston’s iconic skyline comes to mind when looking at the artist Chris Bexar’s works — but appearances can be deceiving. “That’s a heat sink; it’s the computer’s radiator,” says Bexar, pointing at one of his blurred images. “It has a nice form; it reminds me of Modernist German architecture.” A former member of I Love You Baby, a painting collective, Bexar worked alongside Flood on a series of projects. “Chris’s work is really the most futuristic of the bunch, but he’s been doing this for years,” Flood says.
The painter El Franco Lee II’s digital prints hang across one wall of the gallery with stacked, plastic-wrapped multiples on the floor beneath. “I woke up one morning and realized I could put El Franco Lee II in the show because he printed all those multiples,” Flood says with a smile. “I wasn’t sure he’d let me hang them the way I wanted to, but I think the digitized prints play even in plastic wrap. They fit in with the others.” A painter whose work balances the jazz of Archibald Motley’s frenetic scenes and the childlike hand of Henry Taylor, the reserved El Franco Lee II’s work stands out for its more traditional artistic language. “I was worried they wouldn’t convey his art, but they absolutely do,” Flood says.
