Lois Weisberg, a whirlwind of civic enthusiasm whose decades of shepherding public arts projects to fruition deepened the cultural life and reputation of Chicago, died on Jan. 13 at her home in Miami. She was 90.
The cause was kidney failure, said her son Jacob, the chairman of the Slate Group of online magazines.
Beginning in the 1980s, Ms. Weisberg served two Chicago mayors — as the head of the office of special events in the administration of Harold Washington, who died in office in 1987, and, from 1989 to 2011, as the city’s commissioner for cultural affairs under Richard M. Daley.
In those roles she was responsible, in whole or in part, for creating programs that have featured hundreds if not thousands of performances and encouraged the participation of thousands if not millions of Chicagoans and visitors.
An abbreviated list of her contributions: In 1984, she helped start the Chicago Blues Festival, an annual series of free concerts on the greensward near Lake Michigan now called Millennium Park; the city now boasts of it as the largest blues festival in the world. Another musical extravaganza she pushed forward, the Chicago Gospel Music Festival, held its 30th program last spring. She was also the driving force behind an annual summerlong series of dance nights with live music in different dance genres.
In 1999, Ms. Weisberg imported an idea that originated in Switzerland: having local artists decorate some 300 fiberglass sculptures of cows, which were placed at different street locations around the city. The exhibition, “Cows on Parade,” was wildly popular and replicated in cities around the country and elsewhere.
In 1990, with Maggie Daley, Mr. Daley’s wife, pooling federal grant money with private donations, Ms. Weisberg helped turn an empty downtown lot into an arts apprenticeship program for students. By 1999, it had more than 3,000 participants, and it has since expanded beyond the arts under the umbrella organization After School Matters.
A diminutive, energetically sociable woman with seemingly indiscriminate curiosity, Ms. Weisberg gained wider recognition (and some local notoriety) in 1999 when Malcolm Gladwell wrote a long article about her in The New Yorker. He posited Ms. Weisberg, who would become a key figure in his best-selling book “The Tipping Point,” as an example of a rare but identifiable type of person: a connector.
“She’s the type of person who seems to know everybody,” Mr. Gladwell wrote. But beyond that, he added, she seems to know people from very different walks of life and has the personality to put the right combinations of them together.
Her connections included Tony Bennett and Allen Ginsberg, Arthur C. Clarke and Dizzy Gillespie, the longtime congressman Sidney Yates and Nichelle Nichols, who played Lieutenant Uhura on “Star Trek.” The list also included doctors, lawyers, environmentalists, real estate moguls, politicians, activists and street peddlers.
Lois Helen Porges was born on the West Side of Chicago on May 6, 1925, the daughter of Mortimer Porges, a lawyer for the State of Illinois, and the former Jesse Berger. She went to public high school, started college at the University of Illinois and graduated from Northwestern, where she studied theater directing.
Afterward, she started her own drama troupe, and in 1956, discovering that there was no celebration planned for the 100th birthday of George Bernard Shaw (he had died in 1950), she staged a Shaw festival and started a newspaper devoted to all matters Shavian. It was the beginning of her cultural connecting.
The newspaper evolved into an alternative weekly called The Paper, and its editorial meetings at her home turned into a regular salon where artsy Chicagoans and visiting writers and musicians knew to show up.
At the time, she lived with her first husband, Leonard Solomon — a drugstore owner whose brother-in-law was Irv Kupcinet, a Chicago Sun-Times columnist who specialized in celebrity comings and goings — and their two daughters.
Their home was a frequent overnight stopover for passers-through, among them Lenny Bruce, whose comedy Ms. Weisberg claimed not to like — “I just couldn’t stand his jokes, his act, all the words he was using,” she told The Tribune in 2008 — though she did, she said, like him. Bruce once answered the door wearing only a towel to find Ms. Weisberg’s mother waiting there, she said.
Her marriage to Mr. Solomon ended in divorce, and she later married Bernard Weisberg, a lawyer and later a judge whom she first noticed at a party for Ralph Ellison — then a visiting lecturer at the University of Chicago — but who did not give her the time of day.
To get his attention, by Mr. Gladwell’s account, she wrote about Mr. Weisberg for a newspaper in the university neighborhood, The Hyde Park Herald, but it didn’t work: He didn’t call. So she called Ellison, whom she did not know, and said she wanted to have a party in his honor. When Ellison agreed, she sent an invitation to 100 people, including Bernie Weisberg, who asked her out — to a performance by Lenny Bruce.
Mr. Weisberg died in 1994. In addition to her son Jacob, she is survived by another son, Joseph, the creator of the television series “The Americans”; a daughter, Kiki Ellenby; a sister, June Rosner; eight grandchildren; and three great-grandchildren. A daughter, Jerilyn Fyffe, died in 2011.
Ms. Weisberg founded an advocacy group to support Chicago’s parks and another group that helped rescue rail service from South Chicago into Indiana.
In The Tribune’s obituary, Jacob Weisberg recalled going backstage at the Blues Festival and spotting his mother in conversation with Keith Richards of the Rolling Stones.
