The governor of Michigan said on Friday that race was not a factor in the state’s response to lead contamination in the drinking water in Flint, a poor, majority-black city where the supply has been tainted for more than a year, but for much of that time, state officials insisted that it was safe to drink.
Later in the day, Gov. Rick Snyder suspended two environmental regulators over their roles in the crisis.
Months after the city of Flint, Mich., switched from a Detroit water supply to one from the Flint River, contaminants have sickened people. Residents have filed lawsuits, and the governor has apologized.
An interviewer, Mika Brzezinski, cited a New York Times article that asked, “If Flint were rich and mostly white, would Michigan’s state government have responded more quickly and aggressively to complaints about its lead-polluted water?” Many Flint residents, and Democratic politicians including Hillary Clinton and Flint’s mayor, Karen Weaver, have said the answer is yes.
Mr. Snyder acknowledged failures on the state’s part. “If you look at it, it was people being much too technical, not having the culture of asking the common-sense questions, and then the tone of how things were done,” he said.
But he also deflected blame from his high-level appointees, questioning the competence of state workers who analyzed the quality of the water and the threat it posed to residents.
The two state employees he suspended work for the Department of Environmental Quality, but his office did not identify them by name or position. After an investigation, they could face further discipline. The suspensions were the first stemming from the Flint emergency, but not the first personnel changes.
The director and chief spokesman for the department resigned last month, and two administrators overseeing water quality enforcement were reassigned to other duties within the department.
On Thursday, the regional administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, Susan Hedman, announced her resignation, amid criticism that she took no action for months after learning of Flint’s water problems last year.
How the crisis developed, and which neighborhoods had the highest lead levels.
A specialist at the federal Environmental Protection Agency began warning the state last February that its testing was probably understating lead levels in Flint’s water, but state officials dismissed those concerns, and the federal officials declined to go public with them.
Researchers at Virginia Tech who have looked into the lead poisoning contend that state health officials knew of the lead problem for months but that the Department of Environmental Quality suppressed the information and misled the public.
State officials have acknowledged being much too slow to take complaints about Flint’s water seriously, but critics say that even since the lead problem became public knowledge in September, the governor has been late to act.
It was not until this month that Mr. Snyder declared a state of emergency; sent a small contingent of National Guard troops to help with distributing bottled water, water filters and lead testing kits; and requested and obtained a federal emergency declaration from President Obama.