The University of Missouri men’s basketball team opened its 2013-14 season at home with the standard mismatch designed to invigorate fans. On that night in early November, the Tigers scored 89 points, kept visiting Southeastern Louisiana to just 53 — and did not win.
That’s right: Missouri 89, Southeastern Louisiana 53, but no win for good old Mizzou.
In fact, Missouri scored more points than its opponents in each of the next nine games yet has not one victory to show for it. The team outscored Southern Illinois by 13, the University of Hawaii by 12 and Gardner-Webb by 9. Its record by that point: 0-0.
In the case of the 2013-14 Missouri Tigers, every one of the team’s 23 victories has been vacated, leaving only its 12 losses to remain on the official ledger. Winless, then, for all of basketball eternity.
■ That a booster had provided “impermissible benefits” to three student-athletes and one prospective student-athlete. These forbidden benefits included the all-too-familiar no-show jobs, housing, a modest amount of cash ($520), iPads, meals and the use of a local gym.
■ That a second booster provided student-athletes and a few family members with a reduced rate at a hotel — with transportation provided by a student-manager for the team — as well as some meals and a ride on a recreational boat.
■ And that a former assistant coach provided a donor with the telephone number of the mother of a player looking for housing. Although the family paid the market rate for the housing, the coach’s actions violated N.C.A.A. bylaws.
The university also issued a list of punitive actions that included a ban from postseason play this year for the men’s basketball team, various recruiting restrictions, the loss of a couple of scholarships, a $5,000 fine, the permanent banishment of one booster, a two-year disassociation from another — and the vacating of all wins from the 2013-14 season.
Vacated victories — such as those of Missouri — must be reflected in all university athletics publications, including media guides and websites, said Emily James, a spokeswoman for the N.C.A.A. In addition, she wrote in an email, the archives of the N.C.A.A. and the conference — in this case, the Southeastern Conference — are updated to reflect the removal of wins.
Missouri’s interim chancellor, Hank Foley; its athletic director, Mack Rhoades; and its basketball coach, Kim Anderson, released statements expressing their disappointment in the past actions of others, as well as their resolve to do better.
“We will win at Mizzou and do so with integrity and class,” Rhoades said.
But university officials did not return requests for reflection on the psychological toll — if any — from the sudden evaporation of 23 wins. This was left to the former grand poobah.
Looking back, the 2013-14 Mizzou team may have been cursed from the start.
Just before the season began, the past caught up with the head coach, Haith. The N.C.A.A. suspended him for five games for improprieties that occurred while he was coaching at the University of Miami, when the Caligula of boosters, Nevin Shapiro, was providing money, prostitutes and other “gifts” intended to keep athletes content.
The suspension of Haith now may seem to hint of foreboding, but back then the embarrassment was lost amid the giddy promise of a new season. More than 2,000 fans showed up for the annual preseason scrimmage called the Black and Gold Game, at which players autographed team posters that, given the notoriety, might now be collectible.
By mid-December, Missouri was ranked among the country’s top 25 teams. But week by week, the team slipped into a kind of upper-level mediocrity, losing three SEC games in a row in early February. When the Tigers lost to Florida by 23 points in the conference tournament, they sealed their postseason fate: the N.I.T., the tournament of N.C.A.A. also-rans, from which they were ousted in the second round.
Without last week’s sanctions, the 2013-14 season would have been mostly forgotten. Considered not as good as the grand poobah’s freshman year, 2011-12, when the Tigers won 30 games and reached the N.C.A.A. tournament, but not as bad as his senior year, 2014-15, when they won only nine games.
Now it is a season branded with an asterisk, a season in which the joy of 23 victories — against West Virginia, against Arkansas, against Texas A&M in double overtime — lives in collective memory but not on the official tally.
