COLUMBIA, S.C. — After a week filled with attack ads and months of caustic debates, six of the Republicans running for president gathered in the same place on Saturday and showed they can, after all, get along.
In contrast to some of their television personas, the Republican candidates who showed up to the Kemp Forum on Expanding Opportunity here offered a cordial and substantive discussion about combating poverty, often agreeing with one another as they discussed issues including education reform, the role of states and how to better employ new technology.
In a noon panel, Senator Marco Rubio of Florida not only extolled his own background — the son of a bartender and a maid — but also noted that Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio, sitting next to him, understood the challenges of struggling Americans because he had lived through similar circumstances, with a father who was a mail carrier.
In an earlier session, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, Ben Carson, and Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey repeatedly complimented and agreed with one another, holding up their rivals’ ideas as smart policy.
Notably absent, though, were Donald J. Trump and Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, who lead in many national polls and have provided some of the more colorful and cutting moments of the campaign. Both were campaigning in Iowa, where the nation’s first caucuses are a little more than three weeks away. Former Gov. Mike Huckabee of Arkansas also attended the forum, while Carly Fiorina, who was scheduled to appear, missed her flight.
Candidates at the forum used their time to showcase their views on fighting poverty. Mr. Rubio, who had unveiled his own proposals in a speech two years ago on the 50th anniversary of President Lyndon B. Johnson’s war on poverty, said the Republicans needed to focus their assistance on breaking what he described as a vicious cycle.
“If you are a child born into a broken family, in an unstable home, in a dangerous neighborhood, in substandard housing, in a school that’s failing in your community, where the people on the street corners are drug dealers or not good role models, you’ve got six strikes against you,” he said.
In his 2014 speech and more recently, Mr. Rubio rejected the idea of raising the federal minimum wage, saying the move could lead to more automation and job losses, and said more welfare money should be turned over to states, praising those that promote work requirements for recipients.
Mr. Bush, whose own plan for the nation’s welfare system, released on Friday, also includes more state control and work requirements, spoke of the importance of allowing all Americans to have the chance to achieve earned success, or the “right to rise” — also the name of the “super PAC” supporting him.
“Compassion is not measured by how much money you spend through Washington, through a big administrative bureaucracy, and send it back down to other bureaucrats, filling out forms to eventually get back into a community,” he said.
Mr. Christie talked about his decision to double his state’s earned-income tax credit for low-wage workers.
“When folks lose hope, as Jeb talked about in his answer, a lot of them turn out of desperation to drugs, and then what we have is a situation where incarceration goes even higher,” he said.
Perhaps the most boisterous moments came when immigration protesters, who said they were undocumented, repeatedly interrupted Mr. Rubio before being escorted out. After the third interruption, he said, “We’re going to enforce our immigration laws, guys,” as the crowd applauded. He later joked that he wished they would interrupt Mr. Kasich instead.
The gathering was organized by the Jack Kemp Foundation, named for Jack Kemp, the Republican congressman and housing secretary who made fighting poverty with conservative principles a central issue. House Speaker Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, who considers Mr. Kemp a mentor and similarly has focused on poverty as one of his defining causes, and Senator Tim Scott of South Carolina, moderated the day’s panels.
The event in South Carolina, which heads to the polls on Feb. 20, also provided the candidates a chance to seek endorsements from some of the state’s crucial players, including Senator Lindsey Graham, who dropped out of the presidential race last month; Gov. Nikki Haley, and Mr. Scott. Mr. Ryan’s support is also coveted.
Mr. Christie has meetings scheduled with Ms. Haley and top South Carolina Republican activists on Wednesday in Charleston, when he returns to the state for Thursday’s Republican debate. And Mr. Bush has actively wooed Mr. Graham, securing dozens of his supporters by arguing that he is best qualified to lead on Mr. Graham’s main concern of national security.
Mr. Rubio, who is seeking to peel conservative voters away from Mr. Trump and Mr. Cruz, on Friday evening met with leaders of an anti-abortion march being held in Columbia this weekend. Mr. Bush appeared at a rally for the group on Saturday.
Some of the more personal comments at the forum came from Mr. Carson, a retired neurosurgeon, who seemed more comfortable with Saturday’s questions of domestic policy than he has been on foreign policy. He opened by referring to the economic struggles of his childhood.
