LOS ANGELES — Hollywood loves a comeback story. And right now, there is perhaps none better than Rich Ross and Discovery.
Concerned that its shows lacked diversity, thwarted by streaming services like Netflix and embarrassed by ratings stunts (watch a man get eaten alive by an anaconda), Discovery Communications in 2014 installed new management at its flagship network. Out: Eileen O’Neill, a Discovery lifer. In: Mr. Ross, a former Disney executive with something to prove.
The debonair Mr. Ross, 54, is perhaps the last person one might expect to find associated with “Alaskan Bush People,” one of Discovery’s hits. But running the channel offered a new start. Disney had ousted him as movie chairman in 2012. A subsequent job at Shine America, a television production company, ended with a corporate restructuring.
In the span of a year at Discovery, Mr. Ross has delivered noticeable results. The casts of Discovery shows like “Gold Rush” and “Men Women Wild” are more diverse. The quality of documentary films has improved under a new lieutenant who hews closer to historical facts. Promising new series are arriving, in particular “Killing Fields,” a true-crime serial that is set to debut on Tuesday.
And ratings are up. The channel delivered a 12 percent year-on-year gain in total viewers, according to Nielsen data, along with a 3 percent increase in adults 18 to 49, a bracket that advertisers often pay a premium to reach. For the first time in its 34-year history, Discovery just ended a year as the No. 1 nonsports cable network among men age 25 to 54, a target demographic.
Discovery’s strength comes as other cable networks have faltered. Viewership plummeted in 2015 for stalwarts like History, A&E, USA, MTV and Comedy Central. Reasons include poor programming choices, the loss of popular stars, competition from streaming services and a glut of similarly themed reality shows.
Mr. Ross offered “Moonshiners,” an Appalachian docudrama that he inherited, as an example.
“Killing Fields” brings a new test.
One of the first new shows created under Mr. Ross, it follows a colorful detective, Rodie Sanchez, who comes out of retirement to try to solve a 1997 murder case — possibly tied to a serial killer — that has never stopped haunting him. With its artistic pacing and lush, foreboding images of Louisiana topography, “Killing Fields” resembles the celebrated first season of HBO’s “True Detective,” except that the Discovery version is true.
The stylized show has a strong pedigree, especially for Discovery. Its executive producers are Tom Fontana, whose credits include “Homicide: Life on the Street” and HBO’s “Oz,” and Barry Levinson, the Oscar-winning director of “Rain Man,” neither of whom had worked in unscripted television before.
The so-called true-crime genre is hot. Recent successes include “The Jinx” on HBO, “Making a Murderer” on Netflix and the “Serial” podcast. But “Killing Fields” represents a risk nonetheless. Crime has not been part of Discovery’s programming mix for years. “Killing Fields” is also an attempt to attract more female viewers; crime shows tend to draw large numbers of women.
Mr. Ross has other efforts on the way. He is making a move toward scripted shows; an early project — a drama about the history of the motorcycle maker Harley-Davidson — will start to film in March. Mr. Ross is also focusing on what he calls brand-defining event documentaries that can cut through the clutter, like the environmental-activism film “Racing Extinction,” which became a ratings success last month.
Like other cable channels — notably ESPN — Discovery is losing subscribers in the United States. Analysts estimate that Discovery has lost roughly four million subscribers since 2011. Consumers, less willing to pay for expensive cable packages that include channels they do not watch, are cutting off service or not signing up in the first place.
To grow, Discovery must work harder to maintain its stronghold on its core audience of men while becoming more inviting to other audiences, notably women.
But those days now seem firmly behind him.
“He’s working on the weekends, he’s working late at night, and he’s driven,” David Zaslav, the chief executive of Discovery Communications, said of Mr. Ross last month at a UBS global media and communications conference. Mr. Zaslav, who recently gave Mr. Ross control of two additional networks, Animal Planet and Science Channel, added that Discovery had been steered back toward quality.
Not on Mr. Ross’s agenda are programming stunts.
Without question, Discovery’s surge has been aided by plummeting ratings at its rival History Channel, which is co-owned by Disney and Hearst. History experienced a 26 percent drop among 18- to 49-year-olds in 2015. But Mr. Ross — crediting lessons he learned early in his career — says he has pushed his team to pay less attention to the competition.
