For a quarter-century, they have circled each other as hard-bitten rivals for one of the plum jobs in law enforcement, the claim to the Tiffany badge of the commissioner of the New York Police Department, the country’s biggest police force. They are the only men to have held the rank twice in something akin to an extraordinary game of musical chairs.
Raymond W. Kelly, the longest-serving commissioner in the city’s history, was the first to accomplish the feat. William J. Bratton, the current commissioner, is the second.
Both times he was named commissioner, Mr. Bratton succeeded Mr. Kelly, and their intermittent swapping of the job has entwined their policing legacies.
Neither is especially enthralled by that. For while the before-and-after commissioners have usually been dutifully respectful when necessary, those who know them are well aware of the longstanding tension between two of the most renowned law enforcement leaders New York has ever known.
The tension between the two men erupted into remarkable public animosity in recent days, as Mr. Kelly pointedly questioned the accuracy of dwindling crime numbers under Mr. Bratton’s watch. And that led to thunderbolts being slung both ways.
At a news conference on Tuesday, Mr. Bratton challenged Mr. Kelly to “be a big man.” Responding several hours later at his own news conference, Mr. Kelly explained how he felt the city’s crime statistics were being massaged. He has been saying that people tell him that New York is not as safe as it was when he led the department.
Yes, police commissioner versus police commissioner.
Through the years, the expression of their rivalry has been through mathematics and sentiment. Who’s got the better crime numbers? Whose city felt safer? As well as one piece of reality: Who has the job?
Crime data can be squishy. And while it is Mr. Kelly who is currently casting shadows over Mr. Bratton’s statistics, the same sorts of accusations about distorting numbers were thrust at Mr. Kelly from various corners when he was commissioner. Mr. Bratton has also faced questions about the accuracy of crime statistics when led the Los Angeles Police Department.
Both men have a thirst for attention and are partial to finely tailored clothes and glamorous night life. Both have long held skyward ambitions. Each has written a book attesting to his achievements.
Their personalities and leadership styles are quite different. Mr. Kelly is typically curt and loath to delegate. Mr. Bratton is more expansive, with a more inclusive approach to steering the police force. Both seem to possess an ingrained self-image as America’s master crime warrior. And thus it can be hard for them to find space for the other.
Mr. Bratton declined through a spokesman to be interviewed for this article.
Although Mr. Kelly is several years older, the two men’s lives have been shaped by similar circumstances. They both started their careers on the street, as officers walking a beat.
Mr. Kelly, now 74, grew up on the Upper West Side of Manhattan; his father was a milkman, and his mother checked the dressing rooms at Macy’s. He did not always want to be a police officer. He was looking for ways to help pay for law school when he read about the police cadet program and applied. He barely satisfied what was then the height requirement of 5-foot-8.
Police work had to wait while he enlisted in the Marines and was sent to Vietnam. When he returned, he finished at the top of his class at the Police Academy. As a cadet, he worked the police switchboard. When he moved to the streets as an officer, he was assigned to patrol the Upper West Side. It was the 1960s and the neighborhood was more hardscrabble then. But his life as a patrol officer was brief. After seven months, he was promoted. Promotions continued with numbing frequency.
Mr. Bratton, who is 68, was born in Boston — he retains the accent — in a house without running hot water. His father worked at the post office and at a chrome-plating plant. Even as a boy, Mr. Bratton wanted to be a police officer. When he was 9, he happened on a children’s book, “Your Police,” in the library, and checked it out repeatedly. It told him his future. He has carried a copy with him to every police department where he has worked.
Unable to afford college, Mr. Bratton joined the Army when he was 19 and served in the Military Police Corps in Vietnam. (He later earned a college degree.) He began his police career in Boston in 1970. Just a decade later, at 32, he held the department’s second-highest job, only to see his career stall after a reporter quoted him saying he wanted to become police commissioner.
He left the department in 1983 to lead the Boston transportation authority’s police force. It was soon after that that he and Mr. Kelly, then a police captain, first met, at an event at Harvard University, according to Mr. Kelly, who had earned a master’s degree there.
In 1990, Mr. Bratton made the leap to New York to lead the transit police. The job offered knowledge of the city from what he would call “a view from the underground up.” By chasing fare-beaters and minor offenders, he also captured more serious criminals, an application of the “broken windows” approach to policing he has long believed in.
Two years later, he returned to Boston as the police department’s second-in-command. Mr. Kelly had by then risen to become the top deputy to Lee. P. Brown, the New York police commissioner. When Mr. Brown resigned in August 1992, and Mayor David N. Dinkins needed a new commissioner, the mayor’s screening panel settled on four candidates, including Mr. Kelly and Mr. Bratton.
Mr. Kelly got the job, leaving Mr. Bratton deeply disappointed. The following June, Mr. Bratton became commissioner of the Boston Police Department. He would stay less than six months as New York beckoned again.
After Rudolph W. Giuliani beat Mr. Dinkins in 1993, Mr. Kelly tried to persuade the new mayor to retain him. Instead, Mr. Giuliani chose Mr. Bratton, who had a reputation as an innovator. Those who know Mr. Kelly said he was embittered that Mr. Bratton had gotten what he felt belonged to him, though Mr. Kelly suggested in the interview on Thursday that the view was exaggerated.
After Mr. Bratton took over, he made a point of saying, at a meeting of the police press corps at Police Headquarters, that Mr. Kelly had left the department in good shape. It was a compliment that masked the strain beneath the surface.
Mr. Bratton mingled adeptly with the press. He made a visible splash around town, often finding his way to Elaine’s, the Upper East Side hangout, or sitting courtside at Knicks games. He was the recipient of numerous welcoming headlines about the sizable declines in crime. He made the cover of Time magazine.
At the same time, Mr. Kelly and his acolytes kept in touch with reporters to argue that the crime drop they were witnessing was put in motion under Mr. Kelly, that Mr. Bratton and Mr. Giuliani should not be taking the credit. The rivalry was very much in swing.
All the attention being heaped on Mr. Bratton did not sit well with Mr. Giuliani, who pushed him out in April 1996, barely two years after hiring him.
Several years later, in 2002, Mr. Bratton became head of the Los Angeles police force, a job he held for seven years.
His departure from New York allowed for a temporary gap in the Kelly-Bratton chain, with two other men, Howard Safir followed by Bernard Kerik, serving as police commissioner.
Mr. Kelly accepted high-level security jobs with private firms, as well as government positions in Washington. While working in security at Bear Stearns in 2001, he was not shy about casting doubt on the reductions in crime under Mr. Giuliani. “It’s like trying to take credit for an eclipse,” Mr. Kelly said in an interview in Time magazine.
With Michael R. Bloomberg’s election as mayor in 2001, the stage was set for Mr. Kelly’s encore. It would span all 12 years of the Bloomberg administration and see crime driven to historic lows.
The rivals were now the sitting police chiefs of major cities on opposite coasts. From time to time, Mr. Bratton would show up in New York. Those who know them said that Mr. Kelly would do his best to avoid much contact.
Paul J. Browne, a former chief spokesman for the Police Department who worked for Mr. Kelly during both of his terms as commissioner, said that what he saw of their relationship was “cordial.” He said that during that time, Mr. Kelly kept a second Chevrolet Suburban in addition to the one he used and made the vehicle available to Mr. Bratton when he was in the city. He said Mr. Bratton did use it.
Mr. Browne recalled Mr. Bratton visiting Mr. Kelly during this period to discuss counterterrorism. At one point, Mr. Kelly told him he was continuing one of Mr. Bratton’s practices. In his first term, Mr. Kelly had carried the gold-and-platinum commissioner’s shield in his pocket. When Mr. Bratton took the job, he decided to mount it in a shadowbox on the wall instead. Mr. Kelly did the same and told visitors it was Mr. Bratton’s idea.
In October 2009, Mr. Bratton left the job in Los Angeles and moved to New York. He became chairman of Kroll, a corporate security and investigations company, and then started his own consulting business. He made no secret of the fact that the job he craved was his old one, the one then held by Mr. Kelly.
Once Bill de Blasio was elected mayor in 2013, in what was beginning to seem like the latest in a series of reruns, Mr. Bratton got his wish and reclaimed the police commissioner’s office.
It was not long before Mr. Bratton began to criticize aspects of Mr. Kelly’s reign. In a television interview in April 2014, Mr. Bratton said Mr. Kelly had left him a police force saddled with “awful morale.” He subsequently said he had not meant to criticize Mr. Kelly personally and was simply stating a fact.
For his part, Mr. Kelly has been saying that constraints placed on stop and frisk are the cause of an uptick in murders. He pointed out that Mr. Bratton made heavy use of the tool when he ran the Los Angeles police force.
“He had a higher stop rate in Los Angeles than we had here,” Mr. Kelly said.
Mr. Kelly recently became vice chairman at K2 Intelligence, an investigations company. He is promoting his autobiography, and there is renewed speculation that he intends to run for mayor. Prominent Republicans have long urged him to consider a candidacy, yet friends say that, for now, he is unlikely to run. Despite his many years in public life, he has never faced the rigors and indignities of an electoral campaign and does not take criticism easily.
He vigorously made the case on Thursday that he has not been stewing in animus toward his successor.
In his book, Mr. Kelly had little to say about Mr. Bratton. As for the drop in crime under Mr. Giuliani, he ascribed much of it to the expansion of the police force approved when he was commissioner and Mr. Dinkins was mayor.
