His mother wore Coogi.
On Monday night at Terminal 5, a couple of thousand people gathered for Yams Day, a celebration of the life of ASAP Yams on the one-year anniversary of the music executive and tastemaker’s death at age 26. Late in the night, his mother, Tatianna Paulino, addressed the crowd, thanking people for coming and for keeping her son in their hearts. After speaking, she slipped on a hooded cardigan in the brand’s signature woven multicolor mélange, the sort of hip-hop staple her son used to wear and loved being connected to.
Yams was as much a consumer as a creator. His success as an executive — chaperoning the career of ASAP Rocky, and giving a spark to a cache of younger rappers — was completely tied to his passionate consumption of all things hip-hop. He was a fan turned manager, a fantasy sports player given the keys to an actual team.
In his work, Yams was an archivist but not a re-enactor. He believed that New York could be vital as a hip-hop hub, but only by fully imbibing the past and then innovating upon it.
So Monday night’s tribute concert was made in his image, gathering several New York-area rappers and a few out-of-towners, with a range of styles: the rigorous classicists Joey Badass and Action Bronson, the eccentrics Flatbush Zombies and Lil Uzi Vert, pugnacious toughs like Dash and Retch, and more. All of them could have easily shared space under Yams’s aesthetic umbrella.
It made for the sort of old-fashioned New York rap show that Yams would have appreciated: chaotic, energizing, undisciplined. A stage teeming with dozens of people. Occasional wide gaps between performances. At one point early in the night, there was something of a stampede at the door when people weren’t being admitted quickly enough.
At the end of the night came ASAP Rocky, the stylish inheritor of ASAP Yams’s wisdom. Last year he released his second major label album, “At.Long.Last.ASAP” (Polo Grounds/RCA), a murky and twisted record that showed him to be a rapper willing to take ever greater risks, largely because he was so well schooled in the fundamentals. He was joined by the other members of the crew — ASAP Ferg, ASAP Nast, ASAP Twelvyy — and they ran through a quick set of hits.
The most potent of these was the oldest: “Peso,” the cloudy, abstract, slick 2011 song that was ASAP Rocky’s mainstream breakthrough. The track’s video made ASAP Yams a star — wearing an upside-down Nike sweatband, drinking quarter waters and 40s, showing off the ASAP tattoo on his arm.
ASAP Yams was already a crucial presence in the online hip-hop world at that point, but that video set the ASAP Yams mythology in motion. It reinforced the idea that a sideman can be a hero, that great ears, an uproarious Twitter presence, an encyclopedic understanding of the music and the culture that comes with it, can all add up to make someone just as viable a star as any frontman.
Attainability and accessibility were the hallmarks of his fame, and that was clear at this show, too. At a face-painting booth, a makeup artist applied burgundy blotches to people’s cheeks, mirroring Yams’s birthmark.  The night was ostensibly about performance, but was really a place for the faithful to gather.
That was true onstage as well. After Ms. Paulino finished her speech, she returned to the Coogi-print couch at center stage in front of a Coogi-patterned backdrop, and let her son’s friends swarm around her. They gave her long hugs, kisses on the cheek and reassurance that her son’s memory was alive and would remain that way.