He meant Senator Ted Cruz, of course, who is the latest candidate to challenge Mr. Trump’s lead in the polls. But does everybody hate Mr. Cruz? The answer is a clear no. In fact, some people like Mr. Cruz a lot.
Although it is true that some in Washington — even in Mr. Cruz’s own party — have publicly discussed their contempt for him, the electorate does not share that disdain. Polling data coming from Iowa, which will hold its nominating caucuses on Monday, suggests that Mr. Trump has only a slight lead against him. Mr. Cruz may not be popular in Congress, but among a specific segment of the Republican electorate — Tea Party supporters, evangelicals and those who describe themselves as very conservative — he has strong support.
To see the support for Mr. Cruz across different groups in the Republican electorate, I turned to weekly surveys conducted by the opinion research firm YouGov and data from the National Exit Poll in 2008 and 2012. The YouGov data reveals the share of the vote for Mr. Cruz within groups like Tea Party supporters, conservatives and born-again Christians, while the exit poll data allows me to calculate the size of each of these groups among the Republican primary voters across different states. The size of the group is important because some segments are much bigger than others. All else being equal, candidates would prefer to be popular with the larger segments.
Mr. Cruz is most popular in two of the smallest groups in the G.O.P. coalition: Tea Party supporters and very conservative voters. The people who count themselves in one or both of these groups cover roughly 20 percent of the Republican primary electorate nationwide, and Mr. Cruz enjoys nearly a third of the vote in those groups. Mr. Trump is even more popular among Tea Party supporters, but about as popular as Mr. Cruz with the most conservative voters.
Mr. Cruz is much less popular among people in two large groups in the party: those who do not consider themselves born-again Christians, and those who do not support the Tea Party movement. Each of these groups encompasses roughly 60 percent of the G.O.P. primary electorate nationwide. (Again, the groups may overlap.) Mr. Cruz barely registers above 10 percent of the vote in these groups. Mr. Trump is three to four times as popular among these larger groups.
The differences in support across these groups partly explain the candidates’ different fortunes in Iowa and New Hampshire. Iowa, compared with New Hampshire, has both a larger share of very conservative caucus voters and voters who consider themselves born again. This makes Iowa fertile ground for Mr. Cruz, and New Hampshire better for Mr. Trump — just as the polls reveal.
There are other points of differentiation. A new survey released Wednesday by the RAND Corporation, a think tank, details the stark differences between backers of Mr. Trump and Mr. Cruz and suggests why the two candidates are faring differently across the early primary states.
According to RAND’s Presidential Election Panel Survey, supporters of Mr. Trump are more concerned about the rise of immigrants while also being more open to higher taxes. This gives Mr. Trump an advantage over Mr. Cruz in both Iowa and New Hampshire, but for different reasons.
The survey, which I helped RAND develop, involved 3,037 people was fielded in December and January.
To highlight the differences between the supporters of Mr. Trump and Mr. Cruz, the survey asked respondents to agree or disagree with a set of statements. One of the items was whether “immigrants threaten American customs and values.” Less than 10 percent of likely Republican voters who strongly disagreed with this statement support Mr. Trump, while roughly 60 percent of those who strongly agree support him. Mr. Trump’s support steadily increases among people as their anxiety about immigrants increases. Mr. Cruz’s support is essentially flat across increasing levels of fear of immigrants.
Mr. Trump’s advantage over Mr. Cruz also increases as voters perceive threats to American culture. Among those who believe immigrants are not at all a threat to the American way of life, Mr. Cruz has a nine-point lead over Mr. Trump. But with increasing levels of anxiety, Mr. Trump takes the lead — and among voters who strongly believe immigrants will destroy American culture and values, Mr. Trump holds a 44-point lead over Mr. Cruz.
Mr. Trump also increases his lead over Mr. Cruz among people who strongly believe that women who complain about harassment cause more problems than they solve.
Mr. Trump does extremely well among people who strongly favor increasing taxes on the wealthy. More than half of the people who want to increase taxes on the rich support Mr. Trump in the G.O.P. race. Less than 10 percent support Mr. Cruz. The candidates are nearly tied among those who do not support this tax increase.
That Mr. Trump draws differential support from both groups is what makes him compelling to both Iowa and New Hampshire Republicans. It also suggests that the time to bring a strong challenge to Mr. Trump may not come until the contest moves into states with more moderate voters on both dimensions, which is why so many of the remaining candidates are unlikely to drop out soon.
What about moderates’ views of Mr. Trump and Mr. Cruz? And do moderates hate Mr. Cruz the way his fellow senators are said to?
The answer is no. Using favorability ratings, we can see that 84 percent of strong conservatives and 70 percent of conservatives have favorable views of Mr. Cruz. Mr. Trump gets favorable ratings from 70 percent of strong conservatives and 68 percent of conservatives. A solid 41 percent of moderates have a favorable view of Mr. Cruz (relative to Mr. Trump’s 58 percent, Jeb Bush’s 44 percent and Marco Rubio’s 51 percent).
So, while few moderates are choosing Mr. Cruz now, they don’t dislike him so much generally — nearly half give him a favorable rating over all. Not “everyone” hates Mr. Cruz, not even moderates.