Johnson Controls, an industrial and auto parts supplier headquartered in Milwaukee, announced this week that is was selling itself to Tyco International, a maker of fire safety products based in Ireland. The deal will let Johnson Controls pass itself off as Irish and, in the process, cut its taxes in the United States by at least $150 million a year.
Johnson Controls is not the first American company to avoid taxes by merging with a smaller company in a low-tax nation, and it won’t be the last. Nor is it the biggest. That distinction goes to Pfizer, which is in the process of becoming Irish, having merged last year with a smaller company based in Dublin.
Johnson Controls is, however, the latest and quite possibly the most brazen tax dodger. The company would not exist as it is today but for American taxpayers, who paid $80 billion in 2008 to bail out the auto industry. Johnson Controls’s president personally begged Congress for the bailout, which came on top of huge tax breaks that the company has received over the years, including at least $149 million from Michigan alone from 1992 to 2009, according to The Times.
Inverted companies keep the benefits of being American, but have a much lower tax bill. They remain majority-owned by shareholders of the American company. They normally keep their headquarters and top executives in the United States. They also keep the protections on securities and patents provided by American laws, as well as their contracts and connections with the federal government and its research agencies.
Legislative remedies are available. One would be to deny investors the use of low capital gains tax rates when they sell stock in an inverted company, on the sensible ground that the company’s reduced tax bill is enough of a break. Corporate boards would surely think twice about approving an inversion if it meant higher taxes for investors.
But Congress won’t lift a finger. Many lawmakers, chiefly Republicans, seize upon the wave of inversions as proof that corporate taxes in the United States are too high. Reform the corporate code by slashing rates, they argue, and inversions will end. Granted, corporate tax reform is needed. But allowing inversions to proceed in order to make a partisan point is not the way to approach it.
As Congress dithers, consumers and taxpayer-advocacy groups can show disapproval by identifying and publicizing the products made by inverted companies and similarly identifying and publicizing replacement products from less offensive competitors. In addition, advocates of ethical investing, which applies social as well as financial criteria in selecting investments, could screen out inverted companies. The White House should reform federal contracting rules to make it harder for inverted companies to win contracts. It also needs to be more vocal in criticizing Ireland, the Netherlands and other inversion destinations for their beggar-thy-neighbor tax policies.
Congress is on the wrong side of the inversion issue. Censure has to come from elsewhere.