Alan Rickman, the accomplished British stage actor who brought an erudite dignity to film roles like Hans Gruber, the nefarious mastermind of “Die Hard,” and Severus Snape, the dour master of potions in the “Harry Potter” series, died on Thursday in London. He was 69.

In an acting career of more than 40 years, Mr. Rickman, with his sensuous, shadowy purr of a voice and often an enigmatic grin, played a panoply of characters whose outward villainy often concealed more complicated emotions and motivations.
Mr. Rickman, who attended the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London, had his early successes in stage works like the Royal Shakespeare Company’s 1985 production of Christopher Hampton’s “Les Liaisons Dangereuses,” in which, in a leading role, he played the manipulative Vicomte de Valmont. He earned a Tony Award nomination for the performance after the production transferred to Broadway in 1987.
Mr. Rickman gained a worldwide audience the following year in “Die Hard,” the first of the Hollywood action-thriller franchise, playing Gruber, the devious, well-spoken terrorist whose takeover of the fictional Nakatomi Plaza building in Los Angeles is foiled by the resourceful police officer John McClane, played by Bruce Willis.
Professor Snape seemed at first to be a traditional foil for the titular protagonist, but through Mr. Rickman’s increasingly intricate performances over eight films, he would be revealed as having had a more crucial and courageous role in the young hero’s life.
Though Mr. Rickman was never nominated for an Academy Award, he shrugged off the value of awards in general. “Parts win prizes, not actors,” he told IFC in 2008.
On Thursday, his life and work were celebrated by his “Harry Potter” collaborators in emotional online remembrances.
Alan Rickman was born Feb. 21, 1946, into a working-class family in the Acton section of London. After a peripatetic art career, including studies at different art colleges and a brief involvement in a graphic design studio, he auditioned for the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art and was accepted in 1972.
After leaving the academy in 1974, he worked with the Royal Shakespeare Company, appearing in acclaimed 1980s productions of “Troilus and Cressida” (as Achilles) and “As You Like It” (as Jaques); in that same period he also performed in “Mephisto” as Hendrik Höfgen, a character modeled on the German actor Gustaf Gründgens.
Mr. Rickman made his television debut in 1978, playing Tybalt in a BBC version of “Romeo and Juliet.” He also appeared in a 1980 mini-series adaptation of “Thérèse Raquin” and the 1982 mini-series “The Barchester Chronicles,” adapted from the Anthony Trollope novels.
Following his success in “Liaisons Dangereuses,” Mr. Rickman traveled to Los Angeles, where he was offered the role in “Die Hard” by the producer Joel Silver.
As Mr. Rickman would recall, at a celebration of his career held by the British Academy of Film and Television Arts, he was not initially impressed by the movie or its screenplay, credited to Jeb Stuart and Steven E. de Souza.
Mr. Rickman’s many other film roles included the dastardly sheriff of Nottingham in “Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves” (1991) and a married man tempted by his young secretary in Richard Curtis’s romantic ensemble comedy “Love Actually” (2003). He appeared in the 1999 science-fiction spoof “Galaxy Quest,” in a role sending up classical British actors relegated to lightweight fantasy fare.
In 2013, he played Ronald Reagan in “Lee Daniels’ The Butler” and Hilly Kristal in “CBGB,” a biographical film about the founding of the New York punk-rock club.
The latter portion of his film career was defined by the Snape character in “Harry Potter,” a franchise that has sold more than $7.6 billion in tickets worldwide.
Beneath his ominous exterior, Snape proved to be “unutterably honorable,” Mr. Rickman said in a 2011 interview with The Times.
Pointing to more upstanding and honorable figures he had played, like the suitor Colonel Brandon in Ang Lee’s film adaptation of “Sense and Sensibility,” Mr. Rickman said it was a mistake to associate him only with corrupted characters.
“The label gets written because of a very small amount of work that’s had a lot of publicity,” he told The Times.
Mr. Rickman continued to perform on stage in London and New York. He returned to Broadway in 2002 in a production of Noël Coward’s “Private Lives,” and in 2011 in the Theresa Rebeck comedy “Seminar,” playing a novelist and writing instructor whose merciless teaching methods are not all that they seem.
In 2008, Mr. Rickman directed a Donmar Warehouse production of Strindberg’s “Creditors,” adapted by the playwright David Greig, that was presented at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in 2010, where he also starred in an Abbey Theater production of Ibsen’s “John Gabriel Borkman” in 2011.
He directed the 2014 film “A Little Chaos,” a period drama in which he also played Louis XIV. His coming movies include “Eye in the Sky,” a thriller with Helen Mirren and Aaron Paul, and “Alice Through the Looking Glass,” as the voice of the Blue Caterpillar.
Mr. Rickman is survived by his wife, Rima Horton. The couple secretly wed in 2012, but had been together for more than 40 years, People magazine reported last April.
He is also survived by his siblings Michael, David and Sheila Rickman, Ms. Olim, the publicist, said.
“I couldn’t wait to see what he was going to do with his face next,” she said.