Mayor Bill de Blasio moved on Tuesday to fill a crucial post in a depleted team at City Hall, appointing a Bronx-born public health official who has held key roles in California and Texas as his new deputy mayor for health and human services.
The appointment of Herminia Palacio, 54, ended a four-month vacancy in the position, at a time when the de Blasio administration is facing criticism over a rise in the homeless population.
At a news conference at City Hall, the mayor highlighted Dr. Palacio’s biography — the daughter of a subway token clerk and a bus driver whose mother “suffered a psychiatric break” when Dr. Palacio was 17 — as well as her experience confronting the AIDS crisis in San Francisco and Hurricane Katrina as the top public health official in Harris County, Tex. The county, which includes Houston, received tens of thousands of evacuees from New Orleans after the hurricane.
“She’s born and bred in the Bronx, understands the life of this city, has our values and obviously is passionate about making change,” the mayor said in introducing her to the post, which oversees the city’s health and homeless services departments, among other agencies. Dr. Palacio’s predecessor, Lilliam Barrios-Paoli, resigned in August amid growing concern about the city’s handling of street homelessness.
Dr. Palacio’s work in California and Texas, as well as with an advisory group with the surgeon general, earned plaudits from those who worked with her.
Judge Emmett, a Republican, said he ignored local polls and relied on Dr. Palacio — known to some in the county as Dr. P — to counsel him against keeping undocumented immigrants out of county hospitals. Instead of simply keeping the hospital doors open, the county also created neighborhood clinics.
“She has the ability to explain an issue and tell people to get over the politics and do what’s right,” Judge Emmett said.
That quality may prove useful in New York, especially on the issue of homelessness.
Mr. de Blasio, who initially appeared to dismiss accounts of rising homelessness, has moved aggressively in recent weeks to show a sustained response by the city. His commissioner for homeless services, Gilbert Taylor, resigned in December, and the city started a new canvassing effort, Home-Stat, that promised faster response times to concerns about homeless people in Manhattan.
The mayor is also facing political pressure from Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a fellow Democrat who has accused the city of ineptitude in its management of homelessness in recent months.
Dr. Palacio, who lives in Manhattan and has two adult children, Celina and Nicolás, said she planned to speak with those living on the streets and in shelters.
Stressing empathy, she described her experience with her mother’s mental illness; the death of her brother, who was hit by a car when he was 12, before she was born; and her work as a doctor in San Francisco.
Dr. Palacio, who has not worked in city government before, said she would begin with a “deep dive” into the city’s public health apparatus, especially the issue of homelessness, and by trying to “reveal herself” to New Yorkers, to whom she is little known.
The announcement came amid a series of shifts at City Hall on Tuesday that administration officials described as routine moves at the midpoint of the mayor’s tenure: the appointment of a new commissioner of the Department of Citywide Administrative Services, Lisette Camilo; the retirement of a senior adviser, Bill Goldstein; and two deputy mayors, Richard Buery and Alicia Glen, taking on oversight of new agencies.
In addition to homelessness, the first two years of Mr. de Blasio’s tenure have been marked by unanticipated public health crises, including containing an outbreak of Legionnaires’ disease in the Bronx and fears over Ebola. The administration is embarking on an ambitious mental health program, spearheaded by the first lady, Chirlane McCray.
Dr. Palacio, whose parents came to the United States from Cuba in 1940, will leave her position as a director of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, a private philanthropic group focused on public health, when she joins the administration on Jan. 25. She will earn a salary of $227,737.
She said she planned to draw from her experience in disaster response.
