Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo continued laying out his vision for a modernized, statewide transportation network on Wednesday afternoon with one more ambitious project: the renovation of Pennsylvania Station, one of the busiest transit halls in the Western Hemisphere, and the creation of an adjunct train and retail hub within the walls of the blocklong general post office across Eighth Avenue.
During a news conference at Madison Square Garden in Manhattan, Mr. Cuomo called on New Yorkers to “think big” as they did in the past, with equal measures of ambition and audacity.
The announcement was one in a series of appearances by the governor centering on his plans for improving New York State’s infrastructure, which include adding a third track to part of the Long Island Rail Road’s Main Line. On Wednesday morning, in Syracuse, he proposed spending $22 billion to improve roads and bridges, largely upstate.
The governor’s initiative in Manhattan involves projects on both sides of Eighth Avenue, between 31st and 33rd Streets, where Madison Square Garden sits atop the warren of narrow and confusing passageways in Penn Station.
Mr. Cuomo said the state, along with Amtrak and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, would solicit proposals from developers whose options would include the creation of a grand glass-walled entrance to Penn Station on Eighth Avenue.
The project could entail razing the 5,600-seat theater that sits beneath Madison Square Garden, upgrading the shops in the complex, and adding new entrances on Seventh Avenue or 33rd Street.
Developers would undertake the project, Mr. Cuomo said, in return for the rights to control all the retail shops in Penn Station.
Simultaneously, the state and its partners will solicit a developer for the long-gestating plan to turn the nearly vacant James A. Farley Post Office into a train station and a giant waiting room for Amtrak passengers, as well as shops and office space.
Developers could submit proposals for either project or both.
The announcement was a blow to two of the city’s most prominent developers — Related Companies and Vornado Realty — who the state selected 10 years ago to transform the post office building into what was to be called Moynihan Station, after Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who first championed the idea in the early 1990s.
The developers, who had sought a tenant before closing on the deal, had proposed several plans, including moving Madison Square Garden within the walls of the post office, which would have enabled them to build a glass mall and skyscrapers over and near Penn Station. But ultimately, there was no progress.
The developers had agreed to pay the state more than $200 million for the Farley building and $110 million for development rights that they planned to transfer across Eighth Avenue for a residential tower.
Late last year, the state appeared close to a deal with Related and Vornado that would have had the developers signing a contract without a tenant and paying the state. But in December the state suddenly shifted its stance, leading to Wednesday’s announcement of a new request for proposals.
Vornado and Related are not out of the running. Indeed, they have a huge advantage over rival bidders, especially since the state wants developers to respond to its solicitation in 90 days. They have an intimate understanding of both Penn Station and the post office, and the complexity of building at a working train station.
Under the terms of their agreement, the state would be required to reimburse Vornado and Related for more than $30 million if they do not go forward with the post office project. Vornado is the largest property owner in the neighborhood surrounding Penn Station and has its own plans for the area.
Still, at least two other major developers — Brookfield and Extell Development — have told state officials over the past year that they would be interested in taking on the projects.
It is unclear exactly how the more than $3 billion project, which the governor is calling the Empire Station Complex, will be paid for, but Mr. Cuomo is expected to unveil a financial plan for his transportation network at next week’s State of the State speech. The governor said that $325 million would come from government sources. He also said that the request for proposals would go out to developers later this week.
Mary Rowe, executive vice president of the Municipal Art Society, a proponent of a renovated Penn Station, lauded the governor for highlighting the need for urgent and ambitious change.
On any given day more than 600,000 commuters and travelers — triple what the station was originally designed for — move through the underground labyrinth of Penn Station.
On Wednesday, Mr. Cuomo also announced that he wanted to freeze tolls on the Tappan Zee Bridge and the New York State Thruway until 2020. He suggested the state spend $700 million to keep tolls on the Thruway at their current level.
A $3.9 billion replacement for the Tappan Zee currently being built on the Hudson River is scheduled to open in 2018. The New York State Thruway Authority created a task force last year to make recommendations for possible toll increases on the new bridge.