A Pennsylvania prosecutor on Wednesday hit back at efforts by lawyers for Bill Cosby to have the criminal charges against Mr. Cosby dismissed, describing their claim that a former district attorney made a promise not to prosecute the entertainer a decade ago as meritless.
“Only a judge may issue an order granting immunity in Pennsylvania,” the prosecutor, Montgomery County District Attorney Kevin R. Steele, said in court papers.
Mr. Cosby’s lawyers had asked the court last week to dismiss the sexual assault charges because, they said the former district attorney, Bruce Castor, had agreed in 2005 not to prosecute the entertainer.
Mr. Castor had decided there was insufficient evidence to charge Mr. Cosby, who had been accused by Andrea Constand, a Temple University staff member, of drugging and molesting her at his Pennsylvania home in 2004. Mr. Castor had hoped, according to an email he wrote that was filed as an exhibit Wednesday, that a non-prosecution agreement would convince Mr. Cosby to testify freely under oath during a subsequent civil case brought by Ms. Constand, and possibly increase her chances of prevailing.
The entertainer ultimately did testify in the civil case, which was settled out of court. His deposition from the suit, which became public last summer, was cited by prosecutors in December as new evidence that was a factor in their decision to bring criminal charges. 
Mr. Cosby’s lawyers are now trying, among other things, to have the deposition ruled inadmissible, arguing the entertainer only testified freely because he relied on the promise that he would not be prosecuted.
Mr. Steele defeated Mr. Castor in the election for district attorney last fall, after a heated campaign in which Mr. Steele attacked the earlier decision not to prosecute Mr. Cosby.
Mr. Cosby’s lawyers now charge that Mr. Steele is bringing charges, not on the merits, but because of his campaign promise. They have asked that he be disqualified.
The Cosby team is expected to call Mr. Castor as a witness next month at a hearing at which their dismissal motion is scheduled to be heard, and have said he will confirm the promise he had made to Mr. Cosby. Earlier this month, an email from Mr. Castor to the district attorney’s office surfaced in which Mr. Castor warned the office that he had made such a pledge and urged it not to bring charges because, given the circumstances, he said the deposition could not be used in the case. He did not rule out, however, ever prosecuting Mr. Cosby, assuming evidence beyond the deposition surfaced.
Mr. Steele said Mr. Cosby was trying “to distract from the allegations against him by attacking the district attorney’s office.” He asked the judge to dismiss the motion or postpone it until after a preliminary hearing can establish whether or not the case can proceed.
“Defendant seeks special treatment by having this court adjudicate his pretrial motions before a magisterial district judge has even held his case for court,” the filing said.
A spokesman for Mr. Cosby did not return a request for comment.
Mr. Cosby has denied the allegations brought forth by dozens of women that he sexually assaulted them. In the Constand case, he has said the sexual encounter was consensual.