The magician Ricky Jay, considered by many the greatest sleight-of-hand artist alive, is also a scholar, a historian, a collector of curiosities. Master of a prose style that qualifies him as perhaps the last of the great 19th-century authors, he has written about oddities like cannonball catchers, poker-playing pigs, performing fleas and people who tame bees. But probably his most enduring interest is a fellow polymath, an 18th-century German named Matthias Buchinger.
Buchinger (1674-1739) was a magician and musician, a dancer, champion bowler and trick-shot artist and, most famously, a calligrapher specializing in micrography — handwriting so small it’s barely legible to the naked eye. His signature effect was to render locks of hair that, when examined closely, spelled out entire Psalms or books from the Bible. What made his feats even more remarkable is that Buchinger was born without hands or feet and was only 29 inches tall. Portraits show him standing on a cushion and wearing a sort of lampshade-like robe. Yet he married four times and had 14 children. Some people have suggested that he also had up to 70 mistresses, but Mr. Jay says that’s nonsense.
Mr. Jay, 67, has been studying Buchinger and collecting his work since he was in his 20s and has now written a book about him, just out from Siglio, with the mouthful of a title “Matthias Buchinger: ‘The Greatest German Living,’ by Ricky Jay, Whose Peregrinations in Search of the ‘Little Man of Nuremberg’ are Herein Revealed.” A selection of Buchinger work from his collection is also on display through April 11 at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in an exhibition called “Wordplay: Matthias Buchinger’s Drawings From the Collection of Ricky Jay.” The show also includes examples of micrography from Hebrew Bibles and artworks exploring themes of language and calligraphy from contemporary artists like Louise Bourgeois and Jasper Johns.
At one point at the Met, a woman, apparently recognizing Mr. Jay, came up and asked him how Buchinger had made his drawings. Did he hold a pen in his mouth? Mr. Jay said that there are few firsthand accounts, but most seemed to suggest Buchinger balanced a quill between his foreshortened arms. There is a debate about whether or not he used a magnifying lens, though Mr. Jay is inclined to think not. He probably did use a compass and a straight edge, at least on occasion. Fancy signatures or samples of upside-down or mirror writing Buchinger probably executed on the spot, in return for a small fee, but more elaborate works, the ones involving the Commandments and Bible passages, he most likely worked on in private and then customized for an individual buyer.
