Anti-abortion groups are seeking a foothold on a new battlefield: custody disputes over frozen embryos.
Take the case of Jalesia McQueen and Justin Gadberry, a divorced Missouri couple in a court fight over the frozen embryos left over after the birth of their twins through in vitro fertilization.
The groups were recruited by Ms. McQueen’s lawyer for help in appealing a ruling that she could not use the embryos without the consent of her former husband. “This is the thing that kills me — having to fight to get my own children,” she said.
Mr. Gadberry wants no more children with her, and his lawyer, Tim Schlesinger, said his client resented the involvement of outside groups.
“My client views this as a private matter, between him and his former wife,” Mr. Schlesinger said. “They had an acrimonious divorce, and he doesn’t want another child with her. He doesn’t want his other children involved in a media circus. And he doesn’t want pro-life groups meddling in his private affairs.” Mr. Gadberry declined to be interviewed.
As scientific advances have made frozen embryos common, they have brought new complications to divorces. Most courts have treated embryos as marital property, often favoring the party that plans not to use the embryos, emphasizing a right not to be forced to procreate. Some have applied contract law, decided which half of the couple more deserved the embryos, or required mutual consent.
His firm has also intervened in a much-publicized California case on the frozen embryos the actress Sofía Vergara made with her ex-fiancé, Nick Loeb, who wants to use them with a surrogate. Ms. Vergara’s request to dismiss the case was denied, but no trial date has been set.
Mr. Olp said his firm is likely to also join any appeal of recent cases in Chicago and San Francisco, involving women who froze embryos when they received cancer diagnoses and sought to use them after treatment, over the fathers’ objections.
The cases are part of the broader “personhood” debate that has become central to abortion politics. Advocates in many states are seeking laws that would make embryos full legal persons at fertilization — blocking not only abortion but also some forms of contraception and assisted reproduction. None have passed, and some anti-abortion groups say such laws go too far. But some Republican presidential candidates — Senators Ted Cruz and Rand Paul, and Mike Huckabee — support the personhood approach.
Over the last decade, advocates seeking to represent embryos that might be killed in stem-cell research have challenged funding for such research, according to Judith F. Daar, a professor at Whittier Law School, but the courts rejected the cases, saying they had no standing to sue on behalf of such an amorphous group of embryos.
The embryo disputes somewhat echo well-known right-to-die cases in which anti-abortion groups fought the removal of life support from patients in vegetative states — among them, Karen Ann Quinlan, Terri Schiavo and Nancy Cruzan.
Also like the so-called right-to-die suits, the embryo cases raise questions about outside interest groups’ involvement in wrenching family disputes, like the one in Missouri.
In April, a Family Court commissioner found that the embryos were not children under Missouri law, but a unique form of marital property, which she awarded jointly to Mr. Gadberry and Ms. McQueen, for use only if both agreed. The commissioner, Victoria McKee, said using the embryos could violate the right not to be forced to procreate and create complex emotional tangles for the children.
Ms. McQueen, 43, said she had told her 8-year-old twins that she was fighting for their brothers and sisters. “I answer their questions as best I can,” said Ms. McQueen, a lawyer who has formed an organization called Embryo Defense to support others in cases like hers. “It’s a very emotional thing,” she said.
But the anti-abortion groups say failure to consider the Missouri law, plus the lack of scientific testimony on fetal growth, provides grounds for a reversal.
“This court should recognize, as the trial court did not, what science now unmistakenly establishes and what the Missouri General Assembly has acknowledged in the law of this state — new human life is created at the instant of sperm-oocyte binding,” their appeal brief said.
Mr. Schlesinger disagrees.
Missouri has spawned other cases about the boundaries of personhood, including the Cruzan case, in which the Supreme Court established the right to die but found that the state could require “clear and convincing evidence” that the patient would have wanted that.
Missouri also produced the court’s infamous 1857 Dred Scott case, in which it ruled that a slave was not a citizen, but property — a parallel that Ms. McQueen’s backers draw. In their brief they wrote, “our sorry legacy of having enslaved human beings” should “raise a red flag of caution” about treating embryos as property.