Unlike most sports, cricket traditionally has revolved around international play, regarded as more prestigious and lucrative than domestic competition. It is not just glamour in which domestic play lags; it is often subsidized by the money received from international play, too.
But in recent weeks in Australia, domestic matches have reasserted their ascendance. In the traditional Boxing Day Test match in Melbourne that started Dec. 26, pitting Australia against the West Indies, the total crowd over four days was 127,069, the lowest total in 21 years.
Meanwhile, crowds in the Big Bash League, the domestic Twenty20 tournament run by Cricket Australia, have hit record highs: 80,883 attended a derby match in Melbourne on Jan. 2, breaking the previous record by almost 30,000.
It is part of a broader pattern of rising interest in the eight-team B.B.L., which started in 2011. Over the first 27 games of this season, television viewership has increased by 100,000 per match, to 1.01 million, and the average attendance has grown by 4,000 to 28,000 per game, according to Cricket Australia, the ruling body of the sport in the country.
The B.B.L.’s growing popularity might have partly come at the expense of reduced interest in international cricket during the Australian summer.
The success of the B.B.L. represents the continuation of a trend that began in 2003, when Twenty20 cricket was created as a shorter, faster and more hyperactive form of the game to appeal to younger fans. Because of its brevity, Twenty20 lends itself to domestic cricket, as it allows families to easily attend three-hour-long games at night or on the weekends.
No competition has drawn more attention or made a bigger impact than the Indian Premier League, whose start in 2008 represented a seismic moment in cricket’s history.
Although the I.P.L. has endured numerous problems, with several teams having been suspended or dissolved and a number of players investigated for corruption charges, it has turned into the economic juggernaut of the sport. It highlighted how popular domestic Twenty20 cricket leagues could be and changed how much players could earn from domestic cricket.
The I.P.L. and the B.B.L. are both overseen by the ruling bodies in their countries, much as the English Premier League operates under the Football Association. While the B.B.L. owns all the franchises in Australia, the clubs in India have private investors. The I.P.L. is particularly lucrative and lures the world’s top players, but even the B.B.L. can pay some players significantly more than they earn playing international tournaments.
While the West Indies was losing its Test match in Australia, six Caribbean players, including five who have played Test cricket, were playing in the B.B.L.
One player, the top batsman Chris Gayle, will earn $1.25 million during six weeks of the I.P.L. in 2016; as a category A contracted player for the West Indies, he would earn $140,000 a year, plus $5,000 for every Test match appearance. The discrepancy is typical for many players outside Australia, England and India, the wealthiest cricket nations.
A. B. de Villiers, South Africa’s newly appointed Test captain, said there was “a little bit of truth” in rumors that he was considering retiring from the Test format.
The West Indies is not the only place affected. Brendon McCullum, the New Zealand captain, will retire from international cricket at the age of 34 next month, and he has agreed to lucrative deals to play in domestic Twenty20 cricket in Australia, England and India in the next year. John Mooney, an all-rounder for Ireland, retired from international duty last month after receiving an offer to play in the Masters Champions League, a Twenty20 tournament for former international players in the United Arab Emirates.
“The rise of free agency among players is a very real threat to the international game, and the alternative T20 leagues market is a factor in driving premature retirement,” said Irish of the F.I.C.A.
As leading players prioritize domestic Twenty20 cricket over the international game, the importance of international cricket risks being devalued.
“I would prefer that international cricket was about the best playing the best, and that’s certainly not the case at the moment,” Mills said.
Should Twenty20 leagues grow, then pressure on the international schedule will further intensify. The result could be that the richest nations, principally Australia, England and India, prune their schedules by reducing games against smaller countries, which are less lucrative.
“If the bigger countries start to play less international cricket, particularly against the smaller nations, which is less profitable, and commit more time to their T20 competitions, that will significantly impact the smaller nations,” Mills said.
While cricket players will not face the same club-vs.-country conundrum that soccer players do — the International Cricket Council cannot mandate that players take part in international matches, as FIFA does in soccer — the national federations may soon be grappling more with how to keep its best players involved with Tests.
