With high winds, ice-slicked beams and dangling concrete panels, working on the bridge can be dangerous, but the crews say they feel a special verve.
Igino D’Ippolito is no Philippe Petit, the high-wire artist who famously scampered between the twin towers of the original World Trade Center in 1974.
Yet he must often tiptoe along steel beams just two feet wide, perched six stories above the icy, swirling waters of the Hudson River, in order to manage 25 workers installing the concrete roadway of the new Tappan Zee Bridge. Sometimes he cannot help but remember his days in grade school in Mahopac, N.Y., when his teachers prodded him to brave an Outward Bound-type climbing program.
Mr. D’Ippolito, a 34-year-old civil engineer, is one of 5,000 workers who have taken part so far in building the twin-span replacement for the 61-year-old, three-mile-long bridge that crosses a wide stretch of river known as the Tappan Zee, between Tarrytown, in Westchester County, and South Nyack in Rockland. The new bridge, whose official name has still not been decided, will be the first major bridge erected in the New York area since the Verrazano-Narrows opened in 1964.
With high winds gusting across the Hudson, rain and snow turning steel beams slick as a frozen pond, dozens of cranes dangling 37-ton concrete road-deck panels from above, and heavy machinery churning all around, it can be exceedingly dangerous work. Three workers were killed putting up the Verrazano.
Yet the Tappan Zee workers seem to feel a verve that goes beyond what they might experience on more workaday projects, an esprit de corps that comes from knowing they are erecting a mammoth specimen of infrastructure that they can point to and say they helped bring into the world.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo has spoken frequently about the bridge as a symbol of the state’s ability to once again build major infrastructure, and in his second term he seems increasingly intent on making transportation projects a linchpin of his legacy. He has promised to rebuild La Guardia Airport and supports the construction of a new Hudson River rail tunnel. Just the other day he proposed reviving a long-stalled plan to add a track to part of the Long Island Rail Road’s main line, and announced a plan to redevelop Pennsylvania Station. But the bridge is the only one of those projects actually underway. President Obama, too, has used the rebuilding of the Tappan Zee as a symbol of the administration’s “robust” infrastructure program.
The bridge is expected to cost $3.9 billion. Plans for financing it include federal loans, state funds and construction bonds that would be paid off through tolls. But, with an eye to the costs of daily commuting from Rockland, Mr. Cuomo now proposes to freeze tolls on the Tappan Zee at $5 until 2020, paying for the freeze with a $700 million earmark that would also lock in tolls on the entire Thruway.
Already more than a mile of the blue-steel horizontal framework that will undergird the concrete deck of the new bridge’s southern span stretches boldly from the Rockland County bank across the Hudson, ending abruptly in midriver, and part of a second northern span is already projecting a half-mile from Rockland as well. With a schedule pitched aggressively so the first span of the bridge can open by the spring of 2017 and the full bridge by the following year, many of the workers put in 60 hours a week.
Tappan Zee Constructors, the consortium that is building the new bridge for the Thruway Authority, said it does not discuss salary information. But many of the workers installing steel and concrete are members of various locals of the International Association of Bridge, Structural, Ornamental and Reinforcing Iron Workers. Bob Walsh, business manager of Local 40, said workers are paid by the hour only for the hours they work, and that a typical ironworker earns $48.75 in wages and an additional $70.35 an hour in health insurance and other benefits. In bad weather, they do not work and do not get paid.
Starting in October, the first batch of the 7,000 precast concrete slabs that will make up the roadway were shipped by truck and barge from Pittsfield, Mass. They were dropped in place by cranes, though not by the Left Coast Lifter, one of the world’s largest, which is reserved for weightier tasks. The slabs are finagled into place atop the steel girders by crews like Mr. D’Ippolito’s. Meanwhile, more than a quarter of the concrete for the eight 42-story winglike towers has been poured, and two-thirds of the vertical concrete piers holding up the bridge have been anchored in the riverbed.
So far no one has died on the project, which began more than two years ago with the sinking of cylindrical piles into the river bottom. Safety for workers has been emphasized in a way that it was not 60 years ago, when reckless bravado was especially valued by an almost entirely male work force. There were at least five casualties then: A tugboat captain drowned after his vessel caught fire, and four workers were injured when a boom snapped and they fell 40 feet to a concrete structure on the waterline, newspaper articles at the time reported.
Men and women who work on heights or narrow beams must wear safety harnesses that wrap around the thighs, shoulder and waist and are attached to lanyards, or cables, that are fitted with shock absorbers to gently break any falls. If Mr. D’Ippolito were to slip — and fairly soon he will be working at a height of 12 stories — the lanyard and straps would let him drop six feet, then catch him as if he were a rock climber bouncing casually off the face of a cliff, but fairly gradually, thanks to the springlike action of the shock absorber. Old-fashioned harnesses could result in a broken back, workers say.
Despite the safety precautions, spouses back home fret. Mr. D’Ippolito’s wife, Melissa, a lawyer, needs daily reassurance.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York has been busily announcing big projects, but he hasn’t exactly said where the money will come from to pay for them.
“She says, ‘Be careful!’ every morning when I leave,” he said.
Some workers say the current work force is notable for the number of women involved. Indeed, the chief project engineer appointed by the State Thruway Authority in November is Jamey Barbas, who grew up in Bayside, Queens, and graduated from Barnard College in 1981. As a graduate student she was one of five women in her class of 100 at Columbia’s engineering school. Later, she was head of design and construction support services for the reconstruction of the 112-year-old Williamsburg Bridge and led the design of the bridges for a major highway project in Montreal.
Her specialty is building in, and for, frigid weather; knowing, for example, how much concrete is needed to offset the powerful forces of expanding ice.
Victoria Graney, a 30-year-old engineer from Virginia, has been surprised at how many of the engineers on the project are female. She attributes that shift to the increasing number of elementary schools and high schools offering science, technology, engineering and mathematics programs equally, to boys and girls.
Unlike Mr. D’Ippolito, Ms. Graney is what the trade calls a boomer, traveling far from home to projects made possible by booming local economies. In her case, that means renting an apartment in nearby Sleepy Hollow and trading weekend commutes to and from the Washington area with her husband of one year.
She supervises eight other engineers who work on the Rockland and Westchester landings: the shoreline portions of the bridge, or what Ms. Graney calls “the bookends of the project,” that connect the bridge to the highway and contain the toll lanes.
“I think landings are the coolest part of the project,” she said.
What makes them cool? She has to coordinate construction of new landings that overlap with the current ones, meaning that she and other workers do their assignments while automobiles and truck traffic speed by at 45 miles per hour. She also has to coordinate operations with the Metro-North Railroad, which runs below the landing, and with the utilities that own the electrical and gas lines that cross the bridge.
Architectural blueprints for the landings might as well be sketches; much of the engineering has to be improvised as the construction proceeds. Ramps, for example, have to be engineered as to the peculiarities of a landscape.
She and other landings workers are safeguarded not only by concrete barriers and safety harnesses, but also by luminous clothing.
Ms. Graney grew up in Yorktown, Va., and credits “a bossy mother” for prodding her to take up engineering, which she studied at Virginia Tech, graduating in 2007, a month after a student there shot and killed 32 fellow students.
For Michael Shields, a 38-year-old member of Iron Workers Local 399, the daily work involves safely rigging and balancing the loads of concrete slabs on a crane, swinging them over to the steel framework and setting the slabs at the required elevation using leveling bolts, so the slabs are properly banked to adjust to the road’s curvature.
This video graphic illustrates how a new cable-stayed bridge across the Hudson River north of New York City will replace the 60-year-old Tappan Zee Bridge between Rockland and Westchester Counties.
“So it all lines up together nice,” he said.
Like Ms. Graney, Rick Pitner is also a boomer, but not, technically, on this project: He sleeps at home. He and his wife and two daughters live in East Stroudsburg, Pa., near the Delaware Water Gap, 91 miles away. He leaves the house shortly after 3 a.m. to drive the breadth of New Jersey to get to the Tappan Zee by 5.
He helms a crew of eight that welds the concrete deck panels that crews like Mr. D’Ippolito’s and Mr. Shields’s have fitted into the steel undergirding of the bridge’s roadway. By Christmas, 576 of 2,000 panels had been installed.
Mr. Pitner and his crew use 1,800–amp heating guns that melt 9-inch-long studs, used to bond the concrete decks to the steel girders. They can weld 2,000 studs a day. This work, too, is hazardous. A crane overhead sometimes dangles loads of 12,000 studs. And the gun’s heat produces flash burns, so he armors himself with a flame-resistant coat.
Mr. Pitner, 57, grew up in Ohio with a father who “was good with his hands, and I’m good with my hands.” He said he preferred welding to other crafts, and liked working outdoors.
“When you work outdoors you see that you’re making something, instead of making something indoors and never seeing it again,” he said.
He ticks off bridges, like the James River Bridge in Virginia, the Sunshine Skyway Bridge in Florida, and the Arthur Ravenel Jr. Bridge over the Cooper River in South Carolina, that he has helped weld together since 1979.
When the Tappan Zee’s workers finish their day, they find various ways to unwind. Mr. D’Ippolito relaxes with his wife, his 9-month-old baby, Isabella, and a glass of wine, and Mr. Shields frolics with Addison and his other daughter, Samantha, 7, or settles in to play Fantasy Football.
For Ms. Graney, fellow workers become her family; she goes out to dinner with colleagues, to watering holes near her apartment like the Bridge View Tavern in Sleepy Hollow. Mr. Pitner gets home and does some more welding — it’s his hobby too — patching together, say, brackets for plant hangers.
All four look forward to taking their children one day to see the completed bridge.
