Senator Bernie Sanders’s health care plan is advancing a notion that has long been out of fashion in American politics: that the federal government should provide a new, expensive service to most Americans, and that it should levy significantly higher taxes on most Americans to provide that service.
He is proposing a health care plan that would require over a trillion dollars a year in new, broad-based taxes applying to nearly all Americans who work. His main opponent, Hillary Clinton, has reiterated President Barack Obama’s pledge not to raise taxes even on many affluent families, setting her cutoff for tax increases at $250,000.
His campaign estimates that his plan to cover all Americans with a zero-deductible, zero-co-pay health plan will add $1.38 trillion a year to government spending. There are reasons to think that estimate is optimistically low, but even if it’s correct it’s still a lot of money: Paying for it would require increasing federal tax receipts by about a third, and Mr. Sanders has a plan to do so.
According to revenue estimates provided by the campaign, $238 billion of his new revenues would come from taxes focused specifically on people making more than $250,000 a year or inheriting estates larger than $3.5 million.
Income tax rates would get progressively higher at the top, maxing out at 52 percent for people making over $10 million per year. (Currently, the maximum federal income tax rate is 39.6 percent.) Mr. Sanders would eliminate tax preferences for capital gains for people making over $250,000, and also limit the value of tax deductions they could take.
That would be a large tax increase on the wealthy, similar in size to the tax increase high earners faced in 2013. That’s when portions of the Bush tax cuts expired and taxes in the Affordable Care Act came into effect, causing the effective tax rates for the top 400 taxpayers to rise by seven percentage points.
Still, this wouldn’t be the main source of financing for his plan. Most of the new revenue, about $1.15 trillion a year, would come from broad-based taxes: $630 billion from a 6.2 percent employer-paid tax on payrolls; $210 billion from a 2.2 percent income tax, applied to the existing taxable income base; and $310 billion from the elimination of existing tax preferences for health benefits.
The third item is a somewhat complicated idea: Currently, health insurance benefits are exempt from both income and payroll taxes. If employers didn’t need to pay for health insurance, economists generally believe that, in the long run, their spending on health insurance would shift into taxable wages and salaries. That is, eliminating employer-based health insurance would cause wages and salaries to go up.
Under Mr. Sanders’s plan, employers would need to use some of the money they were spending on health insurance to pay the new 6.2 percent payroll tax, but this would be less than what they’re spending on health insurance now. If the difference went into higher wages, that would mean $310 billion a year in new income and payroll taxes, on average over the next 10 years.
This is key to the Sanders argument. His plan isn’t just a big new government program paid for by big new taxes. It would replace private spending on health care, which is currently a huge burden on employees and employers. Yes, employees would pay some new taxes, and employers would pay a new payroll tax that would eat into wages, but it wouldn’t eat into wages as much as health insurance premiums do now. Employers would have extra cash to hand out raises, more than offsetting the new taxes employees would have to pay.
Jared Bernstein, an economist at the liberal Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, argued there were reasons to think a move to single payer would lift economic growth by making the health care sector more efficient, even if it required large tax increases.
“People have correctly raised the caveat that restructuring the health care industry would be incredibly disruptive and shouldn’t be taken lightly, but I don’t think anyone who has taken a good look at that industry and compared the numbers to other countries would disagree that we could create a lot of efficiencies,” he said.
But while health expenditures per capita are extremely high in the United States, the size of the efficiencies that could be achieved through a plan like Mr. Sanders’s has been a subject of much debate. His plan has been criticized by left-of-center policy analysts like Ezra Klein of Vox, who wrote over the weekend that Mr. Sanders’s plan does not address politically challenging questions that would determine its effectiveness in controlling costs, like whether a British-style government board would determine which treatments are cost-effective enough to merit coverage.
If Mr. Sanders’s plan failed to contain costs as much as he projected, it would be significantly more expensive and require significantly more in tax increases than he has already proposed. It would also do less to increase economic growth.
Alan Viard, an economist at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, raised another concern. Mr. Sanders’s tax increases might not raise as much revenue as the campaign anticipated because of how the tax changes would change taxpayers’ behavior. That is, individual high-income taxpayers could delay sales of assets to avoid creating taxable capital gains, and higher taxes could reduce economic activity and taxable income over all.
A spokesman for the Sanders campaign said they did not make dynamic assumptions in modeling their plan. That is, while they estimated there would be an increase in taxable wages, they did not assume that changes to the health care system would cause the economy to grow over all, nor did they assume that higher tax rates would shrink the economy.
The interaction between taxes and economic growth is a highly controversial area of economics, and reports proposing implausibly large economic gains from tax cuts and harms from tax increases have become a staple from some conservative think tanks like the Tax Foundation and the Heritage Foundation. Still, Mr. Viard notes, the prevalence of overly large estimates does not mean the correct guess about the impact of a large tax increase on the economy is zero.
