David Bowie’s dense catalog is a rich portrait of the ways in which he subverted rock and pop norms, exalted his fellow misfits and delighted in reinvention. It’s also a testament to the power of collaboration: Throughout his career, Mr. Bowie teamed closely with writers and producers, including Tony Visconti, who has frequently worked by his side since “Space Oddity” in 1969.
In the 1970s Mr. Bowie famously paired with Brian Eno, Iggy Pop and Klaus Nomi. In the 1980s he created some of his most enduring hits in alliances, like “Let’s Dance” with Nile Rodgers and Stevie Ray Vaughan, “Under Pressure” with Queen and “Fashion” with Robert Fripp.
Later in Mr. Bowie’s career, he showed a remarkable generosity of spirit toward younger artists. In the 1990s, when long established as a rock innovator, he vocally championed up-and-coming independent musicians. Those nudges of support became more evident in the 2000s, when the Internet could track his movements exhaustively, and sometimes they blossomed into collaborations, too. Here is a sampling of the musicians who caught his ear.
Mr. Bowie was an early, voluble admirer of this band, which would go on to win the Album of the Year award at the 2011 Grammys. He shared the stage with the fast-ascendant Canadian group at several shows, including the televised Fashion Rocks fund-raiser for Hurricane Katrina relief aid at Radio City Music Hall in 2005. That evening was one of Mr. Bowie’s last live performances; together they delivered a cathartic duet of the band’s “Wake Up” in addition to his own “Life on Mars?” and “Five Years.” Mr. Bowie also sang on Arcade Fire’s album “Reflektor” in 2013.
“Anywhere I Lay My Head,” the actress’s 2008 tribute album to Tom Waits, received a precious stamp of approval from Mr. Bowie, who supplied backing vocals on two songs. “Scarlett’s performances are mystical and twice cool,” Mr. Bowie wrote at his website, comparing Ms. Johansson’s delivery to the mood created by the authors Margery Latimer and Jeanette Winterson.
Before the British alternative rockers Placebo released their debut record and honed their own androgynous glam-rock spectacles, they were Mr. Bowie’s touring band in 1996. “He got ahold of our demo and, on the strength of that, asked us to come support him,” said Stefan Olsdal, 41, the group’s guitarist-bassist. In 1999 Mr. Bowie also boosted the band’s track “Without You I’m Nothing” by recording a duet with them that became a single. “We felt he had all the time in the world for us — he didn’t have to do that,” Mr. Olsdal said.
Early into TV on the Radio’s career, after the Brooklyn rockers released their debut album “Desperate Youth, Blood Thirsty Babes,” the band got a stellar dispatch from Mr. Bowie when he cold-called the singer, guitarist and producer Dave Sitek. When Mr. Bowie asked to meet the group, Mr. Sitek hung up on him, believing it to be a prank. Mr. Bowie persevered; the delicate resulting duet, “Province,” was a highlight of the band’s breakthrough 2006 album, “Return to Cookie Mountain.” TV on the Radio later recorded a rhapsodic cover of Mr. Bowie’s anthem “Heroes” for the 2009 charity album “War Child Presents Heroes” at Mr. Bowie’s request.
