After the Bernie Sanders campaign improperly accessed voter data, the Democratic National Committee was swift with its punishment, suspending his campaign from having access to the database. How did you come up with that sanction? Quite honestly, we are putting this behind us. The American people deserve an intelligent debate, and this isn’t one.
Some of the criticisms of your tenure do strike me as characterizations that would be considered either — My tenure at D.N.C. or my tenure in Congress?
At the D.N.C. I should be specific. Yeah, because I have two jobs.
These criticisms — that you are ambitious, you play one side against another, you make decisions on your own — might be considered compliments of men. Do you think that people expect a different style of leadership from women? The politically safe thing to say would be: ‘‘No. Of course not.’’ I don’t usually see sexism around every corner, but the criticism I’ve noticed of me over the past couple of years has absolutely zeroed in on qualities that, for a man, wouldn’t even be considered fodder for criticism.
Do you notice a difference between young women and women our age in their excitement about Hillary Clinton? Is there a generational divide? Here’s what I see: a complacency among the generation of young women whose entire lives have been lived after Roe v. Wade was decided.
You’re one of a dwindling number of progressive politicians who oppose legalization of even the medical use of marijuana. Where does that come from? I don’t oppose the use of medical marijuana. I just don’t think we should legalize more mind-altering substances if we want to make it less likely that people travel down the path toward using drugs. We have had a resurgence of drug use instead of a decline. There is a huge heroin epidemic.
Heroin addiction often starts with prescribed painkillers. Pill mills were a problem in Florida, but the state didn’t make prescribing opiates illegal. There is a difference between opiates and marijuana.
Still, your opinion on this does seem like an outlier. It’s perfectly O.K. to not be completely predictable. I am a person, and I have individual opinions that may not line up ideologically. They’re formed by my personal experience both as a mom and as someone who grew up really bothered by the drug culture that surrounded my childhood — not mine personally. I grew up in suburbia.
Are there any other positions that you have that might surprise people? My criminal-justice record is perhaps not as progressive as some of my fellow progressives’.
It sounds as if these are things that come from a personal place for you. I guess I’m protective. Safety has been my top legislative priority. I’m driven by the idea that safety is really a core function of government.
Conservatives hate that framing of the relationship between citizens and government. I don’t think we should just let things happen to people and let them be stupid and the victims of the consequences of their actions. I think we can put enough obstacles in the path of poor decision-making.
You once compared Republican policies to Jim Crow. And you’ve said Scott Walker was ‘‘grabbing [women] by the hair and pulling us back.’’ The Republican candidates have made their rhetoric more heated, especially Donald Trump. Should the Democrats do the same? No. I’m the chair of the D.N.C., and this role requires a lot of aggressive, focused, pointed debate. But I also have a responsibility to not take the rhetoric to the basement.
What do you think is the absolute nastiest thing you could say about Trump and get away with? I have no interest in answering that question. I’d be doing exactly what I just told you I shouldn’t do.