Vegas Dave knows what it costs to ring in the new year, Vegas Dave-style.
For more than a decade, the 39-year-old professional sports bettor (real name: Dave Oancea) has routinely spent $20,000 to $30,000 — by his own estimate — on pricey Champagne, the best tables and limo service for the dozen or so friends he parties with in Las Vegas at year’s end. The most desirable tables at his favorite clubs might go for $5,000 any other night of the year, but he knows what happens on New Year’s Eve: Prices triple.
“You can sit in a terrible area for, like, $5,000 on New Year’s — like by the bathroom,” he said.
This year, Mr. Oancea stayed in — he has a girlfriend now — but across the country, countless people paid a premium to not be home when the ball dropped.
Call it surge pricing on bar stools, breadsticks and everything in between. As businesses across the country pick up the confetti from their floors, recycle their wine bottles and perhaps tidy up the back of their cabs, everyone from nightclub owners to Uber drivers will be tallying up their earnings from one of night life’s most lucrative days of the year.
Of all the businesses that look to cash in on New Year’s Eve, clubs and bars are among the most aggressive, of course. Nightclubs, which already double, triple or even quadruple the price of a bottle of alcohol, often send their prices even higher on Dec. 31.
On a typical night at the nightclub TAO in Las Vegas, for example, partygoers must agree to spend a minimum of $550 to $5,000 to get a table. On New Year’s Eve, that minimum ranges from $1,500 to $15,000, according to a spokeswoman, Maggie Rubenstein.
Tickets to TAO and its sister venue, Marquee Nightclub and Dayclub, were set starting at $100 on New Year’s Eve, compared to a typical cover charge that starts at $15 for TAO and $25 at Marquee, Ms. Rubenstein said.
For instance, poolside cabanas at the Fontainebleau in Miami, for the Weeknd and Kygo concert sold out for Thursday night on Mr. Schurr’s website — for about $28,000 each. On a normal night, Wantickets might sell those spots for about a quarter of that price, he said. The $28,000 also got a party of 15 six bottles of Champagne and liquor and “Red Bull party favors,” according to Wantickets.com.
Night clubs are not the only businesses with dollar signs in their eyes. Airbnb said it expected to break records for bookings in a single day. At the Olive Garden in Times Square, where entrees typically run $20 to $30, revelers could buy a $400 dinner with a full buffet, multiple open bars and a D.J. (A year ago, the chain charged $350.) A spokeswoman for Olive Garden, Jessica Dinon, said the New Year’s Eve buffet also included unlimited breadsticks.
The Uber ride-hailing service, which has been criticized for charging more during peak periods, earlier this week began bracing customers for surge pricing on the big day. New Year’s Eve is the ride service’s busiest night of the year, according to a spokeswoman, Molly Spaeth.
Uber has its own unique justification for charging a higher price when demand rises: It helps to attract drivers to offer their services when they are most needed.
On an ordinary day, it remains unclear whether surge pricing really entices more drivers to offer rides, according to Chris Nosko, an assistant professor of marketing at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business and co-author of a recent study on Uber’s pricing. New Year’s Eve might be an exception, though, since drivers might themselves prefer to hang out with friends instead of chauffeuring tipsy, sloppy passengers — unless the price is right.
“I think New Year’s is, anecdotally, probably one of the best arguments for surge pricing bringing drivers online,” he said. In fact, Mr. Nosko said he had been watching as drivers discussed their New Year’s Eve plans in online forums.
“I have rubber floors and vinyl-covered seats to deal with people who do manage to smuggle in a drink then spill it,” wrote one poster to uberpeople.net, one of the sites Mr. Nosko monitors.
Mr. Oancea — Vegas Dave, that is — has long done just that, making him a club promoter’s dream. New Year’s Eve typically followed a pattern: dinner at a nice steakhouse, then a limo to the club, where Vegas Dave said he drank only the finest tequila and Champagne.
Not everyone can party like Vegas Dave, although some try. The research firm IBISWorld expects Americans to have spent $26 billion on night life in 2015, and says total revenue has been growing modestly since 2010.
Still, the industry has been hampered by shaky consumer confidence after the recession. Much of the revenue growth can be attributed to higher alcohol prices, rather than higher volume, according to IBISWorld’s report.
