Stills from noteworthy films that played at Sundance this year, including (clockwise from top left): “Sing Street,” “Goat,” “Morris from America” and “Indignation.”Credit...Clockwise from top left: courtesy of the Weinstein Company; Ethan Palmer; Sean McElwee; Indignant Productions Inc.
Each year, there is a moment at Sundance when the murmurs begin and a narrative develops around a single film. Increasingly, this groundswell of admiration happens on Twitter, where one can either participate in the discourse or miss it completely. This year, however, it was hard to miss Sundance’s big story. On Monday, Nate Parker’s “The Birth of a Nation” premiered to rapturous applause — and by Tuesday morning, it had been rewarded with a blockbuster deal. Fox Searchlight bought the film for a reported $17.5 million, besting the previous Sundance record — held by 2006’s “Little Miss Sunshine” — by over $7 million. And by noon that day, after waiting in line for over an hour at a press screening of the film only to be stopped tantalizingly close to the front, I had missed the movie completely.
Thankfully, there was plenty of good to go around at Sundance 2016. Here, a look at some favorites, as well as a preview of things to come in the year ahead.
Philip Roth’s books have proven particularly difficult to adapt, with the possible exception of the filmmaker Alex Ross Perry’s 2014 Sundance film “Listen Up Philip,” which — while not based on any one Roth novel — borrowed liberally from the author’s ethos. That James Schamus does such a nimble job with this one, let alone in his directorial debut, is a tremendous feat. Schamus, the former Focus Features C.E.O. whose previous screenwriting output includes “The Ice Storm” and “Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon,” works wonders with the story of Marcus Messner, a fervent atheist who is admitted to a Christian college in Ohio during the Korean War. Logan Lerman, so good in 2012’s “The Perks of Being a Wallflower,” shines as the protagonist, but it’s a nearly 15 minute tête-a-tête between Messner and the school’s dean (a terrific Tracy Letts) — adapted by Schamus with an almost Tarantino-like zeal — that really steals the show.
The best horror movie at Sundance may not explicitly be identified as such, but Andrew Neel’s story (co-written with David Gordon Green and Mike Roberts) of masculinity run amok is nevertheless chilling. Nick Jonas shows surprising depth as a college student forced to confront the brutal realities of hazing after his 19-year-old brother pledges his fraternity. The film can be hard to watch as things spiral to a grisly ending, but there are important lessons to be learned for those who can hold on.
13-year-old Morris (newcomer Markees Christmas) and his dad (Craig Robinson) are the only black people in Heidelberg, Germany. That could be the setup for a simple comedy of errors — instead, director Chad Hartigan (whose previous Sundance outing, “This Is Martin Bonner,” won the Audience Award in the NEXT category in 2013) deftly combines Morris’s fish-out-of-water experience with a coming-of-age story that is equal parts salty and sweet. Also of note: the pulsing hip-hop and electronic score by Keegan DeWitt — who is quickly becoming the go-to composer of Sundance — and the cinematographer Sean McElwee’s gorgeous, textured shots of Heidelberg that set the scene.
Casey Affleck is staggeringly good in this Kenneth Lonergan-helmed feature, which simmers along for nearly two hours before a devastating final act that raises questions about whether one can truly move on from unspeakable tragedy. Affleck plays Lee Chandler, a Boston handyman who must return to his childhood home after his 16-year-old nephew (Lucas Hedges, also excellent) is left without a guardian. The film sold to Amazon for a reported $10 million, setting up what should be a generous awards push in the fall.
Sundance’s sweetest film plays like presidential fan fiction: Barack Obama (Parker Sawyers), a summer associate at a Chicago law firm, takes his adviser Michelle Robinson (Tika Sumpter) on a date. He chain-smokes Marlboros. She bristles at his flirtations. He doesn’t open her car door.  By the time they kiss outside Baskin-Robbins, a historic couple has been born.
Over the years, Ira Sachs has become as close to a sure thing as there is at Sundance, and his latest effort is no different. Following in the wake of 2012’s “Keep the Lights On” and the criminally underseen 2014 relationship drama “Love Is Strange,” “Little Men” returns to Sachs’s New York, this time with a focus on the city’s rapid gentrification. By establishing tension between the film’s adults, who quarrel over rent increases in a newly emerging Brooklyn neighborhood, and their sons, who just want to hang out and play video games, Sachs proves a keen observer of the impact that parents’ decisions can have on their kids. He also infuses the proceedings with great warmth and humor, including what may well be the only scene set at a middle-school dance club this year.
A mild sense of panic sets in the moment you hit “play” on this mobile VR experience, which places the viewer inside a prison solitary confinement unit with little more than a cot and a toilet. The Guardian-produced film runs only seven minutes, but it makes each moment count: While actual inmates speak to you directly, the film begins to emulate the kind of psychological effects — blurred vision, hallucinations, a sense of floating — that may occur after long-term sensory deprivation. The resulting experience is especially timely in light of the recent ban on solitary confinement for juveniles, and a compelling case for the use of virtual reality as a tool for empathy.
As often as Sundance movies can be uplifting, they can also be challenging and difficult to watch. After six hours of the latter on Sunday, the premiere of “Sing Street” — the latest musical effort from the Irish filmmaker John Carney, of “Once” acclaim — was a breath of fresh air. Set in 1980s Dublin, the film follows a down-on-his-luck 14-year-old named Conor (the singer-songwriter Ferdia Walsh-Peelo, making his feature debut) who forms a band to win the girl of his dreams (Lucy Boynton). The laughs come hard and fast when Conor and his friends start showing up for school dressed like Duran Duran and the Smiths, and the songs — written by Carney with ’80s hitmaker Gary Clark — should have audiences singing long after they leave the theater. Acquired by the Weinstein Company in 2014, the film should be released later this year.