PARK CITY, Utah — Gun violence can be an awkward subject at the Sundance Film Festival. Over the years, the event has helped popularize — some would say glamorize — extreme gun imagery in movies; Quentin Tarantino was incubated and hatched here.
But this year Sundance programmers, with deep commitment to freedom of expression, and their selected filmmakers seem to be taking a position that real guns, not the movie kind, ought to be more tightly policed. At the very least, four major gun-themed films having their world premieres at the festival, which begins here on Thursday, want to amplify the debate on firearms in America.
“For me, it’s just not O.K. for us as a country to have decided that this carnage is the price of doing business,” said AJ Schnack, the director of “Speaking Is Difficult,” a documentary short that begins with the recent mass shootings in San Bernardino, Calif., and ends with a plea for gun control. The Oscar-winning documentarian Laura Poitras (“Citizenfour”) is one of the film’s executive producers.
Sundance will also give a megaphone to Tim Sutton, who wrote and directed “Dark Night,” a drama inspired by the Aurora, Colo., movie theater massacre in 2012, and Kim A. Snyder, whose “Newtown” examines the continuing community trauma caused by the 2012 mass shootings at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut. Part of Ms. Snyder’s harrowing documentary looks at how little has changed in regard to gun reform.
A look at select films screening at the Sundance Film Festival.
Together, these films — along with others in the Sundance lineup, including “As You Are,” a teenage drama that turns on the availability of weapons — could add up to a cultural sonic boom. Sundance draws intense scrutiny (1,130 reporters from 17 countries attended in 2015) and in many ways determines what independent films will be shown in theaters and on TV for the rest of the year.
Davis Guggenheim’s “An Inconvenient Truth,” first shown at Sundance in 2006, moved climate change to the front burner. “The Invisible War,” about rape in the United States military, had a swift impact on government policy after its 2012 Sundance debut.
Sundance will present its films against the backdrop of a presidential race in which gun violence has fueled a divisive partisan debate, with Democratic candidates calling for stricter regulation and Republicans generally asserting that new measures would penalize law-abiding gun owners while failing to solve the problem of mass shootings. The festival organizers are well aware of the topic’s political sensitivity.
Speaking separately, Mr. Cooper said there was an “extraordinary” number of gun-focused films among the 12,793 submissions for the current festival.
Ms. Cuomo Cole added that she saw Newtown as a “metaphor” for all of America, given the number of towns and cities affected by mass shootings. “These are communities still very much in trauma,” she said.
While “Newtown” brings viewers face to face with still-devastated parents — and child survivors — “Speaking Is Difficult” hopes to motivate viewers, Mr. Schnack said, by depicting what has become a repeating cycle with mass shootings: carnage and then complacency. Twenty-five incidents over five years are recounted in quick succession; 911 recordings are played against placid images of the shooting sites as they appear today (for instance, the supermarket in Arizona where Gabrielle Giffords, who was then a representative in Congress, was shot in 2011).
Mr. Schnack scrambled to add two incidents that took place after he submitted his film to Sundance: the December massacre in San Bernardino, where 14 people were killed, and a November shooting in Colorado, where three people died.
“Speaking Is Difficult” takes its title from a 2013 plea to Congress for tighter gun laws by Ms. Giffords. After the festival, the film will be available through Field of Vision, an online platform (created in part by Ms. Poitras) for documentary shorts.
Although a drama, “Dark Night” makes its points very clear. Set in Florida in the days leading up to an Aurora-style event (the film ends with the killer entering a theater), “Dark Night” looks at a disparate group of people pushed to the edge — by poverty, by social pressures, by military service, by violent video games. Which one will end up as the shooter?
“It could be any one of these people, and yet, as what seems to happen in real life, it’s always clear if you really pay attention,” Mr. Sutton said.
“Under the Gun” has been kept under tight wraps ahead of its premiere on Sunday. (A request by The New York Times to view it for this article was denied.) But Ms. Soechtig emphasized that she wanted to make a balanced film that could, with any luck, bring together Second Amendment purists and those who favor stricter gun control laws. “Is there more common ground than we’ve been led to believe?” Ms. Soechtig said.
