Retirement isn’t for everyone, least of all John Rebus, the hero of Ian Rankin’s mordant police procedurals set in the shadowy underworld of Edinburgh. In EVEN DOGS IN THE WILD (Little, Brown, $26), Rebus’s unorthodox friendship with the aging crime boss “Big Ger” Cafferty allows this retired detective to attach himself to a police investigation into the murder of a former lord advocate and death threats against other high-profile citizens, including Cafferty.
“Sometimes there’s such a thing as a responsible criminal,” according to Rebus, who believes powerful men on both sides of the law are duty-bound to control the crazies in their ranks. Smart players in this tricky game know that “the world of the gangster was the world of the capitalist.” And the markets for their respective professional services must be protected against competitors like Joe Stark and his son, Dennis.
The presence in Edinburgh of these hard men from Glasgow attracts a special task force of fierce Glaswegian cops who are scarier and less principled than the gangsters. The culture clash felt by cops and crooks alike drolly illustrates the tensions between Scotland’s two major cities. One Edinburgh mobster’s impression of Glasgow — “the people spoke differently here, and had a garrulousness to them that spilled over into physical swagger” — is among the more polite comments.
Dove Carnahan’s mother named her after a brand of soap, so it’s no wonder that ANGELS BURNING (Gallery Books, cloth, $25.99; paper, $16), which is told from her perspective, takes an almost obsessive interest in parent-child issues. Tawni O’Dell’s Appalachian mystery is vividly set in the economically depressed region surrounding the town of Campbell’s Run, abandoned after a 300-foot-deep sinkhole erupted from an underground mine fire. But Dove loves both her ramshackle community and her neighbors — the kind of folks who buy $3,000 TVs on credit and toss their old ones in the front yard — and serving as chief of police is proof of her loyalty.
That loyalty is sorely tested when the body of a teenage girl is found in one of the still smoldering holes at Campbell’s Run, and Dove is forced to question members of the victim’s family, a surly clan that has little respect for her authority and no use whatsoever for the law. But Dove’s penetrating eye finds redeeming qualities in just about every person she interviews, from the despondent Vietnam vet who lives on a bare lot by the side of the road (“not a tree, not a bush, not a single burst of dandelion yellow or a sprinkle of violets”) to the chatty old ladies at the nursing home, who play gin at 8 o’clock in the morning and gossip at all hours of the day ­and night.
There’s a depressing sameness to mysteries about missing children. A detective is bound to become obsessed with the case, one of the frantic parents is sure to come under suspicion, and there’s only a 50-50 chance the child will be found alive. The British writer Gilly Macmillan introduces some smart variations on the theme in her debut mystery, WHAT SHE KNEW (Morrow/HarperCollins, paper, $14.99), in which 8-year-old Ben Finch disappears while on a walk in the woods with his mother, Rachel. Besides letting Detective Inspector James Clemo of the Avon and Somerset constabulary share the storytelling with Rachel, Macmillan enlivens the narrative with emails, newspaper headlines, passages from professional journals, even transcripts from Inspector Clemo’s sessions with a psychotherapist. But her best move is to include vicious blog posts that go viral. Guilty or innocent, once Rachel is put on trial by Internet, her fate may be sealed.
Belinda Bauer riffs on the missing-child theme by taking it into the spooky realm of the supernatural. In THE SHUT EYE (Grove, paper, $14), a psychic holds out hope to Anna Buck that he can find her 4-year-old son, Daniel. (“The Dead Are Waiting to Speak to You,” his flyer reads.) But the clients who show up at Richard Latham’s “spiritualist church” are more likely to be looking for lost dogs. As Anna descends into madness, stealing money to pay the psychic, Bauer’s novel takes a bizarre turn, drawing on uncanny coincidences to connect missing children not only with one another but with missing pets. Bauer is an imaginative writer, and before she lets the story spin off into outer space, she offers sensitive insights into maternal love and grief — and cutting observations about some of the people who presume to offer them comfort.