As he has done twice since his arrest on Tuesday, Mr. Bundy again asked the remaining occupiers — who now number four — to leave the refuge.
Judge Beckerman ordered Mr. Bundy, his brother Ryan Bundy and three other defendants — Ryan Payne, Jason Patrick and Dylan Anderson — to remain jailed.
Two of the defendants, Joseph O’Shaughnessy and Shawna Cox, were told they could be released with conditions once the occupation was over. The judge delayed hearings for Duane Ehmer, Brian Cavalier and Peter Santilli.
A lawyer for Mr. Payne, Lisa Hay, set the stage for her colleagues by stating that the occupation, which seeks the return of federal lands to local or private control, should be viewed in the context of political protests such as the Boston Tea Party and the decision of four black men to sit at a Woolworth counter in Mississippi in 1960.
Ten of the protesters in Oregon who were arrested this week appeared before a federal magistrate in Portland. The judge ordered the Bundy brothers and three others to remain in custody; two others will be released once the occupation ends; and the judge delayed decisions on three.
In ruling that Mr. Bundy be held, Judge Beckerman accepted prosecutors’ arguments that he posed a flight risk and a danger to the community.
Judge Beckerman’s words were harshest for the leaders of the protest, which began Jan. 2.
She said that those who were there at the beginning and at the end created a “danger to the people of Harney County,” where the refuge is.
“The tactics were far too drastic,” she said, addressing a courtroom packed with about 20 members of the news media and about 40 spectators, including several friends and relatives of the defendants.
There were no outbursts during the nearly three-hour hearing. Several defendants waved, winked and smiled at people they knew in the gallery.
The lawyer for Mr. O’Shaughnessy, Amy Baggio, argued that her client was not one of the leaders of the takeover, had not participated in it and had in fact argued against it.
She also presented receipts showing that her client had spent the first week in a motel in the town of Burns.
Judge Beckerman said she would sign an order granting his release with several conditions including home confinement and GPS monitoring.
The prosecutors signaled they would appeal the judge’s ruling at a hearing on Tuesday.
Several defense lawyers also planned to appeal the rulings keeping their clients in jail. Those appeals are to be heard on Tuesday.
One remaining defendant, Jon Ritzheimer, who turned himself in to the police in Arizona, is scheduled to appear in court on Tuesday in Phoenix.