MELBOURNE, Australia — Fourth-seeded Agnieszka Radwanska of Poland became the first player to reach the Australian Open semifinals, overpowering Spain’s Carla Suárez Navarro, 6-1, 6-3, in the opening match at Rod Laver Arena on Tuesday.
Radwanska will be in the final four at Melbourne Park for the second time in three years. She reached the semifinals in 2014, when she lost to Dominika Cibulkova after beating the defending champion, Victoria Azarenka, in the quarterfinals.
Radwanska’s win Tuesday was her third victory in four matches against Suárez.
The next step in a daunting path to a potential title will be a meeting with the top seed, Serena Williams of the United States, a six-time champion here, who easily handled the fifth-seeded Maria Sharapova of Russia, 6-4. 6-1, in their quarterfinal match.
After advancing to her fifth semifinal at a Grand Slam event — but before she learned who her opponent would be — Radwanska said she would not be as nervous this time around.
“Right now, I have nothing to lose,” she said, adding that she hoped she would play her best.
“Otherwise I’ll be in big trouble,” she said.
In the men’s draw on Monday, Milos Raonic persevered with his serve-and-volley game plan, holding firm even in the deciding set after Stan Wawrinka had rallied from two sets down to force a fifth.
It paid off with a 6-4, 6-3, 5-7, 4-6, 6-3 win that secured Raonic a spot in the quarterfinals.
It was Raonic’s first victory in five matches against the fourth-seeded Wawrinka, a Swiss who won the 2014 Australian Open and the 2015 French Open.
Raonic, the No. 13 seed, said he felt fitter, faster and more confident in going to the net more frequently, and all that combined to produce his first win on Melbourne Park’s center court.
Raonic, a 25-year-old Canadian, is in the quarterfinals for the fourth time at a major, including a loss here last year to Novak Djokovic. Next up, Raonic will face the 23rd-seeded Gaël Monfils of France, who reached the last eight in Australia for the first time in 11 trips with a 7-5, 3-6, 6-3, 7-6 (4) victory over Andrei Kuznetsov of Russia.
The Spaniard David Ferrer reached his sixth quarterfinal at the Australian Open, holding off the 10th-seeded John Isner of the United States, 6-4, 6-4, 7-5. A two-time Australian Open semifinalist, Ferrer has not dropped a set in four rounds and will next play Andy Murray of Britain, who defeated the Australian Bernard Tomic, 6-4, 6-4, 7-6 (4).
On the women’s side, the two-time Australian Open champion Victoria Azarenka of Belarus returned to the quarterfinals with a 6-2, 6-4 victory over the Czech Republic’s Barbora Strycova. A growing favorite for the title in a strong comeback from two injury-interrupted seasons, Azarenka next faces No. 7 Angelique Kerber, who beat her fellow German Annika Beck, 6-4, 6-0.
Johanna Konta’s strong run at the Australian Open continued with a 4-6, 6-4, 8-6 win over the 2015 semifinalist Ekaterina Makarova of Russia. Konta, who was born and raised in Australia but became a British citizen in 2012, became the first British woman since Jo Durie in 1983 to advance to the quarterfinals in Australia.
Konta will next face No. 133-ranked Zhang Shuai of China, her sometimes practice partner. Zhang, a qualifier, had lost in the first round of 14 Grand Slams dating back to 2008 and played so poorly last year that she thought the Australian Open might be the final tournament of her career.
Instead, Zhang, 27, is in the quarterfinals of the season’s first major after defeating an injured Madison Keys, 3-6, 6-3, 6-3.
Keys, an American who broke through to reach her first Grand Slam semifinal in Melbourne last year, dominated the first set with powerful groundstrokes that Zhang had trouble returning.
Raonic and Wawrinka were both on seven-match winning streaks entering the fourth round, having won titles leading into the season’s first major. Raonic won in Brisbane, beating Roger Federer in the final, and Wawrinka in Chennai, India.