IN police shooting cases like that of 12-year-old Tamir Rice in Cleveland, grand jurors are typically asked to focus on one question: At the moment the officer fired, did he have reason to believe the person he shot posed a grave and imminent threat?
This question fails to consider whether alternatives to deadly force were available and how race might have affected the officer’s perception of the threat. Under the prevailing legal standard, those questions aren’t relevant. Until we make them relevant, American policing will continue to have a tragic excessive force problem and, specifically, a race problem.
 From January through July, according to The Washington Post, unarmed black men were seven times more likely than unarmed white men to die by police gunfire.
An analysis of F.B.I. data from 2010 to 2012 concluded that the police killed black men ages 15 to 19 at a rate 21 times greater than the statistic for white men the same age. Department of Justice numbers indicate that a black person is about four times as likely to die in custody or while being arrested than a white person is.
What can be done about these appalling facts? Increased use of body and dashboard cameras should help, but will fail to address a fundamental problem.
Police officers in the United States are taught that they can use deadly force if they reasonably believe an individual poses a grave, imminent danger to themselves or others. Superficially, this “reasonableness” rule looks unobjectionable.
But racial bias can affect what seems reasonable. Individuals of all races in America perceive black people as more aggressive and dangerous than white people.  When faced with an armed black target, shooters are both more likely to shoot and quicker to shoot than they are when faced with an armed white target.
These biases can affect the way we think, judge and act. As a result, force that may seem unreasonable if used against a white person may seem perfectly “reasonable” when used against a black person.
One critical and common-sense change would be to adopt a necessity rule. The difference is simple but crucial. Even when the police have a reasonable belief that a person is dangerous, the necessity standard does not permit deadly force if non-deadly or less deadly alternatives are available and adequate to meet the threat.
The difference is not semantic; it can be a matter of life or death. A serious necessity rule would require all officers to carry nonlethal weapons and deploy them when feasible. If this rule had been in effect in Chicago, Bettie Jones — the 55-year-old woman apparently killed by a stray bullet on Dec. 26 by officers responding to a domestic disturbance call — would almost certainly still be alive.
Chicago just announced that it would equip more officers with Tasers. But this step was discretionary, too; current law doesn’t require it. And today’s Tasers can also be lethal and are frequently misused. If a necessity standard were rigorously pursued by courts and legislatures, we would develop better nonlethal weaponry, with better training and stronger punishments for misuse.
Only eight states legally require their police officers to give a warning, where feasible, before using deadly force. The necessity rule would make this mandatory. The officer who killed Tamir Rice fired less than two seconds after arriving on the scene. If Ohio law had required the police to first try warning Tamir, which they could have done from inside their vehicle, he, too, would probably still be alive.
One piece of good news is that the federal appellate court that covers California, the Ninth Circuit, has been edging toward the necessity rule, holding that courts must inquire whether nonlethal alternatives were available in excessive force cases. As a result, in 2014 a district court in San Diego held that officers in a fatal shooting could be held liable because they didn’t use a Taser or try other nonlethal alternatives before opening fire.
Police officers often do heroic work, and of course they need leeway for split-second decision making in dangerous situations. But deadly force has to be necessary to be justified. It should be the last resort, not the first.