After decades at Fanelli Cafe in Manhattan, Bob Bozic goes in search of the family villa in Belgrade that Communists seized in 1946.
If you’ve heard of Bartender Bob Bozic, then you’ve heard the stories.
A 65-year-old former boxer who had been a bartender at the Fanelli Cafe in SoHo since 1990, Mr. Bozic cultivated a following as a rude barman who reads several books a week, keeps season tickets to the opera and tells stories of an improbably novelistic life: He fought Larry Holmes at Madison Square Garden; he tried to rob a bank to pay overdue rent; he married Barack Obama’s former girlfriend. It goes on.
Fanelli’s may have endured SoHo’s gentrification, but it remains to be seen how it will endure without Mr. Bozic, who worked his final shift Sunday night two weeks ago. Bar-stool soliloquies about the end of an era were common at his farewell party.
“Fanelli’s is Bob,” said Jason Solarek, 40.
Mr. Bozic usually wore a ragged T-shirt to work, but he opted for a white shirt with a red tie that evening. Customers speculated aloud whether it was a clip-on.
The bar’s owner, Sasha Noe, instantly intervened.
Mr. Bozic called for silence again later to take a theatrical swig of beer before turning to his boss. “I’ve waited years to say this,” he began, and then uttered something unprintable to much applause.
Mr. Bozic halted his performance at one point to make a speech about why, precisely, he was leaving his longtime gig at a New York institution. His hulking hands wiped away tears as he sat on the bar. He was flying to Serbia the next afternoon to reclaim the 22-room mansion in Belgrade that Communists seized from his family in 1946.
But the story of the mansion in Belgrade, improbable as it seems, turns out to be true, like his other tales. Or at least most of them.
The effort to reclaim the house began a decade ago, when he waded into the byzantine process of Serbian property restitution. But its origins date to 1946, when Mr. Bozic’s family was forced to flee Yugoslavia.
He was born in Windsor, Ontario, in 1950, too late to have enjoyed his family’s prosperous life in Belgrade, complete with maids, nannies and a yacht. His father, Dobrivoje Bozic, was an influential engineer who invented an air-brake system for trains. The Bozic brake revolutionized train travel and made him wealthy. He bought a regal 22-room villa on Krunska Street in central Belgrade.
But after World War II, the Communist Party seized much of the country’s property, including the house on Krunska Street. Like other Serbian expatriates, the Bozics settled in Ontario.
The move changed everything. Days after Bob was born, his father abruptly left the family. Mr. Bozic speculates that his father wanted another daughter — several years earlier, Bob’s sister, Vesna, died when she was 5 from complications of appendicitis. Mr. Bozic met his father only once, when he was 5, at a family gathering. His mother, Radmila, became a cook at a hotel and lived there in a small room with Bob’s brother. She placed Bob in foster care.
Mr. Bozic, the legendary Fanelli’s bartender, was known for his outlandish exploits, usually self-reported. They couldn’t possibly all be true. Or could they?
Their 24-year-old daughter, Vesna, named after the sister Mr. Bozic never knew, shared her mother’s opinion.
In Mr. Bozic’s telling, this unfortunate childhood becomes more of a mythical origin story.
He dropped out of high school and ran away from home when he was 15. He was living on the streets of Toronto and checking pay phones for change when a bookmaker named Bertie Mignacco took Mr. Bozic under his wing, enlisting him as an errand boy and, later, a debt collector. Mr. Mignacco also owned a boxing gym, and Mr. Bozic started training there. Mr. Bozic went on to win the Canadian national amateur heavyweight championship. It turned out he could fight.
Mr. Bozic’s battle with Holmes, a future heavyweight world champion, occurred at the Garden in 1973. Mr. Bozic’s nose was broken in the first round. Teeth flew out of his mouth in the third.
Mr. Holmes, now 66, still remembers Bob Bozic.
From there, Mr. Bozic’s story begins to jump around. He worked as a bouncer at Studio 54, was the personal driver for a reporter covering the Sandinistas in Nicaragua in the ’80s and drove in a convoy of trucks carrying “automobile parts and sewing machines” from Istanbul to Afghanistan.
The bank robbery was in 1980. Mr. Bozic told the managers of a Madison Avenue bank that accomplices outside were aiming guns at them. In fact, there were no weapons involved, and Mr. Bozic was arrested when the police arrived. Somehow he managed to avoid jail time.
Fanelli’s hired Mr. Bozic in 1990.
“Bob’s past 20 years in New York have probably been the most uneventful of his life,” said Madeleine Greey, a former girlfriend.
After he served his last beer at Fanelli’s, he was asked if he would miss New York. He didn’t think about it long.
“I’m good at closing chapters,” he said, continuing to wipe down the bar.
After Mr. Bozic arrived at Nikola Tesla Airport in Belgrade, he immediately checked into a hotel down the street from his family’s old house. He is killing time in the city as he waits for a final decision regarding his ownership of the place. He spends afternoons drinking wine and reading books in cafes.
The house, after being confiscated by the Communist Party, had a few illustrious owners. It was the Canadian Embassy, then the Iraqi Embassy. It later became the headquarters of Serbia’s Democratic Party. And now Serbia, hoping to join the European Union, has adopted guidelines for the restitution of seized property. After a promising development in September, Mr. Bozic felt confident enough to quit his job and book a flight.
While waiting for the official decision, he has been exploring the house and imagining what went on in certain rooms or where his sister might have played.
“It’s me and the ghosts,” he said.
One detail about the house delighted him. He came upon one of his father’s train brakes. A previous tenant apparently thought it made a good doorstop.
