But as he prepared to run for president half a decade later, Mr. Christie steadily abandoned that position, overhauling his policies to match a rhetorical swerve toward the pro-gun right.
A review of Mr. Christie’s record found that he has exercised his executive powers with increasing assertiveness, using his veto to block new gun restrictions, and wielding pardons and executive orders to revise the way state laws are enforced.
Mr. Christie now rejects a ban on assault weapons, and has renounced his past endorsement of the state’s tough gun laws, declaring that he would make it easier for residents to carry concealed weapons if he could.
He said on Sunday that he had “learned a great deal” about guns as he traversed the country, and had grown more suspicious of gun restrictions.
Campaigning in the conservative early presidential primary states, Mr. Christie has used his recent record in New Jersey to recast himself as a champion of the Second Amendment — and as ballast for his criticism of President Obama’s recent gun-control push.
In New Hampshire, where Mr. Christie has staked his campaign, gun-rights activists say the New Jersey governor has insistently sought their support.
“He’s done exactly what we hope people do when they’re given the facts, and that’s become more aware of the Second Amendment and more aware of people’s rights,” Mr. Clegg added.
Some of Mr. Christie’s explanations of his stances on guns have been inconsistent. He has recently claimed that he learned extensively about gun crime as the chief federal prosecutor in New Jersey, and grew more supportive of gun rights as a result.
But when Mr. Christie ran for governor in 2009, he cited that same tenure as a prosecutor to explain his support for gun regulation, citing handgun violence as a serious problem.
Mr. Christie’s political migration on guns unfolded slowly. In his first term, he took only a few modest steps to please gun-rights advocates. He commuted the sentence of a man, Brian Aitken, who was sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment for transporting guns he purchased legally in Colorado. In 2013, he reversed his support for a ban on .50-caliber rifles and vetoed a bill that would have done just that.
But at that stage, Mr. Christie still tried to straddle the issue: He signed bills tightening penalties for a range of gun crimes and barring people on the federal terrorism watch list from buying guns. When he vetoed the .50-caliber rifle ban, and a measure requiring guns to carry “smart card” tracking technology, he did so in pragmatic language, calling the proposals unnecessary or unworkable rather than constitutionally offensive.
All of the Democratic candidates want new gun laws, while nearly all Republicans are against additional restrictions they see as harmful to Second Amendment rights.
But Mr. Christie’s approach in his second term has been different.
Starting in 2014, Mr. Christie has issued a series of contentious vetoes, striking down bills that would have banned high-capacity magazines and that would have required that law enforcement be notified when New Jersey residents sought to have their mental health records expunged while buying a gun.
Rebuffing overtures from Gabrielle Giffords, the former Arizona congresswoman and gun-control activist, Mr. Christie sent back to the Legislature a bill that would have made it simpler for courts to strip domestic violence offenders of their firearms, and asked that it pass broader domestic violence prevention legislation instead.
When Newtown families sought another meeting with Mr. Christie to discuss the high-capacity magazine ban, he declined, saying the ink on his veto was already dry.
State Assemblyman Jack M. Ciattarelli, a Republican from Somerset County who recently joined Democrats in an unsuccessful effort to override one of Mr. Christie’s vetoes, said the governor had plainly adjusted his position on guns as he has pursued national office.
Where in his first term, Mr. Christie used his clemency powers in just one gun-transport case, involving Mr. Aitken, he has recently pardoned a half-dozen more out-of-state gun owners for carrying their weapons through New Jersey in violation of state law.
In 2014, Mr. Christie’s acting attorney general, John J. Hoffman, issued a directive to local prosecutors urging them to avoid imposing punitive prison sentences on out-of-state gun owners who move legal weapons through New Jersey.
Mr. Christie’s recalibration on guns reached its climactic point in June, when he issued an executive order creating a commission on New Jersey’s process for issuing gun permits.
Mr. Christie has described Mr. Hoffman and his commission on gun permits as acting independently of his office.
But gun-control supporters in New Jersey say the commission and the attorney general’s role are part of Mr. Christie’s abrupt shift to the right in the midst of a presidential campaign.
Loretta Weinberg, the State Senate majority leader and a longtime proponent of gun regulation, said Mr. Christie knew full well he had to use his executive powers to bypass the Democratic majority in the Legislature.
