DAVENPORT, Iowa — At big ballroom dinners on the campaign trail, Hillary Clinton often emerges from behind a curtain to deliver a speech, then disappears again behind the folds when finished.
But on Saturday night, under a disco ball that seemed to brighten everything around her, Mrs. Clinton took an impromptu stroll around the Starlite Ballroom here, shaking hands, posing for selfies and signing, “Best wishes, Hillary,” when attendees at the Democratic Party dinner handed her copies of her books.
She talked about the snow in New York and her granddaughter, and she helped an older woman snap her first selfie. “Here, I’ll show you, it’ll be fun!” she said, grabbing the iPhone and extending her arm.
Facing a rougher-than-expected battle in the Democratic primary campaign, Mrs. Clinton seems to be drawing on a new spunkiness in her final push before the caucuses in Iowa on Monday, an instinct that has served her before when she has confronted a possible defeat.
Before Mrs. Clinton began her 2016 campaign, her friends often pointed to the warm and personable candidate that she became in the waning days of the 2008 primary campaign when it appeared she would lose to Barack Obama. If only she ran like that in 2016, they said, she would be difficult for any candidate, Republican or Democrat, to beat.
Instead, many Democratic strategists were befuddled last year as Mrs. Clinton emerged from the cloistered world of Foggy Bottom and arrived on the campaign trail more detached and protected, in layers of security and staff, than she was eight years earlier.
But in the last week, something shifted, as Mrs. Clinton faced sagging poll numbers and the reality that she could endure another loss in the caucuses, this time to Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.
Another Iowan showed her an old photo he had with her, from the White House years, “Oh, look at us! We look great, don’t we?” she asked, gently jabbing shoulders with the man.
In August, after former Senator Tom Harkin endorsed Mrs. Clinton, he said, “She just needs to come out and meet Iowans and the rest will flow into place.” But that has proved difficult at times.
After four years at the State Department and nearly eight years since she was a candidate for elected office, Mrs. Clinton has had to work on appearing more natural and accessible in Iowa, where caucusgoers demand personal interactions with presidential hopefuls.
On her trip to the Iowa State Fair in August, Mrs. Clinton’s staff and security had mapped out a route so she could admire the prizewinning stalks of corn, see an exhibit on agriculture and pick up a pork-chop-on-a-stick before climbing into a black S.U.V. to catch a private flight to Martha’s Vineyard.
The state fair trip was an improvement over Mrs. Clinton’s first visit to Iowa after her third-place finish in 2008. Two years ago, she arrived at Mr. Harkin’s annual steak fry in a motorcade; stood behind metal barricades to flip a couple of steaks for the cameras; declared, “Iowa, I’m back!” in a brief speech; and then departed, without shaking many hands or eating a steak.
Mrs. Clinton does not rouse large crowds the way Mr. Sanders does. One of her largest events yet, a get-out-the-caucus rally in West Des Moines on Sunday, attracted 900 people. Instead, she tries to impress her crowds, made up mostly of older women and their husbands, by appearing prepared and knowledgeable about local dynamics.
When a voter in Indianola reminded Mrs. Clinton that she had asked about a problem with her Medicare payments in a previous rope line, Mrs. Clinton turned serious. “You know what, I tried to check on that,” she said. “But that was a couple weeks ago, so let me check again.” She called out to her Iowa state director, Matt Paul. “Matt!” she yelled before asking him to follow up directly.
Mrs. Clinton rarely tells jokes, but she does occasionally rhyme. “No bank is too big to fail, and no executive is too powerful to jail” is a favorite.
Even amid the crush of voters trying to get autographs, Mrs. Clinton cannot shed her tendency to use detailed policy-speak.
She uses terms like “income contingent repayment plans” (student loan plans on a pay-as-you-earn basis) and often asks the people she meets how much their health insurance co-payments cost.
When Joseph Miller, 13, of Vinton, squeezed his way to the front of the crowd to ask how Mrs. Clinton would make college affordable for his generation, she crouched down to tell him face to face about her “New College Compact” and why it is different from Mr. Sanders’s plan.
