Alan S. Gordon, a colorful union leader who represented singers, dancers and stage managers at many of the nation’s leading opera and ballet companies — and who sometimes used unconventional, theatrical tactics on their behalf — died on Friday in New Hampshire. He was 70.
His daughter Elizabeth Gordon Rosenfeld said he died after having a stroke and attributed the death as well to complications of multiple system atrophy, a rare neurological disorder.
As the executive director of the American Guild of Musical Artists, Mr. Gordon represented chorus members, soloists, dancers, choreographers and production personnel at major companies across the country, from the Metropolitan Opera and New York City Ballet to the San Francisco Opera and San Francisco Ballet.
Since many cultural institutions have been trying to curb their spending, he often used unorthodox tactics to fight for the interests of his members. Litigation was one tool, but so were colorful invective and offbeat theatrics — fielding unusually large negotiating teams of artists and urging them all to have their say during bargaining sessions across the table from management, even trying to invite reporters into usually private labor talks. He had a way of getting under his adversaries’ skin and seemed to relish a good battle.
When the Metropolitan Opera sought major concessions from its employees in 2014, including changes to work rules that were important to members of the chorus, Mr. Gordon swung into action. His union was not considered as powerful as the unions representing the company’s orchestra and stagehands, so he relied on other means to press his case.
He sparred with management over where the talks should be held. He called for opening negotiations to the news media, and when the Met demurred, invited reporters to pre-bargaining sessions, where dozens of his members would make their points as cameras clicked, with management waiting outside. He traded charges of unfair labor practices with management. And he sometimes wielded the “forward” button on his email as a weapon, making sure certain messages from management were widely read.
At one point, after Mr. Gordon engaged Peter Gelb, the general manager at the Met, in a heated email exchange, Mr. Gelb replied with the suggestion “that you reread your note below in the clear light of morning and think about a more temperate response.” Mr. Gordon, evidently delighted, forwarded the entire email chain, with his new response, to a wide audience.
“When you and your advisers are out to destroy the livelihood, welfare and families of the people that it’s my job to represent and protect, there’s little for me to be temperate about,” he wrote.
In the end, after federal mediators stepped in, a compromise was reached between the Met and its unions. The workers agreed to their first pay cuts in decades, but not as much as management had sought, and the work rules were preserved.
Mr. Gelb said this week that the Met would dedicate a performance to Mr. Gordon’s memory later this month. “Alan was an impassioned force during our labor negotiations, but I knew that he was battling for what he believed to be the best for his constituents,” he said in a statement.
Mr. Gordon was born in Manhattan on April 22, 1945, and grew up in the Norwood section of the Bronx. He attended public schools. After graduating from City College and Syracuse University College of Law, he began working in the labor movement. He held positions with the Textile Workers Union of America and, later, the Directors Guild of America.
He joined the guild of musical artists, known as A.G.M.A., in 2000, at a moment when the union was facing a crisis. Some important constituents had left the union, including dancers with American Ballet Theater, and others, including the Met chorus, were trying to leave.
Mr. Gordon worked to retain and expand the union’s reach. He kept the Met chorus in the fold, brought Ballet Theater back in 2007 and added new organizations, including the Washington Ballet, whose dancers joined in 2005, which led to a bitter standoff with management.
Holding his coalitions together was not always easy; in opera companies, for example, soloists have different priorities from chorus members. And he sometimes broke with other unions, in one case over his opposition to a group working to revive New York City Opera.
Besides his daughter Elizabeth, Mr. Gordon is survived by his wife, Susan; another daughter, Jessica Gordon; a sister, Karen Gordon Marrinan; and a grandson.
Mr. Gordon was not an opera buff; his tastes ran more to early rock ’n’ roll. But he enjoyed working with the people who made opera, and at a memorial service on Sunday, a tenor in the Met Chorus, Nathan Carlisle, sang “You’ll Never Walk Alone” in his honor.