WASHINGTON — Over the course of 48 hours, Americans will confront two starkly disparate views of Barack Obama’s America that will frame the debate over the future of the country in this election year and beyond.
The country described by the president on Tuesday night in his final State of the Union address is the most powerful nation on earth and on the rise again, with more jobs, better health care and stunning innovation. Although grappling with serious challenges, it is poised for greater progress.
By contrast, the country that Republican presidential candidates will depict on Thursday night in their next nationally televised debate is a darker place, a once-great power that has lost ground in a dangerous world, surrendered its authority and leadership with allies and enemies alike, and diminished freedom and opportunity at home.
Jonathan Weisman of The Times analyzes key moments from the president’s last annual address to Congress.
In his final State of the Union address, President Obama challenged both parties to turn away from the fear, isolationism, even prejudice that is animating the campaign to replace him: (17:53) “Will we respond to the changes of our time with fear, turning inward as a nation, and turning against each other as a people? Or will we face the future with confidence in who we are, what we stand for, and the incredible things we can do together?” Mr. Obama defended the record of his administration against attacks by Republican presidential candidates. But he nodded to the struggles that are giving rise to their populist appeals. (20:56) Anyone claiming that America’s economy is in decline is peddling fiction. What is true - and the reason that a lot of Americans feel anxious - is that the economy has been changing in profound ways // And more and more wealth and income is concentrated at the very top. He defended his foreign policy as well — and his determination to rout the Islamic State. (46:08) If you doubt America’s commitment - or mine - to see that justice is done, ask Osama bin Laden. // When you come after Americans, we go after you. It may take time, but we have long memories, and our reach has no limit. The president did make one bold pledge, a moonshot to beat cancer, trusting his vice president, Joe Biden, to lead the way — a nod to the loss of Mr. Biden’s son. “I’m putting Joe in charge of Mission Control. For the loved ones we’ve all lost, for the family we can still save, let’s make America the country that cures cancer once and for all.” But this speech was about appealing to the nation’s better instincts, a calling for a politics better than recrimination and blame. That’s the America I know. That’s the country we love. Clear-eyed. Big-hearted. Undaunted by challenge. Optimistic that unarmed truth and unconditional love will have the final word. That’s what makes me so hopeful about our future. Because of you. I believe in you. That’s why I stand here confident as I have ever been that the State of our Union is strong.
Whichever view ultimately seems more credible to the public will help determine who succeeds Mr. Obama next January and sets the nation’s course for the following four years. For months, Republicans led by Donald J. Trump have tapped into a deep river of discontent in the electorate, and Mr. Obama decided to use the most prominent platform in American politics to push back.
But Republicans said Mr. Obama would have a hard time convincing the public with a rosy picture that conflicts with their own perceptions and experiences. Iran’s detention of 10 American sailors from two Navy patrol boats in the Persian Gulf just hours before the president’s address provided timely ammunition for the Republican case that his diplomacy with Tehran has been misplaced and has undercut American power.
Republicans are not the only ones who see a glass half empty. Senator Bernie Sanders, the Vermont socialist who has mounted a populist challenge to former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton for the Democratic presidential nomination, has drawn huge crowds describing a country dominated by well-heeled Wall Street plutocrats profiting off workers who have increasingly lost ground.
Such negativity from the right and left has exasperated Mr. Obama, who has gotten less credit than aides say he deserves for the progress of the last seven years. The only regret he acknowledged was failed promise to change the tone of Washington. Beyond that, he used the speech to try to refute gloomy Republican assessments.
“Anyone claiming that America’s economy is in decline is peddling fiction,” Mr. Obama told the lawmakers in the House chamber and millions watching at home who could easily guess the “anyone” he had in mind.
By some measures, Mr. Obama has a compelling case. Unemployment has fallen to 5 percent, less than half its peak during the economic crisis he inherited, and nearly 14 million more jobs have been created since the recovery began. More than 17 million Americans have health care coverage under Mr. Obama’s program. Median household income finally reached $56,746 in November, the level that had been reached when the recession began, according to one research firm. After a near-death experience, the auto industry has surged. Violent crime is down; so are gas prices.
But two out of three Americans still feel the country is on the wrong path, in part because the gains of the last few years have not been distributed evenly. Income disparities have grown worse. The poverty rate is 14.8 percent, higher than when Mr. Obama took office. The economy is growing again, but not as fast as under Ronald Reagan or Bill Clinton. And although the deficit has been slashed from its recession spike, the overall national debt has ballooned to $18 trillion from $11 trillion.
More challenging to the president’s argument may be foreign policy, where his successes have been overshadowed by turmoil from Paris to Ukraine to Libya to Syria.
Mr. Obama has in the last year secured a landmark nuclear deal with Iran, reopened an embassy in Cuba, sealed a free-trade pact in the Asia-Pacific region and corralled the world into a climate change accord. But each of those agreements has its critics who worry about the economic or national security impact.
The resurgence of Vladimir V. Putin’s Russia, the devastating civil war in Syria and the rise of the Islamic State, accompanied by terrorist attacks and beheadings, have unsettled many Americans. A president who authorized the raid that killed Osama bin Laden and who hoped to leave office having ended wars in Iraq and Afghanistan will instead hand his successor an unresolved war spreading across multiple countries. Where he used to boast that he had decimated “core Al Qaeda,” on Tuesday night he said it still posed “a direct threat” to Americans.
One of the hardest things for a president to do is to assuage fear, and as the aftermath of the attack in San Bernardino, Calif., showed, Mr. Obama’s style tends toward the intellectual, and at times didactic, even as he is trying to be reassuring.
He took over in exceedingly hard times and has struggled ever since to inspire in office the way he did on the campaign trail. But as he begins his final stretch, he has a bully pulpit and he made clear Tuesday night that he intends to use it.
He has 373 days left to define what people think of Barack Obama’s America.