Ellen Stovall, a three-time cancer survivor and, as the president of the National Coalition for Cancer Survivorship, a prominent advocate for patients dealing with a host of problems during and after their cancer treatment, died on Tuesday in Rockville, Md. She was 69.
The cause was complications of cardiac disease associated with her early cancer treatment, her brother, Stephen Lewis, said.
Just weeks after giving birth to her son, Jonathan, at 24, Ms. Stovall was told that she had Hodgkin’s lymphoma and had less than a 20 percent chance of survival. “I promised myself that if I survived, I would do something to help others,” she told JW magazine in 2009.
After undergoing radiation treatment that put her cancer in remission, she began collecting donations for the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society and became a full-time volunteer for the American Cancer Society. Dismayed that she could find no support group for young cancer patients, she started one at Georgetown University Hospital.
After her disease recurred in the mid-1980s — she would later be found to have breast cancer as well — she went to a psychiatrist. In the waiting room, she chanced on a pamphlet that described cancer patients at all stages of diagnosis and treatment and beyond as “survivors.” The word struck her as a vast improvement over “victim,” and as the key to a new way of thinking about the disease and those affected by it. “I was on fire,” she told JW.
The pamphlet had been published by the National Coalition for Cancer Survivorship, founded in 1986 to address the problems that cancer patients faced in living with their disease, and beyond, and to lobby for high-quality cancer care for all Americans.
Ms. Stovall was elected to the coalition’s board in 1988. Four years later, when the organization moved its offices from Albuquerque to the Washington area, she was named executive director and set about leading a grass-roots campaign to make cancer treatment and prevention, and the search for a cure, the top health care and research priorities in the United States.
The campaign culminated in “The March: Coming Together to Conquer Cancer,” a demonstration that Ms. Stovall played a central role in organizing. It drew more than 100,000 people, representing 600 cancer organizations, to the Mall in Washington in September 1998, and a million more to smaller events in all 50 states.
Ellen Roos Lewis was born on Dec. 2, 1946, in Scranton, Pa., and grew up nearby in Honesdale, where her father and his brother-in-law ran a department store.
A talented pianist, she briefly studied music at West Chester State College before transferring to Pennsylvania State University, where she met and married John Stovall, an architecture student.
The remainder of her life was defined by her health battles and her mission as an advocate and adviser. She appeared at countless congressional hearings and public forums.
In 1996, President Bill Clinton appointed her to a six-year-term on the National Cancer Advisory Board of the National Cancer Institute. She later served as vice president of the Institute of Medicine’s National Cancer Policy Board.
As a chairwoman of the board’s Committee on Cancer Survivorship, she helped edit a report, “From Cancer Patient to Cancer Survivor: Lost in Transition,” published in 2005, which put the problems faced by adult cancer survivors at the center of debates on cancer policy.
Ms. Stovall was a founding member of the successor to the policy board, the National Cancer Policy Forum — which gathered experts from government, industry, academic and advocacy groups to discuss cancer policy — and a vice chairwoman of the National Advisory Committee to Promote Excellence in Care at the End of Life, an initiative of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. After stepping down as president and chief executive of the coalition in 2008, she became its senior health policy adviser.
In addition to her brother, Ms. Stovall, who lived in Gaithersburg, Md., is survived by her husband and son.