Richard Libertini in an undated photo.
Richard Libertini, a character actor best known for his antic turn as a deranged Latin American general in the 1979 film comedy “The In-Laws,” died on Thursday at his home in Venice, Calif. He was 82.
The cause was cancer, said his former wife, Melinda Dillon.
A madcap, bearded Ichabod Crane who could spout a Babel of foreign accents, Mr. Libertini made his early career with the Second City, the storied Chicago improvisational troupe, and went on to be a ubiquitous presence on stage, screen and television.
Mr. Libertini delighted critics as General Garcia, the moneyed, genteelly vulgar and more-than-borderline-delirious dictator of a banana republic in “The In-Laws,” which starred Peter Falk and Alan Arkin.
The character is advised by a political counselor formed, à la Señor Wences, from Mr. Libertini’s lipsticked thumb and forefinger; he also owns a vast collection of paintings on black velvet.
Onstage, he appeared in “The Mad Show,” a 1966 Off Broadway revue inspired by Mad magazine, which also starred MacIntyre Dixon, Paul Sand, Linda Lavin and Jo Anne Worley.
The son of Italian immigrants, Richard Joseph Libertini was born in Cambridge, Mass., on May 21, 1933. After earning a bachelor’s degree from Emerson College in Boston, he moved to New York.
There, with Mr. Dixon and Lynda Segal, he wrote and performed in “Stewed Prunes,” a revue inspired by vaudeville and silent film comedy.
He also played Don Adriano in Shakespeare’s “Love’s Labour’s Lost” at the Public Theater and Jaques in “As You Like It” in Central Park.
On film, he played the boss of Chevy Chase’s dissolute newspaperman Irwin Fletcher in “Fletch” (1985) and its sequel, “Fletch Lives” (1989). His other film credits include “The Night They Raided Minsky’s” (1968), “Catch-22” (1970), “Popeye” (1980), “Sharky’s Machine” (1981), “Unfaithfully Yours” (1984) and “Awakenings” (1990).
On television, Mr. Libertini had a regular role as the Godfather on the ABC satire “Soap” and played the defense lawyer Barry Slotnick in “The Trial of Bernhard Goetz,” a 1988 “American Playhouse” production on PBS.
Mr. Libertini’s marriage to Ms. Dillon, a film and television actress, ended in divorce. Survivors include their son, Richard; a brother, Albert; and a sister, Alice Langone.
Mr. Libertini’s success as a performer is all the more noteworthy in that he never set out to be an actor.
