HONG KONG — A Hong Kong publisher last seen in October outside his condominium in Thailand surfaced Sunday on Chinese television, tearfully confessing to violating his probation in a fatal drunken-driving accident and saying that he had voluntarily returned to China to face justice.
The publisher, Gui Minhai, a naturalized Swedish citizen, was one of five missing employees of Mighty Current Media, a Hong Kong publishing company and bookstore specializing in books about the sex lives and corruption of China’s top leaders. The books are popular with tourists from the mainland.
Another Mighty Current employee, Lee Bo, a British citizen and editor, vanished from the streets here on Dec. 30, calling his wife days later from mainland China to tell her he was cooperating with an investigation. The disappearance of the five Mighty Current employees led to the closing of the publishing company and bookstore.
On Sunday, China’s national broadcaster, CCTV, aired a statement by Gui Minhai, a publisher in Hong Kong, in which he said he had turned himself in over a drunken-driving accident 11 years ago.
I am returning to China to surrender by personal choice, it has nothing to do with anyone. I also do not wish that any person or organization, including Sweden, involves itself or interferes with my return to China.
Hong Kong, while part of mainland China since 1997, has a separate government and legal system and guarantees civil rights such as freedom of speech and due process of law.
Mr. Gui’s whereabouts was unknown for three months, though many suspected he had been taken to mainland China. On Sunday, China’s state-owned television broadcaster aired a 10-minute segment alleging that in December 2003, Mr. Gui was driving drunk and struck and killed a young woman in the eastern Chinese city of Ningbo.
According to a report Sunday in the official Xinhua news agency, Mr. Gui was given a two-year suspended sentence in 2004, and in November of that year left the country while still on probation. Mr. Gui, 51, is at least the second Swedish citizen to be taken into Chinese custody in recent months. This month, a Swedish legal aid worker, Peter Jesper Dahlin, was detained on accusations of endangering state security. Mr. Dahlin trained and supported legal activists in China who used the country’s legal system to counter human rights abuses. He may now face a less serious charge of funding criminal activities, according to a report on Saturday by Swedish Radio.
In his televised confession, Mr. Gui told Swedish officials that he voluntarily went into Chinese custody. Mr. Gui, who studied poetry at Peking University, became a Swedish citizen in 1996, according to Xinhua.
While Mr. Gui confessed to fleeing justice, the Xinhua report said that he was also suspected of committing other, unspecified crimes.
Others in the publishing industry knew about the car accident before Sunday’s televised confession. Bao Pu, the publisher of New Century Press and a United States citizen, said that the Chinese government might reopen the case to justify holding Mr. Gui. Details of the case had been reported in China’s state news media more than a decade ago. Some observers on social media noted discrepancies in state news reports on Mr. Gui’s age and how his name was written in Chinese.
Mr. Gui is not the first Hong Kong-based publisher of sensitive political books to be arrested by the mainland police on unrelated charges. In 2014, Yiu Mantin, who had been planning to publish a book critical of President Xi Jinping, was sentenced to 10 years in prison for smuggling industrial chemicals.
A press officer for the Swedish Foreign Ministry did not immediately return a phone call and email sent outside of normal office hours.