The friendship between a middle-aged man and a young girl is at the heart of “Lamb,” a drama from the director Ross Partridge, who also stars as the lead character David Lamb, and adapted the screenplay from the novel by Bonnie Nadzam. The character, adrift and searching for meaning, meets an 11-year-old girl, Tommie (Oona Laurence), in a parking lot when she asks him for a cigarette. This begins an unlikely friendship, one that may raise eyebrows and cause discomfort for many viewers. The film, and book from which it is adapted, looks at the not-easily-definable contours of the relationship in compelling ways, but the subject matter is tricky to say the least.
In an interview at The Times, Mr. Partridge spoke about the film and the complicated friendship at its center. Here are excerpts from the conversation.
Q. This material is a real tightrope walk. I’m curious as to why you wanted to tackle it?
A. Immediately when I read the book, I had the same feeling as most people did, that it is difficult. It left me with this feeling that I was unfamiliar with. There was a certain part of me that was feeling very disturbed and angry at times and yet still empathetic. I felt wrong for having compassion towards this situation. I had to look further and say, my experiences of things and how I put my own sense of morality on somebody else’s experience doesn’t allow for the whole story.
For David Lamb, in his reality, this seems O.K. And yet, he’s trying to maintain a reality that isn’t lasting for him. It changes and fluctuates. He’s caught between his need and logic. To me, that was an interesting thing to look at as an actor. He’s a lost character trying to find salvation in some way to correct the wrongs of his past.
When you made it, did you think there would be people who wouldn’t be able to get over the disturbing nature of this relationship?
Anytime you put a 47-year-old man and an 11-year-old girl together, we are immediately going to assume it’s one thing or another. If it’s not his daughter, then it has to be something else. And what drew me to this situation is that it wasn’t that other thing. What it is is not so clearly defined. And sometimes life isn’t so clearly defined. If we don’t understand what’s going on, it makes us uncomfortable. But sometimes not knowing is intriguing.
How did you work with your co-star, Oona Laurence on scenes?
Do you see David Lamb being attracted to Tommie?
No, not at all. I don’t think that’s his DNA. What he sees in her is himself. In her, he sees the little child that was neglected himself, all the things that he was missing. He’s just lost his dad and his life is falling apart. And this is the one thing that’s trying to pull him up from that. He’s trying to correct the ills of his past, in some skewed way.
How did you find Oona for this role?
Oona comes from a family with three kids that are all actors. She almost didn’t make the audition. And her mom read the script and called Oona’s dad and said you have to get her to this audition because she needs to play this role. It’s hard subject matter, but there’s a beautiful message in the film. So it was Oona’s mom that got us all together, really.