Opinion|Boom or Gloom?
Boom or Gloom?
Whether the winner of the 2016 presidential election emphasizes optimism or pessimism, he or she will face some sobering economic developments.
important because when big companies swallow up others, it signals that acquiring companies have essentially outsourced their ideas rather than growing internally.
suggests that the safer thing to do is to buy someone else rather than develop new products and services yourself. The merger trend is a sign of a collective failure of nerve, the risk-taking that historically contributed to much higher economic growth rates, such as the roughly 4 percent average from 1948 to 1973.
Aggregate productivity growth depends not only on innovations and technology investments within firms but also on the economy’s ability to reallocate resources from businesses with lower productivity to businesses with higher productivity.
In a dynamic economy, businesses are born, grow, and die; jobs are created and lost; and resources are reshuffled according to their best use. If there are fewer new companies and more aging ones, then labor and capital hang tight in old industries. The economy is not refreshed and growth slows.
Robert J. Gordon, an economist at Northwestern, about whom I have written before, has just published a 768-page book, “The Rise and Fall of American Growth.” The message, as the title suggests, is deeply pessimistic.
Gordon contends that prospects for an innovation-driven economic revival comparable to the post World War II boom are essentially nil.
In the century after the end of the Civil War, life in the United States changed beyond recognition. There was a revolution — an economic, rather than a political one — which freed people from an unremitting daily grind of manual labor and household drudgery and a life of darkness, isolation and early death. By the 1970s, many manual, outdoor jobs had been replaced by work in air-conditioned environments, housework was increasingly performed by machines, darkness was replaced by electric light, and isolation was replaced not only by travel, but also by color television, which brought the world into the living room. Most importantly, a newborn infant could expect to live not to the age of 45, but to 72.
in a narrow sphere of activity having to do with entertainment, communications and the collection and processing of information. For the rest of what humans care about — food, clothing, shelter, transportation, health and working conditions both inside and outside the home — progress has slowed since 1970, both qualitatively and quantitatively.
The Republican candidates have been talking more about doom and gloom than candidates usually do. If Gordon is right, whoever holds the White House after Jan. 20, 2017, will find the job as frustrating as it is rewarding.
In an email, Gordon forecasts a 0.3 percent annual growth rate of “median disposable income per person after taxes and transfers” for the period from 2015 to 2040 — one sixth the 1.69 percent rate from 1920 to 2014. Gordon’s apprehension is based in part on his findings, which show the rise and fall of productivity (you can see this in the accompanying chart).
In addition to the slowdown in innovation, Gordon sees four “headwinds”: the aging of the population, the decline of American education in comparison to foreign nations, rising inequality which, among other things, diminishes consumer purchasing power, and the growing federal debt burden.
growth has been consistently weaker than was expected. This has occurred even though interest rates have fallen substantially, suggesting that it reflects a reduction in demand.
As unemployment increases, more people adjust to a lower standard of living. As they become accustomed to the lower standard of living, people may not be as determined to achieve the previously desired higher living standard. In addition, as more people become unemployed, it becomes more socially acceptable to be or remain unemployed. After the labor market returns to normal, some unemployed people may be disinterested in returning to the work force.
The views of both Summers and Gordon are controversial, and disputed by other scholars.
Some of the best economists of our age, including Larry Summers, Paul Krugman, and my own colleague Robert J. Gordon, are joining the chorus of the doomsayers.
For economic historians, this argument flies in the face of 200 years of experience. Pessimists have now been predicting slowing rates of invention and innovation for centuries, and they have been consistently wrong. Looking ahead, it seems clear that the productive potential of robotics and the human genome, for example, have only begun to be realized. Evidence that we are learning how to use intelligent machines to replace first unskilled and eventually skilled labor suggests that we have a distribution problem, not a growth problem.
The transformations brought about by digital technology will be profoundly beneficial ones. We’re heading into an era that won’t just be different; it will be better, because we’ll be able to increase both the variety and the volume of our consumption.
According to Brynjolfsson, as computers learn to identify faces or cancerous lesions, or how to spot fraud in an accountant’s report, the range of new uses for computers will grow geometrically.
Despite the conflicting views of optimists and pessimists on the future of technology, there is a surprising level of agreement among those engaged in the debate over the public policy imperatives.
If the U.S. does experience secular stagnation over the next decade or two, it will be self-inflicted. The U.S. must address its infrastructure, education and training needs. Moreover, it must support aggregate demand to repair the damage caused by the Great Recession and bring the long-term unemployed back into the labor market.
should include increased public investment, reductions in structural barriers to private investment and measures to promote business confidence, a commitment to maintain basic social protections so as to maintain spending power, and measures to reduce inequality and so redistribute income towards those with a higher propensity to spend.
Although Brynjolfsson is optimistic about future economic growth, he believes that major improvements in education and training are necessary to ensure that workers have the skills to fill newly created jobs.
The current configuration in Washington precludes the adoption of such proposals. Big ticket items — a major boost in infrastructure spending, enactment of a federally directed program of school reform and alteration of tax and spending programs to redistribute income appear to be out of reach. The ironclad commitment of Republicans to oppose any domestic initiatives that require higher taxes or deficit financing stands in the way of progress. Democrats themselves have misgivings — ranging from teacher union rejection of school reform to the opposition of upscale Democrats to redistributive tax policies.
however politically improbable, has its limits. The headwinds that are slowing the pace of the U.S.’s future economic growth have been decades in the making, entrenched in many aspects of our society. The reduction of inequality and the eradication of roadblocks in our educational system defy the cure-all of any legislation signed at the stroke of a pen.