MELBOURNE, Australia — At the Australian Open on Saturday, all that stood between Serena Williams and Steffi Graf was Angelique Kerber, who took 33 majors to reach her first Grand Slam final. Kerber was trying to become the first German to win a women’s major since Graf won in 1999. Williams was trying to join Graf as a 22-time major winner in singles.
Williams, the world No. 1, was the defending champion and a six-time titlist here. But in the final it was as if she were playing singles against a doubles team of Kerber and Graf. As strong as Williams is, she could not quite push through the pressure of history and a free-swinging Kerber, who pulled off the 6-4, 3-6, 6-4 upset at Rod Laver Arena.
It was Williams’s second failed attempt to reach 22. She lost in the semifinals at last year’s United States Open, in perhaps even more dispiriting fashion, as she was rolling toward the sport’s first Grand Slam since 1988.
Kerber, 28, was the first seventh-seeded player to win the Australian Open since Williams in 2005, and the first to beat Williams in a three-set major final. When Williams’s last stroke, a volley, sailed long, Kerber watched the ball land, then flung her racket, fell to the ground and motioned as if she were making a Slam angel. Like any worthy disciple, she had defended Graf from a dangerous adversary.
World No. 7 Angelique Kerber of Germany defeated No. 1 Serena Williams in the final of the Australian Open on Saturday, 6-4, 3-6, 6-4.
“I think I helped Steffi right now,” Kerber said with a smile.
After seeing her bid to join Graf evaporate into the night air, Williams made her way to Kerber’s side of the net and enveloped her in a hug.
“I had goose bumps on the court when I was playing,” added Kerber, who did not advance past the third round in any of the majors last year.
The 2-hour-8-minute match swung in an 11-minute snippet in the deciding set. Serving at 2-3, Williams did not put a first serve in play on the first four points and fell behind, 15-40. She saved one break point with a forehand volley winner on the 18th stroke of the rally after running Kerber from side to side. She saved another with an ace.
After Kerber earned a third break point, Williams produced a backhand winner, then another ace for the advantage.
But just when it looked as if Williams’s serve, normally her security blanket, would cover her mistakes, she had two double faults to go with three unforced errors over the next seven points. Those miscues, and a gutsy Kerber drop shot, were the difference in the game.
After each held serve, Kerber was broken at 5-3 but then broke Williams back to win.
Kerber converted five of nine break points and finished with 13 unforced errors to Williams’s 46, many of them committed at the net. She came in 32 times and won 15 of the points. Williams, who did not record her first ace until her eighth service game, finished with seven aces and six double faults. Kerber had five aces against three doubles. Her winners-to-unforced-errors differential was also better — a plus-12 to Williams’s plus-1.
Kerber’s four Women’s Tennis Association titles in 2015 were the most after Williams’s five. On the strength of her runner-up finish at an Australian Open tuneup tournament in Brisbane and her victory here, Kerber will move to world No. 2 when the new rankings come out. She improved her career record against Williams to 2-5. The only other player in the top 10 to have more than one victory against Williams is Maria Sharapova, who is 2-19, including 18 consecutive defeats.
Williams’s graciousness in defeat made an impression on the Australians, who collectively place a high premium on sportsmanship. Barbara Hogg Botsman, an octogenarian who trained under the renowned Australian doubles player and coach, Harry Hopman, watched Williams’s run to the final from her home in Brisbane.
