The history of art is a giant puzzle that will never be complete. New pieces constantly arrive, unsettling one area or another, altering the overall shape.
The latest arrival in New York comes in the form of “Concrete Cuba,” a riveting exhibition at the David Zwirner gallery about a little-known branch of modernism. It adds to the history of postwar abstraction by providing a first glimpse of what a small group of Cuban artists were up to in the 1950s and early ’60s, the tumultuous years leading up to, and just after, the revolution that brought Fidel Castro to power. This is a museum-quality effort, and was seen in a somewhat different form (same artists, some different works) at Zwirner’s London branch last fall.
These artists briefly called themselves Los Diez Pintores Concretos — the 10 Concrete Painters — or, simply, Los Diez, the 10. Formally, their collective had a short life, 1959-61, and showed together as a group only three times. It was the culmination of nearly a decade of work, friendships, writing, lectures, sojourns and shows in Paris and New York, as well as local exhibitions.
The group coalesced around Galeria Color-Luz (Color-Light), which was started in Havana in 1957 by Loló Soldevilla (1901-1971), just after she returned from several years in Paris as Cuba’s cultural attaché. She was an artist with energy to burn, judging by the works representing her here. Her partner in the effort, another member of the 10, was Pedro de Oraá, an artist, poet and art critic, born in 1931, who would write a short history of the group.
The works in this show are small, compared with the canvases that the New York School and the French Tachists were using at the time, and not the least gestural or emotional. The artists of the 10 may have been constrained by economic factors or available materials. More important, they had an entirely different goal, inspired by the utopian geometry of Mondrian, the Constructivists and late Kandinsky, and spiced by the works of their contemporaries, including Victor Vasarely. The Cubans worked out their own mix of these influences, distinguished by a regional sense of color and materials.
Concrete works were not “abstracted” from anything; they represented purely their materials, colors and the self-contained logic of their geometric imagery. The concept of concrete art quickly spawned successive groups in Paris (Art Concret and Abstraction-Création). After the war, artists in Latin America were attracted by its credo, leading to the formation of concrete-minded groups like Madi, in Buenos Aires in 1946, and Grupo Ruptura and the better-known Grupo Frente — which included the artists Lygia Clark, Lygia Pape and the precocious Hélio Oiticica — in São Paulo and in Rio de Janeiro, both in 1952.
Cuba was introduced to nonobjective or abstract art in 1949, with a Havana exhibition of works by Sandú Darié, a Romanian who emigrated to the island in 1941 and became a crucial force among the artists of the 10. The show’s eight works by Darié, who forged ties with the Madi group, make an especially strong impression. Two paintings from around 1950 establish him as one of the few artists who managed to extend Mondrian’s bars and colored blocks beyond the master’s shadow. Darié did this with bright colors (yellow, orange and black on white, in one case) and intersecting forms that convey a prismatic sense of space.
Represented by 11 works, including several made in Paris, Soldevilla is equally impressive. One of the best is a small relief of circles and squares of black, white and tan cardboard, laminated in parts, on wood, with parallel lines of twine connecting them like telephone wires. Echoing the wood’s grain, they keep alive the play of smooth and rough, worn and new. Soldevilla continues this kind of physicality in a moonstruck collage in which small pieces of board swirl across a dark blue surface. She comes into her own with a big square black and white wood relief from around 1960, but everything she did has its own vigor.
It’s probably too soon to say that Darié and Soldevilla were the best of the 10, because their works so outnumber everyone else’s in the show. Wifredo Arcay, who spent two-thirds of his life in Paris, and maintained a connection to the 10 primarily through Soldevilla, also shows signs of moving beyond Mondrian’s idealist geometry. This is even more pronounced in a painting by José M. Mijares, a small but powerful composition in white, black and several shades of blue, painted with quiet gusto. Working in oil and sand, Mario Carreño, who was an important proselytizer of abstraction in early-1950s Havana, arranges geometric shapes into taut, totemic presence. Mr. Oraá contributes a striking composition in glowing black and white that suggests kinship with the intimate black and white geometric paintings of the American Myron Stout.
The artist I most want to see more of is Alberto Menocal, who is represented here by a small marvel of a relief from 1958, in which triangles of primarily red, blue and yellow Formica are arranged on a thin sheet of Masonite (or maybe cork) in an ebullient balancing act. They form a tall and airy facade — the Flying Wallendas of geometry. As with Soldevilla’s wood-cardboard-twine relief, all the materials in this work seem salvaged — as if they’d seen better days, but their dignity is intact. Both these pieces have a lyrical, self-assured modesty that modernism can always use more of.
This show provides a wonderful taste of a very complicated history that should be made clearer by its catalog, which Zwirner will publish later this year. It will feature a substantial essay by the art historian Abigail McEwen, of the University of Maryland, who is finishing a broader history of Cuban art in the 1950s. In the meantime, “Concrete Cuba” is further proof that modernism was a global phenomenon comprising distinctly flavored local variations. Stay tuned.