“Ride Along 2,” it may not surprise you to learn, is a lot like “Ride Along,” only less so. The buddy-cop action-comedy is a foolproof genre, though it’s also one that requires a fool. This franchise is lucky to have Kevin Hart in that role, and his manic comic energy is enough to make the sequel something other than a complete waste of time. But the genre is also stubbornly innovation-proof, and there’s not much new to see here.
Mr. Hart, as an eager Atlanta rookie officer named Ben Barber, is again paired with Ice Cube, who plays James Payton, a veteran detective. Neither man makes the slightest gesture against type. Ice Cube glowers, Mr. Hart jabbers, and a plot is cooked up to provide them with occasions to do so, ideally in the company of women in bikinis or fast-moving vehicles. Plenty of both are to be found in Miami, where a drug kingpin (Benjamin Bratt) has infiltrated the local power structure.
Mr. Bratt moves through his hackneyed role with resigned good humor. Olivia Munn, serving as third wheel and ostensible romantic interest for Ice Cube, seems a bit more tentative. Ken Jeong, as a nutty nerd mixed up in some bad business, does what he can to make Mr. Hart look calm and dignified. Except, that is, when he makes Mr. Hart eat discarded nachos out of a garbage can.
That is not one of the movie’s funny parts, but there are a few. Several involve Mr. Hart and Sherri Shepherd, who plays the wedding planner organizing Ben’s nuptials to James’s sister, Angela (Tika Sumpter). Their brief scenes together represent a missed opportunity, and may also remind viewers of “Real Husbands of Hollywood,” the brilliant BET sitcom that finds more laughter in touchy issues of race and masculinity than the two “Ride Along” movies (both directed by Tim Story) put together.
But that may be an unfair standard. Movies these days are where comedians are paid to play it safe. In half-hour weekly installments — or in a weekend binge — Ice Cube and Mr. Hart might have more room to explore their comic chemistry rather than just cashing in on it.
“Ride Along 2” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Gunplay and profanity. Running time: 1 hour 42 minutes.