Georg Bernardini, a German chocolate expert, has evaluated chocolates from more than 500 companies worldwide and shares the results, A to Z, in a comprehensive tome that has been translated from German into English and is now available in the United States. He is forthright, referring to the chocolate from one company as having an “annoying” taste, and admits to disliking chocolate that contains vanilla. Among the more compelling features is a rundown of what should be listed on the labels of good dark, milk and white chocolate. He also describes the levels of processing, from serious bean to bar (he is not particularly a fan of Mast Brothers) to simple repackaging, and tells you what each company does: “Chocolate – The Reference Standard” by Georg Bernardini (Georg Bernardini, $60), thechocolatetester.com.
It’s as if Tulley Road, a new food company, had my granddaughter Evie in mind with its breakfast Mac & Cheese Muffin, a portion of mac and cheese with bits of vegetables and a pepita topping in a muffin-size wrapper. Other grab-and-go breakfast foods made by the company, founded by Katy Sparks and Mike Ciardi, are an individual spelt yogurt coffeecake and a substantial ciabatta sandwich stuffed with organic eggs, squash, shiitake mushrooms and onions: $5.50 to $8.95 Tulley Road Foods, Toby’s Estate Coffee stores in New York, tobysestate.com.
The tiny life preserver that encircles this thermometer may save your custard or your hollandaise. Those delicate egg-based mixtures should not be heated higher than about 170 degrees Fahrenheit, lest the eggs curdle. The floating thermometer, with a range of 20 to 220 degrees (minus 6.6 to 104.4 degrees Celsius), will monitor your sauce just so; the float can be removed for cleaning. Now how about a similar gadget for frying and candymaking?: CDN Floating Thermometer, $8.06, kitchenkaboodle.com.
Though labeled moonshine, this clear spirit in a handsome Art Deco bottle evokes Gatsby, not Pappy Yokum. It’s a grain whiskey that has not been barrel aged; it has a pleasantly subtle yeastiness rather than the sweet vanilla and smoke of most whiskeys. Made from upstate oats, rye, spelt and malted barley, it’s 95 proof and belongs in cocktails. Save the empty bottle, remove the labels and use it as a carafe: Manhattan Moonshine, $39.99 for 750 milliliters, manhattan-moonshine.com.
Hawa Hassan, a Somali refugee, was sent to live with family friends in Seattle. She began modeling there, moved to New York and eventually was reunited with her mother and siblings. She has recaptured the flavors of her native land in jars of condiments: dense, dark tamarind sauce that defines sweet and sour, and nubbly cilantro chutney with herbal, citric depth and persistent heat: Basbaas Tamarind Date Sauce, Coconut Cilantro Chutney, $16 for two eight-ounce jars, basbaassauce.com.
Camille Becerra, who left the restaurant Navy a few months ago, has resurfaced as the chef in residence at André Saraiva’s art-focused Café Henrie on the Lower East Side. Through Feb. 21, she is preparing an all-day lunch menu featuring dragon bowls: grains, vegetables, pickles, sprouts with add-in sauces like a restorative chile and bone broth and proteins like tender meatballs or pickled eggs. “Basically they’re macrobowls,” she said. “I learned them cooking years ago in vegetarian restaurants.” On her last day, there will be a multicourse French dinner: Café Henrie, 116 Forsyth Street (Broome Street), reservations and information at hello@cafehenrie.com.