In this era of mass-produced goods, when we can breezily purchase dishes and glassware by the set, browse for presized rugs online and “build” furniture by assembling kits from Ikea, it’s easy to take such quotidian household items for granted. But just a couple of centuries ago, the only way to create them was to fashion them by hand.
Like many harborfront areas with easy proximity to the hub of New York City, Fairfield County in the late 1700s and the 1800s was home to dozens of family workshops that specialized in turning out such pieces of practical design. It’s this legacy of craftsmanship, which has endured and flourished to the present day, that is explored in “Handcrafted: Artisans Past and Present,” an exhibition at the Fairfield Museum and History Center.
The display is deceptively small, occupying just a single room of the cultural center. But it plumbs deeply into the region’s creative traditions. Ten contemporary artisans have contributed works to the exhibition, ranging from the purely ornamental (jewelry and embroidery) to the elegantly functional (furnishings, and ceramic and glass vessels). To emphasize the synergy between these modern-day craft works and their lineage, each piece has been partnered with corresponding antiques from the History Center’s collection. Smaller objects are paired with their vintage counterparts in vitrines; larger works square off across the room from one another.
The shared lexicon is immediately clear in the exhibition’s most prominent pieces: wooden furnishings. The aesthetics of the antique and modern examples are distinctly different; while a gracefully shaped writing chair and drop-leaf table from the late 1700s have a sturdy, utilitarian heft to them, two comparable pieces by Thomas Throop, a New Canaan woodworker, have an airy, ethereal quality. Mr. Throop’s ladder-backed chestnut chair has slender limbs that look sculptural; his walnut trestle table, shaped like a Chinese written character, has a top that seems to hover above its legs.
But as Mr. Throop noted, the processes and tools he used to make his pieces — kiln-drying the wood, then shaping it with saws, lathes and planes — were virtually the same as those employed by the much earlier furniture makers, whose names we do not know.
A similar sort of evolution can be seen in two quilts that hang on facing walls of the exhibition room. The vintage piece (mid-1800s), sewn in a geometric pattern from an array of brightly colored fabric scraps, appears a bit cluttered next to its complement, an understated, almost austere study in neutral tones of butter-yellow and gold designed by the Bridgeport artisan Denyse Schmidt. (The composition was inspired, Ms. Schmidt said, by the work of Paul Klee.) Still, both share the common vernacular of pieced construction, batting and elaborate stitching. Between them hangs a piece that seems to bridge their disparate styles: a boldly striped, deeply textured warp-faced wool rug from Patricia Burling, a weaver from Monroe.
Other paired works elicit the same sense of progress. A rough splint basket, made in the mid-1800s by an unknown Native American weaver, appears fully intact, but rudimentary compared with the wildly creative woven vessels made by Kari Lonning of Ridgefield. 
The before-and-after dynamic continues with many other pairings. A stoneware pie plate from the early 1800s, decorated with simple wavy stylus lines, shares a glass display with its companion piece: an elegant porcelain bud vase, painted with graceful cobalt vines and flowers by Frances Palmer, a Weston artist. A plain cherry-wood money box dating from the mid-1700s segues to a glossy cedar-and-mahogany humidor, with intricate wenge inlay along the edges, made by Edward Pirnik-Mauriz, a Fairfield woodworker. A brawny silver tankard from the early 1700s abuts two exquisitely delicate, blown-glass incalmo vessels made by Dylan Cotton and Christopher DeMott of Fairfield, and also several intricate bronze jewelry pieces made by the Fairfield artisan Michael Michaud, including a brooch in the shape of a curled calla lily, and a bracelet fashioned to look like a strip of stippled birch bark.
More nuanced — and easily the most unusual item in the exhibition — is a work of sophisticated, byzantine embroidery from Ruben Marroquin of Bridgeport. The piece, which layers needlework directly over a vintage photograph of the interior of the historic Bridgeport Arcade Mall, brings the building’s architecture, light, shadows, and ambience into vivid relief; rather than just colorizing the old photo, Mr. Marroquin has texturized it, given it depth.
