JERUSALEM — There have been fights over books, music, plays, funding for the arts and academic awards. This being Israel, they have been underpinned by fierce rhetorical exchanges about democracy, fascism and zealotry, identity, the future of the state and the fate of Jews.
A new front in the culture wars opens nearly every week, ripple effects of shifts in Israeli demographics, attitudes and politics that are shaking the society.
The latest was an attack on Wednesday by a far-right group on beloved leftist literary icons including Amos Oz, A. B. Yehoshua and David Grossman, writers who have been considered the voice — and conscience — of the state for years. The group, Im Tirtzu, began a poster campaign calling the writers “moles in culture,” which prompted accusations of McCarthyism and worse, even from many on the right.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and several members of his conservative coalition joined the chorus of condemnation over the vilification of such Israeli cultural pillars. But some of those same ministers have been behind many of the other battles. The previous round was the brainchild of Miri Regev, the divisive and conservative minister of culture and sport, who wants to deny state money to institutions that do not express “loyalty” to the state, including those that show disrespect for the flag, incite racism or violence, or subvert Israel as a Jewish and democratic state.
The steady stream of such conflicts, over what cultural works the state should promote for schoolchildren to read or for citizens to see and hear, is part of a political drama in which the politicians of a new generation are jockeying for position as leader of the so-called nationalist camp.
The cast includes Ms. Regev, 50, a rising power in Mr. Netanyahu’s conservative Likud Party; Ayelet Shaked, 39, an outspoken hard-liner from the more conservative Jewish Home Party; and Naftali Bennett, 43, the education minister and head of Jewish Home.
The Israel they represent is more religious and less beholden to the values and inheritances of the old, Europeanized elite and its dwindling left. They are unapologetic in their nationalism, supportive of both poorer Jews of Sephardic — Middle Eastern, or Mizrahi — background and of settlers in the occupied West Bank, and unmoved by criticism from international leaders and liberal activists.
Yossi Klein Halevi, a senior fellow at the Shalom Hartman Institute, said the culture wars reflected “a growing sense of siege” that Israelis felt from the region and the world.
This month, the left-leaning daily Haaretz highlighted internal discussions in the ministry about what artistic works might be considered “politically undesirable” for high-school students. Among the criteria, the newspaper said, were whether artists would perform in West Bank settlements and declare loyalty to the state and to the national anthem, something that is particularly problematic for Israel’s Arab citizens.
Mr. Kotler infuriated the government and the political right last summer when he compared its supporters to “cud-chewing cattle.” That was in response to Ms. Regev’s effort to freeze state funding for an Arab theater in Haifa because of a play about a Palestinian prisoner who murders an Israeli soldier. The production, “Parallel Time,” had enraged the right and Mr. Bennett banned school trips to see it.
Ms. Regev, who declined to be interviewed for this article, also asked the justice minister to examine whether the Haifa theater, Al Midan, had ties to terrorist activities.
Ms. Regev, a former general and military spokeswoman, also said that she wanted to vet the playlist of the army’s popular music station, Galgalatz, to ensure that more Israeli and Mizrahi works are played. That brought an angry rebuff from Defense Minister Moshe Yaalon, whose ministry controls the station.
Ms. Regev and Mr. Bennett have also clashed, including over his decision to award a new prize to artists who “promote Jewish culture.” Ms. Regev said cultural prizes were her domain — her ministry gives its own prize “reflecting Zionist values and history” — and she threatened to take it up with the attorney general if Mr. Bennett did not transfer the prize budget.
Mr. Gouri, who is 92, said that he thought his book was too personal for the prize, and that it should be used to give a lift to a younger artist’s career. But he also questioned the point of such an award, which had been created as a political gesture by the right several years ago, in response to a cultural boycott of the settlements.
Ms. Regev also wanted to cut funding for the Jewish-Arab Almina children’s theater in Jaffa because its director, Norman Issa, a Christian actor, refused to perform with another theater group in a West Bank settlement. He eventually relented.
Mr. Bennett, for his part, overruled ministry experts to ban from high-school reading lists a novel about a romance between an Israeli woman and a Palestinian man, apparently out of fear that it promotes assimilation. The romance takes place abroad; the pair splits up when they return home, to Israel and the West Bank. Mr. Bennett said the novel, “Borderlife,” by Dorit Rabinyan, disparaged the Israeli military, and the head of his ministerial committee said it “could incite hatred and cause emotional storms” in classrooms.
