A few weeks ago, while visiting my parents in Lucknow, India, I decided to go out and take pictures of the sights in the city. I lived there for the first 30 years of my life and never bothered to photograph these places, but now that I live in the States, I missed my home. In Lucknow, famous for its politeness, poetry, perfume and embroidery, there are many interesting buildings, built by both Mughal and British rulers. So I set out, strolling through a historic part of town with an SLR camera hanging from my neck, looking just like a tourist.
It was a beautiful day of about 70 degrees, with not a single cloud in the sky. Before too long, I noticed several cycle rickshaws following me. They tried to give me a ride for a small amount of money, 10 rupees, which is worth about 15 cents these days. But I wanted to keep walking, so I waved them off.
A bit later, as I trained my camera on a 19th-century mausoleum, I heard someone say, ‘‘Chikan Palace, Chikan Palace.’’ I turned around and saw a couple of more rickshaw pullers. I knew exactly what they meant. Chikan Palace is a generic name for a showroom that sells hand-embroidered clothes. People from all over the world come to Lucknow, and I was being taken for one who might be interested in buying some clothes as souvenirs. I smiled at them and said, ‘‘Main yahin ka hun’’ (‘‘I’m from here’’).
‘‘A kilo of rice?’’ I asked.
‘‘That doesn’t matter. I will still get my rice.’’ He looked at me longingly.
I didn’t say anything. If I had been a tourist and not a local, I might have fallen prey to this arrangement between the rickshaw puller and the showroom owner. But he had trusted me to tell his secret.
I screwed the cap back on my camera and put it in the bag. In India, there are so many people asking for help or money one way or the other. I liked that he had been so open. He was trying to act smart, conning the shop owner he worked with to hook tourists, but I felt sorry for his situation. I was in a position to give him a hand, and I thought it wouldn’t hurt to go along with the game.
I hopped on, and he pedaled me away from the group of other rickshaw pullers who were fighting over me.
He took me about half a mile to a swank embroidery showroom.
‘‘You go in, and I will wait here, O.K.?’’ he said to me.
‘‘O.K.,’’ I said.
I walked in, and a salesman greeted me. I had shopped in stores and left without making a purchase a thousand times before. Now I was nervous. I told myself that if I couldn’t pull it off, I’d just buy something. But I was also a bit thrilled about acting as if I were going to drop thousands of rupees on clothes and then leaving without spending a penny.
I wanted to be careful not to speak Lucknow Urdu, because that would give away my identity and result in the loss of a kilo of rice for the poor rickshaw puller. I spoke in English. Also, I had to remind myself to show curiosity, amazement, interest in the clothes — clothes like the hand-embroidered, knee-length cotton shirts that I wore on a daily basis when I was a young kid and a teenager, whether playing cricket or flying kites on the roof. I smiled at the enthusiastic salesmen, took the material between my fingers, ran my hand gently on the beautiful work.
I gave him my best fake smile.
When he brought out several more outfits, I began to feel pressured, as well as a tiny bit guilty about what I was doing. So I made my excuses and left.
I came out and saw the rickshaw puller smiling. I winked at him and walked away, satisfied with myself for helping him get his rice.
I strolled some more and pointed my camera at another building. Soon, I heard it again: ‘‘Chikan Palace, Chikan Palace.’’ Three more rickshaw pullers were waving at me.