Smaller, louder and unmistakably of the moment: That seems to be the punchy vision of opera that drives the Prototype Festival, which opened its fourth season on Wednesday with Du Yun’s audacious and searing “Angel’s Bone.” It’s an appallingly good work when you consider that it takes on the subject of child trafficking and mixes in elements of magic realism and a musical cocktail of Renaissance polyphony, electronica, Modernism, punk rock and cabaret.
Audience members arriving at the 3LD Art & Technology Center in Lower Manhattan were warned of strobe lighting effects, but it was the scenes of graphic violence that made some want to avert their eyes. Most disturbing of all, perhaps, Ms. Du and her brilliant librettist, Royce Vavrek, refuse to moralize. Their tale of two angels who crash-land in a suburban backyard and come to be maimed, exploited and brutally violated by hitherto unremarkable residents is presented as a parable without take-away lessons.
The cast (all amplified) was led by the incisive soprano Abigail Fischer as Mrs. X.E., who compares herself to the Virgin Mary at the Annunciation even as she conducts business deals with prospective clients. As her husband, the baritone Kyle Pfortmiller was powerfully effective, capable of glib smoothness in the cabaret-style number “They Will Love You” and of summoning terrifying pathos in a climactic scene in which he falls victim to the violence he has wielded.
The Boy Angel was sung by Kyle Bielfield, who perfectly projected the vocal and physical innocence — and occasional heartbreaking hopefulness — required by his character. Jennifer Charles, a vocalist known for her work with the art rock band Elysian Fields, has only one solo, about her martyrdom at the hands of men who “like it rough.” Singing in a bloodcurdling wail of raw despair, she made a singular case for opening opera’s doors to untrained and untamed voices. The director, Michael McQuilken, drew courageous and memorable performances from all.
Ms. Du’s music obeys only her own omnivorous tastes and assured dramatic instincts. The Choir of Trinity Wall Street, functioning both as dark-robed commentators and modern-dress neighbors and customers, negotiated the transitions through different musical styles with wondrous ease. So did the small but potent ensemble Novus NY under the direction of Julian Wachner. And amid the flickering changes in styles, which were echoed by the adaptable sets by Matt Saunders with evocative video projections by Hannah Wasileski, there were little details binding the score together.
Ms. Fischer often sang with a light shudder in her voice that resembled a blend between Baroque ornamentation and a speech impediment. Certain instruments picked it up in turn: a fast-tongued trumpet, the tremolo of a violin. In Ms. Charles’s blazing solo, these unstable tremors came to be amplified into the violent, shuddering sobs of a terrified being.