The candidate’s strategy to win the White House depends on turning out millions of new religious voters.
In retrospect, the pastor’s speech that day might be seen as the first (albeit subtle) public move in the eventual bid for the presidency by his son. Already Ted Cruz’s strategists were discussing a run. His longtime adviser Jason Johnson would go on to spend most of 2014 researching how Republicans had won and lost presidential elections, while the senator appeared at various Iowa fund-raising events. When word began to circulate in March 2015 that Marco Rubio and Rand Paul would be announcing their candidacies sometime in April, by the end of the Senate recess, Cruz’s game plan started to emerge. They set their sights on a date in late March, which would allow Cruz to dominate the news and draw a quick infusion of campaign money for at least a week before attention turned to Rubio and Paul. Needing to move quickly, and not wanting to tip off the opposition, Cruz’s senior staff sought out a telegenic venue where a heavily conservative audience could be assembled on a moment’s notice.
That was how, 16 months after his father took the stage there, Ted Cruz became the first politician to launch a presidential campaign at Liberty — the largest Christian university in the world, with an enrollment of 77,000 students. His March 23 speech, which he hand-scribbled the evening before and delivered without benefit of notes or a teleprompter, included this pivotal thought: ‘‘Today, roughly half of born-again Christians aren’t voting. They’re staying home. Imagine instead millions of people of faith all across America coming out to the polls and voting our values.’’ That exhortation, an echo of his father’s plea to ‘‘vote for righteous people,’’ reflected the Cruz team’s key political calculation: Of the 22 states that will be casting their ballots for a Republican nominee between Feb. 1 and March 5, 11 of them feature a Republican electorate that is more than 50 percent evangelical. Even more significant, the first state to vote is Iowa, roughly 60 percent of whose Republican caucus-goers describe themselves as evangelical Christians. As had been the case in recent election cycles, if Cruz could persuade this voting bloc to coalesce around him, then in this crowded field of Republican candidates he would almost certainly emerge the winner in Iowa. And unlike previous caucus winners, Cruz was already building a formidable national campaign organization that could capitalize on an Iowa victory and propel him toward the nomination.
As a fund-raiser, Ted Cruz has given victory-starved evangelicals some cause to believe that his campaign is, as the Iowa conservative talk radio host and Cruz supporter Steve Deace puts it, ‘‘superior to what we’ve seen from any other movement conservative that’s ever run for the presi­dency.’’ Cruz has raised over $50 million from more than 600,000 donations, including those from the Wilks brothers of Texas, who also have given $15 million to Cruz’s super PAC: all numbers that establish him as a top-tier candidate. He has built large campaign organizations in the states immediately following Iowa — New Hampshire, South Carolina and Nevada — and has also traveled extensively through the March 1 ‘‘Super Tuesday’’ states of Georgia, Alabama, Tennessee, Arkansas and Oklahoma. Though his team is not staffed with the sort of elite Republican operatives who work for Rubio and Jeb Bush, it has thus far waged one of the most professional and error-free campaigns in the field.
The results of these efforts will become manifest on Feb. 1, when Iowa Republican voters will settle the current hard-fought contest between Cruz and Donald Trump. Trump poses a threat to Cruz’s presidential ambitions because, unlike the Texan, he does not seem to possess an electoral playbook, and instead can get by with something Cruz lacks: a lot of potential voters seem to like him and are titillated by the idea of him as president. Exactly two weeks before the Iowa caucus, when Trump himself spoke at Liberty University, he botched a Bible quotation and, against university rules, uttered a profanity, two miscues that Cruz would never commit. All the same, Liberty’s president, Jerry Falwell Jr., declared that ‘‘Donald Trump is a breath of fresh air,’’ and Trump has pulled ahead of Cruz in some national polls of evangelical voters.
Though Cruz must do well in Iowa to establish momentum in the other early caucuses and primaries, the state in recent history has been a dubious springboard to national success. Since 1976, three winners of Iowa’s contested Republican caucuses have ultimately gained the national party’s nomination, but only one — George W. Bush, in 2000 — went on to become president. The last two caucus winners, Huckabee in 2008 and Santorum in 2012, managed to rally Iowa’s social conservatives but lacked both the resources and the breadth of support to compete against John McCain and Mitt Romney, whose campaign themes were less pitched to the Christian right.
And so the Cruz campaign has sought to assure Iowa evangelical leaders of two things: that Cruz is one of them, and that he can win the presidency. In return, Cruz’s campaign team has sought from Iowa evangelical leaders not only their endorsement but also their commitment to rally congregants to the polls. Leading this effort has been Rafael Cruz, who since his son’s announcement has spent 29 days in Iowa, talking to fellow evangelical ministers in groups ranging from 25 to 350.
Bob Vander Plaats, a major evangelical activist in Iowa, told me, ‘‘Evangelicals have really felt a great need to have one of the their own in the White House, and the last couple of election cycles they’ve frankly felt a bit used.’’ He went on to say that in the general election, ‘‘we’ve gone with the guy who can win, but let’s not talk about principles and wink-wink he’ll deliver once he’s there. And I think you now see that frustration in the huge numbers who stay home on Election Day.’’ Vander Plaats has enthusiastically endorsed Cruz; he says the conventional wisdom regarding an evangelical nominee can be proved wrong.
What unites the evangelical bloc with the rest of the Republican base is a shared hostility toward not only those they see as antagonists to the American way of life — ISIS, undocumented immigrants, apostles of political correctness — but also their perceived appeasers in Washington. It’s for this reason that many conservative Christians find themselves drawn to the outsider Trump, despite the latter’s shaky command of Scripture. And this is also why it’s not enough for Ted Cruz to brandish his evangelical credentials in order to win in Iowa and beyond. He must also remind Republicans that his biography is that of a proud foe of the political establishment.
But the questions about whether the guy named Ted can win the nomination, let alone the presidency, run deeper than concerns over his likability. In particular, the campaign’s audacious decision to focus more on revving up the evangelical community than on broadening its outreach to young and Hispanic voters is a high-risk strategy that, should it backfire, might do more than cost Cruz the White House. His deeply conservative rhetoric could cost Republicans the Senate, erode their majority in the House and reinforce the party’s reputation among emerging demographic groups as the party of embittered and narrow-minded white men.
Cruz makes a special point in his stump speech to mock this apocalyptic scenario. After all, he tells audiences, the same fears were voiced in 1980, about an idealistic conservative candidate whom the Washington elite considered an extremist. Instead, Cruz reminds them, the outsider named Reagan inspired millions of disenchanted voters who yearned for a return to American primacy, following the failed policies of a Democratic president both at home and abroad.
Even Cruz’s own advisers find fault with this analogy. As one of them said to me: ‘‘I think he’s much more of a movement conservative than Reagan was. I mean, he’s not putting Sandra Day O’Connor on the Supreme Court.’’ The Reagan-Cruz parallels break down on other levels as well. America is not in a recession, as it was in 1980. The Republican nominee’s opponent will not be an unpopular president but instead, in all likelihood, a female nominee who will be seen as a history maker. Reagan benefited from a less-polarized electorate, attested to by the fact that he garnered 27 percent of the Democratic vote in 1980. By contrast, only 7 percent of the 2012 Democratic electorate chose Romney, who, unlike Cruz, had governed in the blue state of Massachusetts. And the Reagan Revolution was abetted by the shift of white Southerners, who had long viewed themselves as Democrats, to the Republican Party. That revolution has already been fought and won by the Republicans. To win the general election without reaching toward the center, Cruz will have to create his own groundswell with another conservative voting group.
The supposition that evangelicals could be this group is also shaky. Cruz’s team argues that about 10 million such voters who did not vote in the 2000 election turned out for Bush in 2004 and have stayed home since. The Bush campaign strategist Matthew Dowd maintains that the increase in evangelical voters was much smaller, prob­ably closer to two million. (Given that the overall turnout increase from 2000 to 2004 was less than 17 million voters, and that nearly half of those voters went for John Kerry, the 10 million estimate would seem to be mathematically un­likely.) Dowd argues as well that the dominant issue in 2004 for all voting groups, including evangelicals, was national security; socially conservative causes like marriage and abortion, Dowd says, ‘‘didn’t even make the top five.’’ Researchers also dispute that Romney drove away evangelicals in 2012. ‘‘In fact, they were overrepresented — they were 20 percent of the population but made up 26 percent of the electorate,’’ says Robert P. Jones, of the Public Religion Research Institute. Moreover, 78 percent of them cast their ballots for Romney, the same share of the evangelical vote that Bush received in 2004.
But perhaps the diciest assumption made by the Cruz campaign is that it not only can turn out more registered evangelical voters than Romney did but also can recruit millions of unregistered evangelicals at the same time. Every demographic group includes many people who have no interest in the political process, and persuading them to engage is not as simple a matter as offering an appealing slate of issues. Should she become the Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton will be mining the electoral turf for new voters as well. And in general, the task is an easier one for Democrats, given that their targets are more densely concentrated in urban areas. Cruz’s strategists assert that Clinton will not inspire voters the way Obama did, and this may well be true. But the same might be said of Cruz among various voter groups. With his hard-line stance on immigration, will he repel even more Latino voters than Romney, who received a paltry 27 percent of their votes? Though Cruz might catalyze large pockets of unregistered evangelicals, Jones and others suggest that such voters are primarily in states like Alabama and Tennessee that are already firmly in the Republican column. Pursuing them with a deeply conservative platform could gain Cruz very few electoral votes, while costing him significantly among moderate voters in swing states like Virginia and Ohio.
This country, Cruz said, is ‘‘in crisis.’’ But, he added, ‘‘I’m here this morning with a word of hope and encouragement and exhortation. All across the state of Iowa and this country, people are waking up. There is a spirit of revival that is sweeping this country.’’ The candidate went on in a cadence that frequently descended into stage whispers or attenuated pauses, his face clenched in Shakespearean rapture, varying barely a syllable from the monologues he would deliver with equal fervor in 27 other stops on this six-day swing through the Hawkeye State.
And when Cruz’s final words invoked the ‘‘Judeo-Christian values’’ that made America ‘‘that shining city on the hill,’’ the audience exploded in applause. Many of them made their way toward the candidate. Others stood and looked at one another for a few moments, blushing with pleasure. It took a while for all of them to file out of the cramped little bookstore. Once Ted Cruz’s grass-roots army had dispersed into the streets of Boone, the candidate and his half-dozen strategists climbed aboard the campaign bus and headed an hour westward, bound for another event at a steakhouse in Carroll, Iowa. Before the month was done, Cruz would visit all the state’s 99 counties, delivering with practiced zeal the same singular message: I am one of you, and I can win. He could not pretend to be Donald Trump — wildly unscripted, crass, impossible to ignore or forget. He could only be Ted Cruz, with one case to make.