A female, funny Henry James in Asia, Janice Y. K. Lee is vividly good on the subject of Americans abroad. “The Expatriates,” her second novel, is set like her first, “The Piano Teacher,” in Hong Kong, and the two books taken together are a rich education in an almost century of cruelty, exploitation, deep pockets and good parties in the city — a setting that becomes a complicated character in its own right. In her new book, Lee observes an affluent community of contemporary Westerners, but more specifically, those who “crossed over into that other country of motherhood,” another foreign land requiring expatriation.
This competitive procreation is a problem for Hilary, originally from California, who followed her husband abroad and finds herself in her late 30s, paralyzed by infertility and a marriage that has gone from icy politeness to stalemate.
As in “The Piano Teacher,” Lee uses a shifting third-person narration that allies itself first with one character, then another. In addition to Hilary, there are Mercy, a postcollegiate Korean-American from Queens, perpetually “casting an anthropological eye,” not quite belonging to any class or group, and Margaret, a beautiful housewife and sometime landscape architect, one-quarter Korean (though she thinks of this identity as “usually dormant”), “one of those women who Mercy imagined didn’t recognize a mean person, since no one would ever be mean to her.” This fantasy shatters when Margaret’s son disappears, an event that occurs about a year before the novel begins.
Moving between these intersecting characters offers relief from the suffocation of Margaret’s grief. At times, though, her grief seems not suffocating enough, partly because it is often described in retrospect, condensed and reported, rather than lived in a scene. Lee has a gift for the well-observed generalization, but a related tendency to oversummarize. We don’t see Margaret’s worried children slipping into bed with her at night, only hear it referred to in passing. We hear her marriage to her husband has almost failed, but we don’t really see that playing out either. Similarly, her Skype conversations with her therapist are reduced to the platitudes the doctor dispenses: “You will be able to live. Time will help you.” It is almost the difference between overhearing a conversation in another room and witnessing an event. As a reader, I felt I should be suffering more; I wanted to bear more witness.
But I enjoyed the not suffering. The book is also vibrant social satire: Inside these dark materials lies the sharpness of a comic novelist, and Lee’s eye for the nuance and clash of culture, class, race and sex is subtle and shrewd. Away from “the all-­encompassing and smothering embrace of America” — the motherland — these women peek out from the losses of their past tense, the temporariness of their present, and begin to see one ­another.