One is Elena Ferrante’s “My Brilliant Friend,” which I’ve only just started. The other, David Malouf’s “An Imaginary Life,” I’m reading for the second time. Malouf’s novel, a beauty, is about Ovid after he was banished from Rome to live in the wild among barbarians, who speak with ghosts, impale their dead and seem on the verge of becoming animals. Ovid meets and protects a feral child, of whom the barbarians are afraid, and who teaches the city poet to surrender himself to the natural world. A poet tells this incredible tale, but plainly — hardly a metaphor in sight — as if to make the point that if you have the goods, why get fancy? I’m reading the book again for pleasure, and also to get its language into my system and steal from it the way writers steal. No fingerprints.
E. R. Dodds’s “The Greeks and the Irrational,” about a world and a time full of magic. Dodds writes of Dionysus, who dazzled his votaries by making a vine grow out of a ship’s plank. Dionysus, master of illusions, was the god of joy and freedom, my kind of god. The book leaves you asking, with as much fascination as fear, how much of life is a dream.
Too many to count. Carl Phillips and Louise Glück, certainly, who hammer intelligence into feeling. And Richard Wilbur. I haven’t seen a new Wilbur poem in a while, but the classics stick: “Advice to a Prophet,” “The Mind-Reader” and these lines from “Walking to Sleep” — “As a queen sits down, knowing that a chair will be there, / Or a general raises his hand and is given the field-glasses, / Step off assuredly into the blank of your mind. / Something will come to you.” Every writer’s prayer.
You’re a great fan and teacher of Irish literature; who are your favorite Irish writers? Any contemporaries you especially admire?
My all-time favorite is J. M. Synge, who understood the music and humor as well as the pain of the poor, and was such a natural no critic could ever lay a glove on him. Among contemporaries, Paul Muldoon, one of the great poets of the past hundred years, who can be everything in his poems — word-playful, lyrical, hilarious, melancholy. And angry. Only Yeats before him could write with such measured fury.
Injustice, followed by justice. Give me a story where an innocent is mistreated by some swine or by a swinish institution, and then he or she is vindicated and things are made right, and I’m yours. “Let right be done” is the moral of “The Winslow Boy.” Let right be done. I weep without tears.
Alice McDermott’s “Someone.” At the start of the novel, a sweet, hopeful girl dies by falling down the cellar stairs. She isn’t important to the plot, and is not recalled by the narrator until the very end. McDermott has buried the girl in our consciousness, and then brings her back when it means the most to the story. More than the sad accident, the author’s gentle manipulation of the reader’s emotions made me gulp with the discovery that I’d been thinking of the dead girl all along.
I reread Joyce Cary’s “The Horse’s Mouth” a few weeks ago, about the wild-and-crazy painter and scam artist Gulley Jimson, his genius and rejection by nearly everyone.  But one laughs deeper, down the gullet, at the abysmal unhappiness of it all. As Beckett said in “Watt,” the laugh laughing at itself.
Tell us about your favorite poem.
And the best memoir you read recently.
“Speak, Memory,” recently or ever. Such a gorgeous blast. Fairly early in the book Nabokov spends pages and pages creating an exquisite picture of the vast figure of Mademoiselle, his childhood nanny, everything detailed, from her voice to her chins. Then he reverses course and says: Did I get her all wrong? Is she a fiction? Who but Nabokov could get away with a stunt like that — to make us believe all he has written about the woman, and doubt every word, and not care.
And your favorite movie adaptation of a book.
“The Maltese Falcon.” It must have been relatively easy to make the movie, because the book is written like one. And the moral of the tale works even better on-screen, as we see Mary Astor’s disbelief and submerged hysteria when Humphrey Bogart tells her she’s going to take the fall for the murder, that love doesn’t conquer all, and that the test of morality is doing what you least want to. No, Miss O’Shaughnessy, he isn’t joking.
It’s a tie between Gatsby and Dr. Zhivago, for both hero and antihero. Both men are flawed, and both are superior to their flaws. And each occupies so high a plane of thought and ambition that petty little people with lesser dreams cannot touch them. Small wonder Zhivago dies in the street, running after Lara, and Gatsby has to be shot in the back.
So, I’m 9 or so, and I’m in bed at night reading the Sherlock Holmes story “The Speckled Band,” and I come to the part where the killer sends a venomous snake through the ventilator in the ceiling and down the bell cord to bite the sleeping victim. And I look up.
What book read for school had the greatest impact on you?
Mary Shelley. I’d ask her who the monster is meant to be — himself, herself, Victor Frankenstein, us, or Percy Shelley? Then I’d ask her how a 19-year-old comes up with this stuff.
Disappointing, overrated, just not good. What book did you feel you were supposed to like, and didn’t? Do you remember the last book you put down without finishing?
“Kayak Morning,” an account of memories and feelings after our daughter Amy died in 2007, of an anomalous heart condition, at age 38. Writing the book brought Amy back to me, for a while. It also allowed a reaching out to others in the same boat. Everybody grieves.
Jennifer Lawrence. I don’t know how she writes, but I’d sure like to meet her.
