Walt Williams, a high-energy, free-swinging outfielder who played for four major league teams but who was probably best known for the unusual physique that earned him the nickname No Neck, died on Saturday in Abilene, Tex. He was 72.
The cause was a heart attack, his wife, Ester, said.
Williams played most of his career with the Chicago White Sox. He began in Houston, finished with the Yankees and spent a season in Cleveland. He was popular with fans wherever he went.
Like Pete Rose, he played with a caffeinated enthusiasm, running out every batted ball, hustling to his position for the start of an inning and even sprinting to first after receiving a base on balls, although that did not happen too often. Eager to swing the bat, he rarely walked — never more than 26 times in a season.
Williams had a quick bat and was a good bunter but had little power. He hit just 33 home runs in his career. His best year was 1969, when he hit .304, making him one of only six American Leaguers to top .300. He had an average higher than .280 three other times, including his final season as a part-time player for the Yankees. He hit .270 for his career.
Williams was short and broad-shouldered, with the peculiar quality denoted, perhaps with a smidgen of hyperbole, by his nickname.
Walter Allen Williams was born in Brownwood, in central Texas, on Dec. 19, 1943, the son of Coleman Williams and the former Pearlie Mae Diggs. One of nine children, he was sent in adolescence to live with an aunt in San Francisco, where he graduated from Galileo High School (now the Galileo Academy of Science and Technology) and played football, basketball and baseball.
Before the 1963 season he signed with the second-year National League expansion team in Houston, then known as the Colt .45s, playing in their minor league system and briefly in the big leagues before being selected from the waiver list by the St. Louis Cardinals. He played in the Cardinals’ system but never for the Cardinals, who traded him to Chicago, where he made his debut in 1967.
When his major league career was over, he played in Japan and Mexico.
Williams’s first marriage ended in divorce. He married Ester Lacy in 1988, and they lived in Brownwood. In addition to her, he is survived by two brothers, Freddie and Joe; a sister, Carol Sue Stanfield; a stepbrother, Dennis Wade; a stepsister, Madeline Bradley; two sons, Deron and Walter Jr.; a stepdaughter, Sherry Barron; a stepson, Gary Eugene Barron; four grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren.
According to his wife, Williams said the shortness of his neck came about after a bungled vaccination when he was a child. The nickname came later; different teammates during his early days in professional baseball have been given credit for it — or blame.
