Cynthia von Buhler is a painter, playwright, performance artist and children’s book author and illustrator with a reputation for being offbeat. So it’s not a complete surprise to find a miniature pig roaming around her Upper East Side apartment.
The play in question is “The Illuminati Ball,” which Ms. von Buhler describes “an immersive excursion.” Beginning Feb. 13, the “ball” will be held once a month through August (but twice in February) at her lake house in Fairfield County; a $350 ticket includes a “decadent ” dinner and round-trip transportation from Manhattan on a luxury limousine bus.
For his part, Prodigy had this to say (communicated in an email from his publicist): “Illuminati and secret societies have been a recurrent subject in my lyrics throughout my career. I find ‘The Illuminati Ball’ to be a very intriguing play, and I am extremely honored that Cynthia invited me to be a part of the production."
Ms. von Buhler’s apartment has the feel of a stage set, and sometimes it is: Both this and the Connecticut house are rented out for movie and photo shoots through her company CVB Spaces.
She and her husband, the jazz violinist Russell Farhang, rented the townhouse duplex near Gracie Mansion two years ago because of its Victorian woodwork, plaster molding and marble fireplaces.
“It’s rare to find something so carefully preserved,” she said. She has furnished it as a virtual cabinet of curiosities, an autobiographical assemblage of antiques, paintings, objets d’art and memento mori.
Death is a recurring theme, one she has explored in plays like “Ziegfeld’s Midnight Frolic,” another immersive piece, which ran last year at the Liberty Theater on West 42nd Street. The story of Olive Thomas, a showgirl and movie actress who died mysteriously on a trip to Paris in 1920 with her actor husband, Jack Pickford, the play took its name from a late-night cabaret that Florenz Ziegfeld Jr. ran on the roof of the New Amsterdam Theater.
Ms. von Buhler picked up a miniature wooden hammer stamped “Ziegfeld Midnight Frolic Atop New Amsterdam Theater,” which she received as a gift during the run of her play. (Mr. Ziegfeld, she said, feared his audience would applaud so much they would have sore hands, so he provided wooden hammers for banging on the tables instead.) “I put it with the animals because it’s a relic of something that I love that is over,” she said.
As for the pig, she was suddenly nowhere to be seen.
