Theory meets practice as our men’s wear critic tries out the clothes that he has only viewed from the front row.
Duckie Brown made me do it.
Last July, while reviewing the label’s latest collection of men’s wear, I found myself heaping praise on the designers Steven Cox and Daniel Silver for breaking out ahead of the local competition with an audacious collection comprising suits of Brobdingnagian proportions in a show that challenged some hoary notions about gender, played games with shape and proportion, and wholeheartedly embraced drama of movement and sensuality.
It struck me that the task of reviewing clothes stands at some distance from the experience of wearing them. And so I hit upon a solution to try bridging the gap between theory and practice: I would wear the stuff. Not only would I try out Duckie Brown’s upholstery-size runway garments, but also the latest from four other designers.
What would it be like, I wondered, to spend time in get-ups I had admired in the abstract but had seldom contemplated putting on my back?
Would I still be me in a Ralph Lauren suit? How would it feel to take my godson to school while clad in cool-kids layers from Public School? Could I pull off walking the dog while buttoned up in one of Thom Browne’s Puritanical suits, with their taut bum-cooler proportions and high-water pants?
And what of the rigid double-breasted suit from Italo Zucchelli’s most recent Calvin Klein collection? Would the cheetah pattern occasion spit-takes at the coffee shop?
This may be the place to mention that becoming Instagram catnip has never been a particular goal of mine. Having cycled through a variety of sartorial identities over the decades — high-school longhair, platinum-blond crew cut Warhol Factory kid, “Take Ivy” prep — I eventually settled on a sort of uniform.
Its constituent parts are Levi’s worn with custom-made button-down shirts from my favorite haberdashery, AD56 in Milan, and a Brunello Cucinelli vest or else one of several well-cut, understated blazers from L.B.M. 1911. That it’s a look unlikely to have street-style photographers blocking my path I consider a definite plus.
Yet I was about to change things up with my George Plimpton-style experiment, road-testing new garments to experience what some social scientists have termed “enclothed cognition,” a theory proposing that the clothes we wear affect not just how others see us, but how we ourselves think and behave.
Clothes, that is, may not merely “proclaim” a man to the world, as the Shakespearean windbag Polonius had it; they may actually make him.
Anyway, that was the notion I presented to the designers of five labels that I have reviewed over the years.
The delight I experienced when they agreed to my proposal — the loan of a head-to-toe look for a day — was rapidly replaced by fashion’s version of flop sweats.
My first step was to make an appointment with Ryan Dichter, an unflappable Coloradan so deeply attuned to the Ralph Lauren ethos that his title as director of employee experience at the designer’s New York flagship store has shaded into something closer to unofficial brand ambassador.
It was fully my intention, upon entering that Madison Avenue mansion, to assume the mantle of Mr. Lauren’s brand message, to slip into the West Egg fantasy of being the sort of fellow who keeps his Herreshoff moored at Seawanhaka or drinks Southsides on the baize-green lawn of the Meadow Club.
Yet the fantasia retailed in Mr. Lauren’s latest ad campaign — the one featuring his filmmaker son, Andrew, wearing pinstripes and chalk stripes and polka dots — proved too daunting. I thought I might end up looking like a roadshow Gatsby in those duds.
It was when explaining this to Mr. Dichter that I was first introduced to “transfer of emotion,” his practiced salesman’s term for the magical moment when a consumer becomes one with a garment he has just met.
Saying this, he extended a charcoal gray jacket from Ralph Lauren’s Purple Label line, part of a suit made in fabric proprietary to the label. He encouraged me to slip it on.
It would understate things to say that an emotional transfer kicked in when I put on the sleek two-button suit, whose details — pick-stitched lapels; deep double vents; waist adjusters (to eliminate a belt’s bisecting ugliness); a superfluous yet appealingly anachronistic ticket pocket — contributed to the spell.
I thought at the time of a remark the designer Tom Ford once made to me about the way certain of his favored models — Ujjwala Raut, Jon Kortajarena — looked “like money” when they wore his clothes.
Seldom have I felt more like money than I did while riding the R train to work on the morning I took the suit for its test ride, or when sluicing through the Times Square mobs and Elmos wearing Mr. Lauren’s $5,995 suit.
If “enclothed cognition” means one feels somehow more competent, assured and even smarter in clothes that denote professional status (lab coats were used to conduct the study), it is unquestionably the case that the suit made me smarter, in several shadings of the word.
The contrast from that sensation was stark when, for my next act, I spent a day in Thom Browne. For a start, that singular designer’s clothing requires a commitment to his vision, as Mr. Browne himself suggested to me one morning at his TriBeCa store.
“You get stared at a lot, but you get used to it,” said the designer, who was wearing one of his signature suits with short pants.
Women, it seems to me, understand something about clothing that may lie beyond the grasp of most male consumers. They know that in changing clothes, it is easy to try on fresh identities.
It was a lesson clarified for me when I put on a Thom Browne suit and felt suddenly like a different person, as if I were a uniformed conscript in a delightful, if slightly kooky, secular cult.
I had seen this happen to other people — the regulars at Mr. Browne’s fashion shows, and his partner, the fashion curator Andrew Bolton, who dressed well (and yet in a nondescript fashion) before the two met but began wearing Mr. Browne’s designs exclusively once they were together.
What I couldn’t have fully gleaned before trying on the Browne suit was how subtly a designer can use technique to mold a consumer to his way of experiencing the world.
Exposing ankles and behind in a manner that forces you to stand up straighter, a Thom Browne suit dictates that its wearer make certain postural adjustments. Setting the waistband of the trousers at mid-abdomen, the fitness-conscious Mr. Browne effectively disciplines his consumers into sucking in their guts or heading immediately to a gym. If there is an antidote to the slob trend termed “athleisure,” surely a Thom Browne suit is it.
When I took a friend’s dog for a spin in Central Park, I also discovered something else about clothes I had forgotten: their sonic dimension.
Zola, among others, lavished sensual descriptions upon the sounds made by clothing — the swish of a silk skirt, the fallen-leaves rustle of a woman’s crinolines trailing across parquet. Somehow, in an age of stretch fabrics and sneakers, this aspect of dress got lost.
Stomping around in a pair of Mr. Browne’s heavy-soled wingtips brought it back for me. The trigger was Mr. Browne’s custom of adding metal taps to his shoes, on both toe and heel.
And while it’s true that Harrison — a friend’s poodle, with an Upper East Side blow-out — garnered most of the notice as we crossed Fifth Avenue, I was conscious of the way Mr. Browne’s shoes rendered it impossible for me to walk the pavement unheard or unobserved.
While Mr. Browne’s clothes announce themselves a block away, those I borrowed from Dao-Yi Chow and Maxwell Osborne of Public School had a much different effect.
In the eight years since this duo formed their label, they have scooped up accolades and prizes, snagged a side gig as creative directors for DKNY and assembled a passionate following among guys not comfortable dressing like Florentine dandies or the Paul Bunyans of Brooklyn.
“It’s like an urban uniform,” their longtime stylist Eugene Tong once told me, although “urban incognito” may be a more precise term.
The typical elements of a Public School uniform include layered shirts and tunics, sweaters with uneven hemlines, slouchy overcoats, hip-hop ball caps, all in a palette of subdued monochromes.
A lot of the guys who turned out for the Public School presentation at New York Fashion Week: Men’s last July were already comfortably attired in Public School designs, stuff you might characterize as Helmut Lang meets Supreme. They looked natty, yet not strenuously so, wearing assemblages very much like the outfit Mr. Osborne and Mr. Chow had chosen for me.
Far from proclaiming their presence or provoking visual confrontation with my fellow pedestrians, the long-tailed shirt, dark turtleneck and belted overcoat with softly sloping shoulders skewed toward anonymity. An added factor was that, in walking my 10-year-old godson through the West Village to school early one morning, mine was not the outfit likely to catch anyone’s eye.
With his floppy red camouflage shorts, Run-D.M.C. T-shirt and honking big LeBron XII sneakers, Jake was rocking the more notable of our two fashion statements. As we made our way to P.S. 41, I was just a fifth grader’s accessory.
If playing at being a consumer of designs I usually regard in mostly formal terms taught me something about the art and craft of fashion, it also served to remind me of my hometown’s place in the overall scheme of things.
New York, we all know, is often derided as a mere commercial capital. It is the place designers go to earn the money their compatriots in Paris or London are too busy indulging flights of creativity to bother about.
Yet it is to immigrant-built New York that people like the Italian-born Italo Zucchelli continue to fetch up, among others who arrive with their ideas for radicalizing commercial design.
A stealth talent at Calvin Klein for almost two decades, Mr. Zucchelli has spent his years at the label using blaring chromatics, unorthodox materials (bicycle seat foam) and silhouettes so graphically simplified they almost read as cartoonish to revitalize the minimalism that was a legacy of the brand’s founder.
The double-breasted suit Mr. Zucchelli selected for me conformed to his brief: stiff, structured and so slim as to leave no room for indulgence in breakfast doughnuts. All designers, of course, make clothes for some skinny ideal man; yet even as a natural beanpole, I feared bursting a seam.
“Does this gym make me look fat?” said my trainer, Rob Morea, gently mocking me as I stepped out of a changing room and onto the gym floor.
As with Mr. Browne’s suit, the Calvin Klein one was unapologetic in making certain demands. Still, as I walked toward a favorite lunch place, the Smile, on cobbled Bond Street, I eased into the suit and forgot altogether the trepidation I had initially felt about its cheetah pattern.
And I enjoyed how the thick-soled Calvin Klein boots anchored me on the cobblestones, lending me both superfluous added height and a certain resemblance to an extra from “The Night Porter.” That my fellow citizens took no particular note of my somewhat unusual get-up also pleased me.
It was the blasé reception I got that eventually gave me courage enough to wear Duckie Brown out in public, to waltz through NoHo in a pair of lightweight woolen trousers that reminded me of my mother’s 1960s palazzo pants.
I paired them with a white Prada dress shirt that seemed vaguely appropriate to the season and that also set off another Duckie Brown piece, the satin chiffon Harrington jacket, which reminded me of a bed jacket from a George Cukor film.
Something unexpected happened to me wearing those clothes — and, no, it was not a secret yen to try cross-dressing. Liberated from my own safe tastes, I was reminded of some of the reasons fashion interested me in the first place.
You would hardly guess it from all the conformist stuff that fills the fashion magazines, runways and Instagram feeds, but playfulness, experimentation and instruction are also the job of fashion. What interests me most about Oscar Wilde’s famous line — “Fashion is a form of ugliness so absolutely unbearable that we have to alter it every six months!” — is its reference to temporality.
Walking around Manhattan in what constitutes the style of this precise moment, I felt so squarely rooted in the present that I momentarily let go of my habitual anxieties about the future. Within six months, something just as interesting as the stuff I wore will roll around. Designers will see to that.
And what of the doomsayers who have been prophesying the end of the current “men’s wear moment”? My little experiment left me convinced that they are talking through their porkpie hats.