IN a typical presidential campaign, the most successful candidates lay claim to leadership with their high-mindedness. They reach for poetry. They focus on lifting people up, not tearing them down. They beseech voters to be their biggest, best selves.
Sure, we’ve had contenders like them before. But two on top at the same time? And two with this degree of stridency, this deficit of dignity?
Cruz just finished up a dominant week, besting Trump in a poll of California Republicans, drawing swarms of reporters to his bus tour through Iowa, prompting ever surer predictions of triumph in that state.
The Iowa part isn’t particularly surprising. In the previous two election cycles, the top spot went to a Republican who courted evangelical Christians by leaning hard on religion, which Cruz mentions so often and so operatically that he might as well be waging a holy war instead of a political campaign.
But neither the 2008 nor 2012 winners of the caucuses (Mike Huckabee and Rick Santorum, respectively) took a tone as distinctively and consistently bratty as Cruz’s, which was distilled in his remarks the day after President Obama’s tearful address about gun violence.
Making light of so much bloodshed, Cruz told Iowans the story of a Texas woman who was pulled over by a police officer. She supposedly informed the officer that she had a Glock affixed to her hip, a .38 revolver in one boot, a single-shot derringer in the other and a double-barrel shotgun under the seat.
“Not a dang thing,” the woman responded.
Cruz is unsettling enough in isolation, but it’s the combination of him and Trump that really galls. And it galls not just Democrats but other Republicans.
“At some point, we have to deal with the fact that there are at least two candidates who could utterly destroy the Republican bench for a generation if they became the nominee,” Josh Holmes, a former chief of staff to the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, told Politico’s Alex Isenstadt recently.
It’s a king-size bed, and they’re all under an eiderdown of obnoxiousness.
From the moment Trump announced his candidacy, he chose a potty mouth over a silver tongue, and a shocking number of Americans thrilled to that, regarding crudeness as the greatest form of candor.
But what repelled Republican senators is somehow beckoning Republican voters: In a Gallup survey released on Friday, 61 percent of them said that they had a favorable impression of him, while only 16 percent said that they had an unfavorable one, giving him a “net favorable” rating of plus 45, the best in the Republican field.
I guess bird flu is the new catnip.
Many analysts explain all of this in terms of a potent anger among Americans. They say Trump and Cruz lend voice to it.
But that’s not exactly right. Anger can have a noble dimension — as a response to injustice, as the grist for change — and neither Trump nor Cruz projects much nobility or tries to, for that matter. They’re not so much angry as petulant, impudent.
When Trump tells rivals on the debate stage that they’re ugly or unpopular and when he ridicules a journalist’s disability, he’s not being angry.  And when he crows incessantly about his deal-making genius, his billions and his poll numbers, he’s not stoking constructive passions. He’s just stroking himself.
Cruz seems animated less by anger than by scorn. Like Trump he’s proudly divisive. Much of his language, like much of Trump’s, is characterized by a nastiness that’s by turns adolescent and hyperbolic.
Who needs poetry when you have mockery?
Not Trump and not Cruz, who are both products of these texting, tweeting times, fluent in the snark and vitriol that appeal to short attention spans and fit in 140-character outbursts.
That their styles overlap is evident in Cruz’s belief — no doubt correct — that he’s the likely heir to any Trump defectors, and in Cruz’s strategy to treat Trump respectfully as a result. It’s a courtesy he doesn’t afford the majority of politicians in his own party. They don’t pass his purity test.
And they don’t understand, as he and Trump do, that at this crazy, cynical juncture, there’s a band of voters so distrustful of the usual etiquette that they think valor lies in viciousness, integrity in insult. They’re determined to rebel and want the opposite of what they usually get, along with permission to be their smallest, worst selves.
Trump and Cruz are only too happy to oblige.
