The conference championship games included one thrilling ending, two worthy winners and many great performances. And there must have been relief in some quarters that one thing was mostly missing: disputed or outright blown calls by the officials.
Week after week this season, fans, coaches and players have been riled by calls that were questionable, erroneous or flat-out weird. In many cases, the N.F.L., through Dean Blandino, the vice president for officiating, or the spokesman Michael Signora, admitted later that referees had made mistakes. Often that was of little consolation to the teams that suffered.
Here are 10 of the more contentious calls of the season.
SEPT. 27, BENGALS AT RAVENS Tyler Eifert’s touchdown catch on fourth-and-1 seemed to give Cincinnati a 20-0 lead. But Eifert lost the ball as he landed in the end zone, and after a review, the catch was ruled incomplete. Unlike some of the disputed calls this season, this one was defended by the N.F.L.
OCT. 5, LIONS AT SEAHAWKS With under two minutes to go and Detroit trailing by 3, Matthew Stafford hit Calvin Johnson, who seemed headed for a go-ahead touchdown. But just before Johnson crossed the goal line, Kam Chancellor made an athletic lunge and knocked the ball away.
As it bounced through the end zone, almost certain to go out the back, K. J. Wright of Seattle helped it on its way by batting it.
Had that ruling been made, Blandino said, a half-the-distance penalty would have been assessed at the point of the fumble, leaving Detroit inches from the goal line. Instead, Seattle ran out the clock and won the game.
OCT. 12, STEELERS AT CHARGERS After San Diego took a 20-17 lead with 2 minutes 56 seconds left, the kickoff was out of the end zone for a touchback, and the clock should not have started. But it did, and Pittsburgh lost 18 potentially crucial seconds.
Luckily for the Steelers, 2:38 turned out to be enough time for Michael Vick to lead the team to a touchdown and win the game on the final play from scrimmage.
OCT. 26, RAVENS AT CARDINALS On the Ravens’ opening drive, guard John Urschel caught a pass to bring the team down to the Arizona 7. But officials ruled he had not reported as an eligible receiver, and they called an illegal formation.
Blandino acknowledged later that Urschel had reported properly, and said that the referee Ronald Torbert had been distracted because he was announcing a correction to a foul on the previous play.
NOV. 15, JAGUARS AT RAVENS With the Jaguars down a point with only seconds to play, Elvis Dumervil of the Ravens was called for a 15-yard face-mask penalty. The yardage put the Jaguars in position for a game-winning 53-yard field goal, which they made. But they never should have had the chance to kick it. The officials missed that the Jaguars offense was not set properly on the play.
With Baltimore as the winner.
NOV. 15, PATRIOTS AT GIANTS When Odell Beckham Jr. apparently caught a touchdown pass with two minutes to play, it seemed the Giants has taken a 5-point lead. Beckham had both feet inbounds, but New England cornerback Malcolm Butler then knocked the ball from his hands.
The call on the field was touchdown, but after a video review, it was changed to an incomplete pass. The Giants settled for a field goal and a 2-point lead, only to lose the game when the Patriots kicked a field goal of their own.
NOV. 23, BILLS AT PATRIOTS As Buffalo trailed by 7 with time running out, the Bills’ Tyrod Taylor hit Sammy Watkins on the sideline. After making the catch, Watkins fell over and rolled out of bounds, apparently stopping the clock with two seconds left. Time for one more play from midfield? Nope. An official ruled that Watkins was down in bounds and ruled that the clock should keep running. Game over.
Blandino later said that the call was wrong. Since Watkins was never touched, he was not down, and the clock should have stopped when he got out of bounds.
In the same game, a side judge blew his whistle inadvertently, perhaps distracted by Bills Coach Rex Ryan walking in front of him. Danny Amendola of the Patriots had caught a pass and seemed to have open field in front of him, but the officials ruled that the play had ended at the point of the catch.
DEC. 3, PACKERS AT LIONS The clock expired after a desperation play by the Packers involving a completion and two laterals ended when quarterback Aaron Rodgers was brought down by Devin Taylor. The Lions had seemingly upset Green Bay.
The Packers took advantage of the one more untimed play they were awarded, and Rodgers threw the ball 61 yards to Richard Rodgers for the winning score.
DEC. 20, PANTHERS AT GIANTS Beckham and Panthers cornerback Josh Norman sparred repeatedly during the game, including late hits, shoving, tripping and face-mask grabbing. In the most egregious incident, Beckham launched himself at Norman and hit him helmet-to-helmet.
Beckham drew three unnecessary-roughness penalties, and Norman had two, but neither player was ejected. Beckham wound up suspended for a game for his actions, and Norman was fined.
JAN. 17, PACKERS AT CARDINALS Amid the intense complexities of the N.F.L., there is the simplicity of the coin toss. Heads or tails? The coin goes up; the coin goes down. Someone wins, and we move on.
But the simplest of operations grew surprisingly contentious in a divisional playoff game when the Packers called tails at the start of overtime, and the large, heavy, ceremonial coin landed on heads without ever having flipped in the air, prompting yelps of complaint from the Packers.
The referee Clete Blakeman agreed to retoss the coin, and a more severe incident was avoided when it landed on heads again. Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers said he had wanted to switch to heads for the second toss but was not allowed to. The Cardinals elected to receive and marched down the field for a touchdown and a win.
“The referee used his judgment to determine that basic fairness dictated that the coin should flip for the toss to be valid,” Signora told The Associated Press.
Not enough miscues for you? Blakeman will be the referee at the Super Bowl.