Men who make lots of money and growl at one another about profits and margins and winning and losing. Remember them?
Americans used to love watching stories about those guys, in the years before the excesses of Wall Street spawned a great recession and before Bernie Madoff brought abject fear back to personal investing. Once their shortsighted shell games toppled the world economy, though, it was a little harder to get into that high-capitalist gambling spirit.
But if anyone can save hedge fund billionaires from the cultural penalty box, it’s Showtime, the premium cable channel for skin-deep splashiness (see also: “The Affair,” “Californication”). That’s not to mention Damian Lewis. Just as he saved the C.I.A. melodrama “Homeland” from its own histrionic urges, Mr. Lewis pulls “Billions,” which begins on Sunday, back from the brink of macho outlandishness with his natural gravitas. As the hedge fund titan Bobby Axelrod, Mr. Lewis might spend most of his on-screen time spitting out cocksure zingers, but he’s that rare TV actor with the self-possession to make even overdramatic lines sound organic.
The inverse of that charisma is made flesh in Paul Giamatti’s United States attorney, Chuck Rhoades, who serves as Axelrod’s crusading nemesis, fixated on slaying Wall Street corruption — and propelling himself into political office along the way. The conceit — power players duel against a backdrop of ambition, greed, corruption and really good bourbon — feels bulletproof enough, but in practice, the show (Andrew Ross Sorkin, the founding editor of DealBook for The New York Times, is a co-creator and an executive producer) careens into cartoon territory almost immediately, thanks in part to the absurd contrast between Axelrod and Rhoades.
Even so, who can look away? “Billions” is exactly the sort of show that, if you don’t reject its over-the-top tactics in the first three episodes, will hook you by the sixth. So even as Axelrod and Rhoades fulfill what are now the familiar requirements of two snarling patriarchs in a personal as much as a professional standoff; even as Axelrod’s wife (played convincingly by Malin Akerman) hisses threats and struts imperiously around her mega-mansion; even as his goons spit out misogynistic remarks with the casual contempt of those who believe that money buys them the right to be repugnant, it’s hard not to be caught up by the spectacle.
Part of the show’s draw lies with Maggie Siff, who brought transfixing poise to the first season of “Mad Men” as the department store owner Rachel Menken, as well as to the relatively uneven “Sons of Anarchy.” Ms. Siff plays Rhoades’s wife, Wendy, who also (unbelievably enough) works as an in-house “performance coach” for Axelrod. The scenes in which Wendy counsels Axelrod’s gaggle of mini-Gekkos to power down their insecurities and pump up their egos enough to assume their God-given roles as masters of the universe are patently absurd, yet Ms. Siff brings such a placid intensity that they’re still some of the best of the show.
But where Mr. Lewis and Ms. Siff deliver magnetism, composure and loads of restraint, Mr. Giamatti’s performance unravels into what feels like a steady stream of sneers, snorts and growls. That’s partly the fault of an otherwise smart, compelling script: It’s not all that easy to deliver lines like, “I want to put him on a rack and stretch him,” and “Sing for your supper and you get breakfast in the morning,” without sounding like some high school kid taking a blustery stab at Sky Masterson. Every time Mr. Giamatti gamely leans into the melodrama, it backfires. It doesn’t help that his character is always hunched over in some dark, wood-panel-lined municipal office, whereas Axelrod strides down the sparkling white hallways of his pristine empire like a very busy, confident demigod.
Of course, maybe that’s the whole point. After witnessing the rise and fall of many a premium-cable (not to mention Wall Street) antihero before this one, we’ve perhaps grown weary of the precipitous fall of the arrogant, unethical patriarch. Recognizing this, the creators of “Billions” are determined to paint Axelrod as something between a minor deity and a rock star. And why not? When Americans love the player, they tend to turn a blind eye to the game.