Any exhibition of older art drawn from a museum’s permanent collection is a palm held out for us to read, a snapshot of the museum’s sense of its role over time, its present ambitions and its view of art history. Place two such exhibitions side by side and an especially intense and revealing frisson can occur.
These shows say a lot about postwar history and the Modern’s representation of it; moreover, they define a watershed moment when painting began to share the stage with a new kind of art-making that was emerging.
This narrative is overly simple, but it’s true enough. Pollock’s drips were so extreme they stopped painting in its tracks, at least momentarily, deflecting some young ambitious artists, often painters, toward the use of actual objects, often along paths opened foremost by Mr. Johns. The shows are nearly side by side on the second floor. And so, crossing a small lobby, you can walk from an almost overwhelming overview of the greatness — and finality — of Pollock’s drip paintings into a gallery full of some of the first signs of a whole new way of art-making, as if from one explosion to another.
The Pollock display is about as succinct a summary of his short, steep trajectory as any you are likely to see. Organized by Starr Figura and Hillary Reder in the department of prints and drawings, this cache of paintings, drawings and especially prints also testifies to the Modern’s determined accumulation of works by artists it deems all-important. Pollock is, in essence, the Modern’s postwar Picasso and, not surprising, its holdings are unsurpassed. Reading the works’ credit lines conjures the patrons of the Modern’s halcyon days: Guggenheim (Peggy), Rockefeller, Paley, Haupt and Janis (two paintings in 1967, plus funds for a third!).
The plentiful prints here soften the stereotype of Pollockian machismo by revealing his supreme delicacy. Full of linear traceries, they came foremost from his widow, the painter Lee Krasner, and help measure her growing artistic independence. The credits of the 23 prints given in 1969 read “Gift of Lee Krasner Pollock.” Two early paintings and one drawing given in 1980 are “Gift of Lee Krasner in Memory of Jackson Pollock.” Much better.
Pollock’s ambition and experimental drive registered while he was still under the influence of the regionalist painter Thomas Hart Benton. An expansive, all-over energy — influenced by the Baroque tendencies of Benton’s own roiling compositions — enlivens a small rural scene painted on the top of a wood cigar box (around 1930-33) and a fabulous little painting bristling with shards of black, white, red and yellow called “The Flame” (around 1934-38). His interest in materials is strikingly apparent in “Landscape With Steer” (around 1936-37), a lithograph whose bright colors he subdued with sprayed-on black lacquer. The darkness recurs in the small “Painting” from around 1944, in which bright Picassoid planes and symbols are curtained with black.
Pollock was not the only painter to experiment with the all-over drip technique in the early- and mid-40s. Norman Lewis, Hans Hofmann and Janet Sobel came up with similar approaches. But only Pollock pursued its possibilities, doggedly and methodically circling the technique, trying it out, then retreating, then finally embracing it wholeheartedly around 1946. This embrace is evident in the two classic drip paintings in the last of the show’s three sections, but in many ways its evolution is more exciting, at least as conveyed by five paintings in the second section. In two midsize canvases, “Gothic” (from around 1944, bequeathed by Krasner in 1984), and the less-familiar “There Were Seven in Eight,” from around 1945 (a 1980 purchase), Pollock achieves an abstract composition with forceful, choppy strokes, no drips.
“Take an Object” gives a strong sense of the Modern today, struggling to expand its vision of history and to make it more inclusive of nonmale, nonwhite artists. It has been organized by Cara Manes, an assistant curator in the department of painting and sculpture. Tellingly, 22 of the 37 works were acquired in the past decade.
The show begins with works finished in 1955 by Mr. Johns and his partner in crime, Robert Rauschenberg. To one side of the entrance hangs one of the influential works that resulted when Mr. Johns took an American flag and did something to it: He converted its image into a thing at once obvious and implacably mysterious that refused to be solidly a painting or an object. Instead of the brazen dervish implicit in Pollock’s drip paintings, Mr. Johns proceeded carefully, mixing his oil paint with encaustic so that every stroke remained distinct. But beneath the flag’s red and white stripes there lurks, I think, a covert tribute to Pollock, and a new kind of collage: We can see that the canvas was initially covered with torn pieces of newsprint in a loose checkerboard pattern before the stripes were painted. These fragments form their own kind of all-over abstraction, even while they teem with semi-illegible information about everyday, cacophonous life.
Contrasting with Mr. Johns’s method is Rauschenberg’s relative madness. In 1955 he answered Abstract Expressionism with the still-shocking “Bed,” festooning a pillow, sheets and quilt with big gestural strokes of paint, back and forth, almost as if he were slapping someone awake. It is a flamboyant work, gripping in its nonchalance, exuberance and sense of disturbed dreams.
Also from 1955 is “bleu O noir,” a small work — and another twist on collage — made by the French artist Jacques Villeglé from fragments of posters torn from the walls of Parisian buildings. It indicates that the ideas inspiring Mr. Johns and Rauschenberg were in the air, and not just west of the Atlantic. The main idea, of course, was that Duchamp’s ready-mades, despite their seeming finality, were rich with possibilities.
The show is alive with the sight of artists like Christo, John Chamberlain and Joseph Beuys taking objects and doing things to them. Vija Celmins, for example, takes 11 beautiful little stones and creates painted brass replicas, while Yayoi Kusama takes an armchair (maybe symbolic of Matisse’s comfortable one) and renders it uninhabitable by barnacling it with stuffed white phalluses. Betye Saar’s 1969 “Black Girl’s Window” presents a new, charged version of Joseph Cornell’s magical boxes and dovecotes, while John Outterbridge’s doll-like “Broken Dance, Ethnic Heritage Series” (around 1978-82) gives the juxtapositions of assemblage a new, powerful seamlessness, perhaps inspired by the work of Edward Kienholz, who is also here.
Next to Rauschenberg’s “Bed” hang three wall pieces by the Japanese artist Katsuhiro Yamaguchi. All titled “Voice” and made in 1962 from printed sackcloth stretched over iron structures, they evoke two mouths, a heart, pajama-wearing bodies and tents.
Other welcome surprises include a narrow white painting from 1961 by the French artist Niki de Saint Phalle. Found objects, including a tractor seat, protrude from its surface, dripped with color applied by firing a rifle at little plastic bags of paint embedded in its surface. An untitled work from 1966 by the Italian artist Marisa Merz consists of a column of reinforcing wire hung with fat bunches of synthetic blond hair, like so many scalps. It is a stark yet restrained comment on male domination and a cryptic presaging of the haunting enclosures of Louise Bourgeois.
A sculpture from around 1976 by David Hammons indicates that younger artists continue to do things to different objects. His combination of mud, hair, wire and black-eyed peas is totemic, but also adamantly urban. It converses with the personages conjured by Alexander Calder and Joan Miró.
Several artists here set out to be painters and even made early feints at Abstract Expressionism, including Dan Flavin, John Baldessari and Donald Judd. Especially Judd, who struggled to combine aspects of the work of Pollock and Barnett Newman for several years before edging into three dimensions. He’s in transition here with a 1961 black textured relief; the small aluminum bread pan embedded in its center is probably the least altered object in the entire show.
These two dovetailing exhibitions hardly tell the whole story of Pollock’s influence. The Color Field painter Helen Frankenthaler refused to be deflected from painting and made the drip technique her own. Pollock’s ideas affected Allan Kaprow’s Happenings and Richard Serra’s molten-lead Process pieces. But together the shows form an inspiring allegory about artists confronted with a medium pushed to extremes who realized that they had to seek their own originality elsewhere.