322 pages. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. $24.
301 pages. Melville House. $25.95.
Shira, the narrator of Ms. Cantor’s second novel, is a temp worker and a struggling writer in her mid-40s. She lives in Manhattan with her young daughter, Andi, and a “co-parent,” her close friend Ahmad. Earlier in life, Shira had started on the path to a Ph.D., translating Dante. Suddenly, she’s contacted by Romei, a Nobel Prize-winning Italian poet known for “his trickster persona, his inauthentic voice, his disconnection from language.” He would like her to translate his newest work. But why did he choose her? And why is he seeding his text with echoes of Shira’s own stories? Ms. Cantor is unafraid of asking big questions explicitly, like whether fidelity — to texts or to people — is possible. The complicated details of Romei’s schemes and Shira’s past start to pile up and will satisfy lovers of plot, but the novel is at its strongest when Shira’s voice is loosely playful and ruminative.
292 pages. Grove Press. $14.
Two missing children are at the center of the sixth novel by Belinda Bauer, a prizewinning British crime writer. Daniel Buck, a 5-year-old, disappeared from just outside his house, and his mother, Anna, is losing her mind to grief. Edie Evans was “almost a teenager” when she went missing while riding her bike, and a detective named John Marvel remains committed to her case, which many consider cold. When Anna desperately enlists a psychic (the “shut eye” of the title) to help find her son, Marvel balks, but unlikely pieces start to fit together. The book’s supernatural elements are creepy rather than cheesy, and Ms. Bauer is insightful about people, their bereavement and the way it distorts them. She also provides, in the end, the perfect mix of closure and lingering questions. “Was false hope better than none?” the novel asks. “Or far, far worse?” Fans of Ruth Rendell will find familiar pleasures in Ms. Bauer’s work.
311 pages. W.W. Norton & Company. $24.95.
136 pages. McSweeney’s. $20.
If you like stories to make sense, Diane Williams’s will drive you out of your gourd. These very, very short tales are as dislocating as they are brief. Ms. Williams’s sentences can be funny and provocative, but the relation of one to the next is most often a deep mystery. One story ends: “They have acquired love, wealth and fame, but they don’t think they’ve gotten enough reward for all that.” In general, her lines give the impression that they’re pithy in an alternative universe, where they’re surrounded by considerably more context. As it is, fans of the most experimental stories of Donald Barthelme and Lydia Davis are likely to find Ms. Williams’s worthy of the same shelf. Others may feel kept at a very long arm’s length by obscurantism.
The title, as you might imagine, has tongue in cheek. The unnamed painter at the center of Mr. Jelloun’s novel is recovering from a stroke, and is using part of his recuperation time to write the story of his two-decade marriage. It’s a tale of different backgrounds, the painter being from an upper-crust Moroccan family, and his wife from a poor section of the country. He suspects his wife of having affairs, and eventually decides to leave her. Two-thirds of the way through, the wife begins narrating her own version of events. Like “Fates and Furies” and “Gone Girl,” “The Happy Marriage” belongs to the suddenly crowded genre of twice-told marriages. But the two sides in Mr. Jelloun’s novel — their complaints and misunderstandings — are not jarring or even particularly fresh.