Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s budget this year calls for more state control over the financing of affordable housing, a move that New York City officials and affordable housing representatives say would slow and undermine efforts to build and maintain such units for low-income New Yorkers.
Mr. Cuomo is proposing to give the Public Authorities Control Board — whose three voting members are the governor and the leaders of the State Senate and Assembly, or their designees — the power to approve or veto individual housing projects that use tax-exempt bonds that the state gets from the federal government and then allocates to the city and other municipalities.
City officials and builders of affordable housing argue that the state would be adding uncertainty, delays and politics to the production of affordable units while infringing on the city’s ability to shape residential development and implement its housing plan.
“This recalls the famous phrase, ‘If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it,’ ” Mayor Bill de Blasio said during testimony on the budget before the State Legislature this week.
“We think adding these additional layers will only slow down the process at a point where thousands and thousands of people are waiting for housing that will allow them and their families to be able to make ends meet,” he said.
But as with many initial budget provisions, the proposal is subject to negotiation. In an interview on Friday, Mr. Cuomo said that he would be open to focusing on the real target of the heightened scrutiny — counties that use the tax-exempt financing to lure companies from other counties. He referred to the practice as “piracy,” and said he wanted the local governments to use the bonds to bring in new jobs from outside the state rather than hurt one another.
The governor said the proposal would not make “a hill of beans” difference to New York City, which uses the bonds exclusively to finance the construction or rehabilitation of affordable housing.
“I’d be open to discussing focusing on economic development programs, because that’s where the questions lie,” Mr. Cuomo said.
On why he did not propose this from the outset, he said, “I’d never get it passed because now it looks like you’re targeting the Republican areas and not the Democratic areas.” Still, he said the new state oversight would not delay approvals of projects.
Among those who build and rehabilitate affordable housing, most of those interviewed were careful not to ascribe motives to the proposal, given the acrimony between the mayor and the governor. But many had questioned the need for state involvement in a process widely regarded as a well-run engine that produces thousands of affordable units a year.
“I’ve never heard that the city is not accountable,” said Jolie A. Milstein, president and chief executive of the New York State Association for Affordable Housing, which represents developers, lenders and others in affordable housing.
New York City has been its own gatekeeper in marshaling federal, state and city financing to decide which affordable housing projects are built or preserved, and where. The federal tax-exempt bonds, which reduce borrowing costs and leverage other funding sources, pay for nearly half of the affordable units built and preserved in the city, officials said.
The bonds provide $650 million to $900 million worth of financing a year and in the last two years funded the creation or preservation of 16,700 units, said Gary D. Rodney, president of the New York City Housing Development Corporation, which issues the bonds for housing projects in the city. The agency’s board has two members appointed by the governor, but its majority consists of the mayor’s appointees and members of his administration.
“Any additional approvals, in our view, could impact our ability to deliver projects effectively to the market,” she said.
Affordable housing has been a signature issue for Mr. de Blasio, who has promised to build 80,000 new affordable units and preserve an additional 120,000 among the existing rent-regulated stock over 10 years. Earlier this month, Mr. Cuomo unveiled a $20 billion housing plan that includes adding 100,000 affordable units over five years.
Cuomo administration officials had said the new state oversight would add more transparency to a system that funnels $2 billion a year to finance housing and economic development around the state. A senior budget official referred to a report by the research group Citizens Housing Planning Council that called for more coordination between the state and local governments and more publicly reported data on how bonds are allocated and used.
But Jerilyn Perine, the group’s executive director, said the report called for more conversations among officials and more information to be made available on housing agency websites.
“We were not talking at all about additional government bureaucracy,” she said.
Government watchdog groups saw the state’s move as an intrusion that would subject housing applications to horse trading among the governor and legislative leaders.
Nonprofit housing organizations were concerned that small developers would be at a disadvantage in Albany, saying that they lacked the resources to lobby for their projects.
Even the Real Estate Board of New York, which represents large developers, had worries.
