Trim does not charge for its service, and the company does not intend to sell any data. Instead, it wants to gather a customer base for a sort of personal finance assistant that could do everything from nudging you to save in the most tax-efficient account to helping you refinance a mortgage or switching you to a better insurance provider. And yes, it may charge a subscription fee for a premium version of this service, presumably one that is transparent and easy to cancel.
Up at the top of the list, or the bottom depending on how you look at it, is Experian. The company, which sells credit reports and various monitoring products through websites like freecreditreport.com, found itself the subject of cancellation requests 35.8 percent of the time it showed up on Trim’s customers’ statements.
Gogo Air is no stranger to cancellation controversies. It was the subject of a class-action suit in 2014 accusing it of enrolling people in monthly subscriptions without their knowledge or adequate notice. The suit was recently settled. Did you (like me) find yourself with an accidental subscription at any point in the last four years? If so, check the website about the suit to see whether you’re eligible for the free passes Gogo has offered as part of the settlement.
The company does not allow subscribers to cancel by simply pushing a button. Instead, it requires an interaction of some sort, which I find obnoxious but a company spokesman described as “faster and more convenient” since you don’t need login credentials to, say, engage in an online chat with a customer service representative.
Mr. Smyth also admitted begrudging admiration for how Gogo uses a keen understanding of behavioral economics to hook so many people. “The per-month rate is often not that much more than the per-day or per-flight rate,” he said. “So you look at it and say ‘I’m going to be a winner. I’m smarter than these guys!’” And then you forget to cancel. For months.
So keep a close eye on your card statements. And if credit reporting companies, health clubs or Internet providers have their claws in your plastic, reread those bills, each and every month. There’s a decent chance that you have something better to do with the money that they are regularly helping themselves to.