Two members of California’s state assembly are trying to give residents a tax break with a bill that would exempt tampons and sanitary napkins from the state’s sales tax.
Most sales taxes, including California’s, exempt various necessities. Legislators have done this to shield lower-income consumers from tax on the things they must buy in daily life — like food. While 45 states collect a sales tax, only 13 of them charge it on groceries. Only one state — Illinois — charges sales tax on prescription drugs.
As Cristina Garcia, a state Assembly member, points out, tampons are pretty necessary. “You can’t just ignore your period,” she said in a statement.
So why shouldn’t tampons get the same tax break as other necessities? It’s a question that’s been debated in legislatures around the world, with tampon tax cuts adopted in Canada and rejected in France last year.
Five states have already created tax exemptions for tampons. One, Pennsylvania, threw in a tax break for toilet paper and diapers, reasoning that these items also seemed pretty necessary.
Individually, these exemptions make a lot of sense. But as arguments for tax exemptions have gotten sympathetic ears in state capitals over the decades, states’ sales tax revenues have suffered.
“Legislatures always love to give the base away,” said John Mikesell, an expert on sales taxes at the Indiana University School of Public and Environmental Affairs. By his calculations, the typical state sales tax is applied to just 36 percent of that state’s residents’ personal income in 2012, down from nearly 60 percent in the late 1970s.
That means the average American spends less than half of his or her income on items subject to sales tax. In California, the sales tax is already narrower than the national average, applying to just 27 percent of state residents’ incomes.
Sales tax bases have shrunk over time partly because states have created new exemptions, partly because untaxed online sales have expanded, but most of all because the economy increasingly consists of services. Most state sales taxes exclude most services, and state lawmakers and voters have resisted efforts to tax services in part because many of the largest service categories (housing, medical care and education) can also be reasonably counted as life’s necessities.
“It’d be nice if necessities weren’t taxed, but necessity is subjective,” says Joseph Henchman, who oversees state policy for the Tax Foundation, a conservative think tank that generally opposes sales tax exemptions. He notes that the nuanced arguments about what constitutes necessity have often led to very complicated sales tax rules.
For example, the idea of exempting groceries from sales tax sounds simple enough, but most states want to continue collecting taxes on takeout and other prepared foods, on the grounds that having someone else cook for you is a luxury.
As a result, they need to lay out rules explaining what is, and is not, a prepared food.
So in 2010, Wisconsin’s revenue department released a 1,400-word memo titled “Sales of Ice Cream Cakes and Similar Items.” As the memo describes, sometimes an ice cream cake in Wisconsin is a tax-free baked good; in other cases, it’s a taxable prepared food. The question hinges on several factors, including the size of the cake, who decorated the cake, whether a majority of the cake’s layers contain flour and whether the seller provides utensils along with the cake.
A similar prepared-food question led to a minor political crisis in Britain in 2012. The government sought to simplify its rules on prepared food by declaring all foods sold above ambient room temperature, except freshly baked bread, to be subject to that country’s 20 percent value-added tax. Prime Minister David Cameron was forced to withdraw the proposal over outrage that traditional English meat pies would be newly taxed, and so a complicated definition of “prepared food” remains.
Complex definitions have also driven repeated changes in the taxation of tampons in at least one state. In 1990, the Illinois Supreme Court ruled tampons met that state’s definition of a “medical appliance” and thus deserved a tax exemption then being withheld by the city of Chicago, but the state subsequently narrowed the exemption, and tampons are taxed at the full rate again.
It turns out, it’s surprisingly hard to define the place where toiletries end and medication begins. Unlike most states, Illinois needs a rule saying that medicated lip balm is not medication, and neither is dandruff shampoo — not even the kind that smells like an industrial byproduct.
The California bill proposed by Ms. Garcia, a Democrat, and Ling Ling Chang, a Republican colleague, avoids this ambiguity by simply creating an exemption for “sanitary napkins and tampons,” rather than a broad category of necessary medical or personal care products. Still, it would be added to a list of over 100 existing exemptions to the state’s sales tax.
Mr. Henchman noted one other reason to be wary of a tampon tax break: Sales taxes that exclude necessities and services tend to end up relying heavily on restaurant meals and durables like electronics and furniture, which are categories of spending that consumers cut back on when the economy weakens. This makes sales tax receipts more volatile, worsening the budget crises that arise in recessions.
That is, one advantage of keeping the sales tax on tampons is that people will buy them whether the economy is good or bad — which is more or less exactly the same reason to exempt them from tax in the first place.