WASHINGTON — Iran seized two United States Navy patrol boats and 10 crew members who were described as “trespassing” on Tuesday in Iranian waters near a major naval base.
But the Pentagon and the State Department said that one of the boats had experienced mechanical problems while en route from Kuwait to Bahrain on a routine mission. Administration officials said that the military had lost contact with the boats before they strayed into Iranian territorial waters. They said they had received assurances from Iran that the 10 sailors would be returned soon, perhaps on Wednesday.
But a spokesman for the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, Brig. Gen. Ramezan Sharif, was quoted Wednesday morning in the Iranian news media as saying that talk of an immediate release was “speculation.” He said an “investigation” was underway and that “talks” were being held with the sailors, suggesting that they were being interrogated.
The waters where the boats were sailing are a frequent location for intelligence collection by the United States, Iran and many gulf countries. The American and Iranian navies encounter each other frequently there.
Admiral Fadavi said that Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif was immediately informed of the arrests and had spoken to his American counterpart, Secretary of State John Kerry.
He did not say whether the sailors or the United States government were expected to apologize, and the account had not been verified by the Foreign Ministry.
The detention of the sailors comes at a particularly delicate moment in the tense American-Iranian relationship, just days before a nuclear deal is to be formally carried out in which the United States is supposed to unfreeze about $100 billion in Iranian assets.
That step is to be made after international nuclear inspectors verify that Iran has shipped 98 percent of its nuclear fuel out of the country and disabled and removed centrifuges, and taken a large plutonium reactor permanently offline.
The American sailors were aboard two riverine patrol boats — 38-foot, high-speed boats that are used to patrol rivers and littoral waters. One official said the two vessels, which often patrol shallow waters near Bahrain, had failed to make a scheduled rendezvous with a larger ship to refuel.
It is unclear what power Mr. Zarif may have to intervene. Many American and Middle Eastern officials believe that recent actions by the Iranian Navy against American forces in the gulf may be intended to embarrass Mr. Zarif and President Hassan Rouhani. The Revolutionary Guards were responsible for the military side of the nuclear program, and many of its senior officers have objected to the nuclear agreement.
American and European officials say that the nuclear accord should go into effect sometime next week. That is called “implementation day,” and it is crucial to Mr. Rouhani, who wants to demonstrate to voters that he has succeeded in getting oil and financial sanctions lifted, and Iranian funds unfrozen, ahead of a critical parliamentary election.
Many Republicans in Congress have vowed to prevent that day from coming. Mr. Obama issued a veto threat on Monday against a House bill that would delay implementation day until the president can certify that Iran has reported all of its past work toward designing a nuclear weapon. International inspectors recently declared that Iran had a program “consistent” with weapons work through 2009, but that it then ceased. Iran has always denied it ever sought a weapon.
Mr. Obama and Mr. Rouhani share the same problem: Their political opponents want to kill the deal. Both men are determined to see it through. The Treasury Department is expected to place some new sanctions on Iran for recent missile tests — which are not covered by the nuclear pact — but that effort has been delayed for reasons American officials will not discuss. A draft of the sanctions declaration was circulated on Capitol Hill just before the new year and quickly leaked.
In the skies and waters of the Persian Gulf, the Strait of Hormuz, the Arabian Sea and the Gulf of Aden, Iran and the United States constantly watch each other. American naval ships roam the waters along Iran’s 1,100-mile southern coastline, their radar trained on the shore and on Iranian ships leaving their harbors. Iranian fighter jets patrol the skies, keeping an eye on American combat planes that take off from an aircraft carrier in the Persian Gulf every time an Iranian jet comes close to their ship.
The Navy’s Fifth Fleet maintains a presence in the Persian Gulf, including the aircraft carrier, and lately has had several episodes with Iran.
Two weeks ago, the Iranian Navy harassed an American carrier and a French frigate in the Strait of Hormuz, launching rockets that passed within 1,500 yards of the aircraft carrier Harry S. Truman.
Last year in the Gulf of Aden, an Iranian Navy frigate approached a ship where an American military helicopter had just landed and pointed a heavy machine gun at the copter for several minutes before turning around, all while an Iranian film crew videotaped the encounter. The Fifth Fleet, for its part, has its own videotape of the episode.
In 2007, the Revolutionary Guards Navy captured 15 British military service members and held them for 13 days, making a point of protecting its sea borders. A year later, the British Navy released a report saying that its vessels had been in an area with disputed borders between Iran and Iraq.