MEXICO CITY — He became a byword for government incompetence, a figure who seemed invincible after he burrowed his way out of the country’s most secure prison.
But on Friday, nearly six months after his escape, Joaquín Guzmán Loera, the Mexican drug lord known as El Chapo, was captured again after a fierce gun battle near the coast in his home state, Sinaloa, Mexican officials said. “Mission accomplished: We have him,” President Enrique Peña Nieto announced.
The government said late Friday that Mr. Guzmán had been planning a movie about his life and that his people had been in contact with actors and producers, which had allowed the authorities to track him down. It said that the authorities had been watching a home in Los Mochis for more than a month when law enforcement officers finally saw movement on Thursday. Officials said that during the ensuing raid, Mr. Guzmán managed to slip away through the sewers, and then he surfaced, stole a car and was apprehended. The authorities took him to a hotel to wait for backup.
Now, a looming question is whether the Mexican authorities will try to hold Mr. Guzmán for a third time — he has already escaped from prison twice — or whether they will hand him over to the Americans.
Mexican officials are busily debating the issue. Some are arguing for a “fast-track” extradition that could put him in the United States quickly, while others want to continue a previous process that could take months, according to two people with knowledge of the discussions. Mr. Guzmán, the head of Mexico’s most powerful cartel, is facing indictments in at least seven American federal courts on charges that include narcotics trafficking and murder.
The prison break humiliated the government of Mr. Peña Nieto, which had proclaimed the arrests of Mr. Guzmán and the leaders of other drug cartels as crucial achievements in restoring order and sovereignty to a country long beleaguered by the horrific violence associated with organized crime. It was particularly embarrassing because Mr. Guzmán had already escaped from prison in 2001, when his conspirators managed to smuggle him out. By some accounts, he escaped that time by hiding in a laundry bin.
Several senior politicians from Mr. Peña Nieto’s party were already calling for extradition, including Emilio Gamboa, the head of the governing party in the Senate, who told local news media that he agreed with the idea.
Scenes from the arrest of Joaquín Guzmán Loera, also known as El Chapo, as well as a statement from the president of Mexico, Enrique Peña Nieto, on his apprehension.
The Justice Department “is proud to maintain a close and effective relationship with our Mexican counterparts, and we look forward to continuing our work together to ensure the safety and security of all our people,” she said.
In the aftermath of Mr. Guzmán’s escape last July, American officials were frustrated with what they considered Mexico’s resistance to accepting help in the manhunt. After his escape, American officials offered to give their Mexican counterparts whatever assistance they could.
When Mexico rebuffed the offer, many officials in both countries worried that Mr. Guzmán might never be caught.
In October, security forces said they had located Mr. Guzmán in the remote northwestern mountains where he had been hiding out, an area known as the Golden Triangle at the border of his home state of Sinaloa, Durango and Chihuahua. After a gun battle, officials said, he escaped, with wounds to his face and leg.
The authorities ultimately captured Mr. Guzmán in Los Mochis, a coastal town of about 250,000 people that has long been known as a center of boxing in Mexico.
“People knew he would be caught any time; the government was going after him hard,” said Adrián Cabrera, a blogger in Culiacán, the capital of Sinaloa, adding that Mr. Guzmán was still a popular figure in Sinaloa.
When Mr. Guzmán was finally recaptured, the president broke the news himself, via Twitter. Given his sagging popularity — his ratings are the lowest of any president in the last 25 years — Mr. Peña Nieto seemed eager to declare the success personally.
In a statement on Friday, Mr. Peña Nieto said that the arrest was the culmination of months of work, an example of Mexico’s ability to overcome adversity. “Our security institutions have demonstrated that our citizens can trust them and that they have the stature, strength and determination to accomplish any mission they are tasked with,” Mr. Peña Nieto said.
