Harold M. Ickes, a longtime friend and mentor of Mayor Bill de Blasio, delivered about $13,000 in donations last week to the mayor’s re-election campaign, on the day that one of his lobbying clients received the de Blasio administration’s go-ahead to hold a lucrative music festival in New York City.
Mr. Ickes, a veteran political counselor best known for advising the Clinton family, had been paid $150,000 by A.E.G. Live, a concert promoter based in California, to lobby the city as it vied for permission to hold a summer festival in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
Last week, the company’s Queens application was rejected, along with those of two rival promoters, after local opposition. Instead, A.E.G. Live was given clearance to hold a festival in July on Randalls Island; its rivals, Madison Square Garden and Founders Entertainment, did not receive similar permission to hold their events.
On Jan. 11, the day the Randalls concert was announced, Mr. Ickes and his lobbying partner, Janice Enright, contributed $400 to Mr. de Blasio’s campaign account, the limit for a registered lobbyist. Mr. Ickes’s wife, and the wife of his other partner, Kevin McCabe, each gave $4,950, the maximum allowed by law, financial records show.
In all, Mr. Ickes, a longtime contributor to Mr. de Blasio, acted as the intermediary for $19,250 in donations in the four days leading up to the announcement that A.E.G. could bring its festival to Randalls Island.
Finding the right site for a high-profile music festival can be critical to its success, and Mr. Ickes was not the only lobbyist involved in the concert fight who collected money for the mayor’s campaign. In the fall, Suri Kasirer, a lobbyist for Madison Square Garden, delivered about $56,000 in contributions, and James Capalino, who represents Founders, delivered $29,690.
City officials said on Tuesday that the administration assessed each application fairly and without favor. “The parks department makes decisions on all event permits based on a standard criteria that includes impact on the park and its users,” Karen Hinton, the mayor’s press secretary, said in a statement.
There is no limit on how much a lobbyist can bundle for a New York City candidate, and spouses of lobbyists are not restricted in how much they can give, under city campaign finance regulations.
The idea of a festival at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, which has rarely hosted such events, emerged last year after representatives for A.E.G. Live, which stages the popular Coachella festival, approached local officials. But some Queens leaders, including the borough president, Melinda Katz, objected, saying they had not been informed that the parks department was seriously considering the idea.
The three promoters submitted applications in the fall for a Corona Park event. Community opposition increased, and A.E.G. Live submitted a separate application for a Randalls Island on Jan. 4. Ultimately, parks officials decided not to approve an event in Queens, fearing disruptions to the park.
Parks officials say that Randalls Island, already the site of several large music festivals, is an option for any promoter. People briefed on the negotiations, who spoke on the condition of on anonymity to describe private details, said A.E.G.’s rivals were not aware that a Randalls Island date was in play.
“We’re concerned by the lack of transparency during this recent decision-making process and hope the city would continue to support locally grown businesses,” Mr. Russell added.
Madison Square Garden declined to comment; the company did not submit a separate application for Randalls Island.
Mr. Ickes, who did not return requests for comment, has a lobbying firm based in Washington, and opened a New York branch after Mr. de Blasio was elected in 2013.
A.E.G. Live, which is owned by the Republican donor Philip F. Anschutz, hired Mr. Ickes in 2014; his firm lobbied several city officials and agencies on the company’s behalf, disclosure records show. Since Mr. de Blasio’s election, Mr. Ickes has secured major clients like JPMorgan Chase and Microsoft.
Told of the timing of Mr. Ickes’s contributions, Susan Lerner, executive director of Common Cause New York, said she was concerned.
