BUFFALO — Kelli Stack greeted last year’s talk about a professional women’s hockey league based in the United States with a familiar skepticism.
This was hardly the first time that Stack, a 28-year-old United States national team forward, had heard buzz around the possibility of earning a paycheck to play hockey, only to have the plan collapse before a puck was dropped.
“Every August would roll around and people would say, ‘Oh, did you hear?’ ” said Stack, a former Boston College star.
The four-team National Women’s Hockey League has so far proved the exception for Stack, who participated in the league’s inaugural All-Star Game in Buffalo last weekend.
Stack plays for the Connecticut Whale, based in Stamford, and makes a league-high $25,000. The minimum salary is $10,000, and there are 72 players getting paid, according to the league’s website.
The N.W.H.L. is the first to pay its players a salary, but it is not the only North American women’s league. The Canadian Women’s Hockey League is in its eighth season and follows a different business model. The five-team C.W.H.L. pays its coaches and general managers while providing players prize money for winning the regular season and playoff titles.
For the first time, the C.W.H.L. intends to begin paying its players a regular salary, beginning next year.
The C.W.H.L.’s introduction of player salaries does not come in direct response to the emergence of its counterpart in the United States. It has instead been part of the league’s long-term vision to establish a sustainable model by developing a fan base and building ties with corporate sponsors, including four of the N.H.L.’s seven Canadian teams.
By comparison, the N.W.H.L. drew about 900 fans to its All-Star Game in Buffalo and estimated that 2,000 more watched via a live online stream.
The N.W.H.L. was born out of Dani Rylan’s vision to establish a pro league based on what is essentially a start-up business model: relying on investors to fund its launch. Rylan, who is the league commissioner, announced last weekend that the league was financially ready for a second season.
While Rylan has so far delivered on her promises, she remains short on details about the league’s financial backers, its bottom line and its sustainability, given that it has one major corporate sponsor, Dunkin’ Donuts.
Based on each team’s having a $270,000 salary cap, the N.W.H.L.’s payroll totals about $1 million and, according to league officials, represents about 85 percent of its budget.
Rylan, 28, first proposed her plan to the C.W.H.L. before breaking off on her own and taking the core of the defending champion Boston Blades with her. The Blades were mostly made up of United States national team members, who unanimously voted to join the N.W.H.L., which also has teams in Boston, Brooklyn and Buffalo. The C.W.H.L. Blades are still playing in Boston with a depleted roster, going 0-19-1 this season.
The existence of two leagues reflects the rising popularity of women’s hockey.
USA Hockey’s registration for female players has more than doubled since women’s hockey made its debut at the 1998 Nagano Olympics.
The question is whether a merger of the two leagues would benefit the game.
The Calgary Flames president and C.W.H.L. governor Brian Burke said this was not a time to be divisive.
