Just after 1 a.m. on July 28, Leonora Russo woke to a commotion at her home in Howard Beach, Queens. First came the yelps of her daughter’s Chihuahua, then the crash of her front door slamming shut. By the time she reached her window, Ms. Russo saw only a black Dodge Dakota receding into the night.
At the wheel of the pickup truck was Ms. Russo’s brother-in-law Gary Russo, an ironworker christened the Second Avenue Sinatra by the tabloids in 2011. Mr. Russo, who worked on the construction of the Second Avenue subway line, earned the nickname after he began performing lunch-hour recitals of pop classics with a velvet-smooth voice that drew in dozens of passers-by.
The taste of celebrity fulfilled a lifelong ambition for Mr. Russo, but in recent weeks he had seemed off. He had grown gaunt and unshaven, his eyes bleary and veined with exhaustion. His typically ebullient spirit had dissolved into anxiety. When Mr. Russo didn’t show up for work, his friends and family began a search. It wasn’t until a month later that a man walking his dog in Spring Creek Park in Brooklyn spotted him. There, among the unruly thickets of brush, was Mr. Russo, hanging from a tree, a rope around his neck.
The medical examiner ruled his death a suicide, but without a note those closest to Mr. Russo have been left heartbroken and stunned. Months later, they continue to wonder what unraveled inside the man who seemed to embody Sinatra’s “If I can make it there” attitude.
Mr. Russo was born in 1960 and adopted into an Italian-American family from Richmond Hill, Queens. Their lives were unglamorous yet comfortable, with a spacious home and trips to Florida. As a child, he shimmied through the house, singing endlessly into a small karaoke machine, hits by Neil Diamond, Elvis Presley and, of course, Frank Sinatra.
In July 2011, Mr. Russo was in the midst of a separation from his wife when he took his act public. “I decided to focus on the things I wanted to achieve, and I wanted to sing,” Mr. Russo said in recordings for a memoir he wrote with Ms. Goeglein, who provided the tapes.
The day he first hauled his sound equipment to the Second Avenue construction site, Mr. Russo didn’t expect much. Mostly, he hoped to provide a melodious respite to locals, who had long suffered through the cacophony of drills and jackhammers.
The next day, emboldened by the smiles, Mr. Russo belted with the conviction of the Chairman. Among the onlookers was David Fischer, who had long lived in the neighborhood. Mr. Fischer could hardly believe the scene: a persuasive Sinatra baritone sung by the hard-hatted man across from Little Vincent’s Pizza.
“I thought he was lip-syncing,” he recalled with a laugh.
In the clip, Mr. Russo, outfitted in a neon orange shirt and yellow helmet, offers a soothing rendition of “Summer Wind.” Mr. Fischer sent the footage to The New York Post and prayed that someone would take notice. When news trucks pulled up a few days later, he realized his plan had succeeded.
Before long, Mr. Russo had appeared on “Good Morning America,” “NBC Nightly News” and “Access Hollywood.” Then came swelling turnouts and venues beyond Second Avenue. He sang at a Knicks game, the New York City Marathon and the Blue Note jazz club in Greenwich Village.
Mr. Russo delighted in the attention, but doubt soon crept in as he took note of the many street performers around New York.
Mr. Russo also began to question what would come of his newfound celebrity.
“That whole idea of 15 minutes — was it just a quick burst of light that was going to go away, or was the light going to enter my life?” he wondered.
As it turned out, Mr. Russo’s light dimmed to a flicker. Stadiums became local restaurants, and television appearances became piano bars. He would often begin shows by swapping a hard hat for a fedora as he told the tale of his rise. But the money he collected singing was not enough for him to leave construction behind.
“Gary was very humble, but he didn’t want to be singing at a cocktail hour,” said Apryl Nebozenko, a friend.
Mr. Russo’s unusual career path also left him unprepared for the vicissitudes of show business.
Outwardly, Mr. Russo remained cheerful and obliging — he cooked dinners for his daughters and repaired his neighbors’ sinks — but friends wondered whether his verve was masking an inner discontent. Stymied in his musical career, Mr. Russo began searching for his next pursuit in a near frenzy. He had visions of running a cafe in Williamsburg, of starting a travel agency, of painting his name on the side of a tour bus and driving until he hit Hollywood.
Perhaps Mr. Russo’s most sustained project was the restoration of a dilapidated hull that he hoped to fashion into a houseboat. The 34-foot vessel had been stripped down to its bare frame when Mr. Russo bought it in April. By summertime, he had erected a two-story wooden living space, complete with windows and sliding doors. Each day after work, he spent hours waxing, buffing and building the place he hoped to call home.
In those moments, Mr. Russo turned to self-help literature, reading books by Wayne Dyer, Barbara Sher and Deepak Chopra.
“When things didn’t improve he blamed himself and spiraled into this negative feedback loop,” said P. Michael Keane, a friend who joined him in spiritual readings.
As summer pressed on, Mr. Russo faced more difficulties: financial struggles, a breakup, the death of a friend.
One Sunday, Mr. Russo showed up disheveled at Ms. Nebozenko’s house.
Mr. Russo reiterated a similar thought to his sister-in-law Leonora. “He kept telling me, ‘I’m not good, my mind’s not right,’ ” she recalled.
Desperate for some semblance of order, Mr. Russo attended two appointments with a therapist. The night before he disappeared, he reorganized his basement, washed his clothes and discarded six garbage bags of old belongings. He had a third therapy session scheduled for the following day.
In the weeks to come, police deployed helicopters and dogs but found few hints. Family and neighbors scavenged for anything they could find. One friend consulted a psychic. Less than a week into the search, Ms. Gillooley spotted her ex-husband’s car abandoned in the weeds along 165th Avenue in Howard Beach, Ms. Russo said, along with sleeping pills and a bottle of alcohol.
The evidence mounted back in the basement where Mr. Russo lived. Between sound equipment and a rack of Sinatra-style suits and hats, he had left an unlocked box filled with thousands of dollars in cash, checks and bonds for his ex-wife and daughters. Then there was his Internet history, which, friends said, revealed a chilling progression: a frantic search for how to stop destructive behavior, on committing suicide, images of God.
Mr. Russo’s corpse was nearly unrecognizable when a stranger came upon it on Aug. 28. His family identified him only by a tattoo on his arm that spelled out the names of his daughters.
In the months since, Mr. Russo’s loved ones have wrestled with their grief. Ms. Nebozenko sought solace in support groups and homeopathic medicine. Hoping for a fresh start, she breathed a sigh of relief as she watched the ball drop on New Year’s Eve.
She closed her eyes and listened.