American Airlines said that pregnant women with tickets to Panama City, Guatemala City, Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula in Honduras, and San Salvador in El Salvador will receive a refund if they provide a doctor’s note stating that they are unable to travel because of their pregnancy.
Blue Parallel and Dehouche, both custom trip companies in Rio de Janeiro, haven’t received any cancellation requests for coming trips because of the virus, they said, but clients with booked itineraries are asking questions about the disease.
The executive director of the Puerto Rico Tourism Company, Ingrid I. Rivera Rocafort, said: “None of our tourism operators are in despair. We have health protocols in place as always and keep a watchful eye on developments.
Stephanie Loibl of Maywood, N.J., said she and her husband, Mike, will visit Puerto Rico this year despite the advisories.
“I am not pregnant, nor will be, so I’m safe,” she said by email. “We do have some concerns but not enough to give up a trip without kids in a warm destination. I have absolutely no concerns regarding health or sanitation. Ebola scares me, a mild virus from a mosquito doesn’t.” She plans to stay at a coastal resort near Fajardo later this month.
“Tourists keep coming,” said Enrique Obaldía, the secretary of tourism for the Guna Yala Congress in that province of Panama, the region formerly known as San Blas, with more than 300 islands. The archipelago offers excellent snorkeling. “The media alarms but the impact of Zika virus in the communities isn’t so much,” Mr. Obaldía said.
But Kristen Korey Pike, who owns KK Travel Worldwide in Atlanta, said that she has had 10 cancellations for trips booked to the Caribbean. Most were babymoons, vacations that some couples take before the arrival of a baby. “My clients are alarmed,” she said.
Jack Ezon, the president of the New York travel company Ovation Vacations, has had more than 50 cancellations for trips to the Caribbean and Mexico.
“I have a lot of clients who are pregnant or trying to get pregnant, so they’re scared and are halting their travel plans altogether or rebooking to travel within the U.S. instead,” he said.
Some hotels are offering refunds for these clients, according to Mr. Ezon, while others are not or are giving credits for a future stay. “It’s a negotiation every time, but in some instances, my clients are losing thousands of dollars,” he said.
What can travelers do to protect themselves from taking a financial hit on a prepaid vacation that they no longer want to take because of Zika? Ms. Pike and Mr. Ezon recommend buying travel insurance. Stan Sandberg, a founder of TravelInsurance.com, an insurance comparison site, said that most insurance plans are treating the virus as any other illness in the policy’s terms and conditions. That means that if travelers contract the virus while traveling, they would be covered for emergency care, medical evacuation and trip interruption benefits under most plans.
“It’s still important to note that none of the travel insurance providers are considering the C.D.C. warning a reason to cancel a trip to an affected country,” he said.
For travelers to an affected country who want an option to cancel, Mr. Sandberg recommends a plan with a Cancel for Any Reason (CFAR) option; RoamRight and Travel Insured International are two companies that offer such plans.