Brian Bedford, the British-born actor, reared in working-class misery, who became a stellar portrayer of the princes, kings, fops and faded aristocrats of Shakespeare, Molière and Chekhov, died on Wednesday in Santa Barbara, Calif. He was 80.
The cause was cancer, said one of his agents, Richard Schmenner.
His stage career, however — in England, in the United States (Off Broadway as well as on) and in Canada, where he was a mainstay at the Stratford Shakespeare Festival for nearly four decades — had few equals. Playing comedy or tragedy, pathos or hilarity, Mr. Bedford was known for controlled and layered performances, and for finding the depth and subtlety in monumental characters, from King Lear to Tartuffe.
He won only one Tony Award, in 1971, for playing Arnolphe, the desperately jealous and insecure spouse-seeker in Molière’s “School for Wives,” but he did it against especially formidable competition; Gielgud and Ralph Richardson were among the other nominees.
“With his long jaw and listening eyes, Bedford, now 75, uses his physiognomy to tell the stories that no playwright or director can prefigure; that is, he allows himself to be transformed by the theatrical moment,” Hilton Als wrote in The New Yorker in a brief, admiring article about the show.
Mr. Bedford was also the director of “Earnest,” a production that originated at Stratford (now simply called the Stratford Festival) and was itself nominated for a Tony as best revival. And though his career as a director was consequential — Mr. Bedford staged more than 20 shows at Stratford — he craved performing most of all.
A student of theater history, Mr. Bedford played not just the roles that the great writers wrote, but also the writers themselves in one-man shows about them.
For an actor who became known for interpreting classic works, his background might be considered surprising.
His father, Arthur, was a postal worker; his mother, the former Eleanor O’Donnell, was a factory weaver. Two of his three older brothers died of tuberculosis. Sometime after Brian left home and began his acting career, his father took his own life.
The austerity of his upbringing fostered a lively fantasy life. “I used to spend all my time pretending to be a radio,” Mr. Bedford said. He attended a Roman Catholic school in Bradford but left at 15, working in a warehouse by day and performing in amateur theater at night. At 18, he auditioned for the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art.
At RADA, as the academy is familiarly known, Mr. Bedford joined a generation of actors who came of age at a turning point on the British stage, when class conflict and the lives of young people in hardscrabble circumstances became central subjects, realism displaced escapism, and gentility was no longer a watchword for writers or performers.
The shift was given impetus with the first performance, in 1956, of John Osborne’s “Look Back in Anger,” about life in a cramped city flat. It propelled a movement of playwrights and novelists, joined by Arnold Wesker, Alan Sillitoe, John Braine, Kingsley Amis and David Storey, who became known as the angry young men.
Alan Bates, who was Mr. Bedford’s roommate in their own cramped flat, appeared in Osborne’s play; to do so he had to give up a role in another play, based on stories by F. Scott Fitzgerald, called “The Young and the Beautiful,” and Mr. Bedford took over for him.
From there, Peter Brook cast him as Rodolpho, the young swain, in Arthur Miller’s “A View From the Bridge” and as Ariel in “The Tempest,” which starred Gielgud, whom Mr. Bedford had met while at school and who had counseled him when, at 21, he played Hamlet at the Liverpool Repertory Theater.
Gielgud later directed him in “Five Finger Exercise,” Peter Shaffer’s play about an imploding family, which brought him to New York for the first time in 1959; the play ran for 10 months on Broadway.
Mr. Bedford appeared again on Broadway in the early 1960s — in “Lord Pengo,” a comedy by S. N. Behrman, and in an evening of one-acts by Mr. Shaffer, “The Private Ear” and “The Public Eye.” He also appeared Off Broadway in “The Knack,” a frisky bachelor-pad comedy directed by Mike Nichols (fresh from his triumph with Neil Simon’s “Barefoot in the Park”), after which he decided to move to New York.
In the movies, Mr. Bedford appeared in “Grand Prix” (1966) with James Garner, and as Clyde Tolson, associate director of the F.B.I., in “Nixon” (1995), whose title role was played by his fellow Briton Anthony Hopkins.
In 1975, after his debut performance at Stratford as Malvolio in “Twelfth Night,” the festival became his artistic home. He performed in more than 50 productions there, taking on many of his grandest and most celebrated classic roles.
He toured internationally in one-man shows of his own creation; in a tour of Shakespeare’s life and works called “The Lunatic, the Lover and the Poet”; and in “Ever Yours, Oscar,” drawn from the letters of Oscar Wilde.
Mr. Bedford is survived by his partner of 30 years, the actor Tim MacDonald. They married in 2013.
In 2013, illness forced Mr. Bedford to withdraw from a Stratford production of “The Merchant of Venice,” in which he was cast as Shylock.
