Col. Gen. Igor Sergun in 2014.
MOSCOW — Col. Gen. Igor D. Sergun, who oversaw covert military operations for Russia as the director of its military intelligence service, died on Monday. He was 58.
The Defense Ministry, which published an obituary on Tuesday on its website, did not specify where he died or give the cause.
General Sergun had managed the Main Intelligence Directorate of Russia’s General Staff, commonly known as the G.R.U., since late 2011.
Western and Ukrainian officials repeatedly accused the G.R.U. of playing a crucial role in Russia’s takeover of Crimea in 2014 and backing separatist rebels in eastern Ukraine.
In April of that year, the European Union put General Sergun on its list of sanctioned individuals, saying he had been “responsible for the activity of G.R.U. officers in Eastern Ukraine.” The United States had included General Sergun on its own list the month before.
Russian and Ukrainian news media and blogs were rife with conspiracy theories on Tuesday about his death’s being linked to the conflict in Ukraine.
Many commentators pointed out that General Sergun’s death followed that of another high-ranking Russian military official, Maj. Gen. Aleksander V. Shushukin, deputy head of the paratroopers’ general staff, at the end of December.
Igor Dmitrievich Sergun was born in the Moscow region on March 28, 1957. He graduated from the Suvorov Military Academy and joined the Soviet Army in 1973, serving in the Far East and Siberia.
He joined the military intelligence service in 1984 and graduated from the Military Academy of the General Staff, Russia’s most senior military college, in 1997.
In the years before he was appointed head of the G.R.U., three of its eight commando brigades were disbanded, according to Mark Galeotti, a professor of global affairs at New York University who specializes in Russia’s security issues.
But the conflict in Ukraine gave General Sergun an opportunity to reverse that trend and demonstrate the agency’s worth, Professor Galeotti wrote on his blog.
There was no word on the general’s survivors.