DETROIT — In Kathy Aaron’s decrepit public school, the heat fills the air with a moldy, rancid odor. Cockroaches, some three inches long, scuttle about until they are squashed by a student who volunteers for the task. Water drips from a leaky roof onto the gymnasium floor.
Detroit’s public schools are a daily shock to the senses, run down after years of neglect and mismanagement, while failing academically and teetering on the edge of financial collapse. On Wednesday, teachers again protested the conditions, calling in sick en masse and forcing a shutdown of most of the city’s almost 100 schools.
As Michigan’s governor, Rick Snyder, grapples with the crisis in Flint, where residents have been poisoned by the local water supply under a state-appointed emergency manager, he has also had to confront the emergency here, another poor, largely African-American city with a problem that has also festered under state control.
Things have become so bad, district officials say, that the Detroit public school system could be insolvent by April.
Many worry that the state of the schools will hamper Detroit’s recovery from bankruptcy, a recovery evident in the new loft-style townhouses and the bustling Whole Foods that Ms. Aaron passes near her school, where she teaches fifth grade.
Residents wonder how the city can ever recoup its lost population and attract young families if the public schools are in abysmal shape.
In protest over the conditions, teachers began a series of sickouts in recent weeks, inconveniencing many families and reducing classroom instruction time for many students who could ill afford it, but pushing the matter to the forefront.
The problems predate the municipal bankruptcy. One of the biggest is enrollment, which has been in free fall. In 2000, Detroit Public Schools had close to 150,000 students; this year, there are fewer than 45,000.
In recent decades, large numbers of people have left Detroit, which was once the nation’s fourth most populous city. Many of those who stayed chose to enroll their children in traditional public schools in the suburbs, or in charter schools, which more than half of school-age children from Detroit now attend.
According to the National Alliance for Public Charter Schools, about 20 percent of school-age children in Detroit were attending charter schools in 2006. By 2014, that number was up to 55 percent.
Most of the charter schools are outside district control but receive public money, drawing funds from the traditional system that would be used for its overhead and wages, critics complain.
Even after closing schools and reducing its work force, the Detroit Public Schools have $3.5 billion in outstanding debt, much of it from pension liabilities, according to a report this month from the Citizens Research Council of Michigan, a nonpartisan public affairs research organization in Lansing.
Academically, the district’s performance is also alarming. Among big-city school districts, Detroit has come in last every year since 2012, according to the National Assessment of Educational Progress exam. Only 27 percent of fourth graders are proficient in reading; 36 percent are proficient in math.
In response to the sickouts, the mayor of Detroit, Mike Duggan, has ordered a districtwide inspection of each school. Last week, while touring the schools, he came upon a dead mouse in an elementary school.
Mr. Snyder has pushed a plan to create a new school district to run the existing schools, spinning off the old one as a subsidiary that would exist solely to pay down debt. In his speech Tuesday, he urged lawmakers to pass that legislation.
Last week, the Michigan Senate introduced legislation that would establish a nine-person school board, appointed by Mr. Snyder, a Republican, and Mr. Duggan, a Democrat, which would eventually hire a district superintendent.
Many people in Detroit worry that it will not be enough to save their schools. They want a school board that will be elected locally, bringing an end to state-appointed emergency management. And they are calling for more immediate intervention to address the deteriorating state of school buildings.
A spokeswoman for Mr. Snyder, who was also dealing with the public health crisis in Flint caused by an emergency manager’s decision to switch the city’s tap water source to save money, said he understood the frustrations.
At Palmer Park Preparatory Academy, a school that the Detroit Federation of Teachers said was ridden with rats and crumbling ceilings, parents said they were exhausted by the problems.
Not everyone has been sympathetic to the teachers’ protest. “There is no excuse for the illegal teacher strikes that have closed dozens of schools in the past week,” an editorial in The Detroit News said last week.
On Wednesday, the Detroit Public Schools sought a temporary injunction against more than two dozen teachers in response to the sickouts, arguing that they had deprived students of access to education.
Many state legislators from outside Detroit have balked at having the state take on the school district’s substantial debts. Yet they are hesitant to allow the district to continue on a path to insolvency, given the level of urgency.
Last week at the Charles L. Spain school in Midtown, where Ms. Aaron teaches, staff members pointed out their building’s deterioration. In the gym, the air was filled with a stifling, moldy smell. The floors were buckled and partly ripped out, revealing a damp, black substance underneath.
“You hear the water dripping?” said Lakia Wilson, the guidance counselor, nodding at the spot on the floor where water from the roof had accumulated into a cloudy pool. The day after a reporter and a photographer were given a tour of the building, health officials arrived at the school and blocked access to the gym with sheets of plastic, a teacher said.
Andre Harlan, the gym teacher at the Spain school, said he had breathing problems that he traced to the air quality in the gym, which the school stopped using two months ago.
Until further notice, gym class is held in the hallway.
