The Philippine Supreme Court on Tuesday approved an agreement to allow United States troops to return to the country.
BEIJING — The United States won a significant victory on Tuesday in its efforts to counter China’s rising influence in the South China Sea, as the highest court in the Philippines cleared the way for American troops to return to the country.
The Philippine Supreme Court, in a 10-to-4 decision, approved an agreement that would allow the American military to station troops and weapons at bases in the Philippines, a former American territory, more than two decades after lawmakers in Manila voted to expel American troops in a show of anti-colonialism.
The decision seemed likely to heighten tensions between the United States and China, which is seeking to establish itself as a dominant power in the region by building military facilities on top of submerged reefs in the South China Sea, a major shipping route.
“The South China Sea will be more crowded, and the risk for a military conflict will continue to rise,” said Zhu Feng, the executive director of the China Center for Collaborative Studies of the South China Sea at Nanjing University.
The 10-year accord will give the United States a stronghold less than 500 miles from islands built by the Chinese, from which American troops can help train Philippine forces, construct military facilities and deploy planes and ships.
Over the past year, the Obama administration has struggled to contain the ambitions of China, which has rushed to expand its territory in the sea, despite the objections of nearby countries including Vietnam and the Philippines.
In a show of its determination, China said this month that it had, for the first time, landed civilian planes on newly completed airstrips in the Spratly Islands, a possible precursor to military aircraft. The state-controlled news media published photos of flight attendants smiling, waving and snapping selfies along the runway, about 500 miles from mainland China.
The Obama administration has sought to deter China by increasing sea patrols in the region and providing more military aid to allies like the Philippines. But it has struggled to make an impact, and China has pushed ahead with construction of airstrips, military buildings and port facilities.
The approval of the agreement in the Philippines, where many people are still wary of the United States military, highlighted deep anxieties and shifting alliances in the region.
Vietnam, which has sought closer ties with the United States recently, angrily protested China’s decision to land civilian planes on the islands. Singapore last month agreed to allow the United States to deploy spy planes to patrol the South China Sea from its air bases.
The defense agreement with the Philippines, first reached in 2014, languished for nearly two years, caught in legal challenges and a sluggish judicial system, hampering President Obama’s broader shift of military resources to Asia.
On Tuesday, Philippine leaders praised the Supreme Court’s decision. Sonny Coloma, a spokesman for President Benigno S. Aquino III, said the agreement would allow a “generational leap” in the defense capabilities of the Philippines, which has one of the weakest militaries in Asia.
Senator Antonio F. Trillanes IV, chairman of the national defense and security committee, said a stronger American presence would permit the Philippines to protect itself from China’s advances. “It will have some psychological effect on the Chinese, knowing that the Philippines won’t be alone in this part of the world anymore,” he said in a telephone interview.
The United States Embassy in Manila said the deal would help strengthen humanitarian and military efforts.
The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs did not comment on the court’s decision. It has accused the United States of unnecessarily militarizing the region and threatening to disrupt peace.
The Philippines is one of the most vocal critics of China’s activities in the South China Sea. It has filed an arbitration case before a United Nations panel, hoping to put pressure on China to retreat from its claim of nearly 90 percent of the South China Sea.
Under the agreement, the United States can build facilities only within Philippine military bases, and no American ships, planes or personnel are to be permanently stationed in the country. The accord does not give details on how many troops may be stationed in the Philippines, though analysts said it could be a total of several thousand over the next decade.
The United States will invest much of its time and money in helping to revamp the Philippine military, which has long suffered from waste and corruption. The Philippines has just two functioning fighter jets, and its largest ship is a secondhand United States Coast Guard cutter.
The Philippines had asked the United States for up to $300 million in military aid last year, arguing that it needed to make a significant investment in new planes and warships to ward off China. In the end, it received about $80 million, still making it one of the largest recipients of American military aid in Southeast Asia.
The United States maintained military bases in the Philippines for most of the 20th century, including a large base at Subic Bay, once the American military’s largest overseas outpost.
But it was expelled in the early 1990s after the Philippine Legislature passed a law banning foreign governments from operating military bases in the country without Senate approval.
Since then, the Philippines has held joint exercises with the United States that have brought thousands of soldiers and Marines into the country several times a year, as well as dozens of American naval vessels.
While the vast majority of Filipinos hold positive views of the United States, according to polls, some still harbor reservations about the American military.
In Manila, opponents of the agreement gathered outside the Supreme Court on Tuesday, holding signs that said, “Defend Our Sovereignty!” Some hope that a presidential election in May will force a change in policy, though experts said that was unlikely given the Supreme Court’s decision.
“The U.S. wants to remain a Pacific power and is using the Philippines as a launching pad for military intervention and power projection in the region,” Renato M. Reyes Jr., a leader of Bayan, a left-leaning group that opposes United States military involvement in the country, said in a statement.
Opponents of the agreement said it was unconstitutional because it was a treaty and required approval from Congress.
“We should have a government of, by and for the people,” said Rene Augusto V. Saguisag, one of a group of former senators who voted to expel American troops and petitioned the Supreme Court to block the agreement.
Lawyers for the government contended that the agreement did not require Senate approval because it did not involve permanent military bases.