By any number of measures, married people are on average more prosperous than those who are not married. One example: In 2011, the median net worth of married couples ages 55 to 64 was $240,000, about four times that of unmarried men and women, the Census Bureau reported.
There’s a catch, though. Even if marriage rates were to skyrocket, there would be no shortage of poor married people.
About 28 million married Americans and their children lived below or near the poverty line in 2013, according to the federal Government Accountability Office.
A majority of married families who are considered low income (defined as at or below 150 percent of the Census Bureau’s Supplemental Poverty Measure) includes at least one person who is employed. Millions of these families receive help in the form of food stamps or payments from other government programs.
The federal government has long been working to promote marriage. It spent $800 million through 2014 on the Healthy Marriage Initiative, begun during the administration of President George W. Bush, which funds a range of programs to help low-income couples have better relationships.
“Rising income inequality and economic instability contribute to family instability,” Ms. Boteach said.
Poorer Americans already aspire to marriage at similar or higher rates than their higher-income counterparts, according to a 2012 U.C.L.A. study. But when they do marry, their marriages are much more likely to end in divorce. Providing livable incomes for these married Americans, many poverty experts say, may be one way to reduce a powerful source of marital stress.
How to reach that goal is where the divide between parties is most evident.
Democrats say Republican tax and budget proposals could slash benefit programs that many families need. The nonpartisan Tax Policy Center, for example, concluded that large spending cuts would be required with Donald J. Trump’s tax plan or the national debt would soar. Mr. Trump has rejected that assessment.
W. Bradford Wilcox, the director of the National Marriage Project at the University of Virginia, agreed that marriage is not all that is needed to fight poverty.
