BRAIN AWARENESS DAY at the New York Hall of Science (March 17, 2 to 4:30 p.m.). Ever wonder what’s going on inside your own head? There’s no better time to learn about it than NYC Brain Awareness Week, which this Queens museum will celebrate with an afternoon devoted to neuroscience. Researchers, activities and exhibits — including some real brains — will help illustrate this organ’s parts and capacities and explore the similarities between human and animal cognition.
‘CAESAR/X’ at the New Victory Theater (March 17-26). Strong, charismatic leaders who nevertheless proved vulnerable to their enemies: The Acting Company will bring the stories of Julius Caesar and Malcolm X to the stage when it presents two dramas in repertory. Intended for teenage audiences, Shakespeare’s “Julius Caesar,” opening on Sunday, and Marcus Gardley’s “X: Or, Betty Shabazz v. the Nation,” opening on Friday, will both unfold in a rotunda-like setting with part of the audience seated onstage. Shakespeare’s tragedy examines the events and motivations leading to Caesar’s assassination, while “X” takes the form of a mock trial in which Malcolm X’s widow interrogates his associates as she tries to uncover the truth behind her husband’s murder.
‘THE LIGHTNING THIEF’ at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center at the Borough of Manhattan Community College (March 19, 1:30 p.m.). At first glance, Percy Jackson might seem like an average — maybe even below-average — kid. He struggles with dyslexia and impulse control, and school has never come easy. But as fans of Rick Riordan’s young-adult novel of the same title know, he’s actually the half-mortal son of a Greek god, who in this adventure must recover Zeus’ stolen lightning bolt and help restore peace to Mount Olympus. Presented by Theatreworks USA, this hourlong musical was adapted from Mr. Riordan’s book by Joe Tracz and Rob Rokicki.
‘THE PETER PAN EXPERIENCE’ at BAM Fisher (March 18-26). The spirit of the boy who insisted on remaining a child pervades this theatrical production, but don’t expect to see a young fellow in green or a tiny luminescent fairy flitting about. In this show, Peter Pan is more like an unseen force that takes over the lives of five people who have already done the unforgivable: grown up. But the Dutch company Het Laagland will show how easily they grow down when presented with favorite old toys, toe-tapping tunes, an environment of whirling night stands and just the right amount of magic to make strait-laced professionals loosen their ties and let down their hair. Part of the BAMkids series at the Brooklyn Academy of Music and recommended for audiences 7 and older, this 70-minute piece offers something most children find irresistible: adults acting irrepressibly silly.
THEATRESPORTS at the Gallery Players Theater (March 19, noon). It may involve actors, but it’s still a competitive event: The members of Freestyle Repertory Theater, an improv troupe, are once again thinking fast on their feet in Brooklyn. They break into two teams and perform skits based on suggestions from the audience. Children will not only vote to determine the contest’s winner, but also, if they’re game enough, participate onstage.
‘TRIP TO THE MOON’ at the Jewish Museum (March 19, 2 p.m.). The Paper Bag Players have always specialized in out-of-this-world fun, so the journey in the title of their latest show shouldn’t present a challenge. One of the most venerable producers of children’s theater — founded in 1958 — the company is also one of the most innovative, applying paint, markers and scissors to parcel paper and cardboard, turning them into fantastical characters, sets and universes. Each hourlong production, for ages 3 through 8, consists of a series of musical sketches co-starring the audience members’ favorite actors: themselves.
‘THE TRUE STORY OF LITTLE RED’/‘LA VERDADERA HISTORIA DE CAPERUCITA’ at Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural and Educational Center (through April 1). In this version of the fairy tale, Little Red is a fearless little Latina on her way to visit her grandmother, or should we say her abuela? The actors in this puppet musical will probably use both terms, as Teatro SEA, the producing organization, specializes in bilingual stagings of Latino theater for children. With a book, music and lyrics by Manuel Antonio Morán, the show, playing Saturdays at 3 p.m., offers another twist: Little Red and the Wolf trade places.
