TORONTO — DeMar DeRozan had 42 points, and the Toronto Raptors ended an 11-game losing streak against the Chicago Bulls, rallying for a wild 122-120 overtime win on Tuesday night.
DeRozan shot 17 of 38 from the floor and also collected eight assists. Cory Joseph had 19 points for the Raptors, and Serge Ibaka scored 16 before he was ejected for his role in a memorable fight with Robin Lopez during the third quarter.
Jimmy Butler had 37 points for the Bulls, and Rajon Rondo finished with 24. It was Chicago’s first loss to Toronto since Dec. 31, 2013.
After a Butler 3-pointer with 3 minutes 58 seconds remaining in the third quarter, which gave Chicago a 16-point lead, Lopez swatted the ball out of the hand of Ibaka. The two squared up in the middle of a crowd and Lopez swung and missed Ibaka, who returned in kind, barely connecting with Lopez’s head.
Lopez and Ibaka were ejected following a long review. Chicago forward Nikola Mirotic and the Raptors assistant coach Jamaal Magloire received offsetting technical fouls after getting into a shoving match following the brawl.
With Lopez throwing the first punch, Ibaka said he was simply trying to defend himself.
“I’m not just going to be out there and watch a man like him punch me and walk away,” Ibaka said after his fourth career ejection.
Lopez was ejected for the sixth time in his career. He said he expects to be suspended for the fight.
News of the fight traveled quickly to Brooklyn, where Lopez’s brother, Brook Lopez of the Nets, was asked about it after he hit a last-second shot in a 98-96 victory over the Detroit Pistons.
The Bulls opened a 109-94 lead on Paul Zipser’s 3-pointer with 6:39 left in the fourth. But the Raptors responded with a 15-0 run, tying the game on Joseph’s layup with 1:50 remaining.
Toronto took the lead for the first time on a turnaround jumper from DeRozan with 1:23 to play in overtime.
Denzel Valentine missed a 3-point attempt on Chicago’s next possession and Patrick Patterson had a tip-in layup to make it 119-115 Toronto with 44.7 seconds remaining.
The Raptors lead the N.B.A. with 18 comeback victories after trailing by 10 or more points.