Citigroup is playing a smart game with China’s government bond market.
The American bank on Tuesday said that it would include sovereign debt issued by China in three existing fixed-income indexes — becoming the first major international benchmark provider to do so. That is a propaganda victory for Beijing, which has struggled to entice foreign investors. For Citigroup, it is a relatively low-risk diplomatic win.
China has been trying to attract more foreign bond buyers since the International Monetary Fund designated the renminbi as an official reserve currency last year. It has been a tough sell. The country’s capital account is not fully open, and regulation of financial markets remains ham-fisted. The renminbi has also been sliding against the dollar, while rising long-term United States interest rates make Chinese yields less attractive.
Regulators’ efforts to squash capital outflows while encouraging inflows have made fund managers worry that recent reforms are a honey trap. Foreign investors owned Chinese bonds worth just $126 billion at the end of 2016, according to the State Administration of Foreign Exchange — equivalent to less than 2 percent of the onshore bond market.
Adding China’s $1.1 trillion of government bonds to international benchmarks is therefore potentially a big deal. Funds that measure their performance against that index will have to increase their allocation to Chinese bonds. For example, China will account for almost 53 percent of the Citigroup index that tracks emerging-market sovereign debt.
The prospect of mechanically moving large amounts of cash into China is likely to unnerve fund managers. That is the main reason MSCI has so far declined to include Chinese equities in its popular emerging-market indexes, despite the risk of upsetting Beijing.
Citigroup has skirted this conundrum by choosing indexes that are not major benchmarks. Though the bank has not said how much money tracks its indexes, the financial consequences are likely to be small.
There may be a tacit quid pro quo at work. A month ago, Chinese authorities granted Citigroup a bond settlement license. JPMorgan Chase, which operates the leading emerging-market bond index and is also contemplating including Chinese sovereign bonds, received a bond underwriting license around the same time. Watch this space.