While attending graduate school at Northeastern, Dani Rylan obtained a hawker-and-peddler license from the city of Boston. Before Red Sox games, Rylan lugged coolers filled with bottled water onto Ipswich Street near Fenway Park, selling them for $2 before first pitch and $1 after the final out.
Rylan kept meticulous spreadsheets calculating details like how weather affected sales. She bartered with pedicab drivers, offering free water in exchange for bringing customers her way.
Rylan even named her endeavor, calling it Hydration Nation and stenciling it on the side of her coolers.
After graduating from Metro State in Denver in 2010, Rylan emailed Northeastern women’s hockey coach, Dave Flint, who recruited her years earlier when he was at St. Anselm College, in Manchester, N.H. Because Metro State had no women’s hockey team, Rylan still had N.C.A.A. eligibility.
Flint replied that if she could pay her way, she could try to earn a roster spot. And so Rylan sold water.
By Rylan’s second year, she was named a tri-captain, and Flint rewarded her with an athletic scholarship.
After Northeastern, Rylan moved to New York and opened a coffee shop in East Harlem, Rise & Grind. Again, she built the company from scratch, learning on YouTube how to use miter saws for construction and tabulating how many morning commuters passed by her storefront.
In 2015, Rylan set out on her most ambitious enterprise yet: forming the National Women’s Hockey League, the first professional women’s hockey league in North America to offer salaries.
In the N.W.H.L.’s first year, Rylan was hailed as a pioneer, a leader willing to disrupt the status quo and a refreshing jolt to fans and players who had long watched women’s hockey go undervalued.
This year, much of that glimmer has faded. The league cut salaries in November, while fighting a lawsuit and facing criticism over business practices.
Because Rylan, 29, has provided few details about the N.W.H.L.’s board of governors and investors, she, as the league’s commissioner, is the main target for blame. Her most vocal detractors paint her as unfit to run a professional league.
As the N.W.H.L.’s second season ended Sunday with the Buffalo Beauts winning the Isobel Cup final over the Boston Pride, 3-2, Rylan was confident she could restore the league’s image and parlay the lessons learned from a year of tumult to create a better home for professional women’s hockey for next season and beyond.
Before the N.W.H.L.’s arrival in April 2015, the only professional option in North America was the Canadian Women’s Hockey League, which just finished its 10th season but does not pay players. Only one of the C.W.H.L.’s five teams is in the United States.
The N.W.H.L. planned to offer salaries of up to $25,000 and have four teams — the Boston Pride, Buffalo Beauts, Connecticut Whale and New York Riveters. Dunkin’ Donuts was the first sponsor, and Rylan was able to secure streaming broadcast deals.
The games would not sell out arenas, but they packed smaller rinks, enabling a generation of young girls to watch Olympians like Hilary Knight, Meghan Duggan and top college stars and imagine a future as paid professionals.
Players and staff were enthralled by Rylan’s vigor to propel women’s hockey to a higher level.
But Rylan’s D.I.Y. verve was slow to translate among the multimillion-dollar influencers of the professional sports world.
Rylan has been flummoxed that additional sponsors did not follow Dunkin’ Donuts. Major television networks remained unsold on the league’s potential.
Since last April, the N.W.H.L. has also been mired in legal proceedings after Mike Moran, a Massachusetts businessman, filed suit seeking a return of more than $200,000 he said he invested in the league.
Rylan said she could not comment on the lawsuit. A statement provided by the league said Moran briefly was an associate, not an investor. “We look forward to this meritless issue being behind us,” the statement said.
The league also declined a request for further information about the N.W.H.L.’s board of governors and internal structure.
Internally, there was frequent staff turnover and reports of unpaid bills, potential red flags that the league was having more difficulty creating revenue than expected.
The hammer fell on Nov. 17, when the league slashed player salaries by 40 to 50 percent six weeks into this season.
Rylan described it as “the hardest decision I ever had to make” but said it was done with the league’s best interests in mind. A few players left.
“It has put us in a healthier position and it has allowed us to pivot and exist,” Rylan said.
Shortly after the cuts, the players released a statement demanding more transparency, directly addressing what many consider the N.W.H.L.’s biggest shortcoming.
Whether or not Duggan and her teammates on the United States national roster return to the league after this season is unknown. They have made clear that winning an Olympic gold medal is their first priority, and the Pyeongchang Games next February are the biggest spotlight for the sport.
Members of the United States national team are also in a dispute with U.S.A. Hockey, the national governing body, over wages and support. The team’s boycott of the coming world championship tournament is the latest battleground over fair compensation for women’s hockey players.
The setbacks have not stopped Rylan’s determination to push the N.W.H.L. forward. Recently, the league announced plans to host future games outside of the league’s four markets after a successful All-Star weekend in Pittsburgh in February.
Rylan added that N.W.H.L. salaries would probably be in the same range next season, when she hopes to reach profitability with the league. The key will be increasing revenue and sponsors. ABC News agreed to stream two of the three N.W.H.L. playoff games.
Donna Orender, the former president of the W.N.B.A., said she often met resistance from companies even as her league reached a decade of existence.
Despite its missteps, the league has been an advocate of L.G.B.T. rights and expanding the game at youth levels since its inception. The on-ice product is also maturing.
Last Sunday, the Riveters hosted their final regular-season game at the Barnabas Health Hockey House in Newark. Their opponent was the first-place and undefeated Pride, a star-studded team led by Duggan and other Olympians.
After finishing in last place in 2016, the Riveters defined themselves this season as a unit without much Olympic pedigree, but with a lot of chemistry.
In front of a full rink, the Riveters won, 3-2, led by goaltender Katie Fitzgerald’s 44 saves. A few months ago, Fitzgerald was playing in a men’s recreational beer league.
At the final horn, Fitzgerald’s teammates mobbed her and jumped into each other’s arms as if they had just won a championship. Watching from the top of the bleachers was Rylan.
A few weeks earlier, Rylan spoke about her drive to keep creating such opportunities.
