SETTING Heathsville is a rural community near the end of Virginia’s Northern Neck, a peninsula that extends into Chesapeake Bay. Historically agricultural, the surrounding area is now predominantly a retirement and vacation community, anchored by a National Register of Historic Places district dotted with old farmhouses, churches and municipal buildings. The peninsula has several small waterways; the coast is within a few miles.
INDOORS The house was built around 1826 and updated about 10 years ago. The exterior is brick laid in a Flemish bond pattern, with a cedar-shake roof.
Most of the interior is original and restored, including heart pine floors, fireplace mantels, some window glass and door latches.
The layout is center hall, with a large foyer facing the main staircase, adorned with curlicue millwork. The living and dining rooms are adjoining, with wide fireplaces framed by heavy wood mantels. Walls are solid brick with plaster overlay. The entry level is set a short flight of stairs up from the ground, making for a daylight lower level with an eat-in kitchen and family room that has a wide brick fireplace. A dumbwaiter connects the kitchen to the formal dining room above. Both lower-level rooms have exposed ceiling beams made from old barn wood found on the property.
Two bedrooms are on the second level; both have fireplaces framed by painted wood mantels, and one bedroom opens to a second-floor porch. Two more bedrooms are on the third floor. A large barn on the property is used for storage, while another, 2,200-square-foot commercial building is leased as a consignment store.
OUTDOOR SPACE The property’s nine acres are mostly pasture, with a mild rise. Large mature trees closer to the house shade gardens and an in-ground pool.
SETTING This condo is in a former garment manufacturing building in the Washington Avenue Historic District, a neighborhood of late-19th- and early-20th-century warehouses in downtown St. Louis, many converted into condos and apartments. According to the listing agent, the neighborhood has become more resident-friendly in the past few years, drawing in grocery stores and dry cleaners alongside its restaurants and bars. The Peabody Opera House is nearby, too, as are homes for the St. Louis Cardinals and St. Louis Blues.
INDOORS The building was built around 1900 and converted to condos about 15 years ago. This two-story unit was renovated within the past five years. The interior has an open floor plan and retains its original industrial character, with walnut floors, exposed brick walls and ductwork, and wood-beam ceilings.
The living area has an imposing floor-to-ceiling fireplace clad in dark copper, with built-in shelves flanking the firebox. In the kitchen, the cabinets were custom designed by Christopher Peacock; countertops are white marble, with a quartz backsplash; and stainless-steel appliances include a Wolf range and oven, a Miele dishwasher and a Sub-Zero refrigerator. Open metal stairs in the dining area lead up to a loftlike, wood-paneled game room with a wet bar and glass doors that open to a roof deck overlooking downtown.
Both bedrooms are on the first floor, with en-suite bathrooms. The master has a large glass shower with a colorful tile floor and a private balcony.
The unit comes with three spaces in the building’s garage.
OUTDOOR SPACE A master-suite balcony and a roof deck.
SETTING This house is in the Governor’s Mansion Historic District, a neighborhood of grand 19th- and early-20th-century architecture just south of downtown Little Rock. One of several contiguous historic districts in the city’s Quapaw Quarter, the neighborhood contains some of the city’s oldest houses, many in Queen Anne, colonial revival and Craftsman styles.
The River Market, a shopping and dining district on the Arkansas River developed in conjunction with the downtown revitalization, is about a mile and a half away, as is the Clinton Presidential Center. A walking and biking trail along the river connects to a network of trails that spread out across the city.
INDOORS The two-story house was built in 1921 and updated in 2011. It was designed by Charles Thompson, an architect responsible for several properties in Arkansas on the National Register of Historic Places, some of them in central Little Rock.
The house is set back from the street on a large lawn, with a brick walkway to the front door. The exterior is brick, and has a deep front porch. Most of the interior is original, including quarter-sawn oak floors, dark-wood window and door trim, molding and fireplaces.
The living room fireplace has an ornate wood mantel and French doors opening into the dining room and a tiled sunroom. A wall separating the dining room from the kitchen and a den was removed to open up the floor plan. The updated kitchen has a marble island, honed granite counters, a farm sink and stainless-steel appliances, most concealed behind white cabinet facing. French doors in the den open to the back patio.
The second-floor landing opens to a secondary living area known as the chapel room, with a pitched ceiling, massive limestone mantel and large casement windows opening over the front-and-back yards.
All three bedrooms are upstairs. The master has a fireplace, a walk-in closet and a renovated bathroom; the other two bedrooms are en suite as well. The apartment over the garage has an additional bedroom, a kitchen, a den and a bathroom.
OUTDOOR SPACE The lot is .42 acres of fenced, flat yard.
