Roger Federer, seeded fourth, advanced to the fourth round of the Miami Open in Key Biscayne, Fla., beating Juan Martín del Potro, 6-3, 6-4. Federer, who was facing the 29th-seeded del Potro for the first time since 2013, never lost serve and improved to 15-1 this year. He broke del Potro twice, once in each set, and that was all he needed.
Federer plays again Tuesday against 14th-seeded Roberto Bautista Agut, who needed three sets to top Sam Querrey. Other third-round men’s winners included top-seeded Stan Wawrinka, David Goffin, Tomas Berdych, Nick Kyrgios and Alexander Zverev.
Top-seeded Angelique Kerber made the women’s quarterfinals by beating Risa Ozaki, 6-2, 6-2. Kerber next meets 11th-seeded Venus Williams, who defeated seventh-seeded Svetlana Kuznetsova, 6-3, 7-6 (4), in a matchup of former Miami Open champions.
Viktor Arvidsson scored early in the second period, Jusse Saros stopped 24 shots, and the visiting Nashville Predators held on to beat the Islanders, 3-1, for their fourth straight win. Kevin Fiala and Ryan Johansen also scored to help the surging Predators win for the seventh time in eight games and remain in control of third place in the Central Division.
Josh Bailey scored and Thomas Greiss finished with 28 saves for the Islanders, who remained 2 points behind Boston for the second wild card in the Eastern Conference. The Islanders have lost six of their last nine (3-5-1) and are 0-4-1 in their last five at Barclays Center.
CAROLINA GOALIE INJURED Andreas Athanasiou crashed into Eddie Lack as he scored in overtime, giving the Detroit Red Wings a 4-3 victory over Carolina on a play that left Lack, the Hurricanes’ goalie, with a frightening injury.
Lack remained down for several minutes before he was taken off on a stretcher, with both teams remaining on the ice and forming a semicircle to watch him. Lack flashed a thumbs-up sign as he was wheeled away, and the team released a statement saying Lack has “full feeling in his extremities.” An official review determined that the puck was in the net before Athanasiou made contact with Lack.
Jason Day expects to travel to Augusta, Ga., on Friday to start practicing for the Masters, but said he could pull still out of the season’s first major, depending on his mother’s prognosis following surgery for lung cancer last week. Day revealed that his mother, Dening, has cancer after withdrawing from the Dell Technologies Match Play in Austin, Tex., last Wednesday. Day has said the initial diagnosis came in Australia at the beginning of this year and that she had scheduled surgery in Columbus, Ohio, late last week.
Day said Monday that doctors deemed the surgery successful, and now the family awaits results of tests to see if cancer is present in Dening Day’s lymph nodes. Day said he “hasn’t touched a golf club at all” in the days since joining his mother in Ohio last week.