SEOUL, South Korea — A South Korean ferry that sank nearly three years ago, killing more than 300 people — most of them teenagers on a school trip — was raised to the surface on Thursday. It was an emotional moment for families who are still looking for their missing children and a step toward closing one of the most traumatic episodes in South Korea’s history.
The ferry, the 6,825-ton Sewol, capsized and sank off the southwestern tip of South Korea on April 16, 2014. The accident was the country’s worst catastrophe in decades, and it contributed to the recent ouster of President Park Geun-hye. The ship went under while teenagers trapped inside sent text messages asking for help that never came or saying goodbye to their families.
A monthslong underwater search of the ship ended after 295 bodies were recovered. Nine people who were on board remain missing, including four students and two teachers from Danwon High School in Ansan, south of Seoul, the South Korean capital. Of the 324 students from the school on board for a field trip, 250 drowned.
Bereaved families have demanded that the ship be salvaged, hoping that the bodies of the missing would be found inside. They also hoped that the wreckage would reveal more clues to what caused the ship to sink. Government investigators have blamed overloading, the ship’s structural imbalance and poor decisions by the crew for the disaster.
In 2015, the government announced plans to raise the ship, contracting a consortium of Chinese and South Korean salvage crews for the $76 million operation. Their work has been painstakingly slow because of strong currents, frequent periods of bad weather, poor underwater visibility and the complicated engineering maneuvers needed to raise the ship, which was lying on its side about 145 feet below the surface.
Divers spent months placing 33 lifting beams underneath the ferry and tying cables to both ends of them. After days of testing, two salvage barges began pulling up the cables on Wednesday, raising the ship inch by inch.
By Thursday morning, the ferry’s mud-covered, rusting hull broke through the surface, and workers began fastening the ferry to the barges.
Family members of the victims watched the operation overnight from a government ship.
In the next couple of weeks, the ferry will be transferred to a semi-submersible vessel, which will lift it out of the water completely and carry it to Mokpo, a port 55 miles away. There, officials will conduct a thorough search.
The investigation of the sinking has exposed numerous loopholes in safety standards in South Korea.
The Sewol’s operator, Chonghaejin Marine, routinely overloaded the ship with poorly secured cargo, including on the ferry’s final voyage. Inspectors colluded in the practice by giving the Sewol and other ships just a cursory check from the pier, or none at all. When the Sewol capsized, its crew members were among the first to flee, after repeatedly telling passengers to stay in their cabins.
The first Coast Guard boat that arrived at the scene did little more than pick up the fleeing crew members, while passengers trapped inside the ferry banged on the windows as the ship slowly disappeared beneath the waves.
The captain of the ferry, Lee Jun-seok, was sentenced to life in prison after being convicted of murder through willful negligence. Fourteen other crew members received prison sentences of 18 months to 12 years. Dozens of ferry company officials, safety inspectors and Coast Guard officials have also been jailed or convicted on various criminal charges related to the sinking.
Many South Koreans remain outraged by the disaster. Some of the bereaved family members and sympathetic activists have camped out in Seoul and kept watch on the salvage operation from islands near the site, calling for a more thorough investigation into the government’s response.
When huge crowds of people rallied in central Seoul in recent months to demand that Ms. Park be removed, the government’s botched rescue operation was a central grievance voiced against the president. When lawmakers in the National Assembly voted to impeach her on Dec. 9, they accused her of negligence in the handling of the disaster.
When the Constitutional Court formally removed Ms. Park from office on March 10, it said she had stayed in her residence, not in her office, for seven hours after she first heard of the sinking. But the court said her actions in that case were not grounds to oust her. Instead, the court voted to remove Ms. Park based on other charges, including corruption and abuse of power.
Despite the court’s ruling, the disaster was the biggest blot on Ms. Park’s record as president. Many South Koreans saw her failure to take charge of the emergency as emblematic of what they considered her aloofness as leader.