MIAMI — The empty upper decks at Marlins Park on Sunday night said much about the stateside appeal of the World Baseball Classic. The host country was playing Canada in prime time, with a berth in the second round at stake. Yet an announced crowd of just 22,303 dropped by to politely enjoy the United States’ 8-0 victory.
Those fans missed the main event, an afternoon thriller that sent the Dominican Republic onward. The Dominicans, who swept the 2013 tournament, won their third in a row here, but needed 11 innings to outlast the plucky Colombians, 10-3. That game was a sellout: 36,952 fans, most of them cheering vigorously for the Dominicans.
This event can be a tough sell in the United States, where fans have deep loyalties to their local teams and many stars reject the invitation to play. In the United States, as the well-traveled slugger Nelson Cruz suggested on Saturday, the fans love you when you play for their team. In the Dominican Republic, he said, they love you no matter what.
When you watch the Dominicans play, you have to remind yourself that it is only March. The ebullience in the stands — and the intensity and joy of the play on the field — does not match the calendar. We don’t often witness that kind of baseball here, and it is a treat.
In another sellout on Saturday, those fans rattled an American pitcher, Tanner Roark, who struggled to stay composed as the Dominicans rallied from a five-run deficit. On Sunday, the Dominican shortstop Jean Segura said the fans almost intimidated him — and they were on his side.
The United States will join the Dominicans in San Diego, and try to advance to the finals for the first time in four World Baseball Classics. While most of the boldface American starters passed on the event, the starters who came have been dominant so far: Chris Archer, Marcus Stroman and Duffy have combined for 12 ⅔ shutout innings, allowing five hits and no walks with 14 strikeouts.
But the most important throw on Sunday came from the Dominican left fielder, Jose Bautista. Had he allowed Oscar Mercado to score with two outs in the bottom of the ninth, Colombia would have won and advanced to the second round. That would have forced the Dominicans into a tiebreaker game with the United States on Monday.
“And we certainly didn’t want to do that,” Bautista said.
Bautista has not played left field for Toronto since 2009. He usually plays in right, but he has improvised to fit into a packed Dominican lineup. With the score tied, 3-3, in the ninth, he was positioned in shallow left for Reynaldo Rodriguez’s one-out fly ball.
Bautista caught it, and said he sacrificed power for accuracy on his throw. As long as he delivered a strike, he would count on catcher Welington Castillo, now a division foe with the Baltimore Orioles, to do the rest.
The throw was on target, but a bit slow to arrive. It bounced once, and Castillo reached into the baseline to scoop the ball on a short hop. Mercado arrived just as he did so, and Castillo held on tight. He said he never doubted that he had a firm grip.
Clutching the ball with his mitt and securing it briefly with his bare hand, Castillo tagged the left leg of Mercado, who had tried to slide by to his right but never touched the plate. Castillo held the ball triumphantly for the umpire, then pumped his fist with it three times. He had saved the game.
Two innings later, he would win it. At the W.B.C., innings after the 10th begin with runners on first and second. Castillo was due up third in the 11th, and said he had quickly deduced what that meant: The leadoff man would bunt the runners to second and third, and the second batter would be intentionally walked. Castillo would be the first hitter with a chance to swing away off William Cuevas — and he drove a two-run single to left to break the tie.
Segura would soon double home three more runs, and a tight game became a rout. Segura, a late addition to the roster when a sore shoulder felled Hanley Ramirez, had three hits and called the game the highlight of his career.
That is what Cruz said on Saturday night, after his go-ahead homer off Andrew Miller. These games, he said Sunday, would now be part of Dominican lore.
