Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz.
THE MUSIC OF ARETHA FRANKLIN at Carnegie Hall (March 6, 8 p.m.). Fifty years ago, Aretha Franklin went into a studio to record her version of Otis Redding’s “Respect,” an empowerment anthem for generations of feminists and one of the finest pop songs of all time. Now, more than a dozen performers are coming together to pay tribute to Ms. Franklin with a concert honoring her towering catalog of music. The evening’s lineup encompasses many genres and eras, including performances by the soul and R&B singers Sam Moore and Bettye LaVette as well as the pop singer-songwriters Melissa Etheridge and Glen Hansard. (Ms. Franklin is not scheduled to appear.) The Afrobeat group Antibalas is the house band and proceeds will benefit music education organizations.
A PLACE TO BURY STRANGERS AND ONEIDA at Villain (March 3, 9 p.m.). Oliver Ackermann, the frontman of A Place to Bury Strangers, may be the Willy Wonka of noise rock. When he is not performing with his band — often cited as one of the loudest in New York — Mr. Ackermann runs a guitar-effects company called Death by Audio, which has produced some of the most innovative feedback-producing pedals in recent memory. (Its products include the Supersonic Fuzz Gun and the Apocalypse.) In concert, Strangers produces wonderfully overwhelming, yet tuneful, waves of psychedelic noise, whose effects are enhanced by dizzying strobe lights. The group will be joined by another boundary-pushing New York City rock institution: the Brooklyn-based group Oneida, which, over the last 20 years, has released more than a dozen albums and EPs touching on psychedelia, electronica, noise rock, punk and more.
SIGRID AND FLETCHER at Baby’s All Right (March 7, 8 p.m.). Here’s your chance to witness two up-and-coming female pop stars in one tiny room. The Norwegian singer Sigrid, who began writing songs at 16, recently announced her signing to Island Records with the release of the uplifting track “Don’t Kill My Vibe.” The American singer-songwriter Fletcher earned breakout success when her song “War Paint” topped Spotify’s United States viral chart nearly three years ago. Her subsequent EP, “Finding Fletcher,” bodes well for her career: It’s long on edgy electronic beats; bright melodies; and her high, soaring vocals.
LEILA BORDREUIL at Issue Project Room (March 3, 8 p.m.). A French cellist living in New York, Ms. Bordreuil plays steadily scathing music that interrogates how the body interacts with sound. She favors long and corrosive atonalities, typically using extended technique. At moments she seems to be playing the entire instrument, not just the strings. Here Ms. Bordreuil performs one set alongside the guitarist Bill Nace — best known for his work with Kim Gordon in the noise-punk duo Body/Head — and a second with a quartet featuring Austin Julian on guitar and vocals, Tamio Shiraishi on alto saxophone, and Julia Santoli on a set of spatialized amplifiers.
STEVE COLEMAN REFLEX at the Jazz Gallery (March 3-4, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Mr. Coleman’s adamant alto saxophone dances in and out of his own systems, avoiding harmonic resolution and toying with the experimental funk rhythms he composes. A MacArthur fellow, he often travels the globe in search of inspiration, rhythmic and otherwise. Mr. Coleman’s most recent album, “Synovial Joints,” featured a 21-piece orchestra, but at the Jazz Gallery he appears in a trio, with his longtime collaborators Anthony Tidd, on bass, and Sean Rickman, on drums. Expect relentless, bottom-heavy, tuneful interplay.
BILL FRISELL TRIO at the Village Vanguard (March 7-12, 8:30 and 10:30 p.m.). In his examinations of nostalgia, the guitarist Mr. Frisell doesn’t much challenge our love of bygone times. Instead, his glimmering music seems to question the limits — and the essence — of memory. His most recent album, “When You Wish Upon a Star,” features classic tunes from American cinema; the renditions are lulling and picturesque but not altogether soothing. Mr. Frisell, who turns 66 this month, will begin a two-week stint at the Vanguard with six nights alongside the bassist Thomas Morgan and the drummer Rudy Royston.
JON IRABAGON at the Stone (March 7-12, 8:30 p.m.). Hear a saxophonist as effortlessly versatile as Jon Irabagon and maybe you’ll think, He’s got this too easy. Mr. Irabagon doubles on alto and tenor saxophone, and he gamely switches from straight-ahead jazz to astringent post-metal ( his guitar-sax-drums combo, wryly named I Don’t Hear Nothin’ But the Blues). Swallow your doubts: There’s conviction in everything he plays, and often a sense of raffish provocation. Over the course of this weeklong residency at the Stone, Mr. Irabagon will perform with a different ensemble each night.
ROY HAYNES 92nd-BIRTHDAY CELEBRATION at the Blue Note (March 9-12, 8:00 and 10:30 p.m.). Mr. Haynes is one of the few surviving members of bebop’s founding generation. His drumming retains the ardent, propulsive swing that defined recordings by Charlie Parker, Sarah Vaughan, Bud Powell and countless others. Mr. Haynes turns 92 this month, and he will celebrate with four nights of shows at the Blue Note, welcoming an array of special guests, who have yet to be announced, throughout the engagement.
EDDIE PALMIERI at the Rose Theater at Jazz at Lincoln Center (March 3-4, 8 p.m.). Mr. Palmieri has brought a rock ’n’ roll energy and a drummer’s pummeling flair to the piano since the 1960s. Back then he led a famous salsa band, La Perfecta, before embarking on a range of jazz-fusion projects. Mr. Palmieri appears here with his 16-piece orchestra in a celebration of his 80th birthday. The band includes the fabulous lead vocalist Herman Olivera and the strong trumpeter Brian Lynch. Don’t expect to stay in your seat for long.
