Kayla Rae Norton and Jose I. Torres received prison sentences of 15 and 20 years for making racial threats and violating a street gang law at a children’s party in 2015.CreditCredit...Henry P. Taylor/Atlanta Journal-Constitution, via Associated Press.
The child’s birthday party was going strong in Douglasville, Ga., during the summer of 2015 when the convoy of men and women waving Confederate battle flags drove up. The partygoers, most of them black, were grilling and celebrating. Then the people in the pickups pulled out a shotgun, prosecutors said later at trial.
This week, Judge William McClain of Douglas County Superior Court sentenced one of the men and a woman among the group to lengthy prison sentences for their part in the confrontation. He said, “Their actions were motivated by racial hatred,” according to The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
The couple, Jose I. Torres, 26, and Kayla Rae Norton, 25, were each found guilty last month of making terroristic threats and of violating Georgia’s street gang law; Mr. Torres was also found guilty of aggravated assault.
Norman Barnett, an assistant district attorney, said in a telephone interview on Wednesday that Mr. Torres received a sentence of 20 years: 13 to be spent in prison and the remainder on supervised probation. Ms. Norton got 15 years: six in prison and the rest on probation.
Mr. Torres and Ms. Norton, who have three children together but are not married, wept at the sentencing hearing, according to The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Ms. Norton told some of the victims that she accepted responsibility.
The authorities said Ms. Norton, Mr. Torres and other members of a group called Respect the Flag were driving around Paulding and another county, flying the Confederate flag, pointing guns at black residents and threatening to kill them.
On the afternoon of July 25, 2015, according to the district attorney’s statement on Monday, the group drove past the party in Douglasville, a city of about 30,000 residents 22 miles west of Atlanta, and threatened the people there. A cellphone video shows several white men driving away in a convoy of pickups with the Confederate battle flag, the American flag and other banners fluttering from the truck beds.
Law enforcement officials later investigated the social media accounts of the members of the group and found posts suggesting they were “white supremacists who discussed attending K.K.K. rallies, joining Skinheads Nation and making numerous derogatory remarks about African-Americans as a whole,” according to the district attorney’s statement.
Ms. Norton tried to “cover up her actions of retrieving the shotgun from Torres’ truck, loading it and giving it to him to take up to the confrontation,” the statement said.
In October 2015, Mr. Fortner announced indictments against Mr. Torres, Ms. Norton and 13 others. As The Times reported, applying charges related to the state’s anti-street-gang law was an unusual legal maneuver, and legal experts said they could not recall other instances in which a similar statute had been used to prosecute a Confederate heritage group in the Deep South.
A superseding indictment last April added aggravated assault charges against four people: Mr. Torres, Ms. Norton and two others. Ms. Norton was found not guilty of aggravated assault.
