After members of the United States women’s national hockey team decided Wednesday to boycott the approaching world championship over stalled negotiations for increased wages and support, U.S.A. Hockey’s executive director, Dave Ogrean, announced that he looked forward “to continuing our discussions” with the players.
Before Ogrean’s statement, the national team members had received an email from U.S.A. Hockey with an ultimatum: Decide by 5 p.m. Thursday whether they planned to report to training camp Tuesday, apparently so the federation could move on without them if they did not change their stance.
The deadline passed, and the players did not budge. U.S.A. Hockey’s response appears only to have strengthened the players’ resolve.
U.S.A. Hockey, the sport’s national governing body, must consider several options: compile a team of new players before the tournament’s March 31 opening, host the world championship without a team, or listen to the national team’s demands and try to negotiate a compromise.
For that to happen, there needed to be “significant progress” in discussions, the veteran player Jocelyne Lamoureux-Davidson said Thursday night. “We are ready to work with U.S.A. Hockey and start talking about what progress looks like,” she said.
The players are seeking upgrades including an increase in compensation that would assist with living wages; currently, U.S.A. Hockey provides only $1,000 per month during the six-month Olympic residency period every four years. In addition, the players want more investment in girls’ hockey programs and development efforts, including more competitive games during non-Olympic years.
During the 2015-16 fiscal year, U.S.A. Hockey had $42.37 million in revenue — a large portion coming from membership fees, which accounted for $26.5 million, according to audited financial statements posted on its website. The N.H.L. donated $9 million to the U.S.A. Hockey Foundation, the organization’s charity.
Much of U.S.A. Hockey’s financial attention appears to be on its new complex in Plymouth, Mich., which is focused on developing its men’s teams. The organization’s financial documents do not specify payments to women’s programs, although its foundation spent $33,440 on the Patty Kazmaier Award, given to the top player in college women’s hockey.
U.S.A. Hockey said Wednesday that it expected to field a competitive team for the world championships regardless of what happened with the boycott. Because the tournament is taking place in its Plymouth complex, it seemed highly unlikely that the United States would withdraw. But non-national team players from the National Women’s Hockey League have expressed their support for that national team players so the federation’s only option appeared to be asking juniors to compete.
Knight and her teammates said they expected U.S.A. Hockey to reach out to top junior players. However, many younger players have also pledged their support for the national team players through phone calls and on social media.
Using juniors could lead to problems in the tournament. Aside from the talent discrepancy against top teams from Canada and Europe, a team of younger, smaller players would be susceptible to more injuries, and concussions in women’s hockey are a growing problem.
To avoid fielding a team of juniors, U.S.A. Hockey would need to reach out to national team players and reopen negotiations.
