It was an unusual night of boxing at Madison Square Garden on Saturday, with Daniel Jacobs a loser who won respect and Gennady Golovkin a winner who, on balance, may have lost as much as he gained.
Despite coming up a little short on the scorecards, Jacobs won over the capacity crowd with his resilience and earned admiration from a boxing world that had almost unanimously expected him to be steamrollered.
For Golovkin — who entered the bout unbeaten and, in many observers’ eyes, unbeatable — the narrow 12-round victory may have robbed him of something a lot more valuable than the 37th win of his professional career. Gone now is his aura of invincibility, an imaginary suit of armor that made the very thought of sharing a ring with him a scary proposition.
Jacobs stripped that away in the first minute of the fourth round when, after being floored by two hard rights, he rose and came to a realization.
Despite Jacobs’s prefight confidence, which he said was bolstered by his successful battle against a potentially deadly form of bone cancer in 2011, it took that series of punches, and his ability to withstand them, to convince him that he not only belonged in the ring with Golovkin but might prevail.
His confidence grew as the rounds wore on, and his effectiveness increased as he shifted from a conventional to a southpaw stance, with Jacobs, 30, discovering he could hit the onrushing Golovkin with right jabs seemingly at will.
Golovkin, who will turn 35 on April 8, began showing signs of his age for the first time in his 11-year professional career. After opening up a healthy lead in the bout, helped greatly by the knockdown in the fourth round, Golovkin steadily faded.
Jacobs won the final three rounds on two of the official scorecards and two of the final three on the third. Still, it was not enough to overcome Golovkin’s early edge: The final cards were 115-112, 115-112 and 114-113 in favor of Golovkin, who added Jacobs’s World Boxing Association middleweight title to his belts from the World Boxing Council, the International Boxing Federation and the International Boxing Organization.
Golovkin, a 7-1 favorite, had planned to return to his native Kazakhstan for a June bout against the Englishman Billy Joe Saunders, who holds yet another middleweight title.
Now it might seem more prudent for Golovkin to take a brief respite before intensifying efforts to set up a fight against Saúl Álvarez, known as Canelo, a match that boxing aficionados consider a dream showdown and the closest thing to a megafight the sport has to offer these days.
Álvarez, who held the W.B.C. middleweight title until he vacated it last year, has a fight against Julio César Chávez Jr. scheduled for May 6 in Las Vegas.
“We wanted to do the Canelo fight last year, and we’ll do it as soon as possible,” said Tom Loeffler, Golovkin’s promoter.
Boxing history is replete with dream matches that never happened because one of the fighters or both were waylaid en route. One of the more notable instances came in 1973 when Joe Frazier, then the heavyweight champion, decided to take a working vacation to Kingston, Jamaica, and fight a young Olympic champion named George Foreman rather than set up a rematch with Muhammad Ali.
Foreman shockingly knocked out Frazier, and the Frazier-Ali rematch came more than a year later, and with a far reduced paycheck for both fighters.
In a way, Golovkin’s decidedly human showing could help the match with Álvarez come about because, if anything, the closeness of his bout with Jacobs reminded observers how fragile a boxing career can be.
Golovkin was asked afterward if he felt his showing against Jacobs — the victory was the first time in 23 bouts that he had failed to knock out his opponent, and the first time in his career that he had to go 12 rounds — demonstrated that he was, in fact, mortal.
A champion who may have discovered how tenuous even the most dominant reign can be.