JOHANNESBURG — The two rival factions inside South Africa’s governing African National Congress attacked each other publicly on Friday after President Jacob Zuma abruptly fired a well-respected finance minister who was considered a bulwark against government corruption.
Mr. Zuma, who has been embroiled in a series of scandals since taking office in 2009, dismissed the finance minister, Pravin Gordhan, as part of a late-night cabinet shuffle in which 10 of 35 ministers were fired.
The deputy president, Cyril Ramaphosa, called the decision “unacceptable.” Another senior figure, Gwede Mantashe, the A.N.C. secretary general, said the cabinet shuffle was not done with the party’s approval. “Ministers have been moved, and the majority of them were good performing ministers,” Mr. Mantashe said.
“It’s unprecedented to have senior A.N.C. members come out with dissenting views in public like this,” said William Gumede, a political scientist at the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg and executive chairman of the Democracy Works Foundation, a good-government group.
Mr. Gordhan’s backers belong to the urban faction of the A.N.C., one less beholden to the politics of patronage that the party practices in rural strongholds.
Mr. Ramaphosa, a liberation figure who also became one of the country’s richest black businessmen after the end of apartheid, is considered the leader of the urban faction, and he is seen as a leading candidate to succeed Mr. Zuma as the party’s leader in December.
The other top contender, Nkosozana Dlamini-Zuma, a former chairwoman of the African Union who was once married to Mr. Zuma, has been backed by groups most loyal to the president.
The finance minister’s dismissal sent the currency, the rand, plummeting as much as 5 percent at one point. The cost of borrowing for the government jumped, amid fears that rating agencies would downgrade South Africa’s government bonds to junk status. Africa’s most industrialized economy, South Africa is projected to grow 0.8 percent this year, and unemployment is 27 percent.
Speculation is rife that Mr. Zuma might be compelled to step down before the scheduled end of his second five-year term in 2019, clearing the way for another party leader to take the reins.
Mr. Gordhan, who learned of his dismissal from a television report, defended his record on Friday as protesters gathered at the headquarters of the National Treasury, part of the Finance Ministry.
The firing on Thursday night capped a week of tensions that began on Monday when Mr. Zuma ordered Mr. Gordhan to return abruptly from a trade and investment roadshow in Britain. As rumors circulated that Mr. Gordhan would be fired, Mr. Zuma summoned A.N.C. leaders for a meeting. The meeting did not produce a consensus, officials have said.
Mr. Zuma, in a statement on Friday, announced that he had replaced Mr. Gordhan with Malusi Gigaba, the home affairs minister. Mr. Gordhan’s deputy, Mcebisi Jonas, was also fired and replaced by Sfiso N. Buthelezi.
Mr. Gordhan, after a stint as finance minister from 2009 to 2014, was reappointed to the job in December 2015, after Mr. Zuma abruptly replaced his successor, Nhlanhla Nene, with a little-known junior lawmaker. Mr. Zuma changed that decision four days later, after the rand and the stock market tumbled, and Mr. Gordhan’s return to the job helped reassure investors.
But Mr. Gordhan has repeatedly been at odds with the president since then. He resisted Mr. Zuma’s push to approve expensive nuclear power plants, and he tried to rein in public spending. He also clashed with a powerful family, the Guptas, who are close to Mr. Zuma and are so influential that Mr. Zuma was obliged to publicly insist last year that he was in charge of his government.
Trieu Pham, a credit analyst at MUFG Securities in London, said there were important differences between this week’s dismissal of Mr. Gordhan and the firing of Mr. Nene in 2015. Mr. Gordhan’s departure, if not the timing, had been expected; his replacement, unlike Mr. Nene’s, is a cabinet minister, albeit one with limited experience in finance; and the rand and stock prices have risen in recent months, allowing some room for maneuver.
“The long waiting time indicates that Zuma has well weighed the factors for and against the reshuffle, and thinks that he has garnered enough support to resist a power struggle and a breakup of the A.N.C.,” Mr. Pham said.