WASHINGTON — Melania Trump has been a spectral presence since her husband became president. But on Wednesday, the first lady stepped out of the shadows, speaking out on behalf of women who battle gender discrimination and violence around the world.
“Wherever women are diminished, the entire world is diminished with them,” Mrs. Trump said at a ceremony at the State Department that honored 13 women who have faced rapists, acid-wielding attackers and the prejudiced courts that often protect them.
Speaking softly but firmly, from a teleprompter, Mrs. Trump challenged the members of her audience to put themselves in the shoes of these women — victims of domestic abuse, gender bias, or violence — who fought laws and social norms that sought to perpetuate the injustice.
“Ask yourself if you would have the fortitude of spirit, the courage of your convictions, and the enormous inner strength required to stand up and fight against such overwhelming odds,” Mrs. Trump said, gesturing to the women, from Yemen to Sri Lanka, arrayed behind her.
Mrs. Trump’s speech was her first since becoming first lady, apart from brief remarks at another women’s event at the White House.
When previous first ladies like Michelle Obama and Hillary Clinton addressed this theme, it inspired some of their most impassioned, memorable speeches.
Last October, in New Hampshire, Mrs. Obama delivered a scathing indictment of Mr. Trump, who was then still a candidate, for his record of crude statements about women.
Mrs. Trump did not mention the president in her eight minutes of remarks. But she left little doubt she believes the White House should act as a guardian of women’s rights around the world.
For Mrs. Trump, the appearance marked a period of greater visibility, after several weeks when she spent much of her time in New York with the Trumps’ son, Barron, who is in school there.
Stephanie Grisham, Ms. Trump’s new communications director, noted that the first lady had taken part in Mr. Trump’s visits with foreign leaders, including Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan.
She has also visited schools and children’s hospitals, Ms. Grisham said, and looked forward to playing host for the White House Easter egg roll on April 17.
Whether intentional or not, the first lady’s speech kicked off a day in which the White House reached out to women, and sought to make amends for bruised feelings. At the daily White House news briefing, Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary, called first on April Ryan, the White House correspondent for American Urban Radio Networks. On Tuesday Mr. Spicer had a tense exchange with Ms. Ryan, who is African-American, which culminated with him ordering her to stop shaking her head during one of his answers.
“How are you today?” a solicitous Mr. Spicer asked Ms. Ryan, who said she was fine.
A few hours later, Mrs. Trump was on hand when her husband marked the end of Women’s History Month by showing up at a panel in the East Room devoted to women’s issues, in which female members of his cabinet were taking part. Mr. Trump praised “the legendary Abigail Adams” and Susan B. Anthony. “Have you heard of Susan B. Anthony?” he asked with a grin.