Peter Kwong, who came to the United States to be trained as an engineer but became instead an authoritative scholar on America’s Chinatowns and Chinese immigration, died on March 17 in Manhattan. He was 75.
The cause was a heart attack, his wife, Dusanka Miscevic, a China scholar and his closest survivor, said.
Professor Kwong, who joined the faculty of Hunter College of the City University of New York in 1993, was a distinguished professor of Asian-American studies and of urban policy and planning, as well as a member of the doctoral faculty in sociology at the university’s Graduate Center. He was also a journalist, documentary filmmaker and author.
His career spanned the 1965 immigration act, which reversed four decades of virtual exclusion of Asians, and the more recent gentrification of Manhattan’s Chinatown. He charted the spread of ethnic Chinese newcomers to satellite enclaves in other boroughs and the suburbs; the linguistic ascent of Mandarin over Cantonese; and, in New York City, the ultimate validation of an ethnic group’s rise: the designation of Lunar New Year as a holiday, when public schools are closed and alternate-side parking rules are suspended.
His other books include “Chinatown, New York: Labor and Politics, 1930-1950” (1979) and “Forbidden Workers: Illegal Chinese Immigrants and American Labor” (1998). With Ms. Miscevic, he wrote “Chinese Americans: An Immigrant Experience” (2000) and “Chinese America: The Untold Story of America’s Oldest Community” (2005).
Professor Kwong was also a producer of the Oscar-nominated documentary “China’s Unnatural Disaster: The Tears of Sichuan Province,” which depicted the Chinese government’s inept response to a catastrophic earthquake in 2008 that killed tens of thousands of people. The film was broadcast on HBO in 2009.
As a journalist, he reported for many newspapers and magazines, including The Village Voice. One article in The Voice, written with his wife in 1990, examined Chinese drug cartels; another was an essay he wrote in 1992 on race riots in Los Angeles.
At the time of his death, he and Ms. Miscevic were completing a history of Chinese immigration in the Western United States, and he had begun an autobiography.
Peter Chi-Choong Kwong was born on Nov. 13, 1941, in Chungking, China, to Edward Yao-kun Kwong, a university professor and writer, and Susan Su-chuen Ho, who was schooled as a nurse.
He earned a bachelor of arts degree in 1965 in math and physics from Whitman College in Walla Walla, Wash., and a bachelor of science degree in civil engineering from Columbia. Friends said he never practiced as an engineer, having given up the discipline as he became more involved in social issues.
At Columbia, he also earned a certificate in Asian studies from the East Asian Institute, a master’s from the School of International Affairs and a doctorate. Over the years, he held a number of visiting professorships. In China, he taught at Fudan University, the People’s University of China and the City University of Hong Kong; in the United States, at the University of California, in both Los Angeles and Berkeley, and at Columbia, Yale, Oberlin College and Princeton.
Professor Kwong became an expert on the history of Chinese immigration to the United States since the mid-19th century and its evolution.
In the half-century since then, he said, immigrants scattered as jobs became less concentrated. Few enclaves proved as durable as Chinatown in Lower Manhattan.
Although more Chinese immigrants now live in Brooklyn and Queens, Chinatown in Manhattan has endured longer, in part, he said in the NPR interview, because it joined adjacent neighborhoods to resist gentrification.
“We are basically the very last stand,” he said.