At 56, Henry Rollins is still angry.
When he was a younger man, the rage flowed out of him as the scowling frontman for Black Flag, the pioneering Southern California punk band.
Today, Mr. Rollins may no longer scream to get his point across. But as a spoken word performer, radio host and, notably, a widely read columnist at LA Weekly, he has reinvented himself as a political voice that is similarly hard to ignore.
Q. What’s your approach to the column?
A. As far as political writing, to use the baseball idea, if you can’t hit them where they ain’t and score, then — basically don’t be obvious.
And if you’re going to make a point, if you can’t bring some humor into it — I mean obviously someone getting shot and killed in Ferguson, Mo., there’s no fun there. But anything with Donald Trump, where there’s so much to say, if you don’t bring some humor in, it’s going to be unreadable.
Q. Have you mellowed with age?
A. Not really. I’ve just been able to prioritize and direct my energies with a little bit more care and aim, where I don’t need to scorch the entire forest because I’m angry. I can just pick out the three trees and that turns into a column or that turns into something on stage.
Q. You’ve said you cultivate your anger. Why?
A. Because it turns into good things.
I saw the HBO documentary on the West Memphis Three and I said, ‘Oh, O.K. you’ve officially pissed me off. Arkansas we’re coming for you.’ And it was out of anger. I was concerned for guys in jail, yeah, but it was anger that got my civic muscle going. And I started calling rich, famous people I knew — ‘Hey can I have a thousand dollars [to donate to a legal fund]?’ I couldn’t believe it. I was like a member of Congress dialing for dollars.
Q. Do you ever think about making music again?
A. No. For me it was a real time and place. I never really enjoyed being in a band. It was never fun. It was necessary. I really had to say those words. But I never enjoyed it and I’ll be the first to admit I was never all that good at it. But it was real.
It wasn’t looking good for Nalu.
The small, floppy-eared dog inhaled a lot of smoke after a fire erupted at a Santa Monica apartment on Tuesday. The fire was quickly put out. Nalu, a 10-year-old bichon frise-shih tzu mix, was limp and not breathing.
“He was essentially dead,” said Andrew Klein, the firefighter who pulled the dog from the burning home.
Mr. Klein set Nalu on the grass and began delivering oxygen with a specialized pet mask and performing mouth-to-snout resuscitation.
Minutes passed. Nothing.
Kneeling nearby, the dog’s owner, Crystal Lamirande, who had been running errands when the blaze broke out, was distraught.
She put her hand on the dog’s belly. “Come on Nalu,” she said.
Then, an improbable 20 minutes after efforts to revive him began, Nalu blinked and, slowly, his chest rose.
Ms. Lamirande, 35, a nurse, had just lost her home. Yet for the moment she was elated.
“She couldn’t stop saying, ‘Thank you,’” said Billy Fernando, a passer-by who watched the drama.
Speaking by phone Thursday, Ms. Lamirande said Nalu was back to his old self. “He’s so lovely. People just love him,” she said.
Ms. Lamirande said she lost sentimental objects in the fire, whose origin was unknown.
