The Chicago Bears have closed the book on the Jay Cutler era as their franchise quarterback, after an unfulfilling eight years that included only one postseason appearance.
The Bears made cutting Cutler, 33, their first official move as the N.F.L. free-agent market opened, while they were reportedly working toward an agreement to replace him with the former Tampa Bay quarterback Mike Glennon.
Cutler’s final year with the Bears ended with a 3-13 record. Thumb and shoulder injuries limited him to five games.
EAGLES AND JEFFERY AGREE ON ONE-YEAR DEAL The Philadelphia Eagles have agreed to terms with wide receiver Alshon Jeffery on a one-year contract. Jeffery was considered the top receiver available in free agency, but he could not secure a long-term deal to remain with the Chicago Bears. He is coming off two down seasons, and he missed 11 games over that time because of injury and suspension.
SUSPENDED LINEBACKER DETAINED IN CRASH The authorities said that the suspended Oakland Raiders linebacker Aldon Smith was detained in San Francisco after a sport utility vehicle he was riding in crashed into an undercover police car, injuring two officers.
The Bay Area news station KTVU reported that the officers were taken to a hospital for injuries that were not life-threatening. The police said that Smith was detained for public intoxication, but that he was not arrested.
The woman driving the S.U.V. was arrested on suspicion of drunken driving.
Smith has played fewer than 20 games in the last three seasons. The N.F.L. had been expected to review his status this month after he received a one-year suspension for violating the league’s rules on substance abuse.
Manchester United preserved its unbeaten record in Russia but had to settle for a 1-1 tie at Rostov in the first leg of their Europa League round-of-16 match. Henrikh Mkhitaryan’s away goal gave United, which has never won the Europa League, the advantage ahead of the second leg, particularly with the Rostov stars Aleksandr Gatskan and Aleksandr Bukharov ruled out of the match.
The International Olympic Committee has cut funding to Kenya and said it would make a decision on the country’s Olympic future at an executive board meeting next week, when Kenya, a traditional track and field power, faces the prospect of being banned.
The I.O.C. statement came after National Olympic Committee of Kenya executives, led by the two-time Olympic champion Kip Keino, defied the I.O.C. at a meeting on Tuesday and refused to make changes to their constitution.
Kenya’s track federation and Olympic committee have been dogged by scandals since the 2012 Olympics. The national Olympic committee was disbanded by the Kenyan government after last year’s Rio Games amid charges of theft and mismanagement by a number of senior officials.
NEW COACH FOR U.S. WOMEN’S BASKETBALL USA Basketball is expected to name Dawn Staley the new coach of the women’s Olympic basketball team. Staley, 46, the coach of the women’s team at South Carolina, would coach the team at the 2020 Tokyo Olympics, succeeding UConn’s Geno Auriemma, who became the first coach to lead the women’s team at two consecutive Olympics, in 2012 and 2016.
Jim Herman missed the course record at Innisbrook by one stroke and took a two-shot lead over the British Open champion Henrik Stenson and Russell Henley after the first round of the PGA’s Valspar Championship in Palm Harbor, Fla., by firing a bogey-free, nine-under-par 62.
Oakland’s Ace Goes on the D.L.
Sonny Gray, the Oakland Athletics’ ace, will begin the season on the disabled list with a lat strain and has been shut down from throwing for the next three weeks.
General Manager David Forst said there was no timetable for Gray’s return.
This was a big blow to the A’s and Gray, a right-hander who was eager to start fresh after a forgettable 2016. He was on the D.L. twice and went 5-11 with a 5.69 earned run average on the heels of back-to-back 14-win seasons.