Wendy Deborah Gall and Eric Michael Sharfstein are to be married March 5 at Crabtree’s Kittle House Restaurant and Inn in Chappaqua, N.Y. Rabbi Aaron Brusso is to officiate.
The bride, 36, works in New York as a foreign service officer at the Consulate General of Canada. She graduated with honors from the University of Alberta. She is a daughter of Karen L. Gall of St. Albert, Alberta, and the late Gerald L. Gall. The bride’s father was a professor of law at the University of Alberta and a founder and president of the John Humphrey Center for Peace and Human Rights. In 2001, he was appointed an Officer of the Order of Canada.
The groom, 42, is the senior public affairs officer at Columbia University. He graduated cum laude from Union College. He is the son of Ellen L. Sharfstein and Allan Sharfstein of Chappaqua. The groom’s mother is an adjunct professor in the department of reading and study skills at Westchester Community College. His father, who worked in New York, is a retired vice president of Pfizer.
Ms. Gall and Mr. Sharfstein met in December 2014 through JDate.
After exchanging several messages, they went on a first date to a wine bar on the Upper West Side.
They went on a second date and then a third to celebrate New Year’s Eve at an Italian restaurant in New York.
“We are both intellectually curious people who like to feed our inner nerd by watching a lot of documentaries, reading newspapers and occasionally yelling at a TV pundit,” Mr. Sharfstein said, laughing.
In April 2015, they traveled to Edmonton, Alberta, to celebrate Passover with the bride’s family.
“Eric and my mom are like peas and carrots,” Ms. Gall said. “They get along very well.
Three months later, they returned to Edmonton because Ms. Gall had agreed to anonymously donate a portion of her liver to save the life of a child in need of a transplant.
“I had an understanding of what it was like when a family is waiting for that phone to ring,” said Ms. Gall, whose father, in need of a double-lung transplant, died in March 2012, before a donor was found.
He was with her during and after the surgery.
“This was truly an amazing and lifesaving sacrifice,” he said.
In December 2015, just four moths after her surgery, she took a six-week assignment in Amman, Jordan, in support of Canada’s operation to resettle 25,000 Syrian refugees.
Although they missed sharing Thanksgiving, Hanukkah, New Year’s and their first anniversary of being a couple, they still managed to celebrate over Skype.
While she was away, he somehow managed a New Year’s Eve flower delivery to her hotel in Jordan.
