These beauty bloggers have nailed the perfect cat eye and the art of contouring. They help millions of followers navigate the rocky shoals of choosing the best mascara and the longest-lasting foundation. Some now earn six-figure incomes from their adoring audiences, thanks to partnerships with major brands eager to profit from their street cred.
They’re also guys.
Online personalities like Mr. Charles and Mr. Gutierrez represent progressive thinking and a fresh take on an old market, said Neil Saunders, a retail analyst who is managing director of GlobalData. “A cutthroat beauty market, where differentiation is vital, has been keen to capitalize on male bloggers,” he said.
These bloggers tend to project a very traditionally feminine beauty aesthetic — forget facial hair, think Kardashian-style eyelashes. Many of them are gay and say that their followers’ virtual embrace offers powerful reinforcement.
Mr. Charles, who finished high school this year and moved to Los Angeles, specializes in how-to videos that can take him from 90 minutes to seven hours to produce. In a recent one, called “Valentine’s Day Glitter Makeup Tutorial,” he shows viewers in just under 12 minutes how to recreate a pink lipstick and eyeliner look. Along the way, he promotes many products by name, as well as a video game that sponsored the segment.
Like other beauty bloggers, he makes money through affiliate deals; by collecting a portion of the sales of the products he promotes; by attending live events; by one-off deals with major brands; and through YouTube advertising.
Fans of Mr. Charles and other male beauty bloggers are heavy consumers — of both the videos and the products they endorse. Jordyn Birden, a 19-year-old student at Virginia Tech, watches five or six male beauty blogs every day, each one about 15 minutes long. “It’s like an addiction,” she said.
Hillary Kline, 29, who works in public relations in Minneapolis, loves male beauty bloggers. “I like seeing how other people create looks,” she said.
Her favorite is Patrick Simondac, known online as Patrick Starrr, who dresses in drag, is sponsored by Smashbox cosmetics and other companies and has 2.1 million YouTube subscribers.
Mr. Rivera, who has a penchant for skulls and Halloween-style makeup, recently dyed his hair blue ahead of a move to Los Angeles. He knows who his fans are.
Thomas Halbert, 20, is another beauty blogger who is moving to Los Angeles (from his native Asheville, N.C.). He has a shock of blond hair and a bit of a Justin Bieber vibe.
By the time he was 15, Mr. Halbert was making $1,000 to $3,000 a month from ads on his Tumblr account. This year, all told, he expects to earn $100,000.
Male beauty blogging began to emerge in 2014, Mr. Rivera said. At the time, he said, about 12 men were doing it; they all knew of one another and were initially collegial. “It was a very close-knit community, trading industry secrets,” he said. Today, the field is much more crowded and competitive.
Another reason male beauty bloggers find faithful followers is their willingness to share their personal lives, as Mr. Charles did in an Instagram post in June: “The past few days of my life have been some of the worst in a long time. I had a boy I really cared about take advantage of me.” That post won more than 55,000 likes.
