“Fearless Girl,” the wildly popular statue that has spent the last few weeks staring down the financial district’s well-known “Charging Bull,” has received a new lease on life. Originally scheduled to be removed next week, it will now remain in place until early 2018, officials said on Monday.
“Fearless Girl” was created by the sculptor Kristen Visbal and erected in Bowling Green, a small park, by the financial firm State Street Global Advisors in honor of International Women’s Day in March.
The statue was an immediate hit, drawing crowds who snapped selfies or stood alongside the bronze child and mimicked her pose: hands on her hips, slight smile on her face, and her skirt and ponytail seeming to blow in the breeze.
Mr. de Blasio said the presidency of Donald J. Trump and the nationwide women’s rights marches the day after his inauguration had given the statue a special power.
Calls for “Fearless Girl” to become a permanent part of the financial district began almost immediately after it appeared, including an online petition that had garnered more than 28,000 signatures by Monday morning. Those calls continued after the decision to extend the statue’s stay for one year became known, including from the New York City public advocate, Letitia James.
“We are encouraged by the positive response, as our goal was to raise awareness and drive a conversation around the need to improve gender diversity in corporate leadership roles,” the company said.
Not everyone has been pleased with the statue, however. Writing in The Guardian, Cara Marsh Sheffler denounced the statue as an act of “corporate feminism” and a “marketing coup” by State Street Global Advisors, which manages $2.5 trillion in assets. Of the 28 people on its leadership team, only five are women, according to its website.
Arturo Di Modica, the sculptor who created the bronze “Charging Bull” sculpture in the 1980s, also fumed about “Fearless Girl” in a recent interview with MarketWatch.
Mr. Di Modica spent $350,000 of his own money to create the sculpture, which he installed without a permit in front of the Stock Exchange in 1989. The city moved it briefly to Queens before installing it in its current location in Bowling Green.
Gail A. Brewer, the Manhattan borough president, said at Monday’s news conference that she thought “Fearless Girl” also sent a message about gender equality to the financial industry.
“This girl — young — taking on the bull in terms of a symbol also says to Wall Street that we need more diversification on some of the boards of these companies,” she said.
