The work, “We Are the World” (2017), is by the Algerian artist Sadek Rahim. It was produced immediately after President Trump’s election win, as a protest against his views on immigration and his foreign policy.
The rug was originally made in the Syrian city of Aleppo. The eagle was reproduced by Mr. Rahim based on images he’s seen of rugs inside the Oval Office. He used black shoe polish, he said, as a nod to the Iraqi man who hurled a shoe at President George W. Bush in protest over the 2003 United States-led invasion of Iraq.
The price for the work: 10,000 euros ($10,600).
Art Dubai started this week just as Mr. Trump’s executive order restricting travel from the Middle East was supposed to take effect — and before it was blocked on Wednesday night by a federal judge in Hawaii. The order, signed March 6, would ban entry for 90 days from six mostly Muslim countries, and would suspend all refugee admissions for 120 days.
Most of the artists, curators and gallerists attending the art fair here were from predominantly Muslim countries. Many called the proposed ban xenophobic, and said it would lead to the cultural isolation of the United States.
At the booth of the Tehran-based Dastan’s Basement gallery, Ashkan Zahraei, the assistant curator, wore his cap backward in a cluttered space designed to look like an artist’s studio — filled with framed and unframed canvases, crates and wooden benches, and the suspended sculpture of a figure with wings.
“To overgeneralize about a nation and say ‘These people shouldn’t come here’ is plainly racist, and it’s plainly wrong,” said Mr. Zahraei, 28, who is from Iran, one of the countries included in the executive order. Mr. Zahraei, who was in San Francisco for an art fair in January, said that under the proposed ban it would be impossible for him to return to the United States.
Laid out on the booth’s central table was an unframed landscape painting by the artist Sam Samiee, 28, who lives in Amsterdam and Tehran. Mr. Samiee said that his planned collaboration with a filmmaker in Los Angeles — artist talks, installations and other projects — would be much harder if he could no longer go there.
On the other side of the fair was a large booth by the Ayyam Gallery, which was founded in Damascus in 2006 and is now based here. The booth featured a solo show by Sadik Kwaish Alfraji, an Iraqi multidisciplinary artist who has been based in the Netherlands since 1996, and now has Dutch citizenship.
Covering the vast main wall was an old-fashioned-looking map of Baghdad made up of framed individual photogravures of the city’s districts. Seen from a distance, the map, “In Search of Lost Baghdad” (2017), has the overall shape of the bald and faceless male figure that Mr. Alfraji frequently uses to represent himself. A black bronze sculpture of that figure was also on display.
As for the proposed travel restrictions, which originally placed nationals of Iraq on the banned list but later removed them, Mr. Alfraji said he “felt pain,” because it was unfair to target a country that had been destroyed by nearly three decades of war, sanctions and conflict, which he said the United States played a big role in.
Mr. Alfraji, who has previously exhibited in the United States, said he would not return if he were invited again. “I don’t want to have a bad experience,” he said, adding that it would not be right to go if so many fellow Muslims were unable to.
Jouhayna Samawi, the Ayyam Gallery’s founding partner, said that although her son and daughter attend college in the United States, she would not have encouraged them to study there had she known that Mr. Trump would be elected. Ms. Samawi, who was born in Syria and is now a Swiss national, said that as a gallerist from the Middle East, she was disgusted by the idea of a travel ban.
