Our guide to cultural events in New York City for families with children and teenagers.
CARNEGIE KIDS: POLYGRAPH LOUNGE in the Resnick Education Wing, Carnegie Hall (March 26, noon and 2 p.m.). Polygraph Lounge is not a place, but if it were, it would probably be unlike anything you’ve ever seen. Consisting of Mark Stewart and Rob Schwimmer, it specializes in instruments unlike anything you’ve ever heard: the nose flute, the slide-whistle organ, saxophones made of plumbing. Small children can hear them — and try them — at this free concert, but it’s best to arrive early: Seating is first come first served.
‘EXCEPTIONAL EXPRESSIONS’ at the Morgan Library & Museum (March 25, 11 a.m.-1 p.m.). Some of those exceptional expressions will be more than a century old; others will be created on the spot. That’s because the Morgan has invited young people — the recommended ages are 8 through 14 — to investigate Emily Dickinson and then write their own poetry. Matthew Burgess, a poet and professor, will lead the workshop, which will start with a half-hour investigation of the Morgan’s show “I’m Nobody! Who are you? The Life and Poetry of Emily Dickinson,” which reveals Dickinson as more of a firebrand than a recluse. The rest of the time will be devoted to writing verse and creating art for its display.
FILM FORUM JR. at Film Forum (March 26, 11 a.m.). The whole point of this Sunday series is to introduce young movie fans to classic cinema. Now it will open its spring season by also introducing them to classic rockers. The film is Richard Lester’s “A Hard Day’s Night,” the 1964 comedy — restored, remixed and remastered — in which the Beatles essentially play themselves, fleeing fans, romping outdoors and hurling quips at reporters. It will be screened with “The Running Jumping & Standing Still Film,” a briefer monument to silliness that Mr. Lester made with Peter Sellers in 1959.
JUST WATER FAMILY DAY at St. Paul’s Chapel, Trinity Church Wall Street (March 25, 10 a.m.-4 p.m.). The title of this event doesn’t mean that water is ordinary; it refers to water justice, the concept that access to clean water is a human right. Children can learn about this essential resource and the impact of climate change at this free program, which will include two science shows from the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia: “Water, Water, Water,” for preschoolers, at 10:30 a.m., and “How to Build a Storm: Weather,” for those in kindergarten through middle school, at noon. Other activities will include watercolor painting; pollution and flotation experiments; themed storytelling and music; and presentations by Salva Dut, the founder of Water for South Sudan.
‘PAW PATROL LIVE! RACE TO THE RESCUE’ at the Theater at Madison Square Garden (through March 26).  They’re the canine cast of the Nick Jr. animated television series “PAW Patrol,” and they’re taking to the stage — in the form of costumed actors — in this musical. All young rescue dogs in training, they save the day when the mayor of their town, Adventure Bay, goes missing. Young audience members can contribute to the adventure as part of the PAW Patrol Cheer Team.
‘WEATHER OR NOT, THAT IS THE QUESTION’ at the Children’s Museum of the Arts (through May 20). Who hasn’t at some point cursed or crowed over the weather? In this exhibition, it has inspired eight contemporary artists to make sometimes stormy statements. For “Presidential Commemorative Smog Plates,” Kim Abeles left dinner plates, each stenciled with an American president’s face, on her Los Angeles rooftop. The more she disapproved of a president’s environmental policies, the longer she let his plate accumulate grime. Virginia Wagner’s painting “After the Flood” contemplates climate change, and Suzanne Anker’s installation “Astroculture (Shelf Life)” addresses crop science. More fancifully, Matthew Albanese photographs meticulously assembled dioramas so they look like real meteorological phenomena. The forecast? Lots of family discussion.
