HAYS, Kan. — When taxpayer money for the arts started getting tight in Kansas, Brenda Meder began scrubbing toilets at the gallery she oversees here, rather than paying for custodial services. She cooked the finger food for receptions, instead of using a caterer. And she signed up more dues-paying members of the Hays Arts Council, a 49-year-old organization where she is the executive director and only full-time employee.
For Ms. Meder, a great purpose is at stake. There are the traveling performers’ visits to elementary schools that she arranges. The classes on stained glass and drawing. The quarterly art walks she organizes in the brick-paved downtown, where storefronts transform into makeshift galleries that draw hundreds of spectators from Hays and beyond.
And for the last six years, Ms. Meder has sustained all that without consistent financing from state and federal sources.
President Trump’s call last week to eliminate the National Endowment for the Arts prompted panic and outrage in major cities and other parts of America where public funds have sustained generations of artists. But in some ways, Mr. Trump is following a path laid in 2011 by Gov. Sam Brownback of Kansas when he defunded this state’s Arts Commission and left local organizations like Ms. Meder’s scrambling to find other sources of revenue.
Hays, a college town with about 21,000 residents, is a case study of how the arts can continue to thrive when public funds dry up. But it is also a cautionary tale of the sometimes-hidden costs.
Ms. Meder fears that artists in Kansas have become more siloed and less engaged with one another in recent years, as financing for conferences has become more elusive and eligibility for grant money has fluctuated. Since Mr. Brownback’s cuts in 2011, some public money has returned to Kansas, but arts advocates here say they have learned to forge ahead — and in some cases scale back their ambitions — without always counting on that assistance.
“We’re gaining ground, but yet we’re staying even,” said Toni Smith, the executive director of the Baker Arts Center in Liberal, Kan., who credited increased donor support for helping maintain programs.
Hays has weathered the uncertainty better than many places. Generations here have enjoyed band concerts and theater on the campus of Fort Hays State University, and the Arts Council claims to be the oldest arts-supporting organization of its type in Kansas. Both the city and county governments provide funding for the council, which has an annual budget of roughly $125,000, and residents of all political stripes cite the creative scene as a point of pride.
The board president of the Arts Council, Mike Morley, 47, is a registered Republican who voted for Mr. Trump in November. Ms. Meder, 60, is a Democrat who voted for Hillary Clinton.
Here in Ellis County, nearly 71 percent of voters favored Mr. Trump, part of his sweep of 103 of Kansas’s 105 counties. In interviews, some of those voters cited the president’s commitment to deregulation, their frustration with traditional politicians and concerns about government spending. But when it came to arts financing, the conversations were more nuanced among Trump voters. Some said they supported the proposed cuts, but others questioned whether eviscerating the endowment was the right approach.
Jacob Brubaker, a sophomore at Fort Hays State and a member of the College Republicans, said that the federal government should perhaps stop funding the arts eventually but that the drawdown should be gradual so that artists could find other money.
“The very last thing I want is to just eliminate these artistic opportunities for people at the high school and college level,” said Mr. Brubaker, a Trump voter who participated in school musicals while growing up on a farm outside Bird City, Kan., and who has attended performances during college. “Art just says so much about the culture of a county, a state, a country,” he added.
Dennis Schiel, an artist here who has paintings displayed in the Kansas Capitol and on the side of a downtown Hays building, also voted for Mr. Trump. He suggested that the endowment should be focused more on arts education but said targeting the agency for elimination was misguided.
“There are other, larger avenues they should be going after first,” said Mr. Schiel, a registered Democrat.
Arts supporters in Hays have managed to preserve most programs since the loss of state funds, sometimes with a frugal twist. Ms. Meder started asking schools to chip in to finance the outside performers she brings to the area, and she asked some of those artists to accept less money for their work. At Fort Hays State, corporate sponsors helped sustain a popular performance series when grant money became scarcer.
That loss of arts funding in Kansas was part of Mr. Brownback’s conservative makeover of state government, which included huge tax cuts that have led to years of missed revenue forecasts and budget deficits. When Mr. Brownback vetoed a $689,000 arts budget in 2011 and state money for the arts dried up, so did matching funds from the endowment, and Kansas’s membership in its regional affiliate, the Mid-America Arts Alliance. Ms. Meder, who has led the Hays Arts Council for 26 years, said that she had not applied for funds directly from N.E.A. but that the council had often benefited from federal money that passed through regional and state agencies.
Kansas eventually created a new state arts commission that awards some grants, but funding has been inconsistent. The state received matching funds from the endowment for 2017 of $637,000, but Kansas artists remain ineligible for grants from the Mid-America Arts Alliance.
Janis Lee, a Democrat who spent years representing a rural district in the Kansas Senate, said that midsize cities and large metropolitan areas often had the means to offset the lack of public funds. But many tiny towns across Kansas had few other options to draw regional or national performers, she said, or even to offer art classes in schools.
“You have a wholesale, gradual diminishing of that kind of activity for your community,” Ms. Lee said.
