WASHINGTON — In his final day of questioning at his Supreme Court confirmation hearings, Judge Neil M. Gorsuch continued to answer with practiced generalities on Wednesday, frustrating Democrats who seemed unable to rattle him or pin him down.
Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, said he was searching to find “a beating heart and an independent streak” behind Judge Gorsuch’s testimony.
After trying over a span of 20 hours over two days, Democrats were not able to move Judge Gorsuch off script. Instead, interest in the hearing seemed to wane, and many in the Capitol came to view a confirmation as inevitable.
Judge Gorsuch managed to endure as much by what he did not say as by what he did.
Most Supreme Court nominees are fairly reticent, but Democrats said Judge Gorsuch outdid the last two Republican appointees, Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. They gave their views on seminal Supreme Court decisions, said Senator Patrick Leahy, Democrat of Vermont.
The Supreme Court gave Senate Democrats a small gift on Wednesday, issuing a unanimous decision in a case on students with disabilities that rejected the approach Judge Gorsuch had taken in a different case.
The relationship between the two decisions was indirect, and Judge Gorsuch said he had merely followed precedent. But Democrats welcomed the opportunity to elicit answers from Judge Gorsuch about a specific Supreme Court decision, and they returned to the topic repeatedly.
At other points, senators probed Judge Gorsuch’s general judicial philosophy, notably his commitment to originalism, which tries to interpret the Constitution consistently with the understanding of those who drafted and adopted it.
“It’s selective originalism,” Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota, said of the nominee’s approach, accusing him of relying on “nonoriginalist judges to get to the outcome” in some preferred cases.
Ms. Feinstein asked where that approach left women and gays given the understanding of the 14th Amendment’s equal protection clause when it was ratified in 1868. Judge Gorsuch responded that he would respect precedents providing for constitutional protections for those and other groups. He later said he would do so even if the precedents had not themselves used an originalist approach to interpreting the Constitution.
Judge Gorsuch added that the intentions of those who adopted the amendment were irrelevant.
Even attempts to saddle Judge Gorsuch with President Trump’s baggage, including the president’s attacks on the judiciary, yielded little. Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, suggested that his Democratic colleagues were being hypocritical, citing their own criticisms of Judge Gorsuch.
“I just won five bucks,” Senator Ben Sasse, Republican of Nebraska, told the judge.
More often, Democrats sought to draw attention to bigger money in politics.
Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, Democrat of Rhode Island, argued that just as agencies could sometimes be captive to the industries they regulate, there was a danger that the Supreme Court could be captured by business interests.
“Nobody will capture me,” Judge Gorsuch responded.
Democratic senators, who had tried largely in vain to find a line of attack that sticks against Judge Gorsuch, appeared to sense an opening of sorts in Wednesday’s Supreme Court decision.
Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, quickly declared his intention to make an issue of the ruling.
Republican aides responded with talking points that Judge Gorsuch was not on the panel in the case and did not invent the relevant legal test. He was merely following binding precedent, they said.
Judge Gorsuch’s opinion for a unanimous three-judge panel came in a ruling against an autistic student whose parents sought reimbursement for his education under a federal law, the Individuals with Disability Education Act.
On Wednesday, Judge Gorsuch said he had merely applied a standard set out in a Supreme Court decision as interpreted by an earlier decision of his court, the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit in Denver.
At about the same time Judge Gorsuch was speaking, the Supreme Court handed down a unanimous decision saying the 10th Circuit had been wrong. All that was required from public school systems, the 10th Circuit had said, was a “more than de minimis” benefit.
Asked about the Supreme Court decision later on Wednesday, Judge Gorsuch said he had been bound by precedent in the opinion he had written.