INDIAN WELLS, Calif. — For Madison Keys, a long-awaited return paid quick dividends.
Playing her first tournament in five months after having surgery on her left wrist, Keys reached the fourth round of the BNP Paribas Open before falling, 6-4, 6-4, to 13th-seeded Caroline Wozniacki on Tuesday night.
Uncertain of how she might perform before the tournament began, Keys said she would leave the California desert content with the answers she found about her readiness to compete again.
Playing through persistent wrist pain, Keys, a right-hander who hits a two-handed backhand, still managed an impressive 2016 season: She made her top-10 debut, finished fourth at the Rio de Janeiro Olympics and qualified for the WTA Finals in Singapore, a round-robin tournament limited to the tour’s top eight finishers.
Dr. Richard Berger, an orthopedic surgeon at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., performed Keys’s operation in November after she returned from Singapore. Berger previously operated on the wrists of other tennis stars, including Juan Martín del Potro and Laura Robson.
Further buoying her, Keys reunited in the off-season with Lindsay Davenport, who had coached her through a breakout 2015 season. The two split at the end of that season, citing the strain on the schedule of Davenport, who is a mother of four young children and works as an analyst for the Tennis Channel.
This time, Davenport’s husband, Jon Leach, is not serving as a co-coach, meaning that Keys’s tennis will not again dominate dinner table conversations. Ola Malmqvist of the United States Tennis Association also coaches Keys, primarily from his base in Florida.
Keys, ranked ninth, said she took particular pride in being one of the few players in the upper echelons of women’s tennis with a female coach.
Keys, 22, has been heralded as a future champion since her early teens, and works to find a sustainable mix of hunger and calm.
The current landscape of women’s tennis may provide opportunities soon. When asked by the Tennis Channel to predict a winner for this tournament, Davenport said, she was struck by the openness of the field. Many of the game’s most dominant players are currently absent. Serena Williams withdrew from Indian Wells and the Miami Open citing knee issues; Victoria Azarenka is on maternity leave, hoping to return in the summer; Maria Sharapova is serving out the final month of a suspension; and Petra Kvitova is recovering from a knife attack.
Angelique Kerber, who will return to the No. 1 ranking next week in Williams’s absence, has struggled this season, compiling a 9-6 record in six tournaments.
After a meeting of Keys’s team to discuss her goals, they found that their patience extends into next season, Davenport said.
Davenport noted that it was a big deal just for Keys to play one match at Indian Wells.
As Keys worked to rehabilitate her wrist in the off-season, she also developed her voice, slowly but steadily becoming more vocal on social media, hoping to cut through the caustic climate of discourse after the presidential election.
“This was kind of my time where I was kind of like, you know what? I’m going to say how I feel,” she said.
Keys is particularly inspired by Chrissy Teigen, a model who is frequently outspoken on Twitter. Keys said her friend Nicole Gibbs, another young tennis player, had encouraged her to become more political, but Keys said she tried to keep her messages purely positive.
Keys has taken that message on the road, speaking on behalf of the organization Fearlessly Girl, a women’s leadership program, to hundreds of high school girls in her hometown, Rock Island, Ill.
