Anheuser-Busch InBev’s flair for cutting costs is being blunted by complexity. The megabrewer now expects annual savings from its merger with SABMiller to reach $2.8 billion, 14 percent more than an earlier estimate. Yet the upgrade is significantly smaller than with previous purchases. Taking on bigger targets is testing its approach.
The beer company revealed on Thursday that it had identified an additional $350 million in savings from increased purchasing clout and its now-famous process of rebuilding budgets from scratch. Before the deal, AB InBev had forecast synergies of at least $1.4 billion. The new figure also includes $1 billion of cost cuts that SABMiller had already promised and were not dependent on the deal.
The company, headed by Carlos Brito, the chief executive, has a track record of exceeding its cost-cutting promises. When InBev combined with the Budweiser brewer Anheuser-Busch back in 2008, its initial estimate of $1.5 billion of annual savings increased to $2.25 billion within eight months. The group’s purchase of Modelo in 2012 followed the same script, with synergies at the Mexican brewer quickly revised to $1 billion a year from $600 million.
SABMiller has created fewer positive surprises. That is partly because it was already a lean operation. It is also a more complex business, spanning multiple markets rather than mostly operating in a single country like Anheuser-Busch or Modelo. Scale has also brought heightened scrutiny over competition and has forced AB InBev to sell assets. Synergies may have taken a small hit from Coca-Cola’s decision to exercise its right to buy back AB InBev’s stake in the soft drink maker’s Africa bottling business, which came as part of the SABMiller deal.
AB InBev took charge only in October, so its managers could conceivably draw more from the keg. And the motivation for the deal was as much about gaining access to new growth markets as cost savings. Still, investors should take note. The investment firm 3G Capital, which helped create AB InBev and Kraft Heinz, is looking for new targets in the food business after its failed try at Unilever. Bigger and more complex targets show budgeting has its limits.