WASHINGTON — Friday’s collapse of Republican plans to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act has broad implications not only for the nation’s health care system, but also for the fate of President Trump’s ambitious agenda in his young and chaotic presidency.
On Capitol Hill, the failure of newly empowered Republicans to make good on their biggest campaign-year promise exposes the deep divisions that remain in the party. It also, importantly, raises profound dangers ahead of next year’s midterm elections.
Taken together, the lessons for the new president and his Republican allies are difficult but necessary if they want to succeed in making progress during the next three and a half years.
The most obvious result from the Republican failure on Friday is the immediate survival of the Affordable Care Act. Those who want to buy plans from HealthCare.gov can continue to do so. Families covered by Medicaid will still have insurance. People who saw premiums rise or choices shrink will remain frustrated. And the eight-year political war over the law will continue to be waged.
Democrats crowed when Republicans pulled back their repeal. But the celebrating will be temporary, as Representative Elijah E. Cummings of Maryland noted. “Americans can breathe a small sigh of relief,” he said in a statement, “for now.” The Republican assault on President Barack Obama’s health care law may continue even without a legislative overhaul as administration officials continue to pick away at its regulatory underpinnings.
The Affordable Care Act was always designed to require continuing support to succeed. Each year, the federal government mounts an advertisement campaign to boost enrollment — something that may no longer happen in a Trump administration. Other regulatory changes could cause problems for the stability of the insurance marketplaces.
The dangers to the law were underscored by Mr. Trump himself, moments after Republicans abandoned their legislative efforts. “When it explodes, they’ll come to me to make a deal,” Mr. Trump told The New York Times’s Maggie Haberman. Any hope that Friday’s experience might encourage Mr. Trump to work with Democrats to fix the law’s shortcomings died with that statement.
Mr. Trump won the White House by selling an image. He told people he was the dealmaker who would get his way — with foreign leaders, chief executives and with Congress — through the strength of his personality and his negotiating skills.
That, more than anything, was undercut by Friday’s failure. Having fundamentally misread the likelihood of success, Mr. Trump and his advisers fully embraced the health care legislation. While the president never slapped his name on the bill, he happily accepted the personal challenge of getting it passed.
Having invested his political capital in the outcome of the legislation, Mr. Trump’s personal brand has been diminished, according to Republicans who watched the health care debate.
“This is a moment of time, when you’re skulking around the family chambers in the White House residence, where you take stock of where you are,” said Steve Schmidt, a Republican strategist who helped run Senator John McCain’s presidential campaign in 2008.
“It’s a startling setback,” Mr. Schmidt added.
Mr. Trump and the Republican Party are moving on. Having spent 64 of his first 100 days pursuing an ultimately futile effort to overhaul health care, the president now must move quickly to try to make good on his other promises — tax reform, a border wall and investment in infrastructure.
That may all be harder now. Lawmakers who disagree with Mr. Trump have seen him buckle in the face of pressure. And Republican lawmakers may be inspired by the success of the Freedom Caucus — which wanted to defeat the health care legislation — to fight for their own interests.
That may be particularly dangerous during an effort to overhaul the nation’s tax code. That process is famously difficult, with every change producing winners and losers, all of them ably represented by powerful lobbies.
If tax reform becomes defined just as “big tax cuts,” the president might find a more unified Republican Party on Capitol Hill. But if he seeks fundamental changes to the kinds of deductions and credits that have been added over decades, he may soon face similar intraparty disagreements.
Steven T. Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, said at an event sponsored by Axios on Friday that he thought tax reform would be “simpler” than passing health reform. But lobbyists from almost every industry have been busily chipping away at parts of the proposal that Mr. Ryan drafted last summer and that powerful groups such as the billionaire Koch brothers, the Club for Growth and the National Retail Federation have come out against.
Representative Kevin Brady, the Republican chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, is hopeful nonetheless.
“This made a big challenge more challenging but it’s not insurmountable, so we’re going to pivot straight to this and just roll forward,” Mr. Brady said on Fox News.
But even as Mr. Trump and Republicans try to turn to other agenda items, the 2018 midterm elections loom large on the horizon.
Most presidents face losses during their first midterm elections, as voters take their first opportunity to express their opinions of his presidency. And few have had the kind of difficult first year that Mr. Trump has already endured, including approval ratings that are in the 30s — much lower than most of his predecessors.
Republican lawmakers will head home for spring break next month to explain the health reform failure. Conservatives may brag that they prevented something worse. But many voters will struggle to understand why a repeal didn’t happen with Republicans in full control in Washington.
The best electoral hope for most Republican lawmakers may be to move away quickly from Friday’s loss.
But election season — a time when legislative success is usually hard to achieve — will come more rapidly than they like. Lawmakers often say legislating is only really possible in the first 200 days of a president’s term.
“The challenge there is that for a lot of big-ticket legislative items, you have a very small window to make big gains on those initiatives,” said Kevin Madden, a Republican strategist and former top adviser to Mitt Romney, the party’s 2012 Republican nominee.
