Caleb Swanigan, Purdue’s dominant power forward, is good at jumping. On the basketball court. Off the basketball court. In so many ways, it is hard to count them. It is also hard to imagine them, given where he came from.
At 13, Swanigan was 6 feet 2 inches and 360 pounds, a man-child fighting what appeared to be a losing battle against obesity. He was homeless and living in shelters with his mother and siblings. His father was struggling with an addiction to crack cocaine. By then, Swanigan, whose nickname is Biggie, had bounced from school to school, maybe four middle schools and nearly 10 elementary schools.
His first big leap came when he moved to Indiana from Utah to live with the sports agent Roosevelt Barnes, who became his legal guardian and adopted him. His next leap came when he lost more than 100 pounds and became one of the best high school basketball players in the country.
He graduated from high school in three years and found himself at Purdue, where he then took yet another leap — into life as a college freshman turned N.B.A. prospect. He had grown to 6-9, but he weighed 250 pounds and became an exercise fanatic, making friends with the StairMaster to keep his body lean. He averaged 10.2 points and 8.3 rebounds and, after making the Big Ten’s all-freshman team, was expected by many to leave college for the N.B.A.
He did not. Now 19, he is the Big Ten’s player of the year, and the driving force for fourth-seeded Purdue (26-7), which won its N.C.A.A. tournament opener, 80-70, over Vermont (29-6) on Thursday night. And he has shown that marinating in college for an extra season might have been his best choice yet.
Coach Matt Painter refers to Swanigan’s statistics as “video-game numbers.” He is recording double-doubles as if they were layups, averaging 18.5 points and 12.6 rebounds a game entering Thursday. He also has made nearly 80 percent of his free throws and 43.1 percent of his 3-point attempts.
His teammates said he went from being a great player to being a phenomenal one partly because he finally let down his guard.
