What books are currently on your night stand?
What’s the best classic novel you recently read for the first time?
For a month last summer I sat on a garden bench under a cherry tree in France, and very slowly read Leo Tolstoy’s “Anna Karenina.” All I can say is that it was an utterly transporting experience. I fell in love with Anna, and she joined my private pantheon of tragic 19th-century heroines: Thomas Hardy’s Tess of the d’Urbervilles, Gustave Flaubert’s Madame Bovary, Theodor Fontane’s Effi Briest and Henry James’s Isabel Archer (in “The Portrait of a Lady”). As a biographer, these books simply remind me of the matchless power of great fiction to create a permanent world and a unique life, that nonfiction can never really quite reach (though Elizabeth Gaskell’s biography of Charlotte Brontë comes close). It’s a humbling, but also uplifting, experience. I can still taste the cherries.
What’s your favorite book no one else has heard of?
“On the Road,” by Jack Kerouac. Yes, I know, I know. But very few readers nowadays can have heard of it as I did, in 1960, the book that made me fall in love with America aged 15.
What makes for a good biography?
Call it the imaginative handshake. The power to transport the reader to another time, another place, and another identity with absolute conviction; and then make them come away with the sensation “I really met that person — and I know how they felt about the world — and it was worth it.” The first writer to show me how this could be done was Michael Holroyd, with his “Lytton Strachey” (1968) set in England mostly before and after the First World War, and recreating the whole lost world and sensibility of Bloomsbury. For me it has been done many times since, and in many different ways: by the big epic of Robert Caro’s Lyndon Johnson; or the vivid celebration of Hilary Spurling’s Matisse; or the exquisite intellectual portrait of Hermione Lee’s Virginia Woolf; or the weird street encounter of Alexander Masters’s “Stuart: A Life Backwards”; or the airborne glamour of Stacy Schiff’s “Saint-Exupéry: A Biography”; or the zingy, sexy bohemian portrait of Edmund Gordon’s “The Invention of Angela Carter”; or the haunted journey into the labyrinthine inner world of an English opium eater recounted by Frances Wilson in “Guilty Thing: A Life of Thomas De Quincey.” The possibilities of good biography are so rich!
What do you read when you’re working on a book? And what kind of reading do you avoid while writing?
How do you organize your books?
There are now so many that I keep them in several different places (and usually, it turns out, in the wrong place). There are ever-shifting shelves in my snug study-room hidden away in Norfolk, U.K., which includes everything ongoing. There are immaculately labeled boxes of research books in a nearby Big Yellow Storage facility, which contains nothing else but a kitchen chair and a yellow duster. There is my beloved Romantic poets and scientists library in my London flat (including the complete works of Keats, Shelley, Coleridge, Humphry Davy, Michael Faraday and Mary Somerville). In our stone cottage in France there are all the short stories of Guy de Maupassant and a heap of popular French biographies (Jacques Brel, Honoré de Balzac, Françoise Hardy, Gérard de Nerval, Jean-Paul Sartre, Françoise Sagan, Juliette Gréco, Simone de Beauvoir . . . ). And I cannot omit the wonderful London Library, St. James’s Square, which allows you to borrow up to 40 books for a fortnight or a month or (dare I say it) for a year on end. This feels like an endless extension of my own book shelves, going on like something out of a Borges story, forever.
A graphic novel by Sydney Padua, “The Thrilling Adventures of Lovelace and Babbage.” Yes, I’m serious. This is an absolutely inspired creation: a cartoon story — “(Mostly) True” — about two real-life Victorian scientists (Ada L. and Charles B.) who invented and described the first-ever computer. It’s hilariously funny and alarmingly clever, and the author presented it at a packed-out lecture hall at the Mathematical Institute, Oxford University.
Who is your favorite fictional hero or heroine?
The hero closest to my heart is the glorious and chaotic Sir Robert Merivel, royal physician to the king’s dogs, in the 17th-century court of the merry monarch Charles II. He appears in two of the historical novels of my beloved Rose Tremain, “Restoration” and “Merivel: A Man of His Time.” An inspired combustion of the witty, lascivious diarist Samuel Pepys and the passionate, self-questioning medical philosopher William Harvey, he is Tremain’s unique fictional creation. I feel I know him very well. So much so that Sir Robert somehow slipped into my strictly nonfiction book, “This Long Pursuit,” with one of his mischievous witticisms — though no one has noticed as yet.
What kind of reader were you as a child? Which childhood books and authors stick with you most?
I have no memory of actually reading my first and favorite book, but its images haunt me to this day, nearly 70 years later. It was Robert Louis Stevenson’s “A Child’s Garden of Verses,” and it was always read to me — or rather gently chanted — in a soft, slightly husky voice by my adored mother (herself half-Scottish and a published poet), sitting neatly at the end of my bed in her flowery print dress, on what seemed to me then like endless summer evenings, with the curtains drawn against the light outside, and the birds still singing in the echoing garden beyond, a situation vividly recaptured in the very first poem of Stevenson’s collection, “Bed in Summer”: “In winter I get up at night / And dress by yellow candlelight. / In summer, quite the other way, / I have to go to bed by day.. . . ” Many of the pieces that follow — “The Lamplighter,” “Where Go the Boats?,” “The Land of Counterpane,” “Windy Nights” — still sound in my head like songs, the words known by heart and locked safely into place by their sure, perfect rhymes. Paradoxically, all of them were promising to take me far away to a quite different place, a glowing open-air world of excitement and adventure, as in the poem “Travel”: “I should like to rise and go / Where the golden apples grow; — / Where below another sky / Parrot islands anchored lie, / And, watched by cockatoos and goats, / Lonely Crusoes building boats.. . . ” Which is exactly where the adult Stevenson himself went, and where years later I tried to follow in his footsteps.
You’re organizing a literary dinner party. Which three writers, dead or alive, do you invite?
I would be looking for some brilliant combination of intelligence, flirtation, scandal and intoxication. My first thought was the three Brontë sisters, but though Romantically fascinating, with haunting anecdotes of the real Heathcliff and the real Jane Eyre, this might be a rather grim, heartbreaking gathering in the end, and disturbed by the absent ghost of their tragic brother Branwell. My second thought was Scott Fitzgerald, Ernest Hemingway and their critical contemporary Edmund (Bunny) Wilson. This would be great fun, noisy, clever and argumentative, and certainly boozy enough, with lovely American memories of Paris in the 1920s, but it might end in fisticuffs, and again there would be the haunting absence of Zelda. My final choice settled on three reliable old Romantics. The first was my friend the mystic poet Coleridge, a talker extraordinaire, who would recite forgotten passages from “Kubla Khan” and tell us about his opium dreams, his difficult friend Wordsworth and his lost love Asra. He would be joined by his aristocratic contemporary Lord Byron, poet, wit, pinup and philanderer, the creator of “Don Juan,” who would embroider on his travels and his romances and tell us why Greece should still be free. The circle would be completed by the sparkling Germaine de Staël, the French beauty and bluestocking, who survived the French Revolution, defied that trumping political bully Napoleon, and wrote a glamorous European best seller, “Corinne.” All three did actually meet on at least one occasion and, with certain reservations, greatly admired each other, which would set a good tone as the first champagne was served. Although, it was said that Germaine shamefully outtalked the other two, and was inclined to set her cap alarmingly at her host.
Of your own books, which is your favorite or the most personally meaningful?
What do you plan to read next?
Andrew Motion’s new collection of poems, “Coming In to Land.” Motion was until recently the poet laureate of Great Britain, a close friend of Ted Hughes and Philip Larkin, and famed for his readings in schools and universities. Now he has completed his tenure, married and moved to America, I am keen to see how his wonderful lyric and elegiac gift has crossed the Atlantic and made the touch-down.