Mayor Bill de Blasio occasionally lectures his staff about what he calls teachable moments — mistakes they or others have made that provide an opportunity for reflection and a change of course.
But when federal and state prosecutors this week raised serious questions about his ethics while saying that his actions, including on behalf of campaign donors seeking favors with the city, did not rise to the level of a crime, Mr. de Blasio declared it a vindication. And he said nothing would change in the way his administration operated.
One former senior prosecutor said the bar had been high all along for proving a criminal case, given that campaign contributions are legal and neither Mr. de Blasio nor his aides had personally profited from the transactions. But that is different from being given a clean bill of health, the former prosecutor said, declining to comment on the record about his former colleagues’ case.
One former aide to Mr. de Blasio, Karen Hinton, came to his defense. Ms. Hinton said she expected that the mayor would make adjustments in how he handles donors. “I think he will make changes because he will not want to find himself in this situation ever again,” she said.
Mr. de Blasio’s fund-raising activities and the actions he may have taken on behalf of donors have been the target of multiple federal and state investigations for more than a year. The investigations have created a distraction, fostered a bunker mentality in City Hall and hampered the mayor in pursuing his agenda. On Thursday, federal prosecutors and the Manhattan district attorney’s office said they had decided a criminal case could not be brought against the mayor or anyone in his inner circle.
Joseph P. Viteritti, a professor of public policy at the City University of New York, said that the mayor was right when he said on Thursday that most New Yorkers were focused on their daily concerns rather than the details of the investigations into his fund-raising.
Mr. Viteritti said that in the absence of an indictment, he did not think that the ethics concerns raised by prosecutors would hurt the mayor’s re-election bid. Although he noted that Mr. de Blasio was now running on his own record rather than against the record of his predecessor.
Despite that, Mr. de Blasio insisted that prosecutors had absolved him and disagreed with the “characterizations” of his actions by prosecutors.
That provoked strong reaction from the mayor’s critics, who were quick to ask whether Mr. de Blasio had learned from the yearlong investigation.
Mr. Tusk has been one of the mayor’s most visible critics and had been trying to recruit a viable candidate to challenge his re-election. But after the prosecutor’s announcement, he said a second term seemed all but assured for Mr. de Blasio.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who often clashes with the mayor, echoed Mr. de Blasio’s desire to put the matter behind him. But he did so with a twist of the rhetorical knife typical of their rivalry, highlighting problems that the mayor has struggled to control.
Even without a slate of strong opponents, this year’s election means that there are political considerations at play in Mr. de Blasio’s public response.
But Mr. Lurie said that the ethical questions raised by prosecutors could hobble Mr. de Blasio’s national ambitions by soiling his reputation among Democratic Party insiders.
On Friday, Mr. de Blasio engaged in the usual mayoral duties on St. Patrick’s Day, marching in the parade on Fifth Avenue. Then, his conscience and schedule apparently clear, he boarded a plane for Florida.
But unlike one earlier this month, this Florida trip was not to raise money for his re-election. He would have no official events, his spokesman said. Instead, the mayor would be catching a spring training game of his beloved Boston Red Sox.