How Does Life Live?
“Where does the sun go? Can girls be robots? Why don’t worms have faces?” A little girl wants to know.
“So I’m going to ask you some things that you’ve asked me. And then I just need you to repeat them. O.K.?” O.K. “Um … how does life live?” How does life live? “Can girls be robots?” Can girls be robots? “Say that again, a bit louder.” CAN GIRLS BE ROBOTS! [melancholy piano] Why is fire called fire? Where is winter? Why do we have to sleep? How many dogs are in this world? Where do ants come from? Why are some things special? Why don’t worms have faces? Why is the sun in my eyes? Why does everybody not like pink — just black? What do princesses do? What do you want to be when you grow up? Do girls have vaginas?  How do you make water? Why you you like beau — beautiful things so much?  Are you old, Mom? Why are the leaves falling down? Will I have another birthday? Why doesn’t everybody know me? What are you talking about? What’s a conversation? Why do people laugh at me? Why is she mean? Why. Are. You. On. Your. Phone?  What is mean and nice? What is kind? Do you love me? Why are kids small? Where did you find me when I was a baby? Why does the heart beat? Why do my feet sparkle? What is bacteria? Does it hurt you? How does food … turn into poo? How do you be a mermaid, Mom? Why can’t we see angels? Can you turn me into a fairy? Do blue butterflies eat parts of the sky? Do worms cry? Do bugs die? Why did the birds fly away? Why are we humans? Why do we eat animals? Why do trees just stand there? Why is it night time when people are awake? Why does the Earth move? What is atmosphere? Did God make the ocean? Where does the Sun go? Why is the world so messy? Why do we all have cars? What is a molecule? What does ‘extinct’ mean? What is power? What is history? Why are we going to die? How do people get killed? What is fragile? When did the world — When did the world even start? Mom, why are we starting again? “Just one more time.” What is history? How does life live? “I can’t hear that.” [girl laughing] [girl laughing] “What?” How does life live?
Why do children ask so many questions? How should grown-ups nurture that curiosity? And, what role should asking questions and seeking answers play in our lives as we get older?
1. Watch the four-minute film above. While you watch, you might take notes using our Film Club Double-Entry Journal (PDF) to help you remember specific moments.
4. After you have posted, try reading back to see what others have said, then respond to someone else by posting another comment. Use the “Reply” button or the @ symbol to address that student directly.
For over a decade I was a television producer who made independent autobiographical films on the side, but after my second child was born in 2007 with severe disabilities it was impossible to go back to TV work; the hours were too long and I needed to be there for him. However, when he was 3 I went back to school for an M.F.A. in film production and to make a documentary about our family’s experience of having a child with special needs. It’s called “Softening”; a short version of it titled “My Brother, Teddy” became an Op-Doc. The experience renewed my interest in making work about family; at least, it affirmed the value of it.
Having children has transformed my creative life in ways that constantly surprise me. Sometimes I wish I could approach the world from a less personal perspective, but I can’t. Instead I try to make work that captures the poetry of the everyday and finds universal themes through my family’s experiences. Since “Softening,” I’ve been slowly working on a film about my daughters: Emma, 13, and my youngest child, Willow, who is 5.
In 2015, I spent a week at a film residency on a farm outside Toronto with my family. The cottage where we were staying was next to a huge gravel pit. Using an old 16 mm Bolex camera, I shot the girls playing there and hand-processed the film myself. I also recorded Willow, who was 3 at the time, reciting some of her questions. More recently, when I finally found time to make the film, I recorded her asking a new batch of her questions.
Kids are endlessly curious and ask about how life works, the ineffable mystery of it, all the time. Their questions reflect that time between innocence and experience as they try to figure out who they are in relation to the world around them.
One day the flow of questions will stop, but of course even as adults we’re still searching for the answers.
• Our next Film Club will take place on Friday, March 31.