Good morning. There are times in New York City when the air is cold and clammy and the sky low and everyone appears twitchy, anxious, hearts pounding, minds racing, on the verge of panic. It’s just you, though. You might be in a field in Nebraska, in a strip mall outside Chicago, on a highway encircling Washington, on the hills of San Francisco, listening to the news, looking for parking, wondering what’s the point. Black dogs are everywhere, biting. There is no better time to cook.
Regina Schrambling wrote a recipe for just such a state back in the dark days that followed the attacks of 9/11: beef stew with Dijon mustard and cognac. “Long before there were antidepressants,” she wrote at the time, “there was stew.” So maybe give her recipe a run this weekend as a kind of meditation, labor therapy over the stove.
Or you could try your hand at a cake. It is hard to be miserable, making and eating Melissa Clark’s recipe for a coconut layer cake — though if you’re nervous about the frosting, we have a detailed instructional guide to cake frosting to help.
Have you ever made fresh pasta? You could this weekend, then use the result to make Melissa’s recipe for lemony pasta with chickpeas and parsley. Use canned chickpeas. You’ve earned that right.
You could braise a duck just as if you were working in a wet kitchen in the back of a condominium in Singapore, happy in your work: Cheryl Lu-Lien Tan’s recipe, adapted by Francis Lam, is shiok, as the Singlish expression has it, pleasure pure and sweet. Serve with white rice and chile sauce.
Make pizza. Make pancakes. Fry chicken. Bake sugar cookies and take them down to the library to give to the clerks, thank them for their service, all those dumb requests met, favors answered, information found.
Now, in other matters, this is an astonishingly creepy read in New York magazine about the modern workplace. I’m excited to put the new “Field Guide to Long Island Sound” to use soon, as birds and striped bass return to the waters.   Watch him work. Then get into the kitchen. We’re all capable of more than we think.