Like the personalities inside the mind of David Haller, the superhero and horror genres coexist in a way that’s difficult to untangle. Superman, the ur-superhero invented by the Jewish-American creative team of Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster, has often been linked by scholars (though never by Siegel and Shuster themselves) to the myth of the golem. (“Frankenstein” author Mary Shelley is said to have been inspired by golem as well, although she never said so herself.) The mild-mannered scientist Bruce Banner turns into a raging behemoth as the Incredible Hulk, an echo of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. Some heroes have powers that are outright demonic in nature, from Etrigan the Demon to the flaming-skull cyclist, Ghost Rider. “Blade,” the 1998 film about a vampiric hunter of the undead was the key precursor to the modern era of superheroic pop-culture hegemony.
In other words, the swashbuckling and world-saving are nice and all, but sometimes a good superhero story just wants to scare the pants off you.
The dread and terror that suffuse the episode take two forms. The first, owed largely to the deft and unnerving acting by Dan Stevens, is the dawning realization that David has turned from schizophrenic to sadist, even as his powers have increased from impressive to godlike. The second is a growing onslaught by the devil’s many manifestations, culminating in its full-on stalking of and assault on David’s girlfriend, Syd, in the placid white room he created as their safe space.
The first approach proves more effective than the second. As these recaps have frequently argued, Stevens has a face, a frame and a charisma that are better suited for boldness — and even badness — than for timidity. Naturally, he makes the most of David’s transition to suave seducer and cocky killer. The bedroom “by a beach” that he mentally constructs in the astral plane so that he and Syd can finally touch looks like something out of an air freshener commercial or a music video for a sexy ’90s R&B slow-jam — a mocking parody of his and Syd’s romantic ambitions, symbolized by the insects crawling all over the dish of strawberries delivered by his mind’s version of room service. “They say the brain is the largest erogenous zone,” he coos as they clinch.
But he’s truly at his worst when he and his sister return to their childhood home, where she quickly realizes something is very, very wrong with her baby brother. “I wanna know your secret,” he suddenly says, smirking. “I can smell it, see.” (Turns out he was adopted; in the Marvel comics by Chris Claremont and Bill Sienkiewicz, his birth father is the powerful telepath and founder of the X-Men, Professor Charles Xavier.) As Amy faces frightening glimpses of his alternate personalities, he switches over to bathetic pleading, reminiscent of Jack Nicholson in “The Shining”: “Please. My whole life is a lie. I just need to know … who am I?” The insincerity is skin-crawling; David may be a lot of things, but insincere is not one of them, so this is our surest sign yet that someone, or something, else is in control.
And in this episode, we learn exactly who or what that is. “The devil with the yellow eyes,” who haunts David’s memories and threatens those who probe them, is a disembodied mutant consciousness that attached itself to the powerful psychic when he was just a baby. It is capable of taking many shapes, including David’s loudmouth psych-ward pal, Lenny (Aubrey Plaza, whose wide-eyed intensity is too much of a constant for her to succeed as the monster as she’s supposed to here); her male counterpart, Benny; and David’s imaginary childhood dog, King. It can also erase David’s memories of its presence outright.
Its favorite form, however, is the obese, grinning, yellow-skinned demon we’ve seen with increasing frequency as the season has progressed. In this episode, camera glitches and audio distortion mark his presence — visual and sonic signatures he shares with Eric Knudsen’s internet-horror phenomenon Slender Man. But in many ways he’s Slender Man’s Bizarro version: fat instead of stick-thin, leering instead of faceless, talkative instead of mute, dressed in a tattered suit instead of a weirdly dapper one, slowly strolling around in full view instead of traveling via blink-and-you’ll-miss-it appearances and disappearances.
But the devil is in the details, and the details of the devil are drab. It’s true that individual moments involving the creature manage to frighten: its infestation of David’s white room as a presence that makes the bathroom glow red, or sudden shots of its dog incarnation that make it seem as monstrous as Cujo, or the heat-vision security footage that shows the glowing and glowering thing where David himself should be. But the beast itself is less uncanny than merely … unpleasant. You wouldn’t want to bump into him in a dark alley — or, as Syd is, to be stalked around a bedroom while your psychic boyfriend screams in powerless rage. The more we actually see him, though, the less menacing he becomes. 
He’s a fundamental miscalculation on the part of the filmmakers, akin to the overbaked Radiohead music cue that accompanies David’s friends when they uncover the slaughter at Division 3, or the casting of a wry comic talent like Plaza as an uninspired manic-pixie-nightmare-girl. And yet the episode’s tense climactic set piece is innovative and deftly paced: a wordless infiltration of David’s house by the rescue team, which culminates in an assassination attempt by the merciless mutant-hunter, the Eye, and a reality shift through David’s white room into an asylum where he and his fellow mutants find themselves under the tender mercies of “Doctor” Lenny.
It’s not just superheroes and horror that coexist on the show and among David’s multiple personalities: The good show and the shaky one share a head space as well — ours. I’m more anxious to see who wins that fight than the one between the devil and David Haller.