The Congressional Budget Office calculates billions of dollars of cost savings to the federal government with the Republican health care bill. Sorry, but where is the cost calculation for the millions who will be sicker without insurance and use hospitals and emergency rooms anyway? Someone is going to pay for it. Or will we leave our ill and frail at the doorstep of a hospital and hope for the best?
SUZANNE SMYTHE, ESSEX, CONN.
In light of Republican attempts to delegitimize the Congressional Budget Office scoring of the Republican health care bill, it is worth noting that Keith Hall, the current director of the C.B.O., was appointed by this Republican-majority Congress less than two months after the party took control of both houses in 2015. At the time he was praised and strongly promoted by the current secretary of health and human services, then-Representative Tom Price.
The writer, a doctor, is a clinical professor of medicine at Weill Cornell Medical College.
Paul Krugman is right that Speaker Paul Ryan does not deserve his reputation as a serious policy wonk.
Is it really possible that Mr. Ryan does not even know the underlying principle of insurance? Everyone at risk pays into an insurance fund. Enough healthy people need to contribute to the risk pool without using services themselves so it has enough money to pay for the sick or injured person’s care.
Since everyone has a probability of needing care, health insurance has value for all. What people buy with insurance is peace of mind. 
Are the Democrats going to mimic the Republicans by spending their years out of office doing nothing about health care? This is the time to work together to come up with proposals to fix the problems with the Affordable Care Act. Assuming that the Republican proposals do not pass, the Democrats should be ready with some ideas. It is apparent that the act needs major improvements.
The Republican proposals don’t address the real problems, and people’s lives are in the balance. Perhaps behind the curtains, Democrats and Republicans should quietly work together for a program that will do its best to cover the most people.
Thanks to “Wealthy Would Get Big Tax Cut Under Affordable Care Act Repeal Plan” (news article, March 11), it is now clear that one of the main reasons the Republicans are so rabidly driven to repeal the act is to cut taxes on the wealthy.
I — and probably most Americans — did not realize that part of the funding of the act came from taxing the richest 1 percent. Now the light shines. So the repeal of the Affordable Care Act will do two things: take more money from the middle class as it pays more for health care and increase the wealth of the richest 1 percent.
Taken together, repeal of the act will further widen the gap between the rich and the poor. That is not a good direction for our country.
LA CRESCENT, MINN.
The writer is a pediatrician.
Do I have this right? Republicans in Congress want to give mentally ill people access to firearms but want to limit their access to mental health coverage under Medicaid? Just checking.
MARK STEIN, LARCHMONT, N.Y.