“Change is not always bad. Change can be good.” So said Dries Van Noten before his 100th show.
He was referring to his own milestone, and the need to move on, to mix things up a bit, to turn the page on one chapter and start another. Still, it’s kind of a funny statement for a fashion person to make. At least when you think about all the complaining that has gone on over the last few years thanks to the upheaval caused by designers’ leaving (or being forced to leave) houses like a warp-speed version of a snake shedding its skin.
Was Mr. Van Noten just putting a positive spin on the situation? Magical thinking? Perhaps. Though he is a designer who has always dealt in reality.
The old order is in flux in ways that go far beyond clothes; orthodoxies are being overturned practically every day (and executive orders issued). You can’t really deny it. And given that fashion is partly premised on change — observing it, reflecting it — if designers can’t make it seem like a palatable situation, what chance is there for the rest of us?
For Mr. Van Noten, there were no rose-colored glasses involved. He did it by learning from history (his own) and deliberately trying not to repeat it.
Using signature prints from his earliest collection through the most recent seasons — a paisley from fall 1997, an ikat from spring 2010, a Chinese dragon motif from fall 2012, a chintzy rose from spring 2000, to name a few — he superimposed Pop Art graphics on top to create a conversation between past and future, both in the clothes and via the woman who wore them.
Like, for example, in a buttoned-up oversize man’s wool coat (men’s wear is everywhere this season) with big split-toned sequined spheres on the hem, over a crisp white shirt. Or an iridescent metallic blazer over a long beige turtleneck and cropped bronze culottes. Or a beaded flapper tank top woven onto a thin shirt of tulle tucked into slouchy white jeans, arms draped in a lavish fake fur stole. In their multilayered dichotomy, they were both familiar and not at all.
Which is not a bad way to describe where we are at this particular moment in time, when you think about it.
Certainly, it was more effective than the proposal at Rochas, where Alessandro Dell’Acqua seems to be stuck in a rut of 1940s pastels, kitschy logos (this time in the form of rhinestone “R”s on sweaters, belts and shoes) and zebra striping — which is to say, bits from this decade, and bits from that decade. Remixed to be sure, but nevertheless too literal to look modern.
He’s just spinning his wheels. Clare Waight Keller, however, is out of here — or at least out of Chloé.
In her last show for the brand that she has steered for six years (she is moving on, though to do what and where has not yet been revealed), Ms. Waight Keller toggled between two poles: sweet short 1960s silhouettes in psychedelic prints and filmy fabrics and elongated, meaty tailoring with a military air.
“I was interested in the whole idea of morphing from one dreamscape world into another, because I feel like we are going through that transition now in the world,” she said backstage before the show, surrounded by jostling photographers and posing models.
So she did. What looked like ornate William Morris wallpapers on little crepe dresses with floppy bows at the neck hid magic mushrooms, swirling black and white sorted itself out into profiles from afar, mohair was rainbow-striped, leather pinafores lacquered, and trousers were slung low on the hips, cut generously through the leg, and gathered at the ankle.
Shoes were low and squared-heeled, and there were only two bag shapes. Indeed, lots of outfits came with no handbags at all. At the end, the audience rose in a standing ovation to pay homage to her tenure, and gold squares of confetti drifted down from backstage.
Wait — hang on a minute. Almost no bags?
Turning point. Told you.