Anyone wanting to invest in the parent company of Snapchat now has an opportunity to do something that early investors were unable to do: buy shares for less than they cost last week on their first day of trading.
After tumbling 12 percent Monday, shares of the company, Snap Inc., fell an additional 8 percent in early trading Tuesday, to $21.91.
Snap priced its initial public offering of 200 million shares at $17 each on Wednesday. Shares opened at $24 on Thursday and closed at $24.48, a 44 percent jump from the offering price the company had set.
But industry analysts grew leery of the slowing user growth the app experienced last year.
The initial public offering of Snap, which is based in Los Angeles, was the most eagerly awaited arrival since Twitter entered the market in 2013.
In a recent filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Snap said its app had 158 million daily users in its fourth quarter, up 48 percent from the prior-year period. But Wall Street has become skittish about future growth.
The app’s rate of user growth slowed during 2016, with just five million new users in the final quarter of the year. In the fourth quarter of 2015, the app had added 13 million.
Snap blamed the slowing growth late in the year on technical problems, saying the launch of several products and the release of multiple updates had hurt the performance of its app.
Social media companies have had mixed success since their initial public offerings. Where Facebook has soared, Twitter has struggled to find its way.
Facebook, which debuted on Wall Street in 2012, has had its ad revenue and its user base grow quickly. Twitter, which had its initial public offering in 2013, has experienced stalling revenue growth, and since the return of its co-founder Jack Dorsey, the company has cut costs and shuffled its leadership.
Twitter is now valued at $11 billion while Facebook is valued at $395 billion.
Snap, upon its public offering, became more valuable than stalwarts like American Airlines, Macy’s and Xerox.