We know already that the 2017 baseball season will be different, because we know what we’re missing. Gone are the soothing soundtrack of Vin Scully and the stylish slugging of David Ortiz. The persistent misery of the Chicago Cubs has gone poof. And we won’t have Ol’ A-Rod to kick around anymore, either.
But fear not. Here are six baseball men who’ve done it all, and still want to stay on the stage. They come from Japan and Ecuador, Canada and the Dominican Republic, California and North Carolina. They are the active leaders in hits, homers, strikeouts, games as an umpire, years in the broadcast booth and years as a major league coach.
They have seen the sport evolve, with home runs and strikeouts continuing to rise. Last season, a record 111 players hit at least 20 homers, while pitchers struck out 21.1 percent of opposing batters, the highest rate in history. That’s a whole lot of balls soaring over fences or being missed completely. All or nothing, boom or bust.
The folks depicted here – the Miami Marlins outfielder Ichiro Suzuki, the Los Angeles Dodgers broadcaster Jaime Jarrin, the Arizona Diamondbacks coach Dave McKay, the Los Angeles Angels slugger Albert Pujols, the Yankees left-hander C.C. Sabathia and the umpire Joe West — share an abiding love of the game, even as it changes. Serving it at the highest level continues to invigorate them.
In what other field could the master craftsman of his generation fail as often as Ichiro Suzuki? Across a quarter-century of baseball seasons, in Japan and in the majors, his batting average is .324. That sounds good, but consider this: he has exactly 9,000 hitless at-bats.
At 43 years old, after so many thousands of hits, Suzuki has no desire to stop chasing the unattainable. Even now, as a part-time outfielder for the Miami Marlins, he approaches every day as he always has.
Suzuki arrived in 2001 as the first Japanese position player to also be a star in the majors. In each of his first 10 seasons with the Seattle Mariners, he made the All-Star team, won a Gold Glove, hit .300 and collected 200 hits. Yet only last season, when he finally crossed the 3,000-hit threshold in the majors, did he feel widespread recognition of his skills.
Suzuki has hit only two home runs in two seasons with Miami, and just 114 for his career. Yet his raw power, saved mostly for batting practice, is so impressive that Giancarlo Stanton, the muscular Marlins right fielder, said Suzuki could have been a slugger if he chose to tailor his game that way.
Instead, he became the antithesis of the modern plodder who slows down today’s game with a so-called three-true-outcome approach (home run, strikeout or walk). For Suzuki, specialization was never an option.
More than any other player this century, Suzuki embodies the game the way it was first intended, when pitchers were merely surrogates to initiate a cunning, action-packed test of hitting, fielding and base-running. He prefers baseball’s free-styling, unpredictable rhythms, and thinks players aren’t as heady as they were when he arrived.
He laughs as he says this, but he’s serious, too. The new rule allowing a hitter to take his base on an intentional walk — without the pitcher throwing four balls — is nonsense to him.
Who knows, he continues — maybe next baseball will eliminate the home run trot, since the ball’s already over the fence. For the career leader in worldwide major league hits, it’s all a bit much. The game has always been an exquisite masterpiece to Suzuki, who has made seven visits to the Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y., where one day his plaque will reside.
The longest-serving broadcaster in baseball was a newsman first. His most challenging workday had nothing to do with rain delays, extra innings or flight delays. It was the funeral of President Kennedy in November 1963.
It was cold, he remembered, and the streets were filled with soldiers. “So what do I do?” he said.
Jarrin, now 81, did what all the greats do: He found a way to get the story. He had covered the Los Angeles City Council and knew Edward Roybal, who had just begun serving in the House of Representatives. He contacted Roybal and soon had all he needed: a car, a driver and radio equipment.
In its own way, baseball was not easy, either. In 1955, when Jarrin left Ecuador for Los Angeles at age 19, he had never seen a game. The Dodgers were still in Brooklyn, but Jarrin noticed the local fans’ passion for the sport. He was drawn to Pacific Coast League games around town, and read as much as he could about baseball.
When the Dodgers arrived for the 1958 season, Jarrin was the news and sports director at KWKW radio. The Dodgers’ owner, Walter O’Malley, wanted the station to call his team’s games, and gave a Jarrin a year to prepare. By 1959 he was ready, and with few other Spanish media outlets, he soon came to feel a powerful bond as the conduit from the team to Latinos.
His teacher and mentor, he said, was Vin Scully, who had joined the Dodgers’ broadcast team in Brooklyn in 1950. In the early years, Jarrin would broadcast only home games, but still had to re-create road games from a studio. Scully would call with the weather and other details to make Jarrin’s job easier.
Jarrin says his style is somewhat like Scully’s — calm and impartial, not a screamer, with plenty of stories and anecdotes, often culled from conversations with Spanish-speaking players. The biggest change in baseball, from his perspective, is the rising influence of Latin-American players, and the corresponding interest from fans.
When he started, Jarrin said, Latinos comprised 8 to 10 percent of Dodgers fans. Now they are nearly half. He can trace much of the team’s popularity to the rise of Fernando Valenzuela, the ace from Mexico who led the Dodgers to the 1981 championship.
Valenzuela called games on radio with Jarrin for more than a decade before switching to television in 2015. Since then Jarrin has been paired with his son, Jorge, 60, who spent many years patrolling the skies as a traffic reporter for KABC.
Jarrin allows himself a two-week vacation at midseason now, but otherwise he embraces the grind of the punishing schedule. His wife, Blanca, still supports his career, and he plans to finish his contract, which runs through 2018. That would give him 60 years calling games, but Jarrin thinks he might continue.
Dave McKay never played high school baseball. Soccer and basketball were his sports, and he figured he would go to art school in Vancouver, his hometown. Yet somehow, baseball tugged at him — first in a summer league, then at a junior college, then at Creighton, where he was supposed to concentrate on basketball. McKay was not drafted, but he was good enough to sign with the Minnesota Twins as a free agent in 1971.
McKay hit a home run in his first major league at-bat, in 1975, and lasted eight seasons as a utility infielder. He absorbed enough to become a major league coach, at age 34, for the Oakland A’s in 1984.
When Tony La Russa was named manager in mid-1986, McKay was the only coach he kept the next season. They also worked together for many years in St. Louis, and when La Russa retired after the 2011 season, McKay moved on to the Cubs. In 2014 he joined the Arizona Diamondbacks, surviving a staff shake-up last winter and returning to man the first-base box while specializing in outfield and baserunning instruction.
La Russa, now a Diamondbacks adviser, valued McKay for his communication skills, his knowledge, his thirst for learning and his toughness. In Oakland, McKay once confronted a slugger who was loudly whining about his batting-practice pitching.
La Russa did not name the hitter, but it might have been Jose Canseco, the home run king whose expose on steroids rocked the industry in 2005 and implicated a former teammate, Mark McGwire. McKay was the Athletics’ strength coach in 1988, when Canseco was at the height of his fame, and once wrote a book with him on weight training.
McKay, 67, said staying in shape keeps him going. The stereotype of the grizzled, potbellied coach with tobacco drooling down his chin? That’s not him. McKay looks much younger than he is, and tailors his winter training to attack all the problems that threaten to wear him down. It’s working.
As a player — for the Twins, the Toronto Blue Jays and the A’s — McKay was no speedster; he had just 20 stolen bases in 32 attempts. But he learned to be acutely aware of game situations, and has spent decades passing on the finer points of baserunning. For his teams, it is not a lost art.
McKay missed that excitement in his formative years. He thrives on it now, as baseball’s forever coach.
Of the 27 players in major league history with 500 home runs, 23 struck out at a higher rate than Albert Pujols. The three who did not were Ted Williams, Mel Ott and Hank Aaron. None has played a game in the last 40 years.
For two generations, then, Pujols has been almost a singular force in baseball: the prodigious slugger who will not strike out. In 2001, when he was the National League Rookie of the Year for the Cardinals, he fanned 93 times. Since then, his season high is 76. Pitchers keep getting better, and time keeps wearing on Pujols. Yet he just keeps connecting.
Pujols, 37, is halfway through the 10-year, $240 million contract he signed after carrying St. Louis to the 2011 World Series title. He hit .328 as a Cardinal, with a .420 on-base percentage and a .617 slugging percentage. As an Angel, those figures have dipped to .266, .325 and .474.
Yet Pujols still plays almost every day, and returned to exhibition games in March after undergoing plantar fascia surgery on his right foot in December. He hit 31 homers last season and ranked third in the American League in runs batted in.
Technology has helped with those adjustments. When he arrived, Pujols said with a laugh, he would watch his at-bats on videocassette tapes, and now coaches send them to his iPad. Those files show more sophisticated pitchers; most relievers have advanced beyond the predictable fastball/slider mix, and nearly everyone throws a cutter.
Yet Pujols’s swing still works, helped greatly by his uncanny ability to identify pitches. When the Angels’ players took their physical exams in February, Pujols aced the vision test yet again.
Pujols keeps the barrel of his bat in the strike zone longer than most hitters, and said he tries to take the same aggressive swing with two strikes as he does on other counts. He once had a high leg kick but rarely hits that way anymore. Mainly he tries to stay simple – or quiet, as hitters say – in the box and not think of his mechanics.
Jesse Chavez, a new teammate, has faced Pujols 21 times without ever striking him out. Chavez called Pujols the toughest hitter in baseball to face because he offers no safe areas to the pitcher. Even the less-fearsome version of Pujols cannot be removed from his comfort zone. He can still hit your best pitch.
Pujols is going to places few hitters ever have; he will soon become just the ninth player ever with 600 home runs. Three in the club (Barry Bonds, Alex Rodriguez and Sammy Sosa) have been tainted by their ties to steroids. Pujols has aggressively — and successfully – beaten back any suspicions leveled at him.
Baseball’s most prolific active slugger does not think much of milestones, he insists. But he is proud of how he got here.
Born July 21, 1980, Vallejo, Calif.
At Yankee Stadium and at Steinbrenner Field in spring training, the corner locker belongs to C.C. Sabathia. From there he can see all the players coming and going, in and out of the Yankees’ orbit, as he enters his ninth season in pinstripes. One day this spring, another big left-hander noticed him there and said hello.
It was Sam McDowell, 74, who was visiting the Yankees on behalf of the Baseball Assistance Team. Decades ago, McDowell was a hard-throwing, dominant ace for the Cleveland Indians. He shares those traits with Sabathia, and another: both are recovering alcoholics. They shared a few words, casually, about the ongoing fight.
Sabathia, now in his 17th season over all, left the Yankees before the 2015 wild card game to get treatment for his addiction. He returned last season and had his best performance in four years, making 30 starts with a 3.91 earned run average. He is hardly a No. 1 starter anymore, but he competes.
When Sabathia joined the Yankees in 2009, he immediately led them to a World Series title. He learned a lot then by watching Andy Pettitte, who was 36 at the start of that season, just as Sabathia is now. Sabathia did not need to be crafty then, but banked the lessons for later.
“When I got here and met Andy was when I started learning that I’m probably gonna have to transition to this type of pitcher to be successful in the big leagues,” he said.
Like Mike Mussina before him, Sabathia recognized that his legacy would not be defined by his work with his first team, but by how he handled the back half of his career, as a Yankee. After four terrific seasons, Sabathia had three far below his standards as he dealt with declining velocity, knee trouble and his struggle with alcohol.
Now, armed with Pettitte’s cutter to give some late life to his ordinary fastball, he has found a new groove. He swears he doesn’t miss his old heat.
So many pitchers do that now, many more than when Sabathia first arrived. Bullpens especially are stocked with hard throwers, and starters reach the majors with more weapons than Sabathia had in 2001.
They served him very well: Sabathia went 17-5 as a rookie, and two years later made the first of six All-Star teams. In 2007 he won the American League Cy Young Award and faced Boston in Game 5 of the championship series, at home, with a chance to give the Indians the pennant. He lost, and he’s never gotten over it.
Indeed, in his next A.L.C.S., with the Yankees, Sabathia was named most valuable player. Soon, he won a ring.
Sabathia wants to keep pitching beyond this season, when his contract expires. He needs 274 strikeouts to become the 17th pitcher in history to reach 3,000. He insists, with a smile, that it will not mean much to him.
Born Oct. 31, 1952, Asheville, N.C.
Sometime this season, Joe West will work his 5,000th game as a major league umpire. Only two men have worked more: Bill Klem (5,375) and Bruce Froemming (5,163).  He said his strong work ethic comes naturally.
West, 64, also started young, and got quite a sight the first time he called balls and strikes in the majors. After working the bases his first three games, West had the plate at Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium on Sept. 16, 1976. The matchup: the Braves’ Phil Niekro – a master knuckleballer — against Joaquin Andujar of the Houston Astros.
If Niekro and Andujar symbolized the ends of the pitching spectrum, West has seen everything in between across the last four decades. Joe Torre, the first manager West ever ejected, noted with a smile that West started umpiring before Torre had retired as a player.
West has umpired 25 postseason rounds, including six World Series. He was behind the plate the night the Yankees won the title in 2009, and also for Game 6 of the 2004 A.L.C.S., when Alex Rodriguez slapped the ball from the glove of Boston pitcher Bronson Arroyo. Rodriguez thought he was safe at second, and the Bronx fans unloaded on the umpires for calling him out.
West thinks back fondly on those moments, and on the pitchers who would tip their cap or acknowledge him when leaving a game, even while losing: Greg Maddux, Tim Wakefield, Roger Clemens, Curt Schilling, Jamie Moyer. As for the complainers, he learned long ago not to be ruffled, through simple but profound advice from the Hall of Fame umpire Doug Harvey.
West has lived by those words. A quarterback in college at Elon and a four-term president of the umpires’ union, he is used to taking a commanding, authoritative presence with him to the field. In the off-seasons he takes a different stage, as a country music singer; his website sells original CDs, as well as umpire equipment he designs for Wilson. More than 90 percent of umpires wear his patented West Vest.
The job has changed in 40 years, of course. Replay can correct missed calls, but West is glad that umpires now tend to take a moment longer to get their calls right. The umpires, who once belonged to different leagues, have been under one major league umbrella since a failed mass-resignation strategy in 1999. West, one of dozens who resigned, was rehired in 2002.
The current labor agreement with the umpires runs three more years, and West would like to negotiate another before he retires. More than his upcoming milestone, West says, he is focused on leaving the state of umpiring in better shape than he found it.
