As snow blanketed New York City on Tuesday, more than a third of the city’s subway stops suddenly disappeared from the map.
For only the second time, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority shut down the subway’s aboveground stations for a snowstorm. Underground routes, protected from the snow, kept running.
For a city largely dependent on the subway, there were two New Yorks on Tuesday: one where people could get around with relative ease, and another where residents had to either stay put or find another way to trek to work. The partial shutdown left huge slices of the Bronx, Queens and Brooklyn without subway service, especially working-class neighborhoods farther from Manhattan.
While many who live in the no-subway zone decided to stay home, others had to report to work. They bundled up and waited endlessly at bus stations, used Uber or walked through the wintry mess.
In Bushwick, Brooklyn, Hilma John stood in the snow on Tuesday morning waiting for her husband to pick her up. Ms. John, 64, usually takes the subway home from her overnight job as a home health care aide, but her line was not running. And a B52 bus was nowhere to be found.
When Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo announced on Monday that outdoor subway lines would be suspended, the forecast was still calling for more than a foot of snow. But the storm ended up being less severe than predicted.
The decision to offer only partial service during the storm is a new approach for the transportation authority, first tried last year. Officials had been criticized in 2015 for closing the entire subway system because of snow for the first time in its 110-year history. At the same time, officials want to avoid what happened during a 2010 storm, when some trains were stranded for hours in the snow.
City leaders and transit advocates have been supportive of the authority’s decision. Councilman James Vacca, who represents parts of the Bronx where subway service was halted on Tuesday, said the authority made the right choice, considering the ominous forecast.
For some New Yorkers, the decision had economic implications. Pavel Trakhter, 28, who lives in Brighton Beach in Brooklyn, said he could not get to his job at a CVS store in Manhattan and would lose a day’s pay.
Others were frustrated about paying for a taxi. As Charles Naraine stood in a bodega doorway dodging sleet beneath the tracks of the shuttered Rockaway Boulevard train platform in Queens on Tuesday morning, he pulled out his phone to call a cab service.
“Plan B is to get a taxi to Euclid Avenue,” he said, explaining that it was the closest underground stop on the A line.
Mr. Naraine, 62, works an afternoon shift at The Knickerbocker Hotel in Times Square. While he and a co-worker discussed splitting the $15 cab fare, a train rattled by on the tracks overhead.
“What is that train running there?” Mr. Naraine asked, with a touch of disbelief. An onlooker explained that it was a service train running to keep the tracks clear.
Gabriel Jacques, 54, took a $10 taxi from his home in Coney Island to his job at a Walgreens store in Brighton Beach. He would most likely have to take a taxi home too, instead of using his unlimited MetroCard. It takes him two hours of work to earn $20.
Some subway riders questioned why the system had been closing for storms more frequently, when it had always kept running in the past.
“In New York, we’re used to not shutting things down just because it’s snowing or it’s cold,” Tony Webb, 55, said as he sat at an espresso shop in Park Slope, Brooklyn, steps from a closed F train station.
In Manhattan, commuters were grateful that the subway was running, but also a bit wistful for the snow day that others were enjoying. Riding a No. 2 train on Tuesday morning, Parlan McGaw, 61, a copy editor for Life Books, said many of his co-workers who live in other boroughs would probably miss work.
“I’d rather be home,” he said with a laugh.