GENEVA — The United Nations’ top human rights body decided on Friday to send an international fact-finding mission to Myanmar to investigate atrocities that the country’s army is said to have committed against Rohingya Muslims, ratcheting up pressure on the country’s leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, to curb the conduct of the powerful military.
Myanmar’s ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva, U Htin Lynn, objected to the resolution, saying that it was “not acceptable and not in harmony with the situation on the ground,” and that Myanmar should be allowed to respond to the accusations. “We will do what needs to be done,” he said.
Mr. Htin Lynn did not say whether Myanmar would allow the fact-finding mission into Rakhine, where the government has restricted the access of journalists and aid workers.
In a statement on Twitter, a spokesman, Zaw Htay, said that the government did not agree with the resolution and that it disassociated itself from the council’s action.
The resolution poses a quandary for Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi. She leads Myanmar’s civilian government but has little authority over the army, which ruled the country for more than half a century and still has considerable power. Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, a Nobel Peace laureate whose party won a majority in elections in 2015, has been criticized by rights activists for failing to speak out on the politically delicate issue of Rohingya Muslims, a long-persecuted minority in a country that is predominantly Buddhist.
Last month, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, called for an international commission of inquiry into the violence in Rakhine. A United Nations report had found that Myanmar’s army had probably committed crimes against humanity in the state, where it began a counterinsurgency operation in October after insurgents killed nine guards on the border with Bangladesh.
The resolution adopted on Friday calls for a fact-finding mission, not a commission of inquiry — a change made by the measure’s sponsors, which include the United States, after Myanmar objected to the original language. Human rights experts and diplomats said a fact-finding mission supported by the United Nations rights office in Geneva would achieve essentially the same objectives. The resolution stipulated that the mission should include experts on forensics and sexual violence.
Myanmar has appointed its own commission of inquiry into the Rakhine unrest, led by Vice President Myint Swe, and it has set up an advisory panel on ethnic strife and poverty in the state led by the former United Nations secretary general Kofi Annan, which is to submit its report in August. But government statements disparaging accounts of atrocities in Rakhine as false or exaggerated have led to doubts that the national inquiry will be impartial, and United Nations officials have said that the work of the inquiry falls far short of international standards. Human rights groups have also expressed skepticism that the national advisory panel will achieve much.
In testimony to the Human Rights Council this month, Yanghee Lee, the United Nations expert monitoring developments in Myanmar, related harrowing accounts she had heard from some of the more than 70,000 Rohingya Muslims who have fled to Bangladesh since the military crackdown began.
Members of the government commission who visited Bangladesh last week heard similar accounts from refugees, who described their experiences from behind a curtain for fear of reprisals. Some Rohingya participating in the meeting said government officials had accused them of lying, the Bangladeshi news media reported.
The abuses in Rakhine threaten Myanmar’s “hard-won progress toward a more rights-respecting and democratic future,” John Fisher, a Human Rights Watch representative in Geneva, said in a statement after the council’s decision. The government “should cooperate fully with the mission, including by providing unfettered access to all affected areas,” he added.