Recently, the actor Mark Ruffalo sent “a prayer out into the universe” for a kind of experience he wanted in 2017.
The universe did as it was bade to do. The very next day, Mr. Ruffalo was offered the leading part in Arthur Miller’s “The Price,” after John Turturro dropped out.
That his wish was answered by Arthur Miller seems particularly heaven-sent: In the almost 11 years since he last appeared on Broadway, in a revival of Clifford Odets’s “Awake and Sing!,” Mr. Ruffalo has crammed an enormous amount of social activism into his busy career, which has garnered him three Oscar nominations (most recently for “Spotlight,” from 2015) and his family life (he and his wife, Sunrise, have three children, aged 15, 11 and 9). So the playwright’s examinations of economic and class struggles resonate beyond the script for Mr. Ruffalo.
“The Price,” which opens March 16 and features Tony Shalhoub, Jessica Hecht and Danny DeVito (in his own Broadway debut), explores familial obligation and money in 1968 New York City. Mr. Ruffalo plays Victor Franz, a career cop who has been exiled to the police department’s version of Siberia — out by the airports — because he doesn’t participate in departmental politics and might rat out his colleagues who are on the take. When the play begins, he is in an abandoned old apartment cluttered with the vestiges of an elegant upper-middle-class family — beds imported from Europe, Biedermeier-style tables, and a large harp, draped against the dust. We learn shortly that it is Victor’s family home, and he is here to sell the contents before the building is demolished to make way for something new and modern.
Complicating the transaction is Victor’s brother, Walter Franz (Mr. Shalhoub), a wealthy doctor from whom he has been estranged for 16 years. And Esther, Victor’s wife (Ms. Hecht), is self-conscious about appearances; she considers her husband’s uniform is too much of a tell-all about their social status. It is full of questions of honesty and corruption, class struggle and expectations, even access to a decent education.
Mr.  “Money was an issue,” he said.
After he graduated from high school, the family moved from Virginia to San Diego, and Mr. Ruffalo discovered acting through the Stella Adler school in Los Angeles. He formed a theater company with friends, working at menial jobs to keep him aloft.
But the joy of working in the theater felt indulgent to his siblings, by this time all working as hairdressers. “I’ll never forget it,” Mr. Ruffalo said.  He was my younger brother. He told me to get a real job.” It was their mother who encouraged Mr. Ruffalo to not give up.
His support of Senator Bernie Sanders’s president campaign was a natural fit, given the overlap in their progressive interests.
