1. Sweat the small stuff. Put energy into your loved ones, into the values which matter to you. Spend time in nature. Drink in the seasons. Enjoy the weather, every type of it. Yes, live frugally. Marry for love, not for money. Do work that carries meaning. Save for the future. Realize one day you’ll be old.
— TheraP in the Midwest, reacting to an article about retirees giving advice to journalism students about preparing for the end of their careers.
This comment received more than 300 reader recommendations.
2. As much as I want to support the continuation of the Women’s March, this format of protest (A Day Without Women) was hard for me. Yes I could wear red and refrain from purchasing, but missing another day of work (I took time off to travel to the DC march in January) was not possible, and I know it wasn’t possible for many. I was fine with that, but it did create a large opening for the right to criticize the event, and for articles like this one that point out how participation dropped off since the Women’s March. I’m not sure that the messaging jelled, and I know many very progressive women who wore red and showed up to work, but for us this was just another day.
— Kristina in Seattle, reacting to an article about whether a planned day for women to miss work and school, “A Day Without a Woman,” instead missed its mark.
3. I love the simplicity of its statement. I love the way it has challenged the minds of so many. I love the passion it brings bubbling to the surface. Love it or hate it. There is no correct or incorrect response. As art it has achieved its goal.
— Janice Gilbert on The Times’s Facebook page, responding to an article about a statue of a little girl, placed by a marketing firm to confront the famous statue of the Wall Street bull for International Women’s Day.
This comment received 40 likes.
4. No Cadillac Tax. No more paying for health coverage that does not apply to me which is one thing that made Obamacare so expensive. Reduced benefits for wealthy. I like this plan.
— Miken in New York, reacting to an article about the House Republicans revealing their replacement for the Affordable Care Act on Monday.
This comment received more than 50 reader responses.
5. So basically with the new plan that has just been put out, there is no way I will be able to pay insurance. I am in cancer remission and it might come back. I’m one of the people who may wind up dead.
— Liz in Sonoma, Calif.
6. The ousting of Park is a giant step in the right direction in institutionalizing sustainable democracy in South Korea. Its people, however, must be vigilant in safeguarding its hard-earned democracy because the remnants of the old order in market, politics and judiciary are still lurking, awaiting their comeback in opportune time. It’s good to hear something good about Korea other than its IT gadgets and K-Pop. Achieving democracy is difficult, but keeping it may prove to be even more demanding.
— JohnSsam in Seoul, South Korea, reacting to an article about the removal from office of Prime Minister Park Geun-hye on Friday by South Korea’s Constitutional Court in the wake of a corruption scandal.
7. He is a blessing for children. When the world seems to be against them, children have art as a means of feeling love and expressing themselves. That’s what art does. It gives us our human-ness, makes each day one of curiosity and exploration. It is what art did for me, and I’m grateful that children in this day and age will have more opportunities to live well instead of simply to exist.
— Aparna Talwalker on The Times’s Facebook page, responding to an article about Chance the Rapper’s $1 million donation to arts programs in Chicago’s public schools.
Performance-Enhancing, or Just High-Performing?
8. Training for distance running can be brutally hard on the body, so anything that maintains the benefits of running while reducing the costs should be encouraged, for recreational and competitive runners. Conservation of energy is different than addition of energy, as in doping, hidden bike motors and the like.
— Look Ahead in Washington, reacting to an article about new shoes developed by Nike that may improve runners’ performance in long-distance races — perhaps too much for the sport’s governing body, which has begun an investigation.
Before my pink surgical clogs left my feet, I was paged by a nurse who said “Ms. J needs to see you.” I returned to her room and she handed me a new piece of paper with a different man’s name and number. She said “should something happen to me, this is the person to call.” “Who is this person?” I asked. She said (paraphrasing) “My family knows him as my neighbor, but he is my lover. I’ve been a widow for a long time and never could have lived this long without him.” Having studied the topic, I was familiar with the stigma that hangs at the corner where sex and aging and widows meet. But I had never before fully appreciated the injustice of that stigma — that a woman could be deprived of her loved one on her deathbed because her family could only know her lover as her neighbor.
— Stacy Lindau in Chicago, reacting to an article on the Well blog about studies showing that widowed people may grieve the loss of sex as much as the loss of their partnerships.
10. I don’t think people are missing sex, per se, so much as they are missing touch. The loss of a partner results in skin “hunger”. That’s more challenging to address. Being open to hugs from friends, treating yourself to massages, etc, can all help. I won’t marry again. I doubt I will have a sexual relationship with anyone. I had the love of my life. I won’t stop missing my husband and what we had together. However, people to talk with, people to hug, people to care about and that I hope care about me? Those things, along with pets, being part of a larger community such as church or politics or whatever results from one’s special interests, and having activities one enjoys, can result in a very rich life. 
— Dianne Fecteau in Florida.