Although it went into effect only on Saturday, a ban on electronic devices like laptops and tablets on certain overseas flights bound for the United States and Britain has already prompted business travelers to rethink their travel plans.
For travelers who frequently cross through the Middle East and North Africa, the choices put them between a rock and a hard place: They can check their devices and lose a day or more of productive work, as well as run the risk of damage or theft, or trade a nonstop flight on a high-end Persian Gulf carrier for connecting flights on one of the major American or European airlines, where amenities and leg room are likely to be skimpier.
The gulf carriers are scrambling to accommodate their most lucrative customers, but there is only so much they can do. They cannot, for example, accommodate travelers who work at companies that prohibit checking electronic devices for security reasons.
“There are a lot of policies out there that basically say you can’t be separated from your laptop,” said Greeley Koch, executive director at the Association of Corporate Travel Executives.
Companies that deal with proprietary or sensitive data, including government contractors, often require that company devices remain with the employee at all times. These travelers will have to forgo the gulf airlines that fly directly to the United States and spend more time making connections and waiting out layovers in European cities.
“We’re going to see people shifting routes to get to other carriers,” said Brian Jenkins, an aviation security expert at the RAND Corporation.
Airlines like Emirates, Etihad Airways and Qatar Airways, which in recent years have come to dominate parts of the long-haul market, stand to lose market share, especially among high-paying business travelers unwilling or unable to fly halfway around the world without their electronic devices.
Before the bans on devices took effect, some gulf carriers had taken steps to try to mitigate any falloff in business travel bookings. Emirates, Etihad Airways and Turkish Airlines established procedures allowing travelers to check laptops and tablets at the gate.
Nikita Maruvanda, an internal consultant for General Electric who is based in Atlanta and described her travel schedule as “24/7,” said it would be impossible to travel without her electronic devices on business trips.
For a coming trip, Ms. Maruvanda said, she will probably choose a European carrier so she can work while en route. “I think now I’m just going to get a KLM flight,” she said, referring to the Dutch airline.
Industry experts predict this will become more common as long as the ban is in place. “This will impact people’s ability to travel nonstop,” said Jeremy Quek, the air practice line lead of the Global Business Consulting division of American Express Global Business Travel.
Mr. Koch, of the corporate travel association, said he had heard from more than 100 of his members since the ban was announced. “It speaks to the level of concern that the travel managers and companies and travelers have about the device ban,” he said.
These concerns, Mr. Koch said, are twofold: the safety of travelers as well as the logistical headache of complying with the ban.
Part of the difficulty are the parameters of the ban, which prohibits in-cabin electronic devices on United States-bound flights from 10 airports in Muslim-majority nations, based on fears that terrorists could smuggle bombs aboard inside larger devices. Although it specifies that travelers are prohibited from taking devices larger than a mobile phone or smartphone into the cabin, it does not include dimensions.
For corporate travel managers overseeing a global work force, the other wrinkle is that Britain imposed a similar in-cabin electronics ban shortly after the United States acted, but the details, including affected airports and airlines, are different. The American ban affects direct flights to the United States from designated airports in Egypt, Jordan, Kuwait, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates. The British ban covers all flights from six Mideast and North African nations: Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia and Turkey.
Naim Alkhouri, an American doctor who oversees part of an annual medical conference in Dubai, said leaving his own computer behind wasn’t an option. “You need your laptop to work at the conference,” he said, and hours of down time on a flight would be more irritant than respite.
“It’s more about doing meaningful work instead of just waiting for 14 hours,” he said.
For travelers in professional services that bill by the hour, the prospect of a day’s work lost for every trip also means a significant loss of productivity.
Technology professionals in Silicon Valley or Seattle will also be inconvenienced. “The gulf carriers have a leading position in a very large and important market, which is the high-tech market between India and the U.S.,” said Craig Jenks, the president of the industry consulting firm Airline/Aircraft Projects.
“The U.S.-India high-tech travel market will be motivated to go to Plan B, which will be to use U.S. carriers,” he added, along with legacy European carriers.
One final indignity for travelers dreading the thought of sharing a long-haul flight with children deprived of their electronic entertainment: Don’t count on blocking the din with noise-canceling headphones.
“In general, noise-canceling headphones are electronics,” Ms. Farbstein, of the T.S.A., said. While some small earbud styles may pass muster more readily than the bulky, over-the-ear models, there are no guarantees.
