308 pp. W.W. Norton & Company. $24.95.
It’s a crisp fall day in 1968. A man in a beige fedora and grease-stained trench coat sits on a New York City stoop, eating a hot dog and singing the first lines of a Beatles song. As a female office worker walks by, he whips open his coat to reveal “the shriveled purple stump of his penis.” Down the street, Yuki, a sensitive and lonely Japanese teenager living with her parents on the edge of Greenwich Village, watches in fascination, so hungry for experience of any kind that she envies even a mildly repellent one.
This early scene sets the tone of Rowan Hisayo Buchanan’s debut novel, “Harmless Like You.” Though it alights briefly on a variety of themes, the book is chiefly preoccupied with the romance of New York City in the 1960s and ’70s, a place and time imagined as a bohemian paradise full of both danger and opportunity. Within 50 pages, Yuki has been befriended by a glamorous, feral blonde named Odile, who teaches her how to skip meals and glue Twiggy-style nylon eyelashes onto her bottom lids; has received her first kiss in a bar near Washington Square Park; and has persuaded her parents to let her remain in New York to pursue a career as an artist when they return to Japan.
In the first of the novel’s two alternating strands, Yuki’s artistic and sentimental education is traced over the period from 1968 to 1983. In the second, set in the present day, the narration is taken over by her adult son, Jay, who was 2 years old when Yuki left him and his father in Connecticut and moved to Berlin to devote herself to her work. Now a new father himself, Jay has decided to meet his mother for the first time since she abandoned him.
Buchanan’s prose is lyrical and evocative, if occasionally overdone. Reflecting Yuki’s artistic sensibility, each chapter narrated from her perspective begins with a description of an exotic shade of pigment — carmine, raw umber, quinacridone gold — selected to correspond to its mood. The language in these sections is insistently color-saturated: Odile is “spearmint-eyed,” a pair of tinted sunglasses are “Tropicana orange” and “citrine-glazed,” Yuki’s bare knees in the cold are as “vermilion as the Red Delicious apples that sat in the kitchen uneaten.” The effect is like looking at the past through a series of Instagram filters, with even mundane scenes bathed in a romantic glow.
But Buchanan also lends Jay an endearingly off-kilter charm (he fusses over Celeste, his hairless cat, rubbing moisturizer into her skin and dressing her in black, blue and “festive” turtleneck sweaters), and makes it clear that he has a sharp eye for the self-deceptions of the artists he manages. His voice is sour, unsentimental and often extremely funny, and the contrast between his cynical milieu, in which individual identity and artistic creation are marketable commodities, and Yuki’s ecstatic search for self-actualization gives the novel an edge it might otherwise lack. After all, Buchanan reminds us, the ethereal dreams of the 1960s shaped the all-too-solid contours of the world we inhabit today.