WASHINGTON — When Representative Mark Sanford of South Carolina, fresh off helping torpedo his party’s bill to repeal the Affordable Care Act, showed up at the Berkeley County Republican meeting on Saturday, he was met with applause and praise in one of the most conservative corners of his district.
So less than a week later, after President Trump on Thursday warned the Freedom Caucus that he would “fight them” when they face re-election next year, Mr. Sanford was hardly cowering in fear. Instead, he and other members of the Freedom Caucus returned fire.
Representative Tom Garrett of Virginia, another Freedom Caucus member, was even more blunt. “Stockholm Syndrome?” he asked on Twitter above a copy of Mr. Trump’s taunting post, suggesting the president had become captive to the Republican establishment he gleefully flayed during the campaign.
Mr. Trump’s attack on fellow Republicans was only the latest and most high profile in the increasingly open warfare within the party that controls Washington but has struggled to gets its legislative agenda off the ground.
When Mr. Trump and some Senate Republican suggested that the law should be repaired with the help of Democrats, it was the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, who spoke out and discouraged the idea. That, in turn, led Senator Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee, to blast Mr. Ryan.
“We have come a long way in our country when the speaker of one party urges a president NOT to work with the other party to solve a problem,” Mr. Corker wrote on Twitter, an extraordinary cross-cameral blast from the Senate Foreign Relations Committee chairman.
Mr. Trump’s Twitter account has long been seen as fear-inducing political weapon. And his message Thursday was the sort of warning shot many Republicans thought could be fired to enforce party discipline. But it seemed to have the opposite effect.
The reasons Mr. Trump’s threats may well have about as much bite as a catfish — scary appearance, weak teeth — are many.
The health care bill that the many House members rejected was extremely unpopular. Only 17 percent of Americans supported the proposal, according to a Quinnipiac poll released last week. Even among Republicans, the repeal-and-replace measure was barely tolerable: Just 41 percent of Republicans in the same survey said they approved of the bill. Many voters in states that Mr. Trump won benefit from the Affordable Care Act, derided as Obamacare, particularly in states that have expanded the Medicaid program.
In the most conservative districts where Mr. Trump may target lawmakers, such as that of Mr. Sanford, voters are likely more in sync with their representatives, who felt the rollback of the law did not go far enough, than their president, who simply wanted a win.
Further, Mr. Trump’s approval rating, at least for now, does not suggest that he has considerable sway among voters beyond his core supporters. Even if that improves, perhaps especially if that improves, Mr. Trump may find that he has more fruitful targets to pursue than fellow Republicans.
Beyond blustery Twitter messages, Mr. Trump has so far not shown much of a willingness to aggressively confront his party’s hard-liners. He wooed them during the weeks leading up to the collapse of the health care bill, agreeing to some of their requests to make the measure more conservative. But he never set foot in any of their districts to demand they support the proposal.
The House districts he did hold rallies in shortly before the vote were represented by Democrats, who unanimously opposed the bill.
But the abrupt shift from aggressively courting his party’s most conservative lawmakers to hurling threats at them neatly illustrates how confused Mr. Trump, and his adopted party, are at the moment. He ran vowing to tear up President Barack Obama’s health law, while simultaneously pledging universal coverage.
And even though his was an ideologically scattered candidacy, some of his most loyal supporters were the small-government conservatives that he at times seemed to have little in common with other than a confrontational attitude.
These contradictions have now spilled into the first months of his presidency, as he has largely aligned himself with Mr. Ryan and the Republican establishment — to the dismay of the hard-liners.
