The congestion worsens Sunday night with the arrival of two more century-hopping shows, “Time After Time” on ABC and “Making History” on Fox. Like most time-travel stories, they’re about fixing things — stopping the killer before he kills, rescuing the loved one before she dies, saving the world before it implodes.
But in a genre prone to hand-wringing, these new series go about it a little differently. “Time After Time” may be about chasing Jack the Ripper, but it’s primarily a romantic comedy. And “Making History” strays even further, using a time machine as a vehicle for frat-house comedy with a veneer of social satire.
“Time After Time” will start out with a reservoir of good will among those fond of the 1979 Nicholas Meyer film on which it’s based, and Mr. Meyer returned to write the first episode. Like the original, the series imagines an alternate history in which the Victorian writer and futurist H. G. Wells (Freddie Stroma of “UnREAL”) not only wrote the novel “The Time Machine” but also invented a time machine as well. When Jack the Ripper (Josh Bowman, “Revenge”) hijacks the machine and flees to the present to avoid capture, the upstanding Wells gives chase.
In the film, the present setting was a San Francisco reeling from the Jonestown massacre and the murders of the city officials Harvey Milk and George Moscone, and the sinister joke was that the Ripper found it an even more promising killing zone than 1880s London. The TV show tries to do the same thing with 2017 New York, and while that might seem like a natural fit, there’s not much of a sense of danger in the pilot (the only episode available for review). The science-fiction and thriller elements are routine, and Mr. Bowman doesn’t have the suave menace David Warner brought to the Ripper in the film.
What does work is the cross-century romance between Wells and the woman he befriends, in this case a curator at a museum holding an H. G. Wells exhibition. (The time machine is on display, as a curious relic discovered in Wells’s London basement.) Mr. Stroma, who was good as the entitled bachelor in Season 1 of “UnREAL,” and Genesis Rodriguez make an appealing couple.
The first four episodes of “Making History” take the more traditional time-travel route, into the past. Adam Pally of “Happy Endings” plays a schlub named Dan who finds a time machine — actually an extra large duffel bag — and begins taking trips back to the 1770s, an era when he can entice a significantly more attractive and interesting girlfriend, Deborah (Leighton Meester), than he’s capable of in 2017.
Dan begins to worry, however, that the butterfly effect of his travels will include the elimination of the American Revolution, leading to a present in which Starbucks is a tea franchise. So he recruits a historian (Yassir Lester) to travel with him and help set the colonists back on course.
The humor of “Making History,” created by a writer for “Family Guy” and “Dads,” is broad, sometimes borderline gross and pop-culture inflected. Dan, incapable of much original thought, impresses his colonial acquaintances by quoting movies — Deborah, his new girlfriend, both completes him and had him at hello. John Hancock and Sam Adams turn out to be prank-playing gossips who can only be bothered to take on the British when Dan convinces them that their gun ownership is threatened.
The jokes are also, with some regularity, funny and endearing, especially when delivered by Mr. Lester or Ms. Meester, whose portrayal of an earnest proto-feminist is the show’s best weapon. Dan’s squirrelly disingenuousness reads as enlightenment to Deborah, and Ms. Meester is very winning as she tells him with a sweet smile, “You aren’t afraid to show your feelings, even the ones you should be ashamed of.” “Making History” won’t make America great again, but it makes it a little funnier.