With repeal of the Affordable Care Act on the back burner, Republicans have moved forward with plans for a sizable tax cut, and so, too, did The New York Times’s coverage.
Several readers were concerned with The Times calling the coming changes to the tax code “tax reform” in some of its stories.
I would like to suggest that the Times not use such expressions as “tax reform” without providing the necessary context in which they are being used. The term “reform” means to modify or revise something to correct a defect. By using an expression like “tax reform” the Times implies there is in fact a defect in the tax system that needs correction.
Bob Dowling, Ellison Bay, Wis.
Why is the Times using the misleading term, “tax reform,” to refer to the Trump/GOP’s coming waves of tax cuts? “Reform” implies improvement — the “tax cuts” (really, “tax deform”) as proposed will disproportionately favor the wealthy. Such massive tax cuts, especially when coupled with cuts to essential programs, are mean-spirited, short-sighted and will not improve the lives of most Americans.
We brought these concerns to Phil Corbett, the associate managing editor for standards, for his reply.
Ideology aside, I agree that “reform” is a tricky word, and we should be more careful and sparing in how we use it. Besides taxes, it crops up — across the political spectrum — in phrases like “health care reform,” “criminal justice reform,” “sentencing reform,” “entitlement reform” and others. Some of these expressions become the standard shorthand in Washington, sometimes used by both proponents and opponents of a proposal. And I’m not sure it’s necessary or practical for us to ban “reform” entirely from our lexicon. But often there are synonyms that might seem more neutral. Our newsroom style manual says this: Reform suggests not just change but improvement. Change or overhaul can be more neutral synonyms in the news columns.
The public editor’s take: Tax reform, health care reform, immigration reform — all are to be avoided. Reform is in the eyes of the beholder in most cases. Better to find a neutral term.
We received several complaints about a Times article on the interest level of foreign students in attending American colleges. The headline and article reported that about 40 percent of American colleges had seen a decrease in foreign applicants, but readers — many of whom had read a Washington Post column critiquing the article — noted that the survey The Times relied on reported that 35 percent of colleges saw an increase.
While I haven’t gone to the length of trying to prove it, but my impression as a long-time reader is that The Times has accumulated far more anti-Trump headlines than The Donald has Tweets. “Amid ‘Trump Effect’ fear, 40% of colleges see dip in foreign applicants — but …” That’s a New York Times headline — but the same study reported that 35% of colleges saw an increase in foreign applicants (compared to 39% that saw a decrease).
Charles Chambers, Dunwoody, Ga.
We asked Marc Lacey, the national editor, for his take.
I feel comfortable that the article captured the nuance of this report, and of the reality that universities find themselves in with regard to international students. International student enrollment has been on the rise, which means a drop in numbers in 40 percent of universities is significant. The article noted that there may be numerous factors at work here but that there was concern that Trump administration policies were to blame. This was a careful, nuanced piece of journalism that described a complicated situation.
The public editor’s take: The overall piece was informative. But referencing only one statistic in the report — one that backed the thesis — without noting that other colleges saw applicant increases, hurts the story’s credibility.
An article on Sunday about Mexico’s eagerness to see the North American Free Trade Agreement renegotiated referred incompletely to the current status of the peso. While the currency did in fact fall by double-digit percentages against the dollar after President Trump was elected, it rebounded in February and March and is now about 3 percent below its level of Nov. 8.
A recent obituary for Roger Wilkins, the African-American civil rights leader and academic, contained a sentence that startled several readers: “Beyond attending a segregated elementary school as a boy and being arrested once in a protest against apartheid, Mr. Wilkins had little personal experience with discrimination.” Several readers objected to the sentence, citing it as defamatory and misleading.
 A thing the rest of the article adeptly demonstrates cannot be true. The erasure of a black man’s experience of discrimination in the United States is unworthy of the NYTimes.
Amanda Clay Powers, Starkville, Ms.
I feel this structure negates the seriousness of discrimination and an arrest (and I have an advanced degree in Linguistics, so I also feel my opinion rests on a firm understanding of syntax, semantics, and their interaction). Moreover, the obituary goes on to recount Mr. Wilkins’ sense of alienation, depression, and sense of being a token. I would argue these are all possible effects of personal discrimination and institutional racism.
The obituary — and Mr. Wilkins himself, as quoted in it — make clear that he operated largely in a privileged white world, both socially and professionally, holding positions of power in the federal government, academia, public policy think tanks, at the Ford Foundation, and on the editorial boards of The Washington Post and The New York Times. That was the context of the sentence cited by the reader. It does not erase his experience with discrimination; it says “beyond attending a segregated elementary school as a boy and being arrested once in a protest against apartheid,” he “had little” personal experience with it, as doors were opened to him time and again. As Mr. Wilkins himself said, “Instead of standing with my nose pressed to the window, I often found myself inside rooms with people whose names were Mailer, Vidal, Javits, Kennedy or Bernstein.” This troubled him, as the obituary says; he saw himself as a token black. And that is the theme running through the piece. Rather than dismissing his singular experience as a black man, one that brought him both prominence and pain, the obituary, to my mind, perceptively illuminates it, as few written elsewhere have done.
The public editor’s take: I appreciate McDonald’s explanation, and I agree that over all, the obituary delivered a vivid portrayal of Wilkins’ life. But the obit could have found a better way to portray the sentiment McDonald described. It felt off for the reasons the readers said.
We’re off for a few days of vacation. The Sunday column will next appear on April 8th. Enjoy your weekend.