Spanning four complete pages inside Sunday’s special section, “The Road to Nowhere,” is a single photograph, shot by Mr. Ferguson, depicting about 100 people waiting in line at a food distribution center outside Diffa, Niger. Each of the picture’s subjects had fled from a series of horrors, landing in one of the many makeshift settlements scattered alongside National Route 1, a stretch of truncated highway that is now one of the only places in the region to offer refuge from the terrorist group Boko Haram.
How did the 47-by-20-inch photograph, one of the largest — if not the largest — images ever published in The New York Times, come together?
“With great difficulty, is the short answer,” Mr. Ferguson said.
The aim was to use a large annotated photograph both to convey the scale of the crisis and to humanize those in its grip.
“By attaching names, ages, locations and personal stories and details, we hope a reader can really start to connect with those people beyond a one-line caption that would normally accompany an image,” said Larry Buchanan, a graphics editor at The Times who, along with David Furst, The Times’s international photo editor, helped conceive and direct the project.
In the end, it took two separate trips to Niger and almost two weeks on the ground before Mr. Ferguson captured an appropriately arresting image that also satisfied the compositional requirements: a scene showing a large crowd, with enough empty space at the top and bottom to display personal stories. But shooting the photograph was just the beginning. Mr. Ferguson then set to work identifying the subjects and conducting interviews which, given the fleeting circumstances of the food line, proved staggeringly difficult.
Mr. Ferguson found himself moving from person to person, speaking through a translator to conduct his interviews. But given the often harrowing nature of each story, the interviews took time; meanwhile, the crowd slowly began to transform and, eventually, disperse.
It took the photographer two days to identify 20 of the people in the picture — he had transferred it to his phone and could zoom in on the faces — and interview them. He traveled to and from the scene from a United Nations compound in Diffa, 45 minutes away, where he spent nights.
Dionne Searcey, who wrote the article in the special section, reported alongside Mr. Ferguson during his first trip to Niger. She, too, found herself reflecting on the sense of desperation she witnessed there.
What haunts Ms. Searcey the most, she said, is that the victims encamped alongside Route 1 are among the poorest people on the planet.
