Watching is The New York Times’s TV and film recommendation newsletter and website.
At the beginning of every month, subscription streaming services add a new batch of movies and TV shows to their libraries. Here are the titles we think are most interesting, broken down by service and release date. Streaming services occasionally change schedules without giving notice.
Used to be, when someone asked you what your favorite Christmas movie was, there were some obvious answers — “It’s a Wonderful Life,” “Miracle on 34th Street,” “White Christmas” — but then came the ’80s. And all of a sudden the definition of “Christmas movie” expanded. Now, it could be one in which a shoeless cop in a high-rise goes around killing bad guys (“Die Hard”) or one in which a depressed cop goes around killing bad guys (“Lethal Weapon”) or one in which a teenage girl tells the tale of how her dad tried to play Santa, got stuck in their chimney, and died (“Gremlins”). Feel free to watch this one after midnight.
After making totally fine historical dramas like “Empire of the Sun” and “The Color Purple,” Steven Spielberg embarked on this more personal and sweeping project, based on the true story of a sympathetic German (Liam Neeson) who saved over a thousand Jews from concentration camps during the Holocaust.
Who would have ever imagined that a charming rom-com love triangle could be constructed with Jack Nicholson (playing a womanizing music executive), Diane Keaton (playing a neurotic playwright) and Keanu Reeves (playing a hunky doctor). No one. Yet here we are.
Originally set to debut on Netflix last month, Steven Spielberg’s most recent film is an adaptation of Roald Dahl’s fantastical children’s book, which follows a the adventure of a young girl (Ruby Barnhill) to Giant Country. There she meets a big friendly giant (Mark Rylance), which is the only thing that “BFG” could stand for.
In this adventurous tale set in an ancient Japan where magic exists, Kubo (voiced by Art Parkinson) must learn to use an enchanted two-stringed instrument to fight back against the relatives who killed his father and attacked his mother. Along the journey, Kubo is joined by an assortment of supporting characters voiced by Charlize Theron, Matthew McConaughey, George Takei and Ralph Fiennes.
Make fun of terrible B-movies just like old times, though a new host (Jonah Ray) has joined our favorite snarky puppets. Felicia Day, Joel McHale and Dan Harmon will join the “3000” veterans Kevin Murphy, Bill Corbett and Mary Jo Pehl aboard the Satellite of Love. You can warm up by sampling the “Mystery Science Theater 3000” collection currently available on Netflix.
In late-Victorian London, two magicians become consumed by a rivalry that leads to the creation of a morbidly dark trick in this Christopher Nolan thriller. The film has almost as many stars as it has illusions — Christian Bale, David Bowie, Michael Caine, Hugh Jackman and Scarlett Johansson. And for a film by a director who has literally directed two movies with the word “dark” in the title, this might be Nolan’s most dour yet.
Ten-year-old Phiona Mutesi (Madina Nalwanga) lives in a slum in Uganda and doesn’t see much cause for hope. That is, until she comes upon a local chess class and discovers a talent for the game. Her single mother, Nakku (Lupita Nyong’o), and an enthusiastic coach (David Oyelowo) stand by her side in this heartwarming tale based on a true story.
Fresh from Sundance, this meta-documentary for the true crime fans in the crowd looks at the JonBenet Ramsey murder case through the actors auditioning to re-enact the lives of Ramsey, her family, suspects, witnesses and just about anybody involved in the story.
This visionary fiasco from Baz Luhrmann and Stephen Adly Guirgis about the burgeoning hip-hop and disco scene in the South Bronx in the mid-to-late ’70s earned mixed notices for the six-episode first part of its first season. But its outsized ambition and gonzo craft made it a true television event. The second half of the season picks up the action in 1978, as Zeke, Shaolin Fantastic and other young artists continue to plug away at their musical dreams.
Britt Robertson stars in an adaptation of the autobiography by Sophia Amoruso, a tech and fashion entrepreneur who experienced a rapid rise to fame while still in her 20s. The series is being overseen by Kay Cannon, the screenwriter for “Pitch Perfect,” whose experiences working on “30 Rock” and “New Girl” should make her an ideal choice to tell the story of a stylish, harried young businesswoman.
Writer-director Justin Simien’s 2014 campus comedy, “Dear White People,” took a frank and funny look at Ivy League race relations, with a memorable collection of characters and a scattered assortment of plot lines that — honestly — felt like the pilot for a TV series. Netflix apparently agreed, and is now letting Simien convert his insights and joke-writing skills into serialized form, with a new cast taking its turn at portraying the movie’s feisty college radicals.
Spike Lee reunites with one of his most frequent collaborators, the actor Roger Guenveur Smith, for a filmed production of Smith’s one-man show about the man whose beating by the L.A.P.D. sparked a riot. Lee previously directed the Peabody-winning film adaptation of Smith’s solo play “A Huey P. Newton Story,” but this new piece is more freewheeling, using Rodney King’s life and death as a jumping-off point for a monologue about L.A. race relations.
In this film, loosely based on the young experiences of the writer-director Cameron Crowe, a budding music reporter in the ’70s joins a band on the road for Rolling Stone magazine and witnesses the highs and lows of the rock ’n’ roll lifestyle up close. It wouldn’t be a Crowe film without a packed soundtrack.
This painfully funny dark comedy about a high school election gone rotten stars a young Reese Witherspoon as an insufferable overachiever and Matthew Broderick as an equally insufferable teacher who tries to rig the race for student council president. If you’ve ever heard anyone described as a “Tracy Flick,” this is where that comes from. And if you’re enjoying Witherspoon on HBO’s “Big Little Lies” but have never seen this movie, complete the loop.
A private business attempts to replace the beleaguered city of Detroit’s police force with robot cops (what ... to call them?), and it goes about as well as expected.
Film industry misogyny may be the talk of Hollywood trade papers today, but director Lake Bell addressed it head-on in 2013 with this smart comedy about a voice actress (Bell) looking to outdo her famous voice-actor dad and his male protégé to score a big gig.
Park Chan-wook (“Oldboy”) weaves together a complex story of intrigue, betrayal and love (or is it lust?) set in 1930s Japanese-occupied Korea. In it, an isolated Japanese heiress (Kim Min-hee) hires a Korean handmaiden (Kim Tae-ri), who is secretly plotting with a con artist (Ha Jung-woo) to swindle the wealthy woman out of her inheritance.
All’s fair in love and witchcraft, or so the brilliantly styled Elaine (Samantha Robinson) would have you believe. Desperate for love, she brews magic potions that work all too well on her targets and causes her more headache than heartache. Director Anna Biller employs a vibrant color palette and B-movie aesthetics for an enchanting concoction that’s a welcome respite from so many dark and dingy horror movies.
A directionless young woman named Star (Sasha Lane) joins a group of traveling swindlers after being charmed by their ringleader (Shia LaBeouf) in this 2016 film by Andrea Arnold. As in her previous work (“Fish Tank,” “Wuthering Heights”), Arnold’s camera moves freely and observes things in detail, giving this movie a sense of the wanderlust followed by its characters.
Also of interest (from April 1 unless noted): “Saturday Night Fever,” “There Will Be Blood,” “Hello, My Name is Doris” (April 2).
With a powerhouse lineup including Julianne Moore, Nicole Kidman and Meryl Streep, this dark drama packs a lot of talent into its run time. In the film, three different women in three different eras struggle with fear, longing and frustration at different points in their lives. Kidman earned an Oscar for best actress for her role as Virginia Woolf.
Morgan Freeman narrates this hit documentary with all the benevolent warmth and sympathy you might expect from the man who played God in “Bruce Almighty.” The film details the difficulties faced by emperor penguins as they try to hatch and feed their young in harsh Antarctic conditions.
Maybe pair “Saturday Night Fever” with this one, another New York City classic set in the 1970s. After a gang summit goes wrong, the Warriors are framed for the murder of a big-time leader and are forced to retreat to their turf in Coney Island. Good luck with that late night train service.
In this, her breakout performance, Brie Larson plays a counselor at a home for troubled children who is struggling with her past and her impending future as marriage looms on the horizon. Based on his own short film of the same name from 2008, Destin Daniel Cretton expands his look into the emotional baggage of its beleaguered lead character.
One of the scarier movies in recent memory comes from Australia and involves a disturbing children’s book. In the film, a widow and her troubled son are terrorized by a boogeyman figure that invades their home and then her mind. Maybe you shouldn’t watch this movie home alone in the dark.
Also of interest (from April 1 unless noted): “Almost Famous,” “Election,” “Chaplin,” “Days of Thunder,” “Ferris Bueller’s Day Off,” “JFK,” “RoboCop,” “Serpico,” “Thelma and Louise,” “Hello, My Name is Doris” (April 2), “In A World” (April 9).
Robert De Niro has probably never been scarier than in this 1991 Martin Scorsese remake of the 1962 thriller about an ex-con (De Niro) who returns to wreck the life of the lawyer (Nick Nolte) who buried evidence that would have set him free. De Niro might even be more frightening than his predecessor in the original, Robert Mitchum. Which is no small feat.
This underseen film is worth seeking out if you were impressed by Casey Affleck’s Oscar-winning performance in “Manchester by the Sea”; if you like to see Brad Pitt acting cool (he’s Jesse James); if you’re a cinephile who adores the work of cinematographer Roger Deakins; or you happen to be a fan of the musician Nick Cave (who has a scene-stealing cameo and worked on the score).
Before the box office debacle “Heaven’s Gate” tarnished director Michael Cimino’s career, he made this tense and epic drama centered on three men (Robert De Niro, Christopher Walken and John Savage) from Pennsylvania steel country, and how the Vietnam War affected their lives and their loved ones.
Noel Murray and Scott Tobias contributed reporting.
