“Training Day” remembers its star Bill Paxton, who died on Saturday. “Nashville” pays tribute to the fictional Rayna Jaymes. And “Code of a Killer” recounts the first use of DNA fingerprinting to solve a murder.
TRAINING DAY 10 p.m. on CBS. This series honors its star Bill Paxton, who died on Saturday at the age of 61 of complications from heart surgery. Continue the tribute by streaming “Twister,” in which he stars as a storm chaser still pining for his ex-wife; “Apollo 13,” where he plays Fred Haise, an astronaut on a troubled mission; “Big Love,” for which he earned three Golden Globe nominations as the patriarch of a polygamist Utah family; or “Hatfields & McCoys,” for his Emmy-winning portrayal of Randall McCoy. All can be found on Amazon and iTunes; “Big Love” is also on HBO Go.
NASHVILLE 9 p.m. on CMT. Rayna James’s family members and friends bid farewell at a graveside service, while the music industry pays tribute to this beloved songbird at the CMT Awards. Her family, meanwhile, could be torn apart as Tandy, Teddy and Deacon argue over who should run the Highway 65 record label — and care for her daughters.
WHEN WE RISE 9 p.m. on ABC. It’s now the ’90s in Dustin Lance Black’s chronicle of the gay-rights movement, and H.I.V.-AIDS is devastating the community. Cleve dedicates himself to creating the Names Project AIDS Memorial Quilt. Ken enters a Veterans Affairs hospital to get the treatment he needs. And Roma lives with Diane and her daughter, Annie, who yearns to know her father’s identity. “When We Rise: The People Behind the Story” leads in at 8.
THE BLACKLIST: REDEMPTION 10 p.m. on NBC. The Halcyon team rushes to the rescue of an American journalist — and close friend of Scottie’s — whose life is threatened after a false arrest for espionage while abroad.
PORTLANDIA 10 p.m. on IFC. Carrie works to improve her passenger rating. An actor trains a boss in how best to fire his employees. And people chat it up at the National Small Talk Convention.
CODE OF A KILLER on Acorn TV. Set in 1980s Britain, this drama recounts the pioneering discovery of DNA fingerprinting by Alec Jeffreys, a geneticist at the University of Leicester, and its use, for the first time, to catch the murderer of two schoolgirls. John Simm and David Threlfall star.