The Israeli settlement movement is always in the news. It was central to the diplomatic dance surrounding Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s recent visit with President Trump. Now the issues of Israeli sovereignty are revisited in two new films.
Shimon Dotan’s documentary “The Settlers” gives the headlines a firm grounding in context. While any explanation of this fraught phenomenon feels like an oversimplification, Mr. Dotan sorts out the forces and personalities that shaped the movement, going back to the 1967 Six-Day War that provided the territorial gains that enabled some Israelis, with a range of ideologies, to stake out newly occupied lands.
The film takes viewers into the living rooms (and, in one case, the yurt) of Jews who have moved onto Palestinian land. Packed with maps and facts, the documentary pointedly notes that the approximately 400,000 settlers stand in the way of peace by ensuring that the land will not revert to Palestinian control.
Some of today’s settlements of spacious homes with swimming pools have tunnels that allow residents to zip to Israel proper. Keeping settlers safe, the film notes, is costly.
Then there are the outpost dwellers, who strike out to build towns in as yet untouched occupied areas. Most settlers interviewed are united in their outspoken love of the land. Some talk about hating and hurting Palestinians.
Mr. Dotan talks to Palestinians whose olive groves have been disturbed by settlers or who have seen their land gobbled up by the illegal construction of outposts by renegades. Their frustrated accounts illuminate some subtexts for the rock-throwing boys of the Palestinian uprisings.
When the settlement movement began, David Ben-Gurion, one of the Zionist founding fathers and Israel’s first prime minister, was just leaving politics. “Ben-Gurion: Epilogue” is a refreshing and effectively edited documentary that has at its core a six-hour black-and-white interview conducted in 1968. Lost for decades, it was trimmed and shaped by the writer and director Yariv Mozer, and interleaved with news footage and other clips that contain everything from historic moments of oratory to charming shots of the elder statesman doing a headstand on the beach or sharing a piano bench with Ray Charles.
Ben-Gurion’s message, in the sessions conducted five years before his death, is, at this point, largely a peaceful, nonexpansionist one that contrasts sharply with many of the Israeli voices in the settlement film. It conveys a satisfying, informative portrait of a well-read man who looks back at his life, good decisions and bad, with wisdom and intelligence.