AMSTERDAM — How safe is it to buy old masters at Tefaf Maastricht, which bills itself as one of the most intensely vetted and reliable art fairs in the world? That question is being asked this week by some art dealers both inside and outside the fair, after Dutch news organizations flagged the fact that three participating galleries have open legal cases involving artworks deemed by other experts to be fakes or forgeries, and that a fourth is associated with a continuing investigation into possible forgery. No conclusion has been reached by the courts in any of these cases.
The Dutch newspaper NRC Handelsblad first raised the question, asking whether the four galleries should be allowed to participate in the fair this year and citing “insiders” whose critical comments could not all be verified by The New York Times.
But Daniel Blau, an art dealer from Munich who was named in the article, said in an interview with The Times that he was concerned about the four participants and had chosen to “take a sabbatical” from exhibiting this year because of concerns the fair’s reputation would be damaged.
The four galleries mentioned by NRC are Colnaghi, the Weiss Gallery and the Mayor Gallery, all from London, and Didier Aaron from Paris. They are long-term participants in the annual art fair in Maastricht, the Netherlands, which runs through March 19 this year. Konrad Bernheimer of the Colnaghi gallery serves on the Tefaf board.
Mr. Blau said he sent a private letter to fair participants a year ago, arguing that “that there are issues coming up and the fair should prepare itself by being open” rather than putting itself “in a defensive position later.” He said that those galleries linked in particular to the old masters forgery cases should “recuse” themselves until the cases are resolved. He added that he received supportive responses to the letter from some other dealers.
The world of old master arts and antiques has been on edge for the last year, as two old master paintings sold at Sotheby’s were pronounced “modern fakes” in two separate complaints filed by the auction house.
Johnny van Haeften, a Tefaf board member interviewed by telephone, said that “none of the works that have now been questioned was ever sold at Tefaf” and that the courts have not yet given their verdict in any of the cases involving these works.
The chief executive of Tefaf, Patrick van Maris, told the NRC Handelsblad last week that the organization’s board of directors discussed the matter “extensively” and decided not to disinvite the galleries. “As long as there are uncertainties, we have to be very careful about making any comment,” he told the NRC.
According to French investigators and their own accounts, Colnaghi and the Weiss Gallery have been associated with old master paintings that went through the hands of the French art collector Giuliano Ruffini, who is at the center of a French police investigation involving possible forgeries. The Colnaghi gallery has acknowledged that it sold a painting attributed to Lucas Cranach to the Prince of Liechtenstein that was seized by the French police as part of the Ruffini investigation, but the Liechtenstein collection maintains that the work is authentic. Matthew Paton, a spokesman for Colnaghi, declined to comment on Monday.
Mark Weiss, of the Weiss Gallery, who bought a painting from Mr. Ruffini that was attributed to Frans Hals and sold it through Sotheby’s in a private sale brokered by the auction house for around $10 million, is being sued by the auction house for reimbursement. Mr. Weiss has said in statements that Sotheby’s research may be inconclusive, and he is awaiting additional data before he will respond. The Weiss Gallery did not respond to an interview request from The Times.
The Mayor Gallery of London has sold works by Agnes Martin that the Agnes Martin authentication committee has refused to recognize as authentic. The Mayor Gallery has filed a lawsuit against the committee, rendering the works valueless.
A fourth gallery, Didier Aaron, mentioned in the NRC newspaper report, is part of an ongoing French police investigation into suspected fabrication of 18th-century furniture. Bill Pallot, a chair specialist who worked for the gallery, was arrested in Nanterre (Hauts-de-Seine), France, last year. The Syndicat National des Antiquaires suspended Galerie Didier Aaron’s participation in the Biennale des Antiquaires antiques fair at the Grand Palais in Paris in September.
Mr. van Haeften said that he had not received any direct complaints about the galleries participating. “Nobody has said anything to me at all, absolutely not,” he said.
A Paris-based old masters dealer, Bob Haboldt, who is participating in Tefaf this year, said that he had confidence that the Tefaf still had “the most stringent vetting committee in the world.” He said that expelling these dealers from the fair would be unjust.
