BEIJING — Ren Hang, a Chinese photographer whose erotic images of naked young models arranged in provocative poses offered an unfiltered glimpse into the intimate lives of Chinese youth, died on Feb. 24 in Beijing. He was 29.
Dian Hanson, an editor of a monograph of Mr. Ren’s work that was published in January by Taschen, confirmed his death. The newspaper The Beijing News said Mr. Ren had jumped off the 28th floor of a building. Friends said he had suffered from cyclical depression.
In his brief career Mr. Ren honed a distinctly bold visual style that was also subversive, if only because of the social environment in which he worked. In his photos, a person sits on the grass holding what appears to be a disembodied head; a man applies red lipstick to his penis; two naked women hug high in a tree.
Using point-and-shoot film cameras and photographing mostly his friends, Mr. Ren built up an extensive body of work in which clothing was a rarity and gender and sexuality an afterthought. Body parts are presented in every form: erect, limp, hairy, shaved, stacked, twisted, intertwined, bent, pinched.

His numerous encounters with the authorities led many to draw comparisons to other subversive artists, most notably Ai Weiwei, the Chinese activist and provocateur. But Mr. Ren resisted such comparisons, stating over and over in interviews that his photos were never meant to be political and emphasizing instead his deep connection to China and to Chinese culture.
His father was a railway worker, and his mother — who later modeled for Mr. Ren in a memorable series, “My Mum” — worked at a printing house.
At 17 he moved to Beijing, where he began taking nude photos while studying advertising.
He began to show his work in 2009, mostly in small group exhibitions in China. After several years of exhibiting and publishing his own books, he started attracting international attention.
In recent years he had begun to take on more commissions, shooting for major fashion brands and magazines as well as for the singer and rapper Frank Ocean’s Boys Don’t Cry fan magazine.
At his death, Mr. Ren’s work was being shown in two separate solo exhibitions, at the Fotografiska Museum in Stockholm (until April 2) and at the Foam Photography Museum in Amsterdam (until March 12), as well as in a dual show with the artist Li Xinjian at the KWM Artcenter in Beijing (recently extended to March 24). His photos were shown in more than 20 solo and 70 group shows around the world.
Mr. Ren was a writer and poet and kept an account of his experience with depression in a blog, “My Depression,” on his website.
