My 90-year-old mother is in a nursing home with dementia, and the one thing she has wanted ever since she got there is a kitten.
I have been trying to convince the home to allow her to have one, and am making such excellent progress that I am sure I’ll be able to get her one for her 110th birthday. People are living longer these days, and one thing there is never a shortage of is cats. There is even a tribe of ferals around Ma’s nursing home parking lot. Once in a while, I’ve tried to grab a feral kitten to bring it in for a short visit. Why I keep trying, I don’t know; no matter how much whitefish you leave on a napkin, nobody is fast enough to catch a feral cat.
So you’ll understand why, a year and a half ago, I decided it would be a great idea to get her a robo cat. My college roommate had sent me a link about it, the Hasbro Joy for All Companion Pet. This is some cat. It opens its eyes when you pet it, it purrs, and if you pet it long enough, it will roll over on its back for a belly rub.
Elderly men and women, often in wheelchairs, are presented with a Joy for All Companion cat. At the sound of its meows or the sight of it washing its face with its paw, their faces light up as if someone has thrown a switch. They scratch its little ears, they lock eyes with it and snuggle it to their chests, they beam. Cat available in orange, gray and creamy white, $99.99.
I order that fluffy little sucker so fast my credit card smokes. I get it in orange because we had an excellent orange-yellow tomcat when I was growing up in the Catskills, a lascivious boulevardier named Peaches whose sorbet-colored progeny dotted the town. A week later, I trot into my mother’s room with the cat, eager to see her go moist-eyed and tender. It didn’t happen a lot when my brothers and I were growing up — or ever, actually — but after someone’s brain has been fried in a major stroke and they’re in a wheelchair, things change.
 Ma says.
Wait — this wasn’t how it went in the movie.
“It’s not a real cat,” my mother says, glaring at the cat, refusing to touch it.
I sit down, though I know this gambit is doomed, and put the robot cat on my lap and pet it. The cat bats its lovely eyes and purrs loudly and cocks its head. It’s got a convincing purr, almost vibrational, but when it turns its head, you hear metal grating on metal.
“I think it’s stupid,” Ma says.
“Don’t say that; you’ll hurt its robot feelings,” I say, petting the cat, which I’m finding kind of soothing.
I could get into this cat, but then I have no trouble making machines my friends. I pat my little convertible’s top when I take it out of the garage; I thank Siri after she sets the alarm.
I’m not ready to give up. I suggest we take the robo cat along on a stroll because some of the residents may get a kick out of it. What I’m really thinking is that if other people love the cat, Ma may reconsider. I push Ma and the cat in her wheelchair up and down the halls, and just like in the commercial, old people in wheelchairs light up and clamor to hold the cat and pet it and coo. My mother regards them with condescension.
I am so annoyed about it I talk to a social worker.
“They really have to be pretty far gone for those to work,” she says.
As far as I can tell, there are no regulations against cats in nursing homes in New York State. But my mother’s home in Westchester has its own rules. Everyone in her 13-patient unit, including the aides, must agree to having a cat, and some do not.
And who can blame them? My mother cannot care for a cat, and even though her private aides and family can help, we aren’t there 24/7.
A year and a half passes. My mother brings up kittens every time I see her, but she also zones out more often. She becomes fixated on traveling to Mars.
“Well, you know, Ma, Trump is a busy guy,” I say.
The nursing home volunteers to reopen the cat issue. My mother’s unit again votes no; an aide is allergic. I go online and find a hypoallergenic breed, the Siberian. I say my family will be happy to buy one, and if it doesn’t work out we will adopt it. Management suggests we get a kitten and bring it for visits with the goal of eventually making it the pet of the house. I write them that this will not work. Cats are not dogs; cats are attached to a place. I wait to hear back.
The robo cat sits on a lower shelf in Ma’s room, matted and neglected, though sometimes when I visit, I pick it up and pet it. It is still very soothing.