Jim Harrison’s Caribbean stew.Credit...Gentl and Hyers for The New York Times. Food stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Amy Wilson.
I was staying in a square cinder-block house on a dirt road outside the Lovely Bay settlement on Acklins Island in the southern Bahamas. This was a number of years ago, a fishing trip, long days spent out on the flats of the Bight of Acklins with a local guide named Fidel Johnson. Each night we returned to eat fiery stews prepared by his sister, Doramae Johnson. They were bright crimson affairs, perhaps familiar to those who have spent time eating in the islands of the Bahamas and Lesser Antilles. Doramae ginned them up from canned goods and fresh conchs, lobster, sometimes chicken or pork shipped in from Nassau, and served them on a small table in her brother’s kitchen. They were bewilderingly delicious. I begged her for a recipe. She only smiled. I tried to come off the water early to cook with her. She was onto me. The stew was finished, left warm in the oven, and she was gone, her secrets kept.
The writer Jim Harrison, who died last year at 78, did not to my knowledge ever eat or cook with Doramae. In 1981, when he published a recipe for what he called Caribbean stew in the literary magazine Smoke Signals, she was only a child. But when I came across that recipe in Harrison’s new posthumous collection of food writing, “A Really Big Lunch,” published last month, it sent me directly back to that kitchen on Acklins, to the aromas and flavors of the place, and to the deep satisfaction I had eating there, night after night.
It was not easy cooking, at first, to make it right. In Smoke Signals, Harrison shared pages with Terry Southern, Charles Bukowski and Patti Smith. His job was to be ribald and wild. He’d get to the recipe eventually. In his essay “Eat Your Heart Out,” he first outlined a fantasy about Meryl Streep (“Then I slipped on my fifty-dollar Key West pig mask and stalked her pealing laughter through the penthouse etc.”) and delivered the address, in Ann Arbor, Mich., of a woman who made a hot sauce he admired (Clancy’s Fancy, still around).
I had to, though! The recipe didn’t really work. Ingredients were missing. (“Add onions.” What onions?) Or they were crazily specific — not just that Clancy’s Fancy, but tablespoons of basil vinegar from a particular shop in Paris. (Harrison liked his specialty groceries.) Fiddling was needed. Adjustments were made.
So yes, I’ve made some revisions myself. What hasn’t changed, though, is the sheer exuberance of the resulting stew, and the base-line excellence of the flavors within it — onions and garlic sautéed in chicken and pork fat, then caramelized with a full can of tomato paste and the scorching sweetness of hot-pepper sauce, the whole lot mixed with lemon juice and Worcestershire, chile powder and paprika, then poured over the meats and baked covered in the oven until it is fragrant beyond measure and easily spooned over rice.
The meats, plural. In the islands you might only have conch, or a tray of frozen chicken purchased in town at an exorbitant price. For Harrison, though, you’ll buy out the butcher for ribs, Italian sausages, chicken thighs. These offer a delightful variety of textures and flavors in the pot.
Also, it must be said, more than a little fat, for Harrison cooked as he lived, largely and with little heed for consequences.  Vintage Harrison: Eat your heart out.
