Jon Pareles, a music critic for The New York Times, reflects on the pioneering music and attitude of the rock legend Chuck Berry.
Chuck Berry, who with his indelible guitar licks, brash self-confidence and memorable songs about cars, girls and wild dance parties did as much as anyone to define rock ’n’ roll’s potential and attitude in its early years, died on Saturday at his home near Wentzville, Mo. He was 90.
In “Sweet Little Sixteen,” “You Can’t Catch Me” and other songs, Mr. Berry invented rock as a music of teenage wishes fulfilled and good times (even with cops in pursuit). In “Promised Land,” “Too Much Monkey Business” and “Brown Eyed Handsome Man,” he celebrated and satirized America’s opportunities and class tensions. His rock ’n’ roll was a music of joyful lusts, laughed-off tensions and gleefully shattered icons.
Chuck Berry was an inventor of rock ‘n’ roll and a songwriter who understood what the kids wanted before they knew themselves. With indelible guitar licks and brash self-confidence, Mr. Berry defined rock ’n’ roll’s potential and its attitude the moment it was born.
Charles Edward Anderson Berry was born in St. Louis on Oct. 18, 1926, and grew up in a segregated, middle-class neighborhood, soaking up gospel, blues, and rhythm and blues along with some country music. By the early 1950s, he was playing with local combos and joined Sir John’s Trio, led by pianist Johnnie Johnson, right.
Mr. Berry does his famous duck walk during a performance at the Rock ‘n’ Roll Revival concert at Madison Square Garden in 1971.
By the 1980s, Mr. Berry was well recognized as a rock pioneer. The Grammy Awards, which had ignored him in his prime, gave him a lifetime achievement award in 1984.
Mr. Berry is congratulated by Keith Richards during a concert to celebrate Mr. Berry’s 60th birthday at the Fox Theater in St. Louis in 1986. The concert was being filmed for the documentary “Hail! Hail! Rock ‘n’ Roll.” In the film, Mr. Berry told Mr. Richards he wasn’t playing Mr. Berry’s licks right.
When the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum opened in Cleveland in 1995, Mr. Berry performed at an inaugural concert, backed by Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band.
Mr. Berry in St. Louis in 2003. He performed well into his 80s. His music also remains on tour extraterrestrially. “Johnny B. Goode” is on a golden record in the Voyager I spacecraft, launched in 1977 and awaiting discovery.
