There is a planter on the sidewalk in front of a 7-Eleven on Eighth Avenue in Chelsea. It is intended to cheer the place up, unless one knows how it came to be there.
A quiet, homeless woman used to live on that patch of sidewalk. Her name was Mary Lou Ritter, and when I met her in 2013, she was 69 years old, and had been sitting in that spot for so long that she showed up in Google Street View images going back years. I’d stop and say hello from time to time, and she’d smile as if she were sitting on the front porch of her house, and say she was doing fine.
On Feb. 12, 2016, an ambulance came and took Ms. Ritter to a hospital. The management of the building, which surely had a more complicated relationship with Ms. Ritter than I, put the planter in her spot the following day or so, and no one has seen her there since. An optimistic neighbor who knew her thinks she moved to the Bronx.
The reason I met Ms. Ritter to begin with was to ask about strange fliers she had posted telling of the kidnapping and killing of her cat, Snap. I wrote her story, one of a few hundred tales from the streets of the city, some dark, some day-lit, collectively known as Crime Scene.
Many ventured under the scene’s yellow tape. The artists of a Coney Island tattoo parlor paused in their work to examine a photograph of a dead woman’s tattoo and ponder its origin. The unofficial mayor of what is known as Methadone Alley in Manhattan’s Union Square, called Old Man Tom because he had made it to 50, gave a stranger a tour. An 89-year-old landlady walked me around her home, describing the terrible banging and crashing from the upstairs apartment where, she later learned, her new tenant was being beaten to death.
In Crime Scene, people stole: diamonds, gold, pizza. They stole cash from ice cream trucks and ice cream from chain stores. There were stolen sneakers and cement shoes, second-story men and three-card Monte, a fellow shot twice in a year, an iPhone stolen twice in a day.
 Fake mothers defrauding real nannies. Fake tenants listing fake apartments for vacation rentals.
Pickpockets picked, and their niche subset, lush workers, took razors to the trousers of sleeping drunks on the subway. A bunch of people in Brooklyn shared the same gun. A guy got his stolen fruitcake back from the police — his mother had made it from scratch.
For six years, it’s been a joy and a privilege to write those stories. Today, Crime Scene retires, even as its author remains, looking for more good stories until the day he arrives at his desk to find a planter in its place.
One morning in 2011, I dropped by the Sixth Precinct in the Village to introduce myself to the commanding officer. I asked if he had anything interesting going on, and he thought for a moment and dug out a wanted poster from a little pile. On it was a picture of an attractive young woman. “She’s a fortuneteller,” the commanding officer told me, and said she had taken $27,000 from a client to supposedly cleanse her of evil spirits.
It seemed like a good place to find out what the future holds. I dropped by on Wednesday.
The plaque was gone — maybe Zena had folded up the Cannes shop — but the crystal ball and neon sign remained, and a woman answered the bell, sat me down and peered at my left hand.
“You’re happily married,” she said, perhaps noticing, just above the “love line,” a wedding band. Bingo.
She went on. I braced for news of evil spirits and curses, but none arrived in her reading. 
I thanked her, handed over a modest portion of my current income for her fee, and left, walking out of the parlor and toward that happy place.