Theater|Two Female Playwrights Arrive on Broadway. What Took So Long?
Two Female Playwrights Arrive on Broadway. What Took So Long?
Lynn Nottage and Paula Vogel, both Pulitzer winners, will finally make their Broadway debuts this spring. What does that say about the plight of women writing for the stage?
They are two of the nation’s pre-eminent playwrights. Each has won nearly every award their field has to offer, including the Pulitzer Prize. Each has written works that are staged around the world and have become required reading in college classes. And each has earned an admired position in the academy, teaching aspiring dramatists at Ivy League institutions.
One milestone, however, has long eluded Paula Vogel and Lynn Nottage: Broadway.
This spring, their conspicuous absence comes to an end. “Sweat,” Ms. Nottage’s timely exploration of stressed relationships among a group of friends in a working-class city battered by industrial layoffs, opens Sunday, March 26, at Studio 54; “Indecent,” Ms. Vogel’s retrospective dramatization of the rise and fall of a play deemed scandalous during an ill-fated journey from the Yiddish theater to Broadway, opens April 18 at the Cort Theater.
The fact that these two writers are just now making their Broadway debuts raises uncomfortable questions for the theater industry, which season after season sees plays by men vastly outnumber plays by women in the all-important commercial spaces where money can be made, reputations burnished and Tony Awards won.
“Indecent” and “Sweat” are the only new plays by women this Broadway season; by contrast, there are eight new plays by men (none of whom has credentials comparable to those of Ms. Vogel and Ms. Nottage). The disparity is sometimes worse; in 2013-14 there were no new plays by women. Such imbalance remains a striking incongruity for Broadway, where an estimated 67 percent of the audience is women.
Both playwrights arrive scarred by the journey — each frustrated by how long it has taken, and still aggrieved that their best-known, and Pulitzer-winning works (Ms. Vogel’s “How I Learned to Drive,” and Ms. Nottage’s “Ruined”) never made it to the big stage. But both are also thrilled to be here now, and savoring the sweetness.
Ms. Vogel and Ms. Nottage are, in effect, competitors this season, vying for ticket buyers and awards. But their real relationship is as friends and colleagues, each cheering the other on.
Over the years, Ms. Vogel has become one of the nation’s foremost playwriting teachers. She led the graduate programs at Brown and Yale and runs boot camps for aspiring writers; among her students have been three future Pulitzer winners, besides Ms. Nottage: Ayad Akhtar, Nilo Cruz and Quiara Alegría Hudes. Ms. Nottage is now also a teacher, on the faculty at Columbia.
Ms. Vogel and Ms. Nottage are different from many contemporary Broadway creators. Their shows are plays when the big money is in musicals; their plays have ensembles of workaday actors when many are cast with stars. And not only are they both women, but Ms. Vogel is lesbian, and Ms. Nottage is African-American.
The subjects of their plays are not obviously commercial — “Indecent” features a lesbian relationship, and “Sweat” is fundamentally about deindustrialization. Their earlier plays were even more challenging — “How I Learned to Drive” was about a sexually abusive relationship between an adult man and his adolescent niece, while “Ruined” was about rape in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
But the writers are quick to point out that plays by men about similar subjects have run on Broadway, often to great acclaim.
There are many theories about why their earlier plays never reached Broadway, from basic sexism to content, scale, or timing.
Whatever the reason, the writers clearly felt let down.
“I was very disappointed that, for whatever reason the producers — and there were producers who circled — just couldn’t raise the money because there weren’t enough people who had the belief that it could succeed on Broadway for a commercial run,” Ms. Nottage said of “Ruined,” which had a lengthy run at the Off Broadway Manhattan Theater Club.
“We were surprised no commercial producers stepped up to move it Broadway, but I’m sure it will happen in the future,” she said. Transferring it herself didn’t make economic sense, she said, because many Manhattan Theater Club subscribers had already seen it Off Broadway.
Even without Broadway productions, “How I Learned to Drive” and “Ruined” marked turning points for the playwrights.
Their plays are now seen everywhere. “How I Learned to Drive” was the most produced play in the country in the 1998-99 season, according to American Theater magazine, and has been staged dozens of times around the nation, according to Dramatists Play Service. “Ruined” is frequently performed, too — including in South Korea, South Africa and Jamaica — while some of Ms. Nottage’s other plays, including “Intimate Apparel” and “Crumbs From the Table of Joy,” are done even more.
Their two new plays — the ones now transferring to Broadway — are quite different from one another, but have benefited from changing times and fortuitous timing.
“Sweat,” set in Reading, Pa., in 2000 and 2008, draws on interviews conducted by Ms. Nottage, and seems to anticipate the rise of the Trump voter, as its characters are alienated workers concerned about the effects of immigration and trade on their factory jobs in a city with a high rate of poverty.
“Indecent,” a stylized music-and-movement-filled ode to the theater, is set throughout Europe and around New York from 1906 to 1952, and reflects contemporary concerns as it grapples with issues of identity, sexuality, immigration and artistic freedom.
Both are directed by women: “Indecent” by Rebecca Taichman, its co-creator, and “Sweat” by Kate Whoriskey. And both were supported by the Oregon Shakespeare Festival’s American Revolutions project, which has been commissioning plays prompted by periods of change in American history, and which in 2014 sent “All the Way,” by Robert Schenkkan, to Broadway, where it won the Tony Award for best new play.
Each play was nurtured through regional and Off Broadway productions, and then championed by experienced Broadway producers — important because there are long odds for nonmusicals to make a profit there. “Sweat” is being capitalized at $3.6 million, and “Indecent” at $3.5 million.
“Indecent” is being produced by two veterans, Daryl Roth (“Kinky Boots”) and Elizabeth Ireland McCann (“Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?”) as well as a relative newcomer, Cody Lassen. Ms. Roth, who has extensive experience producing challenging (and prizewinning) plays as well as deep financial resources as the wife of billionaire real estate investor Steven Roth, was on the board of the Vineyard in 1997 when she saw “How I Learned to Drive,” and was so impressed that she led a commercial Off Broadway production; last year, she saw “Indecent” at the Vineyard, and was determined to bring it to Broadway.
“Sweat” has two lead producers — Stuart Thompson (“The Book of Mormon”) and Louise Gund, an environmentalist who serves on the board of the Oregon Shakespeare Festival and whose family made a fortune in the beer, coffee and cereal businesses. Before “Sweat” was ever staged anywhere, Ms. Nottage’s agent at Creative Artists Agency sent the script to Mr. Thompson, who had never met her but was so struck by the play that he immediately optioned it for Broadway.
He insisted that a run at the Public Theater be in a small space for a limited period — a time-honored strategy to create appetite for tickets to a Broadway production. And for Broadway, the producers have reconfigured Studio 54, which normally has 1,009 seats, so that it now only has 659, taking advantage of the likelihood that ticket demand will be modest to create a more intimate playgoing experience.
Ms. Vogel, admiring of that gesture, said it is difficult to overstate the significance of getting to Broadway.
