
A grand jury voted to upgrade existing charges against James Harris Jackson, 28, who the police say confessed to plunging a sword into Timothy Caughman, 66, on March 20 in Chelsea. The killing sent shockwaves throughout New York at a time when there is widespread concern in the city and around the country over rising hate crimes.
The grand jury voted to charge Mr. Jackson with murder as an act of terror in the first- and second-degree, Joan Illuzzi-Orbon, an assistant district attorney, said during a brief appearance in Criminal Court in Manhattan. Judge Tamiko A. Amaker ordered Mr. Jackson, who was also charged with second-degree murder as a hate crime and misdemeanor weapons possession, to return to jail until his arraignment on April 13 in State Supreme Court.
Mr. Jackson cocked his head back and stared at the ceiling as he stood in handcuffs and a khaki prison jumpsuit next to his defense lawyer, Sam Talkin. If convicted, he faces up to life in prison without a chance of parole.
Mr. Talkin declined to comment on the grand jury charges.
 It echoed the 2015 killings of nine African-American churchgoers in South Carolina by an avowed white supremacist, who was sentenced to death. Mayor Bill de Blasio and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo both condemned the attack on Mr. Caughman, with the mayor calling it a racist act of domestic terrorism.
Mr. Caughman, an ebullient man who described himself on Twitter as a can and bottle recycler, was rummaging through the trash on 9th Avenue near the corner of 36th Street around 11:15 p.m. on March 20 when Mr. Jackson pounced on him from behind and plunged the 18-inch blade into his chest, according to the police.
“What are you doing?” a woman told the police she heard Mr. Caughman say, according to a police complaint filed in court.
As his assailant fled, Mr. Caughman staggered the short distance to the Midtown South police station on West 35th Street, where officers summoned an ambulance, the police said. He died at Bellevue Hospital.
Twenty-five hours later, Mr. Jackson walked into the police substation in Times Square and told officers to arrest him, the police said. He told investigators that he dropped the sword in a garbage can in Washington Square Park, where it was later recovered.
Carl Nimmons, 66, and his wife, Portia Clark, 64, both longtime friends of Mr. Caughman, sat stone-faced at the hearing on Monday. Mr. Nimmons, who said he had known Mr. Caughman for more than 55 years, fought tears describing what it was like to see Mr. Jackson in court.
