A trio of talent is branching out with refined lines of furniture and objects.
The Brooklyn-based interior design firm Home Studios has been slowly catching up to its name. The brothers behind it, Oliver and Evan Haslegrave, earned their reputation by outfitting some of New York’s coolest bars and restaurants (Elsa, Paulie Gee’s) with custom carpentry, tile work, lighting fixtures and furniture. Commercial commissions still make up the bulk of their operation — their latest project, a West Village pub called the Spaniard, opens this month — but they’ve begun to take on residences as well, and Oliver recently designed a line of objects and furniture called Homework, debuting in May.
It was her training as a fine artist that inspired Susan Hable to start a textile company with her business-minded sister Katharine 18 years ago. “I thought, ‘Oh, I can paint, and then translate that into a pattern and sell the fabric,’” she says. Her instinct was a good one: Hable Construction quickly became a design world darling, partnering with the likes of Barneys New York and Garnet Hill. Her recent foray into furniture was just as intuitive. In 2009, when Hable moved down south and started looking for local collaborators, she was immediately drawn to the century-old Hickory Chair Furniture Company, based in North Carolina and known for its dedication to craftsmanship and classic, antique-inspired pieces.
In 2012, the Swedish designer Malin Glemme was working at H&M, helping to facilitate the brand’s capsule collections, when she and her boyfriend moved house. “When I was single, I had this pink, totally kitsch home with lots of antiques and porcelain and animals and fringes,” she says. “He had this Danish ’60s style.” Now, they were attempting to combine aesthetics, but Glemme couldn’t find the exact floor coverings she was envisioning, so she designed them herself. Before long, friends and other visitors started to put in requests and her company, Layered, was born, offering a range of rugs from woolly shags to heavy cotton stitched in geometric patterns.
