The bill to replace Obamacare is struggling to gain support from House Republicans, but not necessarily because of how the plan would affect their constituents.
Millions could lose insurance coverage under the Republican plan, particularly people in the states that expanded Medicaid under Obamacare, or the older, rural and low-income Americans who would receive fewer tax credits. Those issues have driven much of the Republican opposition in the Senate, where the bill is thought to have limited support.
But so far, the House Republicans who oppose the plan aren’t from the places most dependent on Medicaid or the Obamacare tax credits. They’re not even among the most vulnerable Republicans when considering the 2018 elections.
Instead, the health care debate is splitting House Republicans along ideological lines, with few signs that members are being pulled off familiar terrain by the effect of the law on their states or districts.
This could change before the Republicans bring their plan to a vote on Thursday. A disproportionate share of undecided Republicans are from Medicaid expansion states or relatively moderate districts.
But by Wednesday morning, 27 Republicans had publicly indicated that they would vote against the plan, according to NBC News — more than the 21 defectors that House Speaker Paul Ryan can afford to lose. It’s clear that ideological considerations, not whether their constituents are more or less vulnerable to the Republican plan, is driving the opposition to the bill.
Take Medicaid expansion. So far, 12 percent of Republicans from Medicaid expansion states are poised to vote “no.” For the states that haven’t expanded Medicaid? Also 12 percent.
What about rural districts, or states where the Republican plan offers far fewer tax credits than the Affordable Care Act, like Alaska? Same story.
Electoral vulnerability doesn’t seem to be a major factor either. So far, there are just three apparent “no” votes out of the 24 Republicans who represent districts carried by Hillary Clinton. By that measure, endangered Republicans are slightly more likely to oppose the plan, but most of the opposition still comes from Republicans who don’t have to worry about the general election.
Over all, 15 percent of Republicans who have less than an 80 percent chance of winning re-election (by our estimates) oppose the bill. In comparison, 12 percent of those with a greater than 95 percent chance of winning are opposed.
What do the opponents of the House bill seem to have in common? They represent competing ideological factions with predictable reservations about the Republican plan, regardless of whether their districts or constituents are posed to be disproportionately affected.
The members of the House Freedom Caucus, a group of conservative lawmakers that helped expel John Boehner as Speaker, are by far the likeliest to oppose the Republican bill. So far, more than half of Freedom Caucus members have announced their opposition, preferring a full repeal of Obamacare. They represent half of the current opposition to the bill, and more could follow.
Just 4 percent of Republicans who aren’t members of the Freedom Caucus oppose the bill. Those members tend to be ideologically moderate by most measures — although there is a small number of conservative, non-Freedom Caucus members who oppose the bill.
There’s a lot of overlap between relatively moderate Republicans and those who might consider themselves vulnerable to re-election. And it’s more than just overlap: The Republicans who would be likeliest to vote differently as a result of their electoral vulnerabilities would also be likeliest to have already amassed a moderate voting record. So far, both electoral vulnerability and past vote record seem to matter, but whether members have been moderate in the past has been a more powerful predictor of opposition.
These patterns could change by the time voting starts. Right now, vulnerable Republicans or those who represent Medicaid expansion states are much less likely to have publicly committed to vote for the bill, even though they’re not much more likely to oppose the bill.
Just 27 percent of representatives who have less than an 80 percent chance of winning re-election in 2018 (by our estimates) have publicly committed to vote for the law, compared with 48 percent of those who have greater than a 95 percent chance of winning. Similarly, 40 percent of representatives from Medicaid expansion states have said they support the bill, compared with 47 percent of those from non-expansion states.
As for the members that Mr. Ryan is counting on, to get over the top, he’ll need to break through among the representatives driven by ideology.