Even the big money managers are struggling to navigate the choppy waters of the hedge fund industry.
Eric Mindich has decided to shut down Eton Park Capital Management, the hedge fund he started in 2004 and expanded to manage as much as $14 billion.
Like other firms, Eton Park was struggling to make the kind of double-digit returns that would justify its hefty fees. State pension funds have been dumping their hedge fund portfolios. Hundreds of smaller funds closed in 2016 after poor performance, investor redemptions and complaints about the fees.
The fund will begin returning its roughly $7 billion in capital to investors and anticipates returning about 40 percent of its outside money by April.
Your personal financial data is valuable currency in an increasingly digital economy. That is why banks and Silicon Valley are fighting over it.
For companies that offer everything from home loans to car insurance, the trail of information that consumers leave behind can be valuable. It helps them figure out whom to market to, and how much to charge.
Technology start-ups, like Mint and Betterment, have been building services to pull together these details with the aim of helping people manage their finances.
But banks want restrictions on how much access the start-ups can gain, even if users supply their passwords. In some cases, the banks have refused to pass along information on fees and interest rates they charge.
The banks argue that there should be more oversight on how the data is handled.
The tech companies, however, say the banks are threatened by the prospect of the data helping customers to get better deals.
Patrick Soon-Shiong, the billionaire doctor who invested $70.5 million in Tribune Publishing last year, has clashed with Michael W. Ferro Jr., the company’s chairman.
The two had teamed up to fend off a takeover by the Gannett Company, but their relationship has deteriorated.
Dr. Soon-Shiong has been alarmed by Mr. Ferro’s lavish spending and crass language, while the company, now called Tronc, has removed Dr. Soon-Shiong from the slate of directors that shareholders will vote on at the annual meeting in April.
At the same time, both men have been increasing their stakes in Tronc, which owns The Los Angeles Times and The Chicago Tribune.
What started off as a deal intended to show a commitment to journalism has, in less than a year, turned into an escalating feud where the endgame is still unclear.