ATLANTA — City Fire Department investigators arrested three people on Friday on suspicion of involvement in the fire that caused a crucial elevated stretch of an Atlanta highway to collapse a day earlier and could cause months of major traffic headaches here.
Sgt. Cortez Stafford, a spokesman for the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department, said that Basil Eleby, 39, was charged Friday with first-degree criminal damage to property. Sergeant Stafford said that additional charges may be forthcoming, and that Mr. Eleby was being held in Fulton County Jail as of Friday evening.
A mug shot of Basil Eleby, who was charged with criminal damage to property in connection with the fire, from a previous offense.
The two other suspects, Barry Thomas and Sophia Bruner, whose ages were not immediately available, were each charged with one count of criminal trespass and were released from custody, Sergeant Stafford said.
Few other details were available about the arrests, which were the result of an investigation by state and city fire officials. Several other people had been detained but were eventually released, Sergeant Stafford said.
Jay Florence, deputy commissioner for the state department of insurance, told The Atlanta Journal-Constitution Friday that investigators believed the three suspects were together when Mr. Eleby set the fire underneath a section of Interstate 85. No other people are thought to have been involved, and the three suspects may be homeless, Mr. Florence said.
Fulton County jail and court records show that Mr. Eleby has had numerous encounters with Atlanta-area law enforcement since 2000. He has been booked on charges including simple battery, criminal trespass, prowling and loitering, and drug sales, though the jail records do not indicate the disposition of many of the cases. But court records do show that Mr. Eleby pleaded guilty to selling cocaine in April 2007, and was sentenced to one year in jail and nine years of probation.
The major fire was discovered Thursday under a heavily-trafficked stretch of Interstate 85, a prominent north-south Atlanta route. Officials say that the fuel for the fire was a large cache of high-density polyethylene conduit being stored under the freeway. The heat from the blaze weakened the freeway, causing a large chunk of it to collapse.
No one was injured or killed in the fire, but the city is expecting weeks, and perhaps months, of disrupted travel for commuters and commercial traffic.