By the time Alex Ferguson sat down, late in 1999, to compose the first of his several memoirs, he had already accumulated a slew of honors. Championships in his native Scotland and in England. An assortment of cups, at home and abroad. And his most recent, most treasured: a long-awaited victory in the Champions League.
As he and Hugh McIlvanney, his ghostwriter, cast back through his career, though, one evening stood out above all the others. Ferguson recalled Manchester United’s party on May 14, 1994, as “one of the best occasions I have known.” With good reason, too: That was the day United, and Ferguson, had done what only the truly great teams did. They had won the Double.
For much of the 20th century, that phrase — the Double, always with a capital D — carried a special weight in English soccer. Every fan could recite the names of the three teams that had done it between the end of the Victorian era and the start of the Ferguson age: Tottenham Hotspur in 1961; Arsenal in 1971; the Liverpool side of 1986.
To be a Double-winning team was to bear the hallmark of genuine, authentic quality, to be granted admission to the sport’s most exclusive club. Very good teams won the F.A. Cup. Even better ones could call themselves league champions. To win both in the same year, though, to do the Double, was the ultimate achievement.
This season, England might yet produce another team worthy of the accolade. With 11 games of the Premier League still to play, Chelsea sits 10 points clear of its nearest rival: not an unassailable lead, not yet, but certainly an intimidating one.
Antonio Conte’s team needs only to beat Manchester United at Stamford Bridge on Monday to earn a spot in the semifinals of the F.A. Cup. An imposing list of rivals awaits there — Arsenal, Tottenham and Manchester City all booked their places over the weekend — but Chelsea will see nothing to fear. Conte’s team has beaten all three already this season. A place among the greats is within its grasp.
Even to a group of players who might have grown fat on success — Liverpool had won nine titles in the previous 14 years — the Double carried a particular resonance.
“It was a chance to put yourself into the annals of history,” said Gary Pallister, a member of the United team that did the Double in 1994 and then did it again two years later. They called that one the Double Double.
“We were the first United team to do the Double,” he said. “And we were the first team ever to do the Double Double.” The pride lasts even now.
So, too, does the sorrow, for those who came close. In 1985, Everton cantered to the league title but lost by a single goal in the F.A. Cup final, beaten by Manchester United.
Three decades on from Sharp’s heartbreak, the Double remains a rare, precious thing in England. Only one team, Carlo Ancelotti’s 2010 edition of Chelsea, has done it in the last 15 years.
And yet the achievement — and the phrase itself — no longer conjures the reverence it once did. It is telling, for example, that Pep Guardiola, the Manchester City manager, was asked more than once during his blistering start to the season whether he thought his team could win a “quadruple” of all three English tournaments and the Champions League. English soccer is locked in an inflationary spiral in more ways than one; two, it seems, is no longer enough.
To Pallister, the explanation for that lies in the changing dynamics of the modern game.
“The F.A. Cup final was always special because, in England, it was the only live game on television,” he said. “Now, there is live football virtually every day.” The F.A. Cup always shone brighter than everything else; now, it is lost amid the endless halogen glare.
The primacy of the Premier League has had an effect, too, he said. “Managers take liberties in the Cup,” Pallister said, sending out weakened teams, packed with fringe players and youngsters, preserving their most potent weapons for the league, where all the money and the kudos reside.
The Double was special because it encompassed the two competitions that dominated English soccer’s thinking.
Now, even winning the Cup is no longer enough to save a manager’s job. Louis van Gaal won it last year, and was fired anyway; Alan Pardew and Tim Sherwood, participants in the last two finals, suffered the same fate. Arsène Wenger has won it twice in three years, and he still faces protests against his reign.
The appeal of the Double lay in the twin appeals of the league and the Cup, the fact that their status was broadly similar. Now that one is little more than an afterthought, and often irrelevant, to the larger clubs, the balance has gone, taking the luster with it. 
There is, though, an added factor. From 1900 to 1993, only three seasons ended with a Double. From 1994 to 2002, five did: Manchester United in 1994, 1996 and 1999, and Arsenal in 1998 and 2002. It is a pattern that has been repeated across Europe: There have been 11 Doubles in Germany this century, and three each in Spain and Italy since 2009.
The familiarity has bred contempt. Winning the Double has become too humdrum to be exclusive. Instead, the Treble — throwing in the Champions League for good measure, a nod to elite soccer’s growing internationalism — has become the yardstick for greatness.
In England, only Manchester United, in 1999, has ever managed that. Doubtless that will be Chelsea’s challenge for next year. For now, though, there is only the Double, the unforgettable target that has somehow been forgotten.