OXFORD, England — In the 2017 world of politics and the news media, there is, we all know, no longer any “normal.” Even so, the announcement this month of the new editor of The London Evening Standard caused a seismic ripple of astonishment through British newsrooms and beyond.
No one had predicted that Aleksandr and Evgeny Lebedev, the father-and-son Russians who own the paper — given away to nearly 900,000 Londoners every day — would pick someone with no journalism experience. That, in itself, would have been considered astonishing … oh, back in 2016, say.
The Lebedevs astonished us further, naming a politician, the former chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne, as the next editor. A photograph of Mr. Osborne, a 45-year-old Conservative politician who once failed to secure a position as a trainee journalist at The Times, addressing his future colleagues was a study in dumbfoundment: a room of journalists literally lost for words.
More stupefaction was to follow. Mr. Osborne immediately made it clear that he would not be giving up his job as member of Parliament for Tatton, a constituency nearly 200 miles northwest of London. His logic was impeccable: An evening paper is on the streets by lunchtime, so it would, he considered, be an easy matter to start the day at 5 a.m. and edit the paper in the morning before turning to affairs of state in the afternoon.
But then, journalists on other papers started counting up his various jobs. They arrived at a total of six.
In addition to being a Conservative member of Parliament and newspaper editor, he pockets nearly $800,000 as an adviser to BlackRock, one of the world’s largest money managers. He made close to $1 million last year in speaking engagements, and earned a further $150,000 as the first Kissinger fellow at the McCain Institute for International Leadership at Arizona State University.
Or normal for 2017.
If Mr. Osborne anticipated any difficulty in meeting the demands of these multiple roles simultaneously, he did not betray it. In his mind, one supposes, he does not think of editing a newspaper as a very complex undertaking, not like being a brain surgeon or a nuclear physicist.
Nor did he appear troubled by the conflicts of interest that others were quick to point out. As a privy councilor who belongs to the body of senior politicians who notionally advise the queen, he has taken an oath of secrecy in relation to his privileged access to confidential briefings. Which obligation comes first: as a keeper of secrets or as a revealer of secrets?
The same blurred boundaries will apply to his membership of the 1922 Committee, the group of senior Conservative members of Parliament who meet weekly when the House of Commons is in session. The private meetings take place around 5 p.m., which will give Mr. Osborne 12 hours to forget all he has heard before turning up to edit the work of his political correspondents doing their best to discover the things he knows but, presumably, won’t tell them.
On important votes in Parliament, members are often subject to a “three-line whip,” a forceful instruction by party managers on how to vote. Can Mr. Osborne, who campaigned for the Remain side in last year’s Brexit referendum, editorialize one way and vote the other?
What about the new editor’s fiduciary duties to BlackRock, or the companies in which it invests $5 trillion? And how, as an editor standing up for Londoners, can Mr. Osborne simultaneously champion the interests of the North of England, which feels left behind by the concentration of money and power in Britain’s capital?
Mr. Osborne will surely soon discover that journalists and politicians are on different sides of the barricades. Journalists are, by instinct, inclination and deed, outsiders. Politicians, particularly when their party is in government, are almost by definition insiders.
Maybe this is to be too gloomy about Mr. Osborne’s choice of a sixth concurrent career. What does it say that someone who was once the second- or third-most powerful politician in the land decides that newspaper journalism is his future? Has Mr. Osborne not been reading the obituaries for the trade he is about to join?
One person who could understand his motivation was the Times columnist Matthew Parris, who chose journalism over politics after a brief spell as a Conservative member of Parliament in the 1980s. To him, Mr. Osborne’s choice was not so much about the strength of journalism in 2017 as the weakness of politics.
So, well and good — and, in its way, encouraging to journalists who have grown used to being told that print journalism is dying on its feet. But what does Mr. Osborne imagine editing a newspaper involves, that he can compress it into a morning’s work? I edited The Guardian for 20 years. I found it quite a demanding job.
The bigger problem is one of perception. Very many people evidently believe in the malign notion of a metropolitan elite: a small sliver of society that went to the same schools and universities, and intermarries, gossips and dines together. As recent political earthquakes in Britain and America show, such people do not believe the members of this elite are on their side or have their interests at heart.
Trust in the American news media, according to Gallup, was at its highest in 1976, when American post-Watergate journalism was arguably most aggressively confrontational toward government. Since then, trust levels have slid steadily, by a remarkable 40 points.
The sight of a recent government minister — who, as chancellor, presided over extremely harsh austerity measures for the rest of us — pocketing $2 million a year to do six jobs simultaneously, each part time, does not feel likely to improve trust in democracy.
Nor does it look good for journalism. It would be better for both if Mr. Osborne made a clean break from politics and became a great crusading editor on behalf of the people.
Now, that would not be normal.