It’s funny how story ideas develop — stray thoughts, random conversations, even children’s books can turn into a piece of journalism for The New York Times. My piece on the Inuit in northern Canada gathering mussels from under the ice at low tide was the result of a gift to my young son when we were living in Shanghai, China, 20 years ago.
I don’t know from whom it came, but “Very First Last Time” — a book by a Canadian author, Jan Andrews — appeared among the piles of books in my son’s room. It’s a coming-of-age story about a young Inuit girl who is allowed to go under the ice to gather mussels for the first time alone. She loses her way as the tide returns but eventually finds her way out, declaring that it is the last time she will go under alone. The illustrations by the Canadian artist Ian Wallace portray a magical world full of color and light. I was enchanted, and ever since have wanted to travel to the Canadian Arctic and go under the ice myself.
When I returned to North America to cover Canada after decades overseas, my first goal was to get to the Arctic to see the mussel gathering first hand. It took time to plan. There is no cellphone coverage in most of the isolated Inuit villages, and finding a phone number for someone who could help took some time. When I succeeded, I was told that the Inuit go under the ice only from mid-February to mid-March, when the weather is coldest and the ice thick enough to be stable at low tide.
In the meantime, I did some research and learned about spring tides (when the earth, moon and sun align every two weeks) and tidal resonance (when the shape of a bay and the Continental Shelf collude to amplify the tide). Resonance is what makes the famously large tides in the Bay of Fundy. Northern Canada’s Ungava Bay is another place where the natural undulation of the ocean matches the length of the bay.
Timing was a challenge: The tides reach their maximum range around the full and new moons, leaving only a three- or four-day window to go under the ice every two weeks. There are no roads linking the 14 villages of Nunavik, the northern Quebec territory that is homeland to the province’s Inuit. We would have to fly.
The photographer working with me, Aaron Vincent Elkaim, met me in Montreal for the flight to Kuujjuaq. There we boarded a lumbering Bombardier turboprop plane and watched the boreal forest give way to treeless, rocky tundra below.
The plane landed, everyone got off and we arranged a ride into town, only to discover that we were in the wrong town. Air Inuit operates like a bus, stopping at each village to drop off and pick up passengers, and we had gotten off too early. The fault wasn’t entirely ours — Aaron’s ticket was issued to the wrong place — but it meant that we had to wait a day for the next flight farther north.
That’s when the blizzard hit. It kept us trapped in the tiny town of Kangirsuk for three days as we watched our mussel-hunting opportunity wane with the latest full moon. Finally, the weather cleared and we flew to Kangiqsujuaq just in time. We managed to squeeze in three trips under the ice in the following days — though, as is often the case, the first day was the best.
It was brutally cold above the ice, and I was warm only after I pulled a homemade Inuit anorak over my store-bought parka. Beneath the ice it was perceptibly warmer. Getting in and out, swaddled in layers of clothing, tested my aging frame. Both Aaron and I ended up with water in our boots, which is obviously a problem in subzero weather. I was shooting a 360 video, so setting up the camera was another challenge for me, as was photographing under the ice for Aaron. Because of the difference in temperature, the lenses fogged and then froze.
Though it didn’t look like the drawings in my son’s storybook, it was just as magical. The ice was curved and smooth and glowed in places from aquamarine to cerulean blue. In darker passages, it sparkled in the lamplight. The air was heavy and salty. Sounds were muffled except for the unnerving gurgle of running water, a reminder that this was a temporary space.
One of the Inuit men offered me a clump of kelp with his bare hand, showing me in the light that it was clotted with dense amber-colored fish roe. We ate the roe together, the eggs firm and chewy and cold. I had been warned not to make loud noises that could trigger a deadly collapse of the ice, but it appeared very stable to me. Nonetheless, it was unsettling to crawl on all fours where the ceiling was low.
The Inuit live with a lot of accidental death, most often people who have gotten lost in a blizzard and frozen in the snow. Others have set off on their snowmobiles never to return, presumably having sunk with their machines to the bottom of the glacial waters. Still, to live with nature is an amazing thing.
Back above the ice, the sun was setting. The moon and Venus were clear and bright in the deepening blue sky. By the time we got back to the village, the sky was black and the eerie shimmer of the northern lights twisted and shifted in an ethereal dance overhead.
Tiisi Qisiig, our rugged guide, brought us to his home to eat the mussels. The Inuit of northern Quebec are better off than those in many other places in Canada because of payments from hydroelectric and mining projects that have destroyed parts of their ancestral hunting grounds. The money has built tidy houses that sit above the ground on adjustable steel jacks to avoid melting the permafrost. The houses come with appliances and utilities, for which the Inuit pay a low subsidized rent. Yet traditions endure.
In addition to “store food,” families still eat frozen, raw caribou and Arctic char, a cousin of salmon, while sitting on the floor. It makes for an odd scene, plucked from an igloo and plopped on the linoleum in front of a humming refrigerator. They use a hatchet and a knife for chopping up the frozen meat, which they eat with their hands. Sometimes they dip the meat in beluga oil, which tastes oddly like blue cheese.
Aaron and I helped de-beard the mussels, and then Tiisi’s wife, Siasi, boiled some for us to eat. The family prefers to eat them raw and so gathered around a bowl on the floor, shucking the mussels with the edge of a mussel shell, scraping out the meat and wringing it of seawater with their fists. Aaron and I ate the raw mussels, too. They are chewier than when boiled, and a bit bitter — but good. One of the rewards of reporting is being invited into people’s lives. Given the excuse, people like sharing — it’s good for the soul, as is a visit to the beautiful world beneath the ice.