Frederic Solis Nathan, the New York City legal officer whose prosecution of the striking teachers’ union in the late 1960s helped transform its pugnacious president, Albert Shanker, into a national figure by sending him to jail for a month, died on Tuesday in Manhattan. He was 94.
His daughter, Jean Nathan, said the cause was Parkinson’s disease.
As the city’s first assistant corporation counsel, Mr. Nathan was assigned by Mayor John V. Lindsay’s administration to enforce the new Public Employees Fair Employment Act, known as the Taylor Law, which prohibited work stoppages by state and municipal employees. It was the first test of the state law, which took effect on Sept. 1, 1967.
In court, union officials at first insisted that what occurred later that month — an effort to press their demands for higher wages and more control over their classrooms — was not a strike but a mass resignation. After 17 days, the longest stoppage in the school system’s history, State Supreme Court Justice Emilio Nunez disagreed.
He fined the United Federation of Teachers $150,000 and held Mr. Shanker in contempt of court, sentencing him to 15 days, served over the Christmas holiday, in the Civil Jail in Manhattan.
The next year, after a series of crippling strikes stemming from a racially polarizing dispute with a predominantly black local school board in Brooklyn over tenure and seniority, Mr. Shanker received another 15-day sentence. He challenged that penalty all the way to the United States Supreme Court, but lost his appeals and served his second sentence in 1970.
Mr. Shanker emerged as a defiant martyr to his union membership, but he was demonized by many fellow liberals, who felt betrayed by the largely white union’s opposition to community control of the city’s public schools.
His name was even immortalized as a punch line in a Woody Allen film. In “Sleeper,” when Miles Monroe (Mr. Allen) is defrosted 200 years after having been cryogenically frozen in 1973, he is stunned to learn that the United States was destroyed by a war.
During the 1967 trial, Mr. Nathan repeatedly sought to provide political cover for his friend and client Mayor Lindsay by insisting that the plaintiff in the case was neither the City of New York nor the mayor, but rather the Board of Education (whose members were appointed by the mayor).
In February 1968, Mr. Nathan’s office also successfully prosecuted John J. DeLury, leader of the sanitation workers’ union, for illegally striking. He, too, was jailed for 15 days.
Frederic Da Silva Solis Nathan was born on June 24, 1922, in Far Rockaway, Queens, to descendants of Sephardic Jews who settled in New Amsterdam in the mid-17th century. His father, Edgar J. Nathan Jr., was borough president of Manhattan in the 1940s and later a State Supreme Court justice. His mother was the former Mabel Unterberg.
Raised on the West Side of Manhattan, he graduated from the private Horace Mann School and earned a bachelor’s degree in American history and literature from Williams College in 1943. He served in the Army in Europe during World War II.
In 1948, Mr. Nathan received a law degree from Yale, where he and Mr. Lindsay, a fellow liberal Republican, were classmates. Mr. Lindsay recruited Mr. Nathan to the city’s Law Department after Mr. Lindsay, a congressman at the time, was elected mayor in 1965 and later became a Democrat.
He returned to his law firm, Greenbaum, Wolff & Ernst, in 1970.
In addition to his daughter, he is survived by his wife, the former Frances Elson; two sons, Fred Jr. and Bill; and three grandchildren.