PANAMA CITY — The chopping and the shoving started early, and it did not let up for most of the 90 minutes. Cleats slashed at shins and sweeping tackles undercut the legs of a slender 18-year-old playing against rugged men in a hostile environment.
At 5 feet 8 inches and roughly 140 pounds, the teenager, Christian Pulisic, could be one of the least imposing people to walk into a room loaded with high-performance athletes. But his piercing skill was enough to instill fear in the Panamanian soccer team, which responded with brute force in a 1-1 draw with the United States on Tuesday night.
Though he broke free regularly, and at one point found enough room to create the Americans’ only goal, the attention and abuse that Pulisic endured offered another snapshot of his rise to stardom: On a soccer field, cleat marks on tender legs can be the highest form of flattery.
Arena’s comments about Pulisic, and more later by some of the players, came unsolicited and could be seen as a message to future referees. There was anger that Tuesday’s referee, César Ramos of Mexico, did not do more to protect Pulisic in a bruising game with 24 fouls called and zero yellow cards shown.
It was not at the level of the defenders ripping mercilessly at Pelé in the 1966 World Cup, and it should be noted that Pulisic is not Pelé. But targeting the most creative player on the field is a timeworn destructive soccer tactic, and that fact was proved again in a sterling moment in the 40th minute when Pulisic, working more from the wings than he had against Honduras, twisted, turned and embarrassed two veteran Panamanian defenders inside their penalty area before sliding a perfect pass to Clint Dempsey for the Americans’ lone goal.
Though the lead did not hold, the United States came away with an important away point in its regional qualification campaign for the 2018 World Cup. After starting the international break in last place in the six-team final-round group, the Americans emerged from it in fourth place, one spot away from automatic qualification.
Pulisic came away with a seminar in targeted physical defending, and the knowledge that he will have to get used to the experience.
The game came only four days after Pulisic’s resplendent breakout performance in the United States’ 6-0 defeat of Honduras on Friday night in San Jose, Calif., and Panama seemed out to test the youngster to see if he could handle physical punishment.
Dempsey, who notched his 56th goal for the United States, moving him to one behind Landon Donovan’s national record, is another dangerous striker. But Dempsey long ago earned his reputation as a sturdy and fearless forward, and there is no need to further test his mettle.
Pulisic, for now, can expect to see many more similar tests, which may be why the United States delegation made a point to highlight the treatment he received on Tuesday, lest other teams seize on the tactic. He shrugged it off, aware that the smallest, most gifted player on the field is likely to be on the business end of pointed tackling, especially if it is not penalized.
That film also reveals that while Pulisic can dribble at defenders until they are almost tripping over themselves and then provide tantalizing service, he is not above tracking back to defend or ramming his foot into a hot spot, when necessary.
As the youngest American to score a goal in World Cup qualifying, Pulisic was not an unknown commodity to Panama. But after his free-running and productive display against Honduras, even with Dempsey’s three goals, it was clear that Pulisic had created the Americans’ best scoring opportunities.
Pulisic has shown flashes of that talent in his play for Borussia Dortmund of Germany, for whom he scored this month against Benfica, becoming the youngest Dortmund player to record a goal in the Champions League.
The defending in high-level European games, as Howard noted, is generally more professional. But Arena also said talented players could expect more protection from referees at the club level than in international play.
Howard went so far as to say the United States was playing against 12 opponents on Tuesday, and Pulisic conceded that he had let his frustration show several times with pleading hand gestures toward Ramos, the referee. In one case, after he drew a foul, he rolled on the grass in agony, only to jump up once he heard the whistle.
“I thought he was great and resilient for a little fellow,” Howard said.
Pulisic was asked if he took it as a compliment that a team had decided to focus its bulldozing techniques on his young legs.
