AUSTIN, Tex. — Some doctors are so inundated with the business of medicine that good bedside manner has become a lost art. As a preventive measure, the new Dell Medical School, part of the University of Texas at Austin, is challenging students in its inaugural class to embrace their feelings by examining the fine arts.
In late January, about 20 first-year Dell Medical students met in a gallery at the university’s Blanton Museum of Art for a two-hour lesson on empathetic communication, the final session in a three-part program. In addition to focusing on ways that doctors treat their patients through empathy, the program aimed to develop observation skills and address how doctors treat themselves, through a session on mindfulness and self-care.
The students’ principal guide for the program was Ray Williams, the museum’s director of education and a veteran of the emerging practice of using art as medicine of sorts for medical professionals, pioneered by Columbia and Yale. Before coming to the Blanton in 2012, Mr. Williams worked at the Harvard Art Museums, where he partnered with Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston to foster teamwork. Mr. Williams, who developed the curriculum for Dell, likens interpreting art to interpreting a patient.
Mr. Williams, joined by the museum educator Siobhan McCusker, welcomed the class with quotations by the actress Meryl Streep describing empathy as a key to her success. Then Mr. Williams presented David, as conveyed in the French painter Claude Vignon’s circa 1620 work “David With the Head of Goliath.” This take on Caravaggio’s classic depicts David, a sword-bearing teenager after his first kill, as forlorn and androgynous.
Mr. Williams doesn’t tell his students the titles of pieces and discourages their reading the labels. For this piece, he started by asking the students to capture the mood in one word and say it aloud.
He challenged the students to delve into the psyche of the young hero, or to cast their “empathetic imagination” upon him, at this life-changing moment. Then he flipped the exercise back on the students.
Mr. Williams and Ms. McCusker also drew from the museum’s Latin American art collection. Ms. McCusker used two 55-inch-by-92-inch paintings from “The Strangest Fruit” series, made in 2013 by the San Antonio artist Vincent Valdez, to illustrate the point of not judging a book by its cover.
One painting depicts a man wearing plain jeans and a long-sleeve top; the other shows a shirtless man in baggy jeans with a huge tattoo on his back. Ms. McCusker asked the students to rate their empathy for the two men, seemingly suspended in air, on a scale of 1 to 10. After she revealed the artist’s personal connections to his subjects and explained his portrayal of them in a “hanging” manner as homage to the Latinos lynched in Texas in the 19th and 20th centuries, some students increased their empathy scores.
Later, Mr. Williams showed the students a fiberglass sculpture about 10 feet tall, “Border Crossing (Cruzando el Rio Bravo),” made in 1987 by the El Paso artist Luis Jiménez. The work depicts a man with a woman on his back, holding a small child to her bosom. It elicited conversation about illegal immigration and how doctors ultimately decide who gets health care.
The effectiveness of a program like this is hard to measure. It is more about process than product. But Dr. MacClements, who attended medical school in South Africa during the H.I.V. outbreak in the late 1980s, saw tremendous value in the experience.
Toward the end, the students were divided into three groups, each paired with a painting. Each student was to compose a sentence in response to the work and then as a group arrange those lines in order, like a poem, to be read aloud.
For Mr. Evuarherhe, these “magical” moments at the Blanton were a nice counterbalance to his studying. He especially liked sharing perspectives on the art with other students.
