In its more than 30 years of existence, the Sundance Film Festival has obtained a name recognition unlike that of any other industry event besides Cannes. The biggest independent film festival in the United States, held in January in a town whose big business is skiing, it’s a rite of passage for both scrappy, small-budget filmmakers and Hollywood names seeking what was once called indie cred. Its frequently circuslike atmosphere is a well-known component of its notoriety.
I admit there were several times during my stays in Park City in the years I covered the festival that I longed for a different way. On days when a current of warm air would turn the town’s plentiful snow into wet mush I would carry around on my ankles from one screening to another, or when a car full of high-school students would flip me the bird en masse for the sin of walking into the parking lot they were leaving, I would think: Wouldn’t it be great if you could go to Sundance without actually leaving your town, or even your house? I dreamed of a festival perk by which films would be simulcast to screening rooms in Manhattan. After all, we do have the technology. What’s missing, I presume, is the business model, and that thing they used to call corporate synergy.
In the meantime, Sundance Now, a streaming service started in 2014, at least carries the festival’s ethos, or portions of its ethos, to the home viewer. (These days, the Sundance cable channel functions as much as an outlet for nostalgia television as for movies and original programming.) Sundance Now, which is available as an app and an Amazon Video add-on, and also streams on the web, Roku, Chromecast and other boxes, costs $6.99 a month after a free trial month, and feels immediately closer to the film festival. Which is not to say that the service can make hits from the festival available by default. A lot of news from every festival, after all, has to do with the deals made for the many films that go to Park City without a distributor. The festival itself is not in the business of actual movie acquisition.
George Schmalz, the service’s curator, said that Sundance Now has “a genuine relationship with the festival.” He added: “There’s a constant dialogue about how to bring the festival and the service together. I’m hoping that someday soon there’ll be a joint project we can roll out with.” Meanwhile, the service keeps close to the festival by inviting filmmakers who have made a mark there to create collections of their favorite films from the service’s library, sometimes with brief text introductions.
The comic actress Jenny Slate unveiled her collection at the end of February, writing, “I feel invigorated and encouraged when I watch films about unique, lively, vulnerable, often lonely people” and choosing, among others, “Crystal Fairy & the Magical Cactus,” “Heathers” and the documentary “Who Is Harry Nilsson?” The service also reaches outside the movie world for its guest curators, including the renegade chef and TV host Anthony Bourdain and the writer and activist Dan Savage.
The site is fun to explore without a docent, too. It’s full of movies whose reputations, or those of their filmmakers, were made at Sundance: Neil LaBute’s still-shocking 1997 “In the Company of Men”; the aforementioned “Raising Victor Vargas” (2003), a coming-of-age drama directed by Peter Sollett that is set in a Lower East Side Latino community; Tom DiCillo’s still-funny 1995 comedy, “Living in Oblivion.” Perhaps not surprisingly, a good number of films featuring the indie icon Greta Gerwig have come to roost here, from the acclaimed 2013 “Frances Ha” to the more obscure but still worthwhile “The Dish and the Spoon,” from 2012. Foreign films are not prominent, but the titles in that category include two by Eric Rohmer, which is never a bad thing. And as is almost always the case on streaming services, there are a couple of head-scratchingly random selections, such as the 1971 made-for-TV sports tear-jerker “Brian’s Song.” The site has also branched out from movies and is now offering the second season of an original series, “The Bureau,” about a clandestine wing of the French Secret Service.
In 1999, the first year I went to Sundance, the horror picture “The Blair Witch Project” was the talk of the festival, to the extent that a young filmmaking couple I encountered one day on a relatively empty bus was pretty downhearted about the lack of attention their own movie was getting. They had brought their film, which made waves the year before in Toronto, to the “alternative” festival, Slamdance, which takes place in Park City simultaneously with Sundance, but it wasn’t getting any buzz. They were the director Christopher Nolan and the producer Emma Thomas. The film they had brought, “Following,” which has some interesting relations to Mr. Nolan’s subsequent blockbuster “Inception,” is also available to view on Sundance Now.