In recent weeks, a widening scandal has erupted over secret all-male groups of Marines and veterans that posted nude photos of female Marines online without their knowledge and consent, and often included names, ranks and where the women were stationed. A new article, the third I’ve done on the unfolding scandal, reports on young Marine veterans who have taken up the fight against the harassment online, saying the Marine Corps leadership is not sure how to tackle the problem. But as is often true, there are interesting side stories that don’t make it into the main report. Such is the case with the inspiration for some of the anti-harrassment efforts: Saint Mattis.
In a photo with today’s story, a former Marine captain named Shawn Wylde, who spent $10,000 taking out targeted Facebook ads asking Marines to help him reveal the identities of those sharing photos, leans on his desk.  Underneath it reads: Saint Mattis of Quantico, patron saint of Chaos.
The image, created by Mr. Wylde, is so wildly popular that it now hangs unofficially in Marine bases around the world. Mr. Wylde, who owns an online, military-themed T-shirt company, has also sold more than 100,000 shirts featuring the tough-talking Mr. Mattis, who has become a cult figure among Marines.
That a defense secretary could have such resonance in the rank-and-file shows that Mr. Mattis is no ordinary secretary. While most recent picks to lead the Pentagon have been policy wonks with Ivy League degrees, Mr. Mattis is a combat-hardened Marine and that most dubious of modern achievements, internet meme.
He is revered in the military as a no-nonsense warrior who as a general never shied away from talking about killing. To the enlisted, whose lives are a dizzying array of questionable training exercises and all-day human resources briefings, he is an inspiration.
Troops saturate social media with their favorite Mattis quotes — many of them unprintable in this newspaper. They build shrines to him in the barracks. They even tried to get him to run for president.
Marines who served under the general say he is also a scholar with an exceptional grasp of history, who is reluctant to fight, but once engaged will go all-in.
“He’s so pure, so real, so intelligent. He’s just a Marine’s Marine,” said Maximilian Uriarte, a Marine veteran who draws the military comic “Terminal Lance, which often is about what he calls “Mattis’s awesomeness.” In a recent strip, simply meeting the general is enough to make a male Marine pregnant.
Mr. Wylde created targeted Facebook ads quoting the secretary, aiming for veterans who might have inside information.
Mr. Wylde had tried to combat online harassment before, reporting it to the Navy Criminal Investigation Service, but he said that nothing happened. Yet after he sent out what he calls “the Mattis post,” he received dozens of tips that helped him unmask the online personas of Marines who had avoided detection, he said.
He began posting their names, ranks and duty stations. Soon, many of the sites associated with the online groups shut down. So did the personal Facebook pages of the men he exposed online.
