237 pp. Bellevue Literary Press. Paper, $16.99.
You can find him on YouTube talking to David Letterman or Johnny Carson — a celebrity novelist. Although at a certain point Jerzy Kosinski became more than that, or something different: one of those hard-to-place figures, not quite funny but not exactly the butt of the joke either. A professional oddball. Letterman doesn’t quite know what to do with him and treats Kosinski like the weird foreign uncle a well-brought-up young man should be nice to. But Kosinski played other roles too: Holocaust survivor, con man, sex fiend, Hollywood actor, seer, a guy on the make.
Jerome Charyn’s new novel covers much of the usual life story, though not in the usual order. Born Jewish, Kosinski grew up in Poland and survived World War II, when he was said to have been taken in by local Roman Catholics. There are stories that he served as an altar boy in church. Some of these experiences made their way into his breakthrough novel, “The Painted Bird” — about a Polish boy who escapes the Nazis by wandering from village to village, where he is, as Charyn puts it, “beaten many times, left to drown in an ice hole, hung from the rafters of a barn.” The book was banned in Poland but made its author famous in America, and what followed was a peculiar kind of American success story: lecture gigs at Yale and Princeton, marriage to a wealthy widow, a divorce and another marriage, affairs, more novels, the inevitable backlash, a cameo in Warren Beatty’s “Reds.” Then, abruptly, suicide, at the age of 57.
Kosinski is a slippery figure to write about, since the facts have gotten mixed up in his fictions. Accusations of plagiarism and dishonesty — and his and others’ defenses against both — have further muddied the waters. But all this confusion is really grist to Charyn’s mill. He’s not trying to tell the story straight.
The opening section is narrated by Peter Sellers’s bodyguard and fixer, here called Ian and identified as the grandson of a man who had once been “lord of the London docks.” Sellers isn’t just your usual erratic, vain, needy actor but a monstrous shape-shifter, desperate to get the rights to Kosinski’s novel “Being There.” It’s Ian’s task to seal the deal. Along the way, the bodyguard sleeps with Princess Margaret, rescues Kosinski from a police raid on a drag queen bacchanal in Harlem and watches Sellers, while the film is being made, push Kosinski out of the picture. Later, Stalin’s daughter picks up the Kosinski story — she’s a friend from his Princeton days. And then the focus shifts to the wealthy widow, and so on, until we finally follow Kosinski back to his Polish childhood and those disputed years when his family was hiding from the Nazis.
“Jerzy” is a novel with a light touch that’s still capable of lifting heavy subjects. Charyn knows what he wants to do and knows how to do it. His prose has some of the rapid-fire but carefully controlled energy of Thomas Pynchon’s early novella “The Crying of Lot 49.” Part of Charyn’s point is to make the real and the imagined sound equally implausible. You find yourself looking up some of the characters, some of the episodes, online: Can this be true? It isn’t always easy to tell.
Charyn’s other point seems much broader: to show that all forms of power are pretty much alike, or at least connected — Hollywood, Capitol Hill, Kensington Palace, the Kremlin. Because Kosinski is a figure who proves (if we still need to learn it) that the craziness of American life may have more in common with the craziness of Russia and Europe than we like to think.