U.S.A. Hockey’s representatives, consisting of four officials and two lawyers, said they would present the players’ proposal to its executive committee for approval.
But by Thursday afternoon, U.S.A. Hockey had countered with a proposal far different than what had been discussed Monday. It had also informed the team that replacement players would be sought if a deal was not reached soon. The world championship begins next Friday in Plymouth, Mich. U.S.A. Hockey’s board is expected to meet Monday, to discuss the fate of the women’s national team’s boycott.
The team is not budging from its original demands, and the fight with the sport’s national governing body is drawing attention to the lack of women among U.S.A. Hockey’s leadership.
Of the 14 members of the executive committee listed on the organization’s website, only three are women. Throughout U.S.A. Hockey’s internal structure, positions of influence are overwhelmingly held by men.
The Women’s Sports Foundation is finishing a report that analyzed the leadership structures of international and United States Olympic and Paralympic organizations. The report found that U.S.A. Hockey is the only national governing body among American Winter Olympic sports in which women account for less than 20 percent of the board of directors.
Published minutes from U.S.A. Hockey’s most recent meeting listed 91 voting board members, 15 of whom were women. In addition, there are only two women on the 19-member board of directors for U.S.A. Hockey’s charity arm.
Reagan Carey, the director of women’s hockey, and Donna Guariglia, the U.S.A. Hockey treasurer, are among the highest-ranking women in the organization and were present at the recent negotiations. The former national team players Julie Chu, Jenny Potter and Molly Engstrom are voting board members, but Knight said that was not enough.
“I think a lapse in former player representation at this level is because of their previous experiences with the organization,” she said.
In 2000, the International Olympic Committee established a goal for partner organizations like U.S.A. Hockey to include 20 percent women by 2005. The Women’s Sports Foundation report said women accounted for three of 15 members, or 20 percent, of the I.O.C.’s executive committee in 2017.
Last week, the I.O.C. announced it would undertake “a major review project regarding gender equality.” Angela Ruggiero, a former American star who is in the Hockey Hall of Fame, is the chairwoman of the I.O.C. Athletes’ Commission.
U.S.A. Hockey is not the only American governing body lacking diversity. U.S.A. Figure Skating is the only Winter Olympic organization with a majority of women on its board of directors.
The Women’s Sports Foundation’s research showed that of the 47 national governing bodies in the United States, six have women at the top. Over all, 157 of 569 total members of national governing bodies (about 27 percent) are women, about a 2 percent decline since the 2012 Olympics. Only eight boards have a female representation of 40 percent or higher.
“The research shows is that unless you add multiples, women don’t have a voice at the table,” Snyder said.
The women’s hockey team is one of the most successful American teams in Winter Olympic sports. It has won a medal in each Olympics since 1998, and has finished either first or second at every world championship contested since 1990. Registration rates for girls continue to rise for U.S.A. Hockey. From 2014-15 to 2015-16, there was almost a 5 percent increase in female players, totaling 73,076. Almost 75 percent of those registered were girls 18 or under.
Many of the top youth players have supported the women’s team in its boycott, presenting U.S.A. Hockey with a challenge in fielding a competitive replacement team. Players from the professional National Women’s Hockey League have been contacted, but many have already voiced support for the national team. Several top college players announced on Twitter on Friday that they had said no to U.S.A. Hockey.
No team of hastily thrown together replacements would be able to equal the current American roster’s talent. The United States has won the last three world championships.
The women’s national team is seeking a package of about $70,000 per year, currently near what the top players on the women’s national soccer team receive. That would be a dramatic increase from the $1,000 per month U.S.A. Hockey currently provides during the six-month Olympic residency every four years.
But the players are willing to accept incremental increases to allow U.S.A. Hockey time to raise money and develop sponsorships.
Almost 20 years ago, Hockey Canada and the Canadian women’s national team devised a varied system for rewarding their players, including donations from national and local governments, sponsors and a number of nonprofit organizations.
Nike, the official apparel supplier and seller of U.S.A. Hockey merchandise, recently launched an advertising campaign titled “Equality.” The company did not respond to emails seeking comment about the women’s hockey team.
On Friday, several star players for the women’s hockey team took to Twitter to promote their cause.
In addition to a fair living wage, equitable accommodations and insurance, the women’s hockey team is also requesting is more opportunities for girls. U.S.A. Hockey pumps millions of dollars into its National Team Development Program for its men’s team, backed largely by donations from the N.H.L., in the hopes of producing the next generation of pros. There is no equivalent system for female players.
The ongoing conflict with the players could be the defining legacy of Dave Ogrean, U.S.A. Hockey’s executive director, who is retiring Aug. 1. In the organization’s most recent meeting, Ogrean acknowledged that diversity within U.S.A. Hockey is “very poor” and that it was an important challenge to tackle.
During the meeting, the search committee for U.S.A. Hockey’s new executive director was also announced. Only two of its nine members were women.