Melissa Weisz, a working actress in Manhattan, did not exactly grow up a drama club kid.
As a Hasidic Jew, she spent her childhood with eight siblings in the Yiddish-speaking and largely insular Satmar sect in Borough Park, Brooklyn. She had little knowledge of secular theater, film and television, which are frowned upon as sacrilegious.
At 19, Ms. Weisz entered into an arranged marriage, but she opted for divorce after four years because of her increasing differences with the strict Hasidic way of life. She stunned her family and friends by leaving her Hasidic community to seek more opportunity. She attended college and eventually became an actress.
Lately, she has found herself among other Hasidic exiles, speaking Yiddish and struggling with the strict rules of Orthodox Judaism.
They are part of the cast of “God of Vengeance,” Sholem Asch’s 1907 play, which is being revived by the New Yiddish Repertory Company. The Off Broadway production will open Tuesday at the Theater at St. Clement’s Church in Manhattan.
In the play, a Jewish brothel owner in early 20th-century Eastern Europe tries to keep his daughter unstained by brothel life. He soon begins to see her drifting away from the faith and into a forbidden lesbian relationship with a prostitute, played by Ms. Weisz.
Ms. Weisz, now 32, is routinely brought to tears in rehearsals watching this distancing between father and daughter, especially since it evokes memories of having to explain to her parents that she was leaving the Hasidic religion and lifestyle.
The play rekindles the pain even while reinforcing her decision to follow her own path, she said.
Another prostitute is played by Malky Goldman, 29, an actress who uses Goldman as a stage name to avoid causing discomfort for her family. Like Ms. Weisz, she broke from her Hasidic background. Their castmates include three young male actors who also broke away from parochial, ultra-Orthodox lifestyles in Brooklyn.
“God of Vengeance” is the professional stage debut for the five Hasidic exiles. Having grown up speaking primarily Yiddish, they were natural choices for the play, which offers projected English subtitles for the audience.
But that intensity has a price, with the play dredging up the anguish of becoming alienated from family and friends and abandoning the only life they had known.
Even if they have achieved rapprochement with their families, the actors said, they would not bother inviting them to the show. After all, most Hasidic Jews would not attend even a tame secular play, much less one with forbidden themes and scenes involving Hasidic characters, they said. And relatives would be further offended knowing that the actors had grown up Hasidic.
Ms. Weisz said her upbringing helped her employ the proper inflections, gestures and even Torah references onstage. It also helped her intuitively connect with the play’s themes of religious hypocrisy, gender roles and forbidden sexuality.
“It’s something so visceral, no one can really, really get it the way we can,” she said.
Ms. Goldman agreed.
For Shmully Blesofsky, 35, growing up in the Lubavitcher sect in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, allowed him to draw on characteristics from two Hasidic uncles: one a modest mensch, the other a swaggering figure who would cut a wide swath during prayer sessions at the Lubavitcher headquarters at 770 Eastern Parkway.
The religious exiles have proved a welcome infusion for the New Yiddish Rep. Its founder and artistic director, David Mandelbaum, invited the five actors to join the company after meeting them at a theater workshop last summer.
With members of the New Yiddish Rep almost all over 50, the company has been challenged by the decline of Yiddish, except in Hasidic strongholds in Brooklyn and some suburban pockets — populations that Hasidic guidelines generally forbid to participate in secular theater. But it has been encouraged by a niche revival of Yiddish study as a cultural phenomenon by non-Orthodox Jews and even gentiles.
Despite growing up without theater experience, the five actors possess “the spirit of Yiddish culture, so we don’t have to teach them that,” Mr. Mandelbaum said during rehearsals with the cast and the director, Aaron Beall.
The actors perform alongside Jewish and Gentile actors who learned Yiddish as adults. They include Caraid O’Brien, an Irish-born actress who, after studying the Irish language, was introduced by Catholic nuns to Yiddish literature and went on to learn Yiddish.
Shane Baker, who plays the brothel owner, has become an aficionado of Yiddish vaudeville even though he grew up an Episcopalian in Kansas City, Mo.
Mr. Baker said the new crop of actors could help lead to “a reflowering of Yiddish culture” with the help of a bridge between religious and cultural Jewry.
When the play premiered on Broadway in 1923, in English, its lesbian kissing scene, said to be the first on a Broadway stage, caused a scandal. The police arrested the cast on charges of public indecency, and the play was shut down, all of which is portrayed in a separate play, “Indecent.” That production, written by Paula Vogel, will be at the Cort Theater beginning in April.
During a rehearsal break, the five actors discussed going “off the derech” — or O.T.D. — an expression that uses the Hebrew word for path and refers to leaving the Hasidic religion and lifestyle. This includes moving out of neighborhoods that can have the feel of a 19th-century neighborhood in Eastern Europe.
For actors who grew up in that environment, the century-old setting of the play does not feel that old, said Eli Rosen, 37, who plays a Torah scribe in the play.
“In a way, the time is parallel, given how traditionally we grew up,” said Mr. Rosen, who was raised in Borough Park and became a cantor and a lawyer before obtaining a divorce and leaving the Hasidic world.
With a production that raises sensitive issues, the cast plans on holding panels after performances to provide perspective on the play and address questions it raises.
Ms. Weisz said she had no problem discussing her current lifestyle as what she called a queer woman.
