R. Seth Williams, the embattled district attorney for Philadelphia, was indicted Tuesday on bribery and fraud charges, a remarkable turn for the city’s top prosecutor, who was considered a rising Democratic star before he became embroiled in scandal and ethics violations.
A 50-page, 23-count indictment accused Mr. Williams of accepting lavish gifts — including trips to a Dominican resort, Burberry accessories, checks for thousands of dollars and a custom sofa worth $3,212 — from businessmen for whom he was willing to do favors. The indictment also accused Mr. Williams of diverting money from a relative’s pension and Social Security for his personal use.
“Mr. Williams was willing to compromise his position of public trust in exchange for private financial gain,” said William E. Fitzpatrick, the acting United States attorney for New Jersey, who announced the charges.
A spokesman for Mr. Williams, Cameron Kline, declined to comment on the indictment. “The D.A. is not in the office today because he is spending time with his family,” Mr. Kline said.
Mayor Jim Kenney called on Mr. Williams to resign.
“It is disheartening to see yet another elected official give the public a reason not to trust us,” Mr. Kenney said.
Mr. Williams has already paid a $62,000 fine to the city’s Board of Ethics after failing to disclose more than $160,000 in gifts. Last month, he told reporters he had ended his run for a third term.
But according to federal prosecutors, Mr. Williams’s problems went beyond a failure to disclose.
The indictment said he had accepted gifts, including trips to Punta Cana in the Dominican Republic and items worth thousands of dollars, from a businessman who asked him for favors.
“I am merely a thankful beggar and don’t want to overstep my bounds in asking … but we will gladly go,” Mr. Williams wrote in a text message, which the indictment said referred to one of the trips.
The indictment also claimed that Mr. Williams accepted numerous flights and even a 1997 Jaguar from a second businessman, whom he named a “special adviser.” He also wrote a letter to further his friend’s business interests, it said.
The indictment does not name the businessmen, but it notes that one of them gave Mr. Williams a gift of $7,000 in 2013. The settlement with the Ethics Board mentions a gift of $7,000 in the same year from Mohammad N. Ali.
Before he was elected district attorney in 2009, Mr. Williams was an assistant district attorney and the city’s inspector general — charged with rooting out corruption. He drew national attention early in his term by reducing penalties for possessing small amounts of marijuana.
And he got caught in the drama surrounding Pennsylvania’s now-disgraced attorney general, Kathleen G. Kane, when some of his prosecutors were found to be involved in lewd email chains that Ms. Kane had uncovered when they worked for the attorney general’s office. He pursued charges that Ms. Kane had dropped against Democratic lawmakers because, she said, they were racially motivated.
“He came in with a lot of promise, and he, of his own mechanizations, messed it up,” said Linn Washington, a professor of journalism at Temple University who has covered criminal justice in Philadelphia for several decades.
Mr. Fitzpatrick, the acting United States attorney, said investigators had not uncovered information that cast doubt on the work of other prosecutors in Mr. Williams’s office.
But observers like Mr. Washington said the accusations could cascade through the city’s criminal justice system.
