Marian Javits, the arts patron, bon vivant and proto-feminist who cut a singular figure in New York while her husband, Jacob, devoted long years in Washington as the state’s long-serving United States senator, died on Tuesday in Manhattan. She was 92.
Her death was confirmed by her son, Joshua.
Mrs. Javits, who grew up in poverty and later became part of a glamorous social set, provided ample fodder for gossip columnists with her nightclubbing, her long-distance marriage to a spouse who was 21 years older and her separate professional life, which crossed prevailing boundaries when she became a lobbyist for the Iranian government.
She was unambiguous about her relationship with her husband, Senator Jacob K. Javits, a Republican, who was first elected in 1956, served until his defeat by Alfonse M D’Amato in 1980 and died in 1986.
He acknowledged that on their wedding night, he brought newspapers to read in their honeymoon hotel room.
“There have always been papers between us,” Mrs. Javits said.
The limits of their separate careers were tested in 1976 after The Village Voice disclosed that Mrs. Javits had registered as a foreign agent to work for the public relations firm Ruder & Finn representing the airline Iran Air and the Iranian government, which was headed at the time by Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi.
The potential conflict — the senator was a ranking member of the Foreign Relations Committee, and Iran had supported a United Nations resolution equating Zionism with racism — provoked an outcry in Congress and among Mr. Javits’s constituents.
Within a few weeks, Mrs. Javits reluctantly resigned as a senior vice president of the company and gave up her $67,000 fee (about $285,000 in today’s dollars).
“I have been encouraged by the hope that my experience will in some way mark a step forward in the historic effort to establish real professional independence among working husbands and wives,” she said at the time.
Mrs. Javits was active in many spheres. She lobbied Congress to establish the National Endowments for the Arts and the Humanities; supported programs to benefit struggling artists and the mentally ill; and was president of a partnership that sold limited-edition prints by leading painters.
In one instance, she persuaded the New York Telephone Company to reproduce paintings on the back covers of its directories so that the books could be displayed face down on coffee tables.
Marion Ann Burros (she spelled her first name Marian episodically, including later in life) was born on Jan. 19, 1925, in Detroit, the granddaughter of Jewish immigrants from Russia. Her father, Morris, was a largely unsuccessful furrier and inventor. (Among his brainstorms was a radio speaker shaped like a Buddha.) Her mother, the former Clara Krellman, was an electrologist.
When Marion was an infant, the family moved to the Bronx and then to Harlem, where they went on welfare. Her parents later separated.
She met Mr. Javits, a divorced lawyer at the time, in 1945, when they were working to elect Jonah J. Goldstein, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor. (William O’Dwyer, a Democrat, won.) They married two years later.
In addition to her son, she is survived by two daughters, Joy and Carla Javits; five grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren.
By planting herself in New York, where she was untethered by the etiquette of a capital she considered provincial (“It’s absolute nonsense to think that if a husband is out of town, a wife cannot go partying,” she told The Boston Globe), Mrs. Javits generated her share of boldface scuttlebutt.
She once told The Washington Post that the image of herself she liked best was a full-length painting by Boris Chaliapin, who was best known for illustrating hundreds of Time magazine covers. It was a conventional portrait, except for one surreal touch, where he painted an arrow cleanly puncturing her head.
