William A. Ackman staked his reputation as a savvy stock picker on his ability to oversee a turnaround at Valeant Pharmaceuticals International.
But it seems even Mr. Ackman didn’t have an appetite for the time and resources that Valeant required.
Mr. Ackman’s firm, Pershing Square Capital Management, sold its entire stake in the pharmaceutical company, which had expanded by aggressively buying up other rivals but has been overwhelmed by, among other things, questions over its accounting and political pressure over its drug pricing.
Valeant’s stock has plummeted from a high of $257 in 2015, closing at $12.11 on Monday.
The two-year bet lost about $4 billion for Pershing Square’s investors.
The firm will at least have more time to dedicate to its other investments, and it said the sale would enable it to realize a large tax loss.
As the Financial Times notes, Mr. Ackman is not the only investor to have lost money because of Valeant, but being on the Valeant board required time and Mr. Ackman had to deal with questions from his own investors about the holding.
The saga also illustrates the risks of Mr. Ackman’s strategy of focusing on just a handful of big bets at a time: Losses on J. C. Penney and the bet against Herbalife have offset big gains on Canadian Pacific Railway and GGP, the mall developer, The Wall Street Journal reports.
The driverless car industry is racing ahead and Intel wants to control the technology under the hood.
Its $15.3 billion deal for Mobileye, an Israeli company that makes sensors and cameras for driverless vehicles, is an effort to ensure Intel’s role supplying autonomous cars with the immense computing power they will need with its chips and data centers.
Mobileye will help Intel broaden its appeal to automakers that want to move into driverless cars, but may not have the in-house expertise and may not want to rely on the likes of Google.
There are questions about how much Intel paid for the company though. Mobileye will need to maintain its current stunning rate of growth for several years, even as plenty of other firms are gunning for the market, Robert Cyran writes in Breakingviews.
It won’t be easy. The self-driving auto unit of Alphabet is already claiming that it is pushing down prices for the imaging technology that maps the surroundings of autonomous cars, which would make it tough for Mobileye to maintain its profit margins, according to Bloomberg.
For years, Mr. Bharara — who was fired as United States attorney for the Southern District of New York — was accused of letting Wall Street off the hook. Then he became a man who apparently terrified Wall Street (though critics said this was the result of overreach).
Neither of these narratives is quite accurate, Andrew Ross Sorkin writes. Mr. Bharara is a pragmatist, and one with a proclivity for publicity.
Sometimes, though, he just did not have enough of a case.
But his successes in court did have some deterrent effect. Much of the trading community lived in fear of his office and firms have tightened up their compliance programs.
So what happens to his cases? One of them appears to be continuing without him.
A federal grand jury is expected to hear testimony soon from witnesses about business practices at Fox News when it was led by Roger E. Ailes, according to people with knowledge of the matter.
Mr. Ailes was forced out after multiple accusations of sexual harassment, charges he has denied.
Worth noting: One of the people mentioned as a possible successor to Mr. Bharara is Marc L. Mukasey, who has represented Mr. Ailes.