When Stephanie Jorge reported to a federal jail in Brooklyn last year to begin a three-month sentence for bank larceny, she brightly announced that she was pregnant.
The correctional officers showed little interest. Later, on the occasions she began to hemorrhage, the officers would typically refuse to call an ambulance until they could summon three officers to take her to the hospital — apparently the required number to guard an inmate, even one pregnant and bleeding. That often took an hour or two, Ms. Jorge recalled.
At the hospital, doctors recommended bed rest and that she avoid exertion, a common directive for women with high-risk pregnancies. But Ms. Jorge said that was ignored the moment she was discharged back to the Metropolitan Detention Center, as Brooklyn’s federal jail is called.
Back inside, Ms. Jorge said she was made to strip, squat, and cough. A guard watched to see if contraband fell from her vagina. The bleeding worsened, she said.
Her bunkmates worried, too. “The other inmates told me, ‘There was a girl who lost her baby in here and you better hope that doesn’t happen to you,’” Ms. Jorge, who is due next month, said in a recent interview.
The treatment of women, pregnant and otherwise, at the Metropolitan Detention Center has alarmed a number of judges. One federal judge has apologized to a woman who had been pregnant while at the jail, saying her treatment was a source of shame for him. Another federal judge expressed reluctance about sending women to the jail because what she had heard about the conditions there made it sound more like “a prison in Turkey or some third-world country” than a federal prison in the United States.
The National Association of Women Judges, which sent a delegation to the jail, said the conditions in the women’s wing were “unconscionable” and violated United Nations rules pertaining to treatment of prisoners.
“Humane treatment of the men and women in our custody is a top priority,” Mr. Long wrote in an email.
Nonetheless, the inspector general at the Justice Department is currently looking into the federal Bureau of Prisons’ “management of its female inmate population,” and the situation in Brooklyn will fall under that review.
Although Ms. Jorge’s account — much of which was described in a letter that her lawyer filed in federal court — could not be independently verified in its entirety, a correctional officer confirms in a disciplinary report against Ms. Jorge that jail staff had ignored a doctor’s recommendation for bed rest.
The Metropolitan Detention Center, or the M.D.C., is a high-rise building in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, that, at a passing glance, might be mistaken for a storage center.
Men make up the vast majority of the facility’s 1,800 inmates; the number of female prisoners has fluctuated between several dozen to more than 150 during the last year.
Men and women are segregated to prevent sexual contact and violence. But the segregation is enforced in a way that tends to disadvantage female prisoners the most. Until late last year, for instance, a recreation room for female inmates received little sunlight because metal sheeting had been used to construct a barrier to block male inmates from peering in.
The lead federal public defender in Brooklyn, Deirdre von Dornum, said that many jobs, such as kitchen work, go to men, leaving female prisoners with little to occupy their time, few chances to move around, and less money in their commissary accounts.
The women generally live together in one or two large dorm rooms, where they also eat and shower. All these conditions can be particularly hard for pregnant inmates, leaving them anxious over long-term health consequences for their children, interviews indicate.
Female inmates told the National Association of Women Judges that the food is frequently rotten. While pregnant, Jamie said she lost six pounds in one week.
Pregnant inmates worry that when they need medical assistance, they would be ignored or told to wait.
Many details about what happened to Joselin Rosario, a former prisoner at M.D.C., remain sealed by court order. But it is clear that a federal judge was deeply troubled by the jail’s treatment of Ms. Rosario, whose pregnancy ended in miscarriage.
A letter from Deirdre von Dornum, the lead federal public defender in Brooklyn, details the medical issues of Stephanie Jorge, who experienced complications with her pregnancy shortly after entering the Metropolitan Detention Center.
“I am ashamed of what we did to you,” one federal judge in Brooklyn, Eric N. Vitaliano, told Ms. Rosario in January, five months after her pregnancy ended. “And on behalf of the people of the United States, I offer our sincerest apology,” he said, as he ordered her deported to Aruba.
Jamie recalled Ms. Rosario being overweight. “When I saw her, I knew she would have a hard pregnancy,” Jamie said in a recent phone interview, shortly before she was deported to Canada.
In Ms. Rosario’s second trimester, she complained that something was wrong. Pointing to her stomach, she would say, “Yo tengo dolor” — I have pain, Jamie said.
Eventually Ms. Rosario was hospitalized. When she returned to jail, she had brought back a little cap, the sort hospitals place on newborns, Jamie said.
After that, Ms. Rosario, 30, often sobbed in her bed, Jamie said.
Her lawyer, Douglas Morris, said Ms. Rosario miscarried and never received “what should be basic standards for medical care, the basic standards for human decency,” the transcript shows.
Ms. Jorge had a similar experience in September after telling correctional officers that her pregnancy was high-risk and required bed rest. One officer accused Ms. Jorge of lying after spotting her walking — once to get food and once to see her husband, who was visiting, according to the officer’s report.
A few days after arriving at the M.D.C., Ms. Jorge began to bleed. She was repeatedly taken to a nearby hospital for examination. Afterward, when she returned to the M.D.C., officers made her squat for an intrusive search, which made the bleeding worse, Ms. Jorge said. The second time, she passed a large blood clot, she said. After that, she spent the remainder of her sentence isolated in a hospital room, mostly without phone calls or visitors, she said.
Interviewed at her mother’s home, Ms. Jorge said the way she was treated had distorted her feelings about being pregnant. “I started to not care about my pregnancy, because no one else cared,” she said.