The art she made reflected that view. Even deep into her 20s, as Ms. Segarra rose as a critically admired singer-songwriter on three albums released under the band name Hurray for the Riff Raff, she kept her lineage at bay. Instead, her music explored the blues and folk roots of Americana. Only last year, as she approached her 30th birthday, did Ms. Segarra confront her internalized cultural exile with the intent to reconcile the disparate strands of her identity.
The results can be heard on her ambitious new work with the band due on Friday, “The Navigator,” a sci-fi-tinged concept album that traces the wanderings of a character named Navita Milagros Negrón. Ms. Segarra fashioned the story as an imaginary Off Broadway play “starring” the musicians, “directed by” its producer and featuring a faux Playbill to guide listeners through. The music uses her contradictions to her advantage, mixing rock guitars with bomba rhythms, while melding original lyrics with some verse from the Puerto Rican poet Pedro Pietri. The songs connect the dots in a long history of Latin influences in popular music, from the street-corner harmonies of doo-wop, to Brill Building hits like “Save the Last Dance for Me,” to the flamenco-punk of Mink DeVille.
On a recent winter afternoon, Ms. Segarra returned to the Nuyorican Poets Cafe to discuss her early alienation, framing it, in part, as a product of assimilation. When she was growing up, her mother, Ninfa Segarra, had a thriving career as an educator and a politician, rising to become the deputy mayor of New York under Rudolph W. Giuliani. Her father was a vice principal and a music teacher in the Bronx, where he taught the singer and actor Marc Anthony as a youth.
Aching for experience and escape, Ms. Segarra took to the road, hopping trains until she finally ended up settling in New Orleans by her 18th birthday. There, she found street kids she connected with more deeply. Together, they began performing songs by Woody Guthrie, whose wanderings Ms. Segarra’s own had echoed. She lived by busking, getting good enough at her craft to make home recordings that earned some buzz, starting with “It Don’t Mean I Don’t Love You” (2008). In 2014, Ms. Segarra was signed to ATO Records for “Small Town Heroes,” which proved a critical breakthrough. Yet she felt unsatisfied in her work.
To focus, she moved to Nashville, where she didn’t know anyone. “I began to ask myself, ‘Who am I when everyone I know is gone?’” she said.
The album’s lyrics conform to rock rather than to theatrical music, favoring poetic abstractions over clear narrative. Themes of gentrification and cultural appropriation center the work, all boldly delivered by Ms. Segarra’s billowing vibrato. Along the way, she gives a nod to the Young Lords, the Puerto Rican activist group of the ’60s and ’70s.
