On a hillside in the shadow of Mount Tamalpais, north of San Francisco, amid the redwood trees, lies what is arguably the most important outdoor deck in American dance history.
Upon its wooden planks, the choreographer Anna Halprin led experimental workshops, starting in the 1950s, that rejected the high style and codified technique of reigning modern-dance choreographers like Martha Graham in favor of improvisatory tasks and everyday activities. In Ms. Halprin’s most famous work, “Parades and Changes” (1965), dancers calmly undressed and dressed several times, and then tore huge rolls of paper in the nude — acts radical enough, back then, to prompt arrest warrants when the piece had its premiere in New York in 1967.
In California, where Ms. Halprin, 96, still teaches, her significance is widely recognized. That’s much less true in New York, where discussions of postmodern dance tend to leave her out, concentrating instead on Merce Cunningham and especially on the members of Judson Dance Theater and their 1960s cultural insurrection.
Soon, New Yorkers will have several chances to reassess Ms. Halprin’s influence — not just on dance in California but also on dance in New York. At the Joyce Theater (March 28-April 2), the Stephen Petronio Company extends “Bloodlines,” a project started in 2014 to remount, and thus preserve, works by artists who have influenced Mr. Petronio. He will perform “Courtesan and Crone,” a solo Ms. Halprin created for herself when she was 79.
And at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, an exhibition called “Radical Bodies” (May 24-Sept. 16) links Ms. Halprin to two participants in her workshops who took her ideas east: Simone Forti and Yvonne Rainer, Judson Dance Theater’s chief theorist-practitioner.
Since the 1970s, Ms. Halprin’s dance practice, following the Human Potential movement and the gestalt therapy of Fritz Perls, has focused on community building and healing. Versions of her “Planetary Dance,” an annual outdoor ritual open to all ages and abilities and intended to create peace on Earth, are performed around the world. “If I leave a legacy, it will be ‘Planetary Dance,’ not ‘Parades and Changes,’” Ms. Halprin said. “Planetary Dance,” though, is hard to squeeze into a program of historically significant works.
“My question is, was Anna the source?” Mr. Petronio said after a recent rehearsal.
Likewise the inclusion this season of Steve Paxton (his extraordinary improvisations to Bach’s “Goldberg Variations”), whose Contact Improvisation class was Mr. Petronio’s introduction to dance in the 1970s. Ms. Brown and Mr. Paxton were members of Judson Dance Theater, as was Ms. Rainer, whose signature work, “Trio A,” will be danced by Mr. Petronio’s company — in its 1970 anti-Vietnam War version, performed in the buff, apart from American flags worn as giant bibs.
The connection to Ms. Halprin isn’t so obvious. Mr. Petronio recalled hearing Ms. Brown tell a story about doing an exercise in momentum on Ms. Halprin’s deck in 1960, sweeping with a broom until she found herself flying through the air horizontally. “I started to realize that everybody had been on that deck,” Mr. Petronio said — Ms. Brown, Ms. Rainer, even Cunningham, many branches of his artistic family tree.
And so, a few years ago, Mr. Petronio’s curiosity carried him there, too. In one of Ms. Halprin’s regular classes, he had another realization: “It was the class that I had taken from everybody in the ’70s,” he said.
These days, when nudity has become commonplace in experimental dance — “God, I wish they’d put their clothes on,” Ms. Halprin said — it still means something to Ms. Halprin, who has dedicated this revival of “Parades and Changes” to the protest against the Dakota Access Pipeline. “I think of it as purity, something beautiful that must not be destroyed,” she said.
