Steven T. Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, makes his first appearance on the global stage today.
At a gathering of G-20 finance ministers and central bankers in Germany, he’ll be trying to balance President Trump’s “America First” economic platform with the fears of other countries.
But it will be a tough sell, The Wall Street Journal explains.
For one, Mr. Trump’s vows to rewrite trade deals could prompt retaliatory moves from other countries.
The president also says he thinks the dollar is too strong, while the renminbi and the euro are too weak, giving them an unfair trade advantage. But his domestic proposals are expected to bolster the value of the dollar.
“It is not our desire to get into trade wars, it is our desire to deal with where there is imbalance in certain trade relations,” Mr. Mnuchin said on Thursday.
It can be useful to have friends in high places, and it doesn’t get much higher than the White House, so Goldman Sachs should be sitting pretty.
And sure, the bank, which has plenty of former employees installed in the administration (including, for example, Mr. Mnuchin), has seen a healthy rise in its shares since the election.
But sometimes friends can be a bit of a drag, too. At least, that’s what some people close to Goldman say.
In their view, the Trump connection may actually be more of a liability — the two organizations are different in style and substance. And the links attract more scrutiny to the bank.
As well as potential differences in opinion over policies though, there could be a longer-lasting effect on Goldman.
Ties to a president with low approval ratings could negatively affect the bank’s image, meaning that it could lose some of its appeal among the next generation of workers. The firm may find itself competing harder with Morgan Stanley for young talent.
While Goldman alumni in the Trump administration try to limit themselves to social conversations with their former colleagues, Gary D. Cohn, the White House economic adviser, is trying to clear his own plate of potential conflicts of interest.
He is selling a significant holding in the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China — the world’s biggest bank, with nearly $3.5 trillion in assets. Mr. Cohn’s stake would be worth about $16 million.