Many readers wrote in with comments, mostly positive, about our “Committed” series, which explored 165 years of articles on love and marriage in The New York Times. A few of these comments prompted us to try, with differing degrees of success, to tie up two loose ends.
Several clothing historians expressed concerns about the first article in our series, which told of the wedding announcement of Sarah Mullett and John Grant that was published on Sept. 18, 1851, in the The New-York Daily Times. Accompanying the article were photos of two oil portraits, presumably of the newlyweds, that now hang on a wall of the home of Wendy Grant Haskell, the Grants’ great-great-granddaughter.
The historians said the clothing worn in the portraits indicated a painting date of about 20 years before the Grant wedding. That would mean that the portraits were not of Sarah and John, but more likely of earlier Grant ancestors.
We decided to seek opinions from two experts in fine art, sending them additional photos, of the backs of the paintings.
One expert, Robin Starr, sided with the clothing historians’ view that the portraits were from circa 1830.
But another authority, Lori Verderame, director of DrLoriv.com and a fine art expert on the History Channel, sided with the family’s original belief of a circa 1850 date.
She added that an artist in 1850 could, for any number of reasons, paint portraits of someone wearing clothes normally worn in the 1830s.
Among the factors cited by Dr. Verderame were the type of wood used, the color of the canvas and the way the pigment was applied. She noted that the brads used to attach the canvas were of a kind typically seen in the 1850s.
So who is right? Dr. Verderame, with the circa 1850 origin, or the clothing historians and Ms. Starr, with the 1830s origin?
We’re not qualified to judge. And the portraits’ painter, said to have gone by the name Graves, has been in one for more than a century, so he (or she) is of little help.
We are therefore declining to issue a correction, or at least are holding one in abeyance, perhaps for another 165 years or so, until a more definitive conclusion can be reached.
Other readers thought that a closing chapter was missing in our report about an article from June 6, 1855, detailing the Virginia wedding celebration of Henry Kane and Sarah Anderson, during which a poisonous dessert was served. The article said that as many as 25 people who had eaten a custard were expected to die, including the bride, and that arsenic had been used.
Well, our readers wanted to know: Did poison actually take the lives of the bride and all those guests?
“The only known fatality was a man named John Bishop,” Laura Wright wrote in Virginia Creeper, an online magazine based in Scott County, where the poisoning occurred.
A slave was viewed as a possible culprit, then released, Ms. Wright wrote. Other suspects included a white woman and a white couple and their slave, but physicians later concluded that the custard had actually been poisoned by iron and copper.
Ms. Wright’s research did not uncover how iron and copper may have seeped into the custard, but she speculated that the serving dishes could have been decorated with paints that contained those elements.
“Fortunately, both bride and groom survived the brush with death and went on to have seven children,” wrote Ms. Wright, who examined old newspaper clippings and family histories to flesh out the story.
And who doesn’t love a happy ending?