WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — In general, there is a myth that adults are wont to suffer from midlife crises at some point in their lives but, given the extraordinary medical advancements we have seen, middle age is a concept with moving goal posts, to say the least.
Jules Markey delineates those goal posts for us today, at least within the boundaries of a crossword puzzle, but are we really talking about a crisis? Let’s find out.
Mr. Markey’s theme consists of four phrases, each of which contains one of the archaeological ages: ICE, STONE, IRON (Bronze is not represented, because it would be impossible to find a phrase where those letters overlap.). I’m not certain that NEW Age is considered to be an official archaeological age, but is actually an “alternative” archaeological philosophy. Still, all four of the entries appear somewhere inside the phrases and the letters are circled to help solvers find them.
Interesting side note: The phrase LOST ONE’S MARBLES makes its debut today. Make of that what you will.
■ 14A: Initials in the clues need initials in the answers, so J.E.B. Stuart’s superior in the Civil War was R. E. LEE, or Robert E. Lee.
■ 38A: Watch out for tricky spelling! “It’s an honour: Abbr.” indicates that the answer has to be a British (or other non-American English) abbreviation, and today it’s O.B.E.
■ 6D: Contract bridge players, you got this one, right? “Game for dummies?” with a question mark means that it is not a disparaging clue, but refers to something that might have dummies in it. According to the American Contract Bridge League, the Dummy is the partner of the Declarer.
I submitted this puzzle a few years ago (STONE AGE?), and I’m happy to see it published today. There were a limited number of workable AGE choices. BRONZE was a non-starter, although I could have gone the “wacky” entry route with something like: LE BRON_ZEBRA_SKIN, clued as: “Nike’s new King James exotic sneaker brand” … Maybe not. DARK seemed to be off because it’s referred to as the DARK AGES. I thought SPACE was cool, but aside from SISSY SPACEK nothing seemed to work, so I settled on the theme entries you see today.
Placing the nine-letter reveal in the center necessitated long downs in the corners, my favorite of which is ODORANT, which is very rarely seen without its DE- prefix but which is a real lifesaver in the form of Mercaptan when added to odorless natural gas. There was one change to the grid: 45-Down was changed to OPTI from OCTI and, as usual, Will and Joel really livened up the clues.
I would like to add somewhat preemptively, that one of the meanings of the word MIDDLE is: being at neither extreme, intermediate. I hope you all enjoyed the solving experience.