WASHINGTON — President Trump and conservative lawmakers in the House agreed Friday to significant changes to Medicaid that could impose work requirements on able-bodied Medicaid beneficiaries in some states and limit federal funds for the program, as Republican leaders tried to rally balking lawmakers behind legislation to repeal the Affordable Care Act.
On Capitol Hill, the outlook was far less clear. The House is tentatively scheduled to vote Thursday to repeal President Barack Obama’s signature domestic achievement, exactly seven years after Mr. Obama signed it into law. As some lawmakers came out for the measure, some others — in the House and Senate — were stepping forward to oppose it.
The concessions to conservatives are significant — and politically risky. The Obama administration refused to allow work requirements, saying they were not consistent with the goals of Medicaid, the health program for low-income people. Several Republican governors have expressed interest in imposing such requirements on certain Medicaid beneficiaries — able-bodied adults without minor children.
The president and House conservatives also agreed to allow states to choose one lump-sum block grant to fund their Medicaid programs. The initial House bill would end Medicaid as an open-ended entitlement to health care, replacing that with an allotment to the states for each Medicaid beneficiary.
If, instead, states accepted lump-sum payments, they could gain more control over spending and more freedom to administer the program and define eligibility and benefits.
Critics say that would restrict access to Medicaid in states with conservative governments.
It is not clear how the federal government would calculate the amount of block grants. Nor is it clear which states, if any, might accept that option.
The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office has already estimated that, under the House bill, the number of people without health insurance would be 14 million higher than expected next year and would be 24 million higher by 2026. The Medicaid adjustments could nudge that number even higher, a problem for many senators.
The one Republican senator up for re-election next year in a true swing state, Dean Heller of Nevada, said on Friday that he opposed the bill in its current form. Another Republican senator, Joni Ernst of Iowa, was noncommittal.
Another likely change, Republicans said, would be to restructure the tax credits offered under the bill to help people buy private health insurance. Republican lawmakers had expressed concern that the tax credits, as originally devised by House leaders, were insufficient and could produce huge increases in premiums for some people age 50 to 64.
The changes in Medicaid provisions of the bill could help win over conservative House members who have expressed concern or outright opposition to the bill for multiple reasons. Mr. Palmer voted against the House bill in the Budget Committee on Thursday. On Friday, he emerged from the White House in favor of it.
Representative Mark Walker of North Carolina, the chairman of the Republican Study Committee, said other members were on board as well. “On balance and with the changes we agreed to in the bill’s final text, I can vote for it,” he said after the meeting in the Oval Office.
Mr. Trump’s level of engagement has been a major question mark as congressional leaders have tried to sell the proposal in the face of stinging opposition from a number of directions. His show of support for the House plan on Friday provided a lift for House leaders, who have been on the defensive all week over their bill and the persistent conservative opposition to it.
Conservative holdouts who still have objections to the bill may reconsider if they come under more pressure from the president.
“These changes definitely strengthen our number, but also show that President Trump’s all-in now,” said the House majority whip, Representative Steve Scalise of Louisiana, who was at the White House meeting and recounted how Mr. Trump voiced his support for the measure.
Representative Bradley Byrne, Republican of Alabama, said the changes in the bill were having the intended effect. “I can tell you, from the private conversations I’m having with people, support for the bill has built dramatically over the last 24 hours,” he said Friday.
But the changes were not enough to sway the hard-right House Freedom Caucus, which reiterated its opposition on Friday. Changing the bill to win over such conservatives risks alienating more moderate members of the House and the Senate who worry that the measure could cause millions of people to lose health coverage.
The Republican governors of four states that have expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act — Arkansas, Michigan, Nevada and Ohio — sent a letter to congressional leaders this week rejecting the House bill as written.
Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, said on Thursday that she opposed the House bill, explaining that it would not do enough to help low-income older people afford insurance. “We don’t want to in any way sacrifice coverage for people who need it the most,” she told The Portland Press Herald.
House Republican moderates may be loath to take a difficult political vote if they are convinced the measure will die in the Senate.
Under the Affordable Care Act, 31 states have expanded Medicaid, providing coverage to millions of adults. The federal government has been paying more than 90 percent of the costs for the newly eligible beneficiaries. Republicans say this has taken the program away from its original purpose.
Democrats contend that work requirements could increase the number of uninsured, limiting access to health care without significantly increasing employment.