GREENVILLE, S.C. — The Confederate battle flag is no longer flying at the State Capitol in Columbia, so for the first time in 15 years, banners welcoming the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament are hanging from light posts in this city in the foothills of the Appalachians.
Since 2002, the N.C.A.A. has kept its championships out of states flying the flag. When the South Carolina Legislature passed a bill in 2015 ending the flag’s display on the statehouse grounds, that restriction was lifted.
The timing proved fortuitous when, a year later, the N.C.A.A. imposed a similar championship ban on neighboring North Carolina because of a contentious law seen by its critics as anti-gay. Just like that, tournament games set to be held in Greensboro, N.C., this week needed a new home. Greenville was happy to step in.
Food and beer trucks have rolled from North Main to South Main, stocking up bars and restaurants ahead of the first- and second-round games to be played here Friday and Sunday. North Carolina, the No. 1 seed in the South Region, and Duke, the No. 2 seed in the East, will bring a legion of fans, and tickets at Bon Secours Wellness Arena, with a capacity of 14,882, are sold out for their games.
But about 190 miles northeast in Greensboro, the fun and energy have been squashed. The loss of the tournament games was a sharp rebuke to North Carolina, with the N.C.A.A. declaring that the state’s contentious law — which curbs anti-discrimination protections for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people and is known as H.B. 2 — was discriminatory.
The concern now is that it could be five years — or more — before Greensboro is a tournament town again. The sites for the 2018 event were awarded several years ago, and Charlotte will most likely be replaced as an early-round site for that tournament unless H.B. 2 is repealed, which appears unlikely. And while Greensboro, Raleigh and Charlotte submitted bids for the next cycle of tournament games, from 2019 to 2022, they will be barred from hosting as long as the law remains in place.
The N.C.A.A. had planned to announce the winners of the 2019-22 bids in December, but Strable said it postponed the decision to give North Carolina’s General Assembly time to modify or pull back the law. The announcement of the sites is now scheduled for April 18, but Strable said it could be made as early as this week.
The bans could spread, too; on Tuesday, the Texas Senate gave tentative approval to a so-called bathroom bill that is similar to the North Carolina legislation. If that bill becomes law, Texas could stand to lose its own N.C.A.A. events, including next season’s men’s Final Four in San Antonio.
For organizers in the affected cities, the bans are not merely a political squabble. Strable said that tourism in Guilford County, which includes Greensboro, brought in $1.2 billion per year, and the N.C.A.A. is a significant part of that revenue — not just with basketball, but with championships in other sports as well.
Still, basketball drives the most interest and the most money, and it is a big part of the city’s sports identity: Greensboro has hosted 63 N.C.A.A. tournament basketball games, the fifth-highest total by a city.
Those dim prospects could play into South Carolina’s hands. Greenville has submitted bids for the N.C.A.A. men’s and women’s tournaments for the 2019-22 cycle of bids, and the state capital, Columbia, is also bidding.
“That whole situation is unfortunate for those guys in North Carolina, but if an opportunity presents itself and we are able to accommodate, we are going to do that,” Wright, of VisitGreenvilleSC, said.
South Carolina officials know that they, too, are at the mercy of factors beyond their control when it comes to the convergence of politics and sports. There had been little interest in removing the Confederate battle flag from the State Capitol grounds until a white supremacist, Dylann Roof, killed nine people at a Charleston church on June 17, 2015.
The episode prompted South Carolina legislators to reconsider the implications of the continued display of a Confederate symbol at the Capitol, and less than a month later, at the urging of Gov. Nikki R. Haley, they voted to take it down.
But Williams may have competitive reasons for wanting to play closer to home: North Carolina is 33-1 in N.C.A.A. tournament games played in its home state. That lone loss came on March 11, 1979 — to Penn in Reynolds Coliseum in Raleigh. Hours later, Duke was upset on the same floor by St. John’s in what A.C.C. fans came to call Black Sunday.
The Tar Heel state is looking at another dark day or two this week, and maybe more in coming years. In response to a letter from the Human Rights Campaign Foundation and Athlete Ally, a group aimed at ending homophobia in sports, the N.C.A.A.’s president, Mark Emmert, affirmed his organization’s hosting policies.
