543 pp. Simon & Schuster. $35.
What drew the participants in the meetings of the Mudfog Association for the Advancement of Everything together was the “spread” of science, by which Dickens meant its final gluttonous banquet. Readers of “Convergence” may think themselves at a Mudfog Feast, for it is the number, not the nourishment, of the dishes that Peter Watson serves up that saves his smorgasbord.
Watson’s apparent mastery of the ingredients and recipes of all the sciences might stagger a general reader used to the works of mortals. What will stagger the knowledgeable is the confidence with which he presents nonsense. No one who knows anything about modern physics could write, as Watson does in attempting to define antiparticles, that the “positively charged electron, called the negatron at one point,” was “later identified in cosmic rays as the highly penetrating positron, midway in mass between the proton and the electron.” (The masses of the positive and negative electron must be the same if they are antiparticles; and why a positive particle should ever have been called a negatron must be a mystery of convergence.) The hash Watson makes of particle physics may be expected, for, as he admits on behalf of others, it is difficult; but there is no excuse for identifying the Manhattan Project as “a special study session of theoretical physicists . . . called at Berkeley”; for relocating the facilities at Oak Ridge to Los Alamos; for confusing John Herschel with his father; and so on.
The main reason Watson has been able to compile so much varied material is that he has perfected the journalist’s art of epitome. Whether accurately or not, he can boil a book down to a striking sentence or two and an article to a sound bite. When he has read the primary material himself, he can make a very good job of it. But in areas where he lacks time or competence, he relies on secondary literature, and that not always of the best. One of these secondary authors is Watson himself, whom he copies substantially, as in his accounts of the discoveries of X-rays and Planck’s quantum, which come from his book “The German Genius.” The high marks Watson deserves for epitomizing, however, scarcely compensate for his errors or for his abandonment of good journalistic practice by being a cheerleader for the story he is reporting.
To historians and other skeptics, Watson’s errors matter very much indeed. They know that science, like all human activities, has been formed by a great many contingencies. No doubt it has developed so as to give us extraordinary control over our environment, in many cases to our advantage and improvement. This control is a product not of convergence, however, but of specialization, of individuals coming to know more and more about less and less. It does not follow that the stories we tell to tie this knowledge together guarantee convergence to a unique Science, or that we would be able to discover such a Science if it exists. To return to our opening metaphor, the primary reason for what appears to Watson as a convergence of the sciences is that they have been cooked in the same kitchen, or, to speak plainly, in their contemporary forms they all try to progress by the application of increasingly precise instruments and strong mathematics to artificially constructed experiments.
The physicist Steven Weinberg, who believes, or has believed, in the imminence of the creation of a Theory of Everything, but more recently has expressed doubts about fundamental aspects of quantum mechanics, devised a metaphor to answer historians who argue from the contingencies of scientific discoveries that theories are to some extent social constructions. Mountain climbers may try many paths, the metaphor goes, run to and fro (the classical method of acquiring knowledge), scramble and slip on their ascent; but if they reach the top, no one doubts they have gotten there. The metaphor can be developed further: A successful ascent does not remove the contingencies in the choice of the mountain. There may be something in Ernst Mach’s remark that the only reason physicists based their science on mechanics and not thermodynamics or acoustics is that human beings have hunted and made war by throwing things.
At the moment the summit we are climbing is obscured by dark matter, which physicists have postulated to save established theory. Although it must have eight or nine times the mass of all the matter in the universe from which mountains can be made, physicists do not seem to know much more about it than what they have had to assume. Perhaps we are barking up the wrong mountain. Perhaps Watson’s story, even if told with all the competence possible, cannot converge. And yet, perhaps, it may. Scientists and taxpayers have invested so much thought, emotion and money in following up the generalizations that Watson thinks put the sciences on the course of convergence that even if our mountain of Science should be no more than a hillock, we might not be able to turn back. In this Pickwickian sense the natural and human sciences might be limping toward convergence. And that would not be a welcome thing.