Gerard Benderoth, a retired New York City police officer and bodybuilder, was pulled over by F.B.I. agents and local police officers on Wednesday morning in a small town near the Hudson River just a short drive from his home. The agents and officers, who were investigating Mr. Benderoth’s links to a case involving a drug conspiracy and four murders, hoped to get him to cooperate with their inquiry, according to three people with knowledge of the matter.
But they could tell something was wrong as soon as they pulled him over in Haverstraw, about an hour north of Manhattan, said one of the people, who all requested anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly about the matter.
Mr. Benderoth called the town’s police department — from which he retired as an officer in 2015 — to say that he had been pulled over, the person said. He then shot himself with a handgun before investigators reached the car, officials said.
The suicide has drawn wide attention from the news media, which has focused on the contours of Mr. Benderoth’s life as a bodybuilder and questions about his purported connection to Nicholas Tartaglione.
But it has also drawn renewed focus on the murders of four men. Mr. Tartaglione, a retired police officer from Briarcliff Manor in Westchester County, was charged by federal prosecutors in Manhattan in December in the quadruple homicide and drug conspiracy. Mr. Tartaglione is being held without bail in federal jail in Brooklyn.
One of the people with knowledge of the matter said that the murders, which took place near a bar in Chester, a town about 30 minutes northwest of Haverstraw, resulted from a cocaine selling operation that had gone awry. One of the men, a landscaper, had been dispatched to Mexico to buy some cocaine that was then sold successfully by the operation upon his return.
But after a second trip, the man, who had been given a larger sum of money to buy a larger quantity of cocaine, returned from Mexico with neither the money nor the drugs, having apparently been robbed, the person said.
The men who had sent the landscaper to Mexico eventually concocted a scheme to lure him to the Likquid Lounge, a bar in Chester, the person said. The man believed he was going to meet someone who wanted to hire him for construction work, so he brought along two relatives and a friend, the person said. But the promise of day labor was just part of the plot to kill him, the person said, and the other three men were simply collateral damage.
Gerard Benderoth, a former police officer under investigation by the F.B.I., shot and killed himself on Wednesday.
It was unclear precisely what role the federal agents and police officers, as well as the prosecutors overseeing the case, believed that Mr. Benderoth had in the case, but they were investigating his involvement, the person said. And while they hoped to win his cooperation, they were prepared to arrest him if need be, the person said, though there were no sealed or unsealed charges against him.
A spokesman for the United States Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York, which is prosecuting Mr. Tartaglione and was overseeing the investigation, declined to comment. The F.B.I. declined to comment on Mr. Benderoth’s death, saying only that a man, whom they did not name, had shot himself in Haverstraw after being stopped by agents.
Bruce Barket, one of Mr. Tartaglione’s lawyers, said that he didn’t know exactly how Mr. Benderoth was connected to his client.
In December, federal officials said that some of the four men who were killed — Hector Gutierrez, Martin Luna, Miguel Luna, and Urbano Santiago — had been in the wrong place at the wrong time. The federal murder charges against Mr. Tartaglione carry the possibility of the death penalty.
Mr. Benderoth lived in nearby Stony Point with his wife and four children, according to Lt. John Hickey of the Haverstraw Town Police Department. The news of his death “was a shock for everybody here,” the lieutenant said.
Mr. Benderoth stopped working for the New York Police Department in 2005 after 10 years on the job, the department said.
A man who answered a call to a phone number listed to Mr. Benderoth’s father, Donald, declined to comment. “We’re all mourning,” he said, his voice cracking.
Mr. Benderoth had previously drawn news coverage for his weight-lifting prowess. A former aspiring World’s Strongest Man whose muscled physique once earned him the nickname White Rhino, Mr. Benderoth could reportedly bench press 625 pounds and squat 800 pounds.
A video online, one of many showcasing his physical strength, shows him at a strongman competition in 2006. 