Some members of the elite legal community are making an unusual appeal to one of their own, asking that he speak out against the White House’s attempt to restrict travel to the United States by people from several predominantly Muslim countries.
A group of 27 former associates from the law firm Sullivan & Cromwell sent a letter on Thursday to Walter J. Clayton, who is known as Jay, a Sullivan & Cromwell partner and President Trump’s nominee to become chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
In the letter, the group urge Mr. Clayton, whose Senate confirmation hearings are set for next week, to publicly denounce Mr. Trump’s proposed travel ban.
Mr. Trump has issued two such orders, the first of which suspended entry to the United States by individuals from Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen, and the second removing Iraqi nationals from the list.
Mr. Clayton is a longtime partner Sullivan & Cromwell, which is known for its representation of Goldman Sachs and major financial firms. As the president’s choice to lead the S.E.C., he has come under scrutiny over whether he will use his experience to protect investors or to loosen regulations that have constrained Wall Street activities in recent years.
“The S.E.C. does not make immigration policy, but if one is confirmed by Congress, you are an important member of the administration,” said Chiansan Ma, one of those who signed the letter. Mr. Ma. a legal services lawyer, left Sullivan & Cromwell last year.
But, they note, they have felt “growing alarm” over the Trump administration’s “actions and statements” regarding the travel ban, and they cite “disturbing reports and allegations regarding the implementation” of the executive order.
Large international firms like Sullivan & Cromwell hire lawyers from around the world, but the president’s executive orders have cast doubt on the ability of some foreign-born lawyers to work in the United States, the letter says.
“Law graduates who have offers of employment at U.S. firms fear they will be unable to practice in the United States,” said Mohammad H. Fadel, a former Sullivan & Cromwell associate who signed the letter.
Mr. Fadel, now an associate professor at the University of Toronto Faculty of Law, said some of his students with employment offers in New York are citizens of countries identified in the executive orders, such as Syria and Iran.