Good morning on this chilly-cheery Monday.
Preet Bharara — considered one of the most aggressive and outspoken prosecutors of public corruption and Wall Street crime in the United States — was asked to resign on Friday along with 45 other United States attorneys who had been appointed by President Barack Obama.
When his answer to President Trump’s office was no, he said he was fired.
How does this affect New York?
Mr. Bharara was the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York with jurisdiction over Manhattan, the Bronx, Westchester County and several counties upstate.
“New Yorkers should care about this because so many of the cases that are prosecuted by that office have a real impact on people here and elsewhere,” said Ben Weiser, a New York Times reporter who covers the federal courts in Manhattan.
Also in Mr. Bharara’s portfolio were federal cases involving civil rights, the Mafia, terrorism and insider trading on Wall Street. Notably, his office won the convictions of Sheldon Silver, the former Democratic speaker of the New York Assembly, and Dean G. Skelos, the former Republican majority leader of the State Senate. Both men have appealed.
Is the firing unprecedented?
United States attorneys are routinely replaced after a new president takes office. In 1993, the Clinton administration told all 93 United States attorneys to resign after Mr. Clinton took office. What’s unusual about Mr. Bharara’s dismissal was that he had met with Mr. Trump, then the president-elect, in November and, according to Mr. Bharara, was asked by Mr. Trump if he was “prepared to stay on as the United States attorney.” He was.
And who will fill Mr. Bharara’s shoes?
Mr. Bharara has been replaced temporarily by his deputy, the longtime prosecutor Joon H. Kim, the former head of the office’s criminal division.
You can stay up to date on the topic by following our courts reporters Ben Weiser and William K. Rashbaum on Twitter.
Winter is (still) coming.
Just when you thought we were in the clear — only one week away from spring — we’re preparing for the arrival of a possible blizzard on Tuesday.
We’ll see sunny skies today, but the wind will make things feel like a bone-chilling 15 to 25 degrees.
For tomorrow, we’re expecting up to 20 inches of snow in the city. The flakes are forecast to start falling very late Monday night or early Tuesday morning, and the storm might stretch all the way through Wednesday.
Food for thought as you plan your Tuesday commute, fill the fridge and dig out the snowboots you already packed away.
• Scoreboard: New York City F.C. kicks D.C. United, 4-0. Nets trap Knicks, 120-112. Rangers rip Red Wings, 4-1.
• Nominations for the NYC Neighborhood Library Awards, the so-called Oscars of libraries, will close at midnight. You can nominate a local library here.
• Rangers host Lightning, 7 p.m. (MSG). Islanders host Hurricanes, 7:30 p.m. (NBCSN).
The citywide ferry service, a major infrastructure initiative spearheaded by our mayor, is expected to start this summer. And now, with the end of the project in sight, 200 jobs will soon be available for roles ranging from captains and engineers to deckhands and maintenance workers.
The number of jobs at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, which will serve as the home base for the fleet, is projected to grow by about 10,000 over the next few years.
Interested? Apply through CitywideFerry.NYC, the Brooklyn Navy Yard’s employment center, or the Department of Small Business Services’ WorkForce1 Centers. Interviews are scheduled to begin on March 24.
