Joakim Noah is an active member of the Knicks again, which means he is healthy enough to sit out the rest of this season.
The N.B.A.’s independent medical expert on Wednesday morning cleared Noah, a veteran center, declaring him physically able to play and starting the clock on his 20-game suspension for a positive drug test. Noah will miss the Knicks’ final eight games this season and the 12 to start the 2017-18 campaign as punishment for taking a performance-enhancing substance.
Noah will be able to practice with the Knicks and to travel with the team, but he must leave the building two hours before a game, as he did Wednesday before the Knicks lost, 105-88, to the Miami Heat at Madison Square Garden, a loss that conclusively eliminated the Knicks from playoff contention for the fourth consecutive season.
The Knicks did not have Derrick Rose, either; he was out with a sore left knee. That mattered little in the grand scheme of the team’s lost season — although it did provide a boost in the chase for better odds in the N.B.A. draft lottery.
Miami, which occupies the seventh playoff spot in the Eastern Conference, throttled the Knicks with suffocating defense and an offense led by Goran Dragic, who scored 20 points and dished out 9 assists.
While Kristaps Porzingis scored 20 points for the Knicks, Carmelo Anthony scored only 9, failing to reach double digits for just the third time this season as the team shot 37.1 percent from the field. Anthony expressed some frustration after the game, not only over another loss but also over his place with the Knicks over the final stretch of another disappointing season.
Anthony took just two shots in the first half and did not score until 22 seconds into the third quarter. After sitting out two games, he has taken just 25 shots over his last two games — a small number for a player who has taken 25 or more shots in a game 12 times this season.
At least Noah was saved from watching an eyesore. His eight-game ban will conclude a disappointing debut season in New York. Noah signed a four-year, $72 million contract in the off-season but played in just 46 games. An operation on his left knee last month threatened to end his season prematurely — a threat the suspension ultimately carried out.
Still, Coach Jeff Hornacek said he was thankful that Noah would be able to practice with the Knicks as the team strengthens its adherence to the triangle offense and moves away from the more open style of play it favored when Noah was healthy.
When Noah returns to the Knicks next season, his role with the team may not be as significant as it was when this season began. He was brought in to show off his skills as a passer and to serve as a defensive anchor, but the Knicks’ defense crumbled almost from the start of the season.
Willy Hernangomez, a 22-year-old rookie who had 12 points and 9 rebounds on Wednesday, has been impressive at center, becoming a building block alongside Porzingis in a development that Hornacek called a silver lining in an otherwise dismal season.
