ORLANDO, Fla. — CiCi Bellis, who, at 17, is by far the youngest player in the top 100, has already proved she can rise to the occasion on a tennis court, beating leading players like Dominika Cibulkova and, just last month, Agnieszka Radwanska.
But parallel parking under pressure remains a different matter.
“Don’t worry,” Bellis said to me on Friday as she eased her BMW sedan into a spot outside a restaurant near her family’s new residence in the Lake Nona community.
The result did not go unnoticed.
“You park like that in Holland and you fail your driving test,” teased Marijn Bal, her Dutch-born agent.
“She left a little space for a motorcycle behind her,” added Anibal Aranda, her coach.
Bellis laughed — a common occurrence — and headed indoors with her team for a healthy, leafy lunch on the eve of her first trip to the BNP Paribas Open at Indian Wells, Calif., as a professional tennis player.
A year ago, for all her precocious talent, Bellis was ranked well outside the top 200 and preparing to remain an amateur and attend Stanford University. That would have been a dream situation for most bright American teenagers, but not if you have dreamed most of your short life about joining the WTA Tour.
“From Day 1, she wanted to go to Wimbledon, and I mean Day 1,” said Monique Javer, Bellis’s childhood coach in Hillsborough, Calif.
In April, Bellis began working full time with Aranda, a former top junior from Paraguay who is on the United States Tennis Association’s coaching staff. Bellis shored up her vulnerable second serve and added more muscle to her slight frame, particularly to her lower body.
Though her serve — so critical to her prospects — is still, in Bellis’s words, “a work in progress,” the results followed. After qualifying for the United States Open last year and winning two rounds in the main draw in September, Bellis turned to Aranda during a warm-down session and shared her decision to turn pro.
Some drop out of Stanford for the lure of a start-up. She skipped it altogether for one of her own, and at least for now, it looks like a sage career move.
Bellis, who will turn 18 in April, is now based at the new U.S.T.A. National Campus in Lake Nona with its 100 courts and elaborate training facilities. She runs and talks fast, and her recent rise in the rankings has been just as expeditious. This week she makes her first appearance at Indian Wells, where she will face the 31-year-old Belgian Kirsten Flipkens in the first round.
Bellis is up to No. 55 in the rankings despite missing the year’s first Grand Slam tournament, the Australian Open. She was recovering from strained hamstring and gluteal muscles, an injury suffered when she lunged for a ball in training after a long running session on the beach.
Bellis left the thought unfinished, but when she returned to the circuit last month, she made her latest big impression, reaching the quarterfinals in Dubai after upsetting Radwanska and then dominating the resurgent Caroline Wozniacki for a few games before fading.
Bellis’s forehand, footwork and swing volleys are particular strengths. With her increasingly complete and impactful game, she looks ready for bigger things, perhaps sooner than later.
“There are a handful of players who are going to overpower her right now, but by the end of the year I wouldn’t be surprised if she was top 20,” said Chris Evert, who has been mentoring Bellis through a U.S.T.A. program.
In 2015, I watched Bellis, then 16, get all but blown off the court by baseline pace in a first-round defeat to Veronica Cepede Royg in French Open qualifying. Though Bellis is still only 5 feet 7 inches tall and 120 pounds, she no longer punches like a lightweight.
Upbeat predictions for teenage tennis players, however well founded, have a dark side. They can lead a young player to press — a trap that Bellis and those close to her remain intent on avoiding. Aranda once coached another young American, Melanie Oudin, who struggled for an encore after she reached the United States Open quarterfinals at age 17 in 2009.
Bellis’s parents, Gordon and Lori, a former competitive junior player, also have emphasized the long view. As a junior, Bellis played in her age group until she dominated, learning to handle the pressure that goes with being the favorite instead of quickly jumping into the much-less-to-lose domain of facing one’s elders.
But make no mistake: She is an authentic prodigy in an increasingly physical sport that no longer produces them at the same brisk pace. There are no other 17-year-olds in the top 100, and no 18-year-olds either.
Javer, a former tour player who coached Bellis in her preteen years, initially resisted training Bellis because she was friendly with Bellis’s parents. But Javer said she agreed to one lesson when Bellis was 7.
She compares Bellis’s versatile style of play to one of tennis’s ultimate wunderkinds: Jennifer Capriati, who was 5 feet 7 and reaching Grand Slam semifinals at 14.
Great height is not a prerequisite to success in women’s tennis: Cibulkova, Simona Halep, Roberta Vinci and Sara Errani — all shorter than Bellis — have reached major singles finals in the past five years. But none of them have won those finals.
Aranda likes to stay upbeat and keeps handwritten notebooks meticulously filled with drawings and inspirational quotes to accompany the day’s practice plans for the “very visual” Bellis, who adds her own thoughts, too.
He worries that her emerging power could be a trap. He is a fan of the soccer coach Pep Guardiola’s philosophy, which calls for great discipline until his players get close to the penalty area, where he asks them to rely more on instinct.
Martin Blackman, the general manager of player development at the U.S.T.A., does not think Bellis will be limited by her size.
“When the big women go big, they will take lots of time away from themselves, and that’s when CiCi is going to hurt them,” Blackman said.
CiCi — short for Catherine Cartan — is Bellis’s nickname, and though the WTA rankings and tournament graphics still use Catherine, she has requested a change.
It seems more marketable, too, but it is Bellis’s age and competitive gifts that truly pique the interest in a sport constantly in search of the next big talent, particularly an American one.
Bellis, who chose tennis over soccer at age 12, has been a candidate since she became the youngest player in 18 years to win a singles match at the United States Open, shocking the 12th-seeded Cibulkova in the first round in 2014. A 15-year-old wild card, Bellis lost in the next round but went on to finish the year as the world’s top-ranked junior.
It surely did not hurt that Bellis came from a comfortable background where the financial pressure did not weigh as heavily on decision-making as it can for some other great young talents. An only child, Bellis was born in San Francisco and grew up in the affluent Bay Area communities of Hillsborough and Atherton.
There remains plenty to juggle. Still home-schooled — as she has been since sixth grade — Bellis trains on a typical day at Lake Nona from 8:30 a.m. to 6 p.m., packing in two fitness sessions, lunch and two on-court sessions.
When she turns 18 on April 8, she will no longer have any playing restrictions on tour, which will mean a fuller schedule. But she already has proved that she belongs.
Solving the riddle of parallel parking will take a bit longer.
