There has been a sit-in and a rally, an allegation of “fake news,” a petition that garnered thousands of signatures and a chorus of outcry from elected officials.
What is causing so much outrage? Townsend Harris High School, a high-performing school in Queens, is getting a new principal.
For several months, students, teachers and parents have made a forceful and public case against the school’s interim acting principal, Rosemarie Jahoda, who has held the position since the beginning of the school year. They have criticized her management style and interactions with students, and called for her to be replaced.
In the past week, the conflict has only intensified.
On Tuesday, the Queens borough president, Melinda Katz, sent a letter to the New York City schools chancellor, Carmen Fariña, calling for changes in the long-established principal-hiring process, which she described as “entirely shrouded under a veil of silence and secrecy.” This was her third letter to Ms. Fariña on the hiring process and its impact on Townsend Harris.
When a principal position is open, the superintendent selects three to five candidates from the applicant pool and sends them to members of the school leadership team, which is made up of parents, school staff members and the chapter leader of the teachers’ union. A committee from the leadership team interviews applicants and makes recommendations to the superintendent. The superintendent then consults with the leadership team, but does not have to choose the candidate it favored.
This is all done in private, and members of the leadership team are required to sign a confidentiality agreement.
“You can’t have true community input without allowing the community input to be public,” Ms. Katz said in an interview.
Students working on the school newspaper, The Classic, filed a Freedom of Information Act request this week asking for the names of the 38 people who had applied to be their principal, according to Brian Sweeney, an English teacher and the school newspaper adviser.
Although being appointed interim acting principal does not officially confer an advantage in getting the job permanently, some people familiar with the workings of the system believe that it does.
Their letter also raised concerns about a comment by an Education Department official that “fake news” about the situation at Townsend Harris was being widely circulated. The official, Fran DeSanctis, a representative for the high school superintendent’s office, made the comment at a district leadership meeting last week, the letter said.
The Townsend Harris newspaper has aggressively covered the tensions at the school and Ms. Jahoda. Students on the school paper were outraged by the “fake news” comment, saying their own reporting accounted for much of the news being written on the subject. They published a public letter of their own online.
Through the Education Department, Ms. DeSanctis declined to comment.
Ms. Katz, the borough president, said she was perplexed by how the conflict had spun so far out of control.
