For each of Texas A&M’s 64,000 students, otherwise known as Aggies, those words are intended as a creed. The Aggie Code of Honor is drilled into freshmen at a required orientation session. It appears at the end of all written exams, followed by a space for students to sign their assent. A marble monument to the code graces the campus here.
Violating the code is serious business. But even by the standards of a university that takes itself and its place in Texas lore seriously, the current campus uproar over the code, which began with a dispute over who won an election for student body president, has heads spinning.
Rick Perry — the United States energy secretary, former Texas governor, two-time presidential candidate and A&M alumnus (class of 1972) — in an op-ed published in The Houston Chronicle on Wednesday accused the university’s Student Government Association of rigging the election to favor an openly gay candidate, Bobby Brooks.
Mr. Brooks described the past few days as an “ordeal.” He said he first learned of Mr. Perry’s op-ed on Wednesday evening, when he was contacted by a Houston Chronicle reporter.
Mr. Brooks says that since the election he has faced harassment from members of opposing campaigns. On March 17, he said, he was accosted at a convenience store in Longview, Tex., by supporters of a rival candidate, whom he declined to identify. He said he was physically threatened and had to leave the store. A friend, Laura Haslam, an A&M junior who remained inside, verified his account and said the young men, whom she did not know, used homophobic slurs after Mr. Brooks left.
The first-place finisher, Robert McIntosh, went to court on Friday to fight his disqualification, which came after he was found to have failed to document a campaign expense: glow sticks that appeared in a campaign video. He filed a petition in United States District Court in Brazos County requesting permission to take depositions from three student government officers he claims conspired to rob him of victory.
To understand how a student election could get so heated, it helps to understand the fierce loyalty A&M inspires.
“We have this saying that from the outside looking in, you can’t understand it, and from the inside looking out, you can’t explain it,” said Sam King, editor in chief of the university newspaper, The Battalion.
Recent decades have brought major changes to A&M, which was created by the Texas Legislature in 1871 as the Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas.
In 1994, the first woman was elected class president. In 2008, the university’s GLBT Resource Center opened. The university has tried to recruit more minority students and now has a vice president for diversity.
The election of an openly gay student body president was initially hailed as another milestone. Now there are questions about why Mr. Brooks’s opponent was disqualified.
The election was held Feb. 23-24. Mr. Brooks was declared the winner on Feb. 25, after Mr. McIntosh was disqualified by the student-run Judicial Court. Mr. McIntosh’s appeal was rejected on March 9.
It remained a dispute on campus. And then Mr. Perry chimed in.
Diversity issues aside, student government elections at A&M are a full-contact sport, said Joseph Puente, who graduated in 2014 with a bachelor’s degree in telecommunication media studies. Mr. Puente spent two years as a student senator and in 2012 helped a friend campaign for student body president.
In 2011, John Claybrook won the election for student body president but was disqualified because he exceeded the $1,800 spending limit for his campaign. (That ruling was later overturned and Mr. Claybrook became president.) In 2015, the student election commissioner resigned under threat of impeachment after ballot errors and multiple campaign violations. The incident became known as Koldusgate after the name of the building that houses the Student Government Association.
But even by A&M standards, the frenzy of accusations and counteraccusations has been extraordinary.
Glaad, the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation, soon published the letter on its website, alongside a petition supporting Mr. Brooks. The organization reached out to him shortly after Mr. Perry’s op-ed appeared. In a sign of his newfound celebrity, Mr. Brooks now plans to appear at the Glaad Media Awards next week in Los Angeles.
“Young people like Bobby Brooks are the future, and should be encouraged, not harassed,” said Glaad’s president and C.E.O., Sarah Kate Ellis.
At the university’s Memorial Student Center on Thursday, Savannah Harper said she had not read Mr. Perry’s op-ed, but did not understand why everyone was making a fuss about Mr. Brooks’s sexual orientation.
“I’m not saying that personally I support that lifestyle, but as long as he can do the job, that’s all that matters,” Ms. Harper, a sophomore and a fourth-generation Aggie, said.
As for the disqualification of Mr. McIntosh, she cited the Code of Honor, saying that all candidates should follow the election rules.
