WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court ruled on Wednesday that the First Amendment applies to a New York law concerning credit card fees.
The decision was a victory for five businesses that had sought to tell their customers that they imposed a surcharge for using credit cards. But the Supreme Court decided only that the law regulated their speech rather than their conduct, and it left it to an appeals court to determine whether the law violated the First Amendment.
The case, Expressions Hair Design v. Schneiderman, No. 15-1391, is part of a long-running dispute between some merchants — who want to avoid fees charged by credit card companies by steering customers toward cash — and credit card companies, which seek to make the fees invisible to consumers.
The New York law, similar to ones in nine other states, bars merchants from imposing surcharges when their customers use credit cards. Credit card companies charge fees to merchants in the range of 2 to 3 percent, Chief Justice Roberts wrote.
The New York law, enacted in 1984, makes it a crime to impose a surcharge for the use of credit cards. The law was for many years almost irrelevant, as credit card companies imposed similar rules in their merchant contracts.
But credit card companies started to back away from those restrictions as part of class-action settlements. Not long after, several New York merchants sued to challenge the law on First Amendment grounds.
The question for the court was a limited one, the chief justice wrote. It was, he said, whether the First Amendment figured in the analysis of a law that barred some kinds of communications from businesses to their customers. He gave two examples involving the plaintiffs in the case.
Justices Anthony M. Kennedy, Clarence Thomas, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Elena Kagan joined the majority opinion. Three justices voted with the majority but did not adopt its reasoning.
In a second concurrence, Justice Sonia Sotomayor, joined by Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr., wrote that the majority had decided little about a confusing statute. Justice Sotomayor said the proper course, and one she urged the federal appeals court in New York to adopt when it again confronted the case, would have been to ask New York’s highest court for a definitive interpretation of the state law.