Good morning on this lovely Thursday.
In the basement of the Congregation Sons of Moses synagogue on the Lower East Side, hulking iron machines rattle and clank amid rolls of colored paper and strips of dark leather.
There, a bookbinder practices a fading craft: stitching, slicing and pressing stacks of paper into books.
With the New York Antiquarian Book Fair starting today on the Upper East Side, we visited the Henry Bookbinding Company in Manhattan to see how books were made in our city’s past.
Henry Alpert, 68, showed us around his workshop, where he has been binding books — including dissertations, Bibles and special edition books for artists — for 25 years.
Books are squeezed together in large racks around the room. Clamps, hammers and what Mr. Alpert calls “the guillotine” (a paper trimmer) are scattered among buckets of glue, some of which are stuck in place.
Mr. Alpert is not a stickler for tidiness.
When we visited, he was rebuilding an 1893 edition of “A Tour Around New York and My Summer Acre” by John Flavel Mines.
To make a book, he uses a collection of tools. One machine, which looks like a weaving loom, stitches spines onto stacks of papers. Another slices through paper with the press of a pedal.
The equipment has been around for more than 50 years, ever since one of Mr. Alpert’s relatives opened the business.
Creating a book takes about a day, but Mr. Alpert can work on more than one at a time. And he enjoys filling special requests, like turning a stack of loose papers into a leather-bound tome with embossed gold lettering.
Another week of wonky weather we’re having.
Today: sunglasses and spring pastels.
Tomorrow: scarves and snowboots.
We’ll see sunshine and a high near 56 today, followed by a good chance of snow tomorrow. Temperatures are expected to flip-flop between the teens and 20s all weekend.
Spring: Are we there yet? Not quite.
• Scoreboard: Hawks descend on Nets, 110-105. Bucks toss Knicks, 104-93.
• Mr. de Blasio will meet with older adults at the Mirage Diner in Brooklyn to discuss the proposed “mansion tax,” at 1:30 p.m. He’ll also host a town-hall meeting at P.S. 23 in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, at 7 p.m.
• Rangers at Hurricanes, 7 p.m. (MSG). Devils at Avalanche, 9 p.m. (MSG+). Islanders at Canucks, 10 p.m. (MSG).
• Alternate-side parking: in effect until Sunday.
Twenty years ago today, Christopher G. Wallace, also known as the rapper Notorious B.I.G., was gunned down in a drive-by shooting in Los Angeles. He was 24.
His killing remains unsolved, as does that of the rapper Tupac Shakur about six months earlier in another drive-by.
Mr. Wallace, who grew up in a townhouse on St. James Place in Bedford-Stuyvesant, often rapped about selling drugs in the Brooklyn neighborhood. His debut album, “Ready to Die,” offered “perhaps the most balanced and honest portrait of the dealer’s life of any in hip-hop,” The Times wrote in 1994.
This weekend, a three-day art show in Bedford-Stuyvesant will mark the anniversary of Mr. Wallace’s death.
The event will feature local artists, an auction and a film about New York rappers.
It kicks off Friday at 6 p.m. at the Bishop Gallery at 916 Bedford Avenue.
