George A. Olah, a Hungarian-born scientist who won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1994 for his study of the chemical reactions of carbon compounds, died on Wednesday at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif. He was 89.
His death was announced by the University of Southern California, where he had been a professor of chemistry, chemical engineering and materials science.
Dr. Olah’s advances in the understanding of hydrocarbons — molecules made of carbon and hydrogen — have been used in an array of applications, including the development of gasoline that burns more cleanly and the discovery of new drugs.
His work began at a Dow Chemical Company research laboratory in southwest Ontario, in Sarnia, where he, his wife and a young son settled in 1957. They had fled their native Hungary a year earlier amid the turmoil of a failed uprising against Soviet rule there.
Dow uses acid-catalyzed reactions to produce materials like styrene, a precursor of polystyrene plastic. Dr. Olah discovered “superacids,” which were trillions of times stronger than sulfuric acid. The superacids were crucial in his subsequent study of hydrocarbon chemistry.
Dissolved in certain superacids, however — Dr. Olah called them magic acids — carbocations do not immediately fall apart.
“You can isolate them and keep them stable in this media,” said G. K. Surya Prakash, a U.S.C. chemistry professor who leads the university’s Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute.
Dr. Olah was then able to study the structure and behavior of the carbocations. “That was a major achievement in the ′60s and the ′70s," said Dr. Prakash, who was a graduate student and then a longtime collaborator of Dr. Olah’s.
Along the way, Dr. Olah overturned scientific dogma that held that, in organic compounds, a carbon atom could bind to no more than four other atoms. He showed that in carbocations, a carbon atom could bond with five, six or seven neighbors, Dr. Prakash said.
George Andrew Olah was born on May 22, 1927, in Budapest, the son of Julius Olah, a lawyer, and the former Magda Krasznai. He attended what he described as one of the best schools in Budapest run by the Piarist Fathers, a Roman Catholic order.
After the war, he attended the Technical University of Budapest, obtaining master’s and doctoral degrees. He was an assistant professor of organic chemistry at the university and then appointed deputy director at the Central Research Institute of Chemistry of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences.
In 1949 he married Judith Lengyel, a technical secretary at the university, whom he had known from his early youth. She went on to study chemistry, as well.
In fleeing Hungary after the 1956 uprising, Dr. Olah and his family made brief stops in Vienna and London, where his wife had relatives, before moving to Montreal, where his mother-in-law lived.
In 1965, he left Dow to return to academia as a chemistry professor at Western Reserve University in Cleveland (which became Case Western Reserve in 1967). He moved to the University of Southern California in 1977 and founded the Hydrocarbon Research Institute there.
Dr. Olah was an author of nearly 1,500 scientific papers and held 160 patents in seven countries.
He is survived by his wife; their sons, George and Ronald; and three grandchildren.
After receiving his Nobel Prize, Dr. Olah, along with Dr. Prakash, worked on addressing the world’s energy needs and climate change. But instead of embracing more typical approaches, like promoting nuclear or solar energy, Dr. Olah believed that the most promising alternative energy source was methanol.
Methanol, which can be burned as a fuel, is also known as “wood alcohol” because it was once commonly produced from the distillation of wood. But it can also be produced by carbon dioxide captured from the air.
“You have a fuel which is a renewable fuel,” Dr. Prakash said.
In recent years, Dr. Olah’s interest in methanol grew. Methanol has been detected in the dust around young stars, before the dust has coalesced into planets. In a paper last year, he and his colleagues speculated that methanol was originally a basic ingredient that was converted into amino acids, nucleic acids and other building blocks of biology.
