Let’s turn it over to Jennifer Medina, a correspondent based in Los Angeles, for today’s introduction.
Often referred to as the Ellis Island of Los Angeles, the neighborhood east of downtown known as Boyle Heights has been the first stop for several waves of immigration. Since the 1940s, it has transformed into a largely Mexican-American enclave and the center of Chicano culture and activism in the city.
As other parts of Los Angeles have seen real estate prices climb steadily, many in Boyle Heights have expressed concern about gentrification, particularly after several art galleries moved into an industrial stretch. The battle between the galleries and activists reached a peak last fall when someone spray-painted a vulgar statement condemning “white art” on the door of one gallery and a hate-crime investigation was opened.
Almost from the moment it opened its doors last year Pssst, a nonprofit gallery, and its creators, have been the focus of protests and criticism on social media.
Last month, they announced they could no longer tolerate it. They were closing up shop.
Defend Boyle Heights, one of the activist groups that has called for a boycott of the galleries, said that it considered the closing a victory and that it hoped other galleries would soon follow suit.
The response has raised alarms for many of the other galleries in the area. Ethan Swan, one of the directors of 356 Mission, which has been there since 2013, said that he had tried to arrange a meeting with local activists, but that he had been repeatedly turned down.
Do you think the galleries should stay in Boyle Heights or leave? Let us know your thoughts at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| On Monday, we wrote about an effort to end daylight saving time in California.
We asked where you came down on the matter.
Among hundreds of responses, an overwhelming majority made the same plea: stop the twice yearly clock changing. Readers called for the adoption of an unchanging time throughout the year, outnumbering those who favored the status quo by roughly eight to one.
Most of those favoring an immutable time said they would prefer to simply stay on daylight saving time, dispensing with the “fall back” of November.
The keep-it-as-is crowd expressed worries of falling out of sync with the rest of the country. Others complained that our politicians should be focused on bigger issues.
