With fatal drug overdoses at alarming levels in New York City, particularly from opiates like heroin, Mayor Bill de Blasio on Monday vowed to reverse the tide and reduce the number of deaths by 35 percent over five years through a combination of outreach, treatment and law enforcement.
The plan, alluded to in Mr. de Blasio’s state of the city address last month, would see the city spend as much as $38 million a year on a broad array of services, including expanded methadone and buprenorphine treatment for addicts; a focus at city hospitals on dealing with addiction and overdoses; aggressive prosecution of illicit opioid distributors and heroin dealers; and the distribution of medication to reverse heroin overdoses to all 23,000 city patrol officers.
The announcement, at Lincoln Hospital in the Mott Haven neighborhood in the Bronx, comes as illicit and prescription opioids are driving a surge in fatal overdoses in New York City, and it follows efforts around the country to address an epidemic that the Drug Enforcement Administration last year said kills more people than firearms.
Indeed, the scourge of overdoses has for years been growing in intensity. Mr. de Blasio’s plan follows efforts at the state level by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and the attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman. The city, for its part, has already announced piecemeal efforts to address the emerging crisis, such as giving police officers the heroin antidote naloxone to use on overdose victims, and making it available more broadly through pharmacies without a prescription.
But like the mayor’s revised plan to fight homelessness, announced last week, the plan to address overdoses arrives deep into his term and years after the scope of the problem had been evident to addiction specialists, law enforcement and the grieving relatives of those who have fatally overdosed. The time frame for reducing overdoses extends to 2022, when Mayor de Blasio, who faces re-election this year, could be at the end of a second term.
That goal is a daunting one given the depth of the national problem and the reality that the trend has been heading in the opposite direction.
Although the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene has not finalized its 2016 figures, the city estimated that 1,300 people died from drug overdoses last year. And more than 1,075 of those died from opioid pain pills or opiates like heroin and its more powerful cousin fentanyl — up from 753 the year before.
Much of the attention has been focused on Staten Island, but the Bronx has been hardest hit in the crisis: four of the top five city neighborhoods ravaged by overdose deaths were in the borough, according to the city; the fifth was the southern part of Staten Island. The Bronx has the highest fatal overdose rate in the city, which nearly doubled in 2015, the most recent year for which detailed data is available. The borough saw the biggest increase in the city, followed by Queens, Staten Island and Brooklyn.
“The last year has been very sobering,” he said.
City officials estimate there are about 85,000 heroin users in the city, a number they say is likely low given the private nature of drug abuse. Four out of five people who use heroin started using prescription drugs, the officials said, a scenario Mr. de Blasio tied to the “corporate greed” of pharmaceutical companies that make and sell opioid pain medications.
Around Lincoln Hospital, a predominantly black and Latino neighborhood, long lines extend from the methadone clinics that dot a landscape where public housing towers look over small apartment buildings, clothing stores, fast-food chains and family restaurants. Children walking to and from school often pass zoned-out drug addicts, and hypodermic needles litter some side streets. The neighborhood, combined with Hunts Point, has the highest the rate of fatal overdoses in the city.
In the plan, the largest portion of spending goes to providing naloxone, with $10.3 million to be spent in the 2019 fiscal year. About $3 million will go to expanding access to buprenorphine, a drug that can help suppress symptoms of withdrawal and decrease cravings, and methadone.
The police were responsible for a small portion of the naloxone “saves” by city first responders, with 51 last year. By contrast, emergency medical technicians and firefighters gave the drug to 2,067 patients over the same period, according to the Fire Department.
“Making naloxone as widely available as possible in the midst of an opioid overdose crisis is a no-brainer, but it’s only going to go so far,” said Dr. Andrew Kolodny, who directs opioid policy research at Brandeis University’s Heller School for Social Policy and Management.
Mr. Kolodny, who has worked in the city’s Health Department on buprenorphine, said he was encouraged by the city’s focus on treatment. “Buprenorphine needs to be easier to access than pain pills, heroin and fentanyl,” he said.
As part of the plan announced on Monday, the Police Department will assign 84 narcotics and homicide investigators to “Overdose Response Squads” to work with federal authorities and target dealers. A pilot program using the same model has been in tested on Staten Island and expanded to all five boroughs. The police commissioner, James P. O’Neill, said the squads had conducted 381 investigations across the five boroughs, but he would not say how many arrests they made or what charges defendants had faced.
Commissioner O’Neill said he did not believe that going after dealers could undercut the willingness of drug users — who often buy from dealers who they know, or are dealers themselves — from calling for help during an overdose. While state law protects those who seek help for an overdose from prosecution for drugs found at the scene, the new effort would aggressively investigate the source of drugs present at overdoses with the goal of bringing criminal charges.
