Some of the young players enrolled at PSV Eindhoven’s academy have had to burst balloons. Others have been told to shoot dots, and more still have been tasked with bringing down alien space fleets.
These are hardly the tasks traditionally demanded of teenage soccer prodigies, but then PSV, the Dutch club, does not think of itself as traditional. Most clubs, after all, are concerned only with developing players with nimble feet. PSV, increasingly, is concentrating on nurturing agile minds.
That is why in recent years every player at the club, from the youth system to the reserve squad, has been assessed on at least one of four customized computer programs. Though the programs bear an uncanny similarity to old-school video games — balloons, space invaders and the rest — Jurrit Sanders, one of PSV’s sports scientists, rejects the term.
Remarkably predictive ones, judging by the evidence that Sanders and his colleagues have encountered. The tests are designed to assess a player’s cognitive capacity, establishing and monitoring his abilities in 16 disciplines, including reaction time, how quickly he makes decisions and how intensely, and for how long, he is able to focus.
The program remains at an early stage; Sanders does not contend that the results are conclusive. PSV is sufficiently intrigued, though, to dedicate more time to researching cognitive training.
“We know a lot about tactical training, technical training, physical training,” Sanders said. “We do not know a lot about this.” Finding a way to sharpen the mind, he said, could be coaching’s next frontier.
As The New York Times reported this year, there remains a considerable degree of skepticism among scientists and researchers about the benefits of cognitive training. Teams and individuals across a variety of sports continue to invest substantial sums — and even more faith — in systems claiming to hone the mind. Matt Ryan, the quarterback who led the Atlanta Falcons to the Super Bowl, is a devotee of NeuroTracker, a program also in use at Manchester United.
Some experts retain the suspicion, however, that they are being sold a myth, that for all the advanced graphics and bold claims, computer programs designed to improve mental performance are, at best, a harmless placebo and, at worst, an expensive delusion.
Luc van Agt, a physiologist at PSV, acknowledges those doubts. “We are just at the beginning,” he said.
That was part of the reason the club agreed to take part in a study conducted last year at PSV and another Dutch club, AZ Alkmaar, by researchers from the University of Amsterdam. Led by Geert Savelsbergh — an academic known in the Netherlands as “the football professor,” van Agt said — the team exposed a control group of players to a video analysis exercise, in which they had to identify certain movements, such as passes and runs. Another group conducted sessions on IntelliGym, an Israeli cognitive training system based on technology designed in a very different context.
IntelliGym’s interface is based on what Dankner called a “space battle metaphor,” which ice hockey teams have used for several years. It was adapted to make it more relevant to soccer, seen as an underexplored market, with the help of PSV coaches and former players — Phillip Cocu, Mark van Bommel, Ruud van Nistelrooy — with respected on-field pedigrees.
The result is a system that would not look out of place in a video-game arcade. Players are asked to take control of one fleet of spaceships and take on another. The situation, though, changes continually.
“One fleet can become invisible, or clouds might come and hide certain ships, or the player might be asked to take control of the other side,” Dankner said. Each twist is designed to flex another mental muscle.
“It examines things like anticipation, the ability to divide your attention, your working memory, your spatial perception,” he said.
The results of the University of Amsterdam study were clear. Both groups — initially comprising 52 players — were asked to perform their tasks twice a week over 10 weeks. Each time, they were then assessed in brief, small-sided games outside on the training field. The researchers found that the skills of the players who had used IntelliGym improved by 30 percent more than those in the control group, according to Dr. Savelsbergh.
Sanders is quick to point out that the study was hardly conclusive. But PSV is already conducting a “Phase 2 pilot,” in van Agt’s careful phrase, to see what else can be gleaned from the cognitive training.
At AZ Alkmaar, the other club involved in the study, the reaction has been — if anything — even more enthusiastic.
“We think of ourselves as the Apple of the football industry,” said Marijn Beuker, the head of performance and development at AZ. “We are always ready to think about new ways of doing things.
That culture of thinking differently has won AZ plenty of admirers. In February, Beuker visited with Bayer Leverkusen, in Germany, on a knowledge-sharing expedition. Real Madrid is among the teams to have met with AZ to learn more about the club’s work, which AZ shares freely.
That may explain his willingness to brush aside doubts about cognitive training: He makes the point that if the improvement is genuine, the cause is irrelevant. AZ has already incorporated IntelliGym into the training regimen of its under-11 through under-15 teams.
The next challenge, according to Sander Roege, PSV’s mental performance coach, is whether anyone can find a way to train cognitive functions with physical exercises.
Whatever the doubts, the clubs see the possibilities that cognitive training could open up. The German Football Association has plans to incorporate an IntelliGym suite at its new training center in Frankfurt; Oliver Bierhoff, its technical director, is an ardent convert to the idea that sharpening the mind is as important as honing the feet.
This, they all believe, is the next frontier. It remains a distant one, but one that ultimately could revolutionize understanding of the sport. At PSV, Roege said there may come a point when it would be possible to determine precisely what sort of cognitive strengths players in specific positions might require.
