When Bonnie Leonard retired from academia at age 65, she knew she was not done working.
After nearly 20 years as dean of continuing education at Wellesley College in Massachusetts, she thought she might go back into teaching, or move into development work, because fund-raising had been part of her job at the college. Instead, she decided to learn how to help others manage change: Since 2002, Ms. Leonard has been running her own coaching business, focusing on middle-aged women who are looking to make career and life transitions.
“I love it,” said Ms. Leonard, who lives in North Kingstown, R.I.
Her perception that people are working longer (not necessarily because they have to, but because they want to) is backed up by data. According to the Pew Research Center, in the year 2000, just under 13 percent of Americans 65 and over reported being employed full or part time. By May 2016, that figure had jumped to 18.8 percent — meaning that nearly nine million Americans 65-plus were gainfully employed.
Over the next five years, that number is expected to increase to 32 percent.
It is in such industries — education, law, business, social services — that older workers are not only staying, but thriving. “In jobs where knowledge is the basis, you don’t see a performance deficit with age,” said Laura Carstensen, a psychologist and director of the Stanford Center on Longevity.
Indeed, a 2015 study by the Transamerica Center for Retirement Studies found that 44 percent of those who retired later than planned said they continued to work because they chose to. Why? “They know they’re doing a good job,” Dr. Carstensen said.
Case in point: Louis DeHaas, a former city prosecutor in Los Angeles who is now a medical malpractice lawyer. At age 75, Mr. DeHaas, who goes by Duke, estimates that he is in trial about six to eight months a year — a heavy load. Although he is usually the oldest person in the courtroom, Mr. DeHaas said, he’s thriving at this point in this career.
He still works hard at it, forcing himself to keep current on music, sports and fashion trends. “I don’t want to be judged as an old fogey standing there in a trial,” he said, admitting that his 15-year-old granddaughter is his source of insight into popular culture.
Rae Ferguson is also flourishing, at age 71 — although, like Ms. Leonard, in her second career.
Ms. Ferguson is an associate professor of African-American history at the University of Rhode Island. “I’m a latecomer to this profession,” said Ms. Ferguson, who was in her 50s when she completed her dissertation at Indiana University — about the role of black women’s clubs in Indianapolis in the early 20th century.
Ms. Ferguson, who grew up in Germany, taught music, practices meditation and yoga and has survived cancer, said she believes that her varied life experiences have helped her in the college classroom. “I think I have a lot more ways to hook students in than I would have when I was 35,” she said.
Of course, working past traditional retirement age is neither desirable nor feasible for some.
Now Mr. Umphenour, who has residences in Atlanta and New York City, has returned to the restaurant business he worked in all his life. He is involved in several ventures, principally as chief executive officer for Stevi B’s Pizza Buffet, a franchise of 29 restaurants in the Southeast.
As the oldest baby boomers hit 70 in 2016, the ranks of septuagenarians who are not just working, but working at the top of their game is likely to grow significantly. Ms. James, of the Center on Aging and Work at Boston College, applauds this trend.
Yet, Dr. James said, “It’s not a good strategy to think you’re never going to retire.” She said that ultimately, most people do have to stop working full time because of health, caregiving responsibilities or other factors.
