MOBILE, Ala. — When people think of Mardi Gras, they think of New Orleans. But long before there even was a New Orleans, another Southern city — Mobile, Ala. — was celebrating Mardi Gras in the run-up to Ash Wednesday.
Mobile dates its Mardi Gras to 1703, a decade and a half before New Orleans was founded. Its Carnival, the oldest in America, stretches for months, beginning in November with debutante balls and other events.
Ladies of the royal court of the Mobile Carnival Association waited in a viewing tent before the King’s Parade. The Mobile Mardi Gras Parading Association says the Mobile area has 72 participating organizations, called mystic societies, celebrating this year. The groups are still largely segregated by race and class.
With no governing body, each organization sets up its own parade, applies for permits, and builds or rents its floats. The Mobile Carnival Association was formed in 1872 to foster economic success in the city and help organize activities for Carnival. It lobbied a few years later to declare Fat Tuesday a legal holiday in Mobile.
The first mystic societies formed in the 1830s, but it took until 1894 for the African-American community to get its own group. The Mobile Area Mardi Gras Association, formerly called the Colored Carnival Association, held its first parade in 1940, more than two decades before the end of segregation. A former president, Eric Finley, says the group was started by African-American businessmen to provide cultural and educational activities for black residents and show them what they could achieve through education. Its parade route winds through the predominantly black Fisher neighborhood of Mobile.
Many of the mystic societies hold annual formal balls.  Membership rules vary. Members need to be born into some societies; other groups invite residents to join, and still others accept anyone who pays the dues.
The king of the Order of Doves, Ross Huffstutler, received help from Maxine Day James as he and the queen — his wife, Hannah Huffstutler — waited to pay their respects to the royal couple of the Mobile Area Mardi Gras Association at their coronation ceremony.
Only two mystic societies, the Mobile Carnival Association and the Mobile Area Mardi Gras Association, have public coronations.
Queen Victoria Maureen Ball, seated next to Father Time, awaits the start of the Mystics of Time parade. Each year, Father Time is selected from the Mystics of Time members based on his service to the organization, and the queen is usually an unmarried relative of Father Time.
A secret society, the Mistresses of Joe Cain, gave out roses during the Joe Cain Procession in Mobile. Joe Cain, a Confederate soldier, is credited with reviving Mardi Gras after the Civil War, and the Joe Cain Procession is held each year on the Sunday before Fat Tuesday.
From the back of a pickup truck along the Joe Cain Procession route, a family waits to see the royal motorcade of the Mobile Area Mardi Gras Association.
One member of the Mystics of Time, who declined to give his name to maintain the group’s cloak of secrecy, said that despite invitations to join several societies, his choice came down to his childhood memories of the parades.
Having moved to Mobile when he was 9, he vividly remembers the 100-foot fire-breathing dragons at the Mystics of Time parade, and what a large impact that had on him.
Parade marshals and members gathered for the midnight toast at the Mystics of Time ball. Wearing masks allows the society members to celebrate with abandon; many mystic societies still protect the identities of their members.
A janitor swept confetti, coins and rubber balls off the floor as the dancing got underway after the tableau, or presentation of the members, at the Mystics of Time ball.
Royal courts from other area organizations were on hand at the Mobile Area Mardi Gras Association’s royal coronation ceremony at the Mobile Convention Center.
A marshal and his escort walked off the stage after being presented during the tableau at the Mystics of Time ball. The presentations are an extravagant event, with each member standing in the spotlight, receiving applause. The ball is held in a convention center auditorium with levels of attendance: Only certain people get a floor pass, but many guests watch from an upper level of stadium seating.
An Order of Myths member, dressed as Folly on the lead float, entered the secret society’s clubhouse at the end of the parade. The organization was founded in the fall of 1867, and its parade this year highlighted its founding 150 years ago. It is the oldest parading society in Mobile.
Debra Stencil danced at her table in the back of the hall during the Grand Marshals Ball for the Mobile Area Mardi Gras Association.
A fire twirler, Reagan Lee, marched through Mobile in the Order of Doves parade.
Vanessa Shoots, a lawyer and historian who attended this year’s Mobile Area Mardi Gras Association ball, recalled struggling to find a good viewing spot while attending a parade a while back with her daughter. A white woman wearing a Confederate flag took Ms. Shoots’s daughter — her “little black baby” — and brought her up to the front so she could see.
“That taught me that not every person who wears a Confederate flag knows how deeply it offends me,” Ms. Shoots said.