Today’s debut by Sandy Ganzell, a math professor, demonstrates that you can never, ever have things work out perfectly because, in his original attempt to make his puzzle narrower in spots, Mr. Ganzell was forced to actually widen his grid to 16 columns (from the more typical 15). Knowing that doesn’t take any of the solving pleasure out of the puzzle — I enjoyed it a lot, even as I was burning calories — but it does lend some sort of credence to a weight-loss theory that I totally made up. No need to thank me; eventually I will come up with a plan for world peace, and you will be able to read about it right here on Wordplay.
Fortunately, the editing process wrangled the puzzle back to a more typical size, which I think is a better presentation of this clever theme. Let’s all inhale deeply and try to squeeze into today’s puzzle.
Solvers will see a slightly different grid depending on where they solve today. In the print version, the columns consisting of 14-/42-Down, 16-/49-Down and 22-Down are not as wide as all the other columns.
There’s a good reason for this: the answers to those clues all begin with synonyms for “thin.” For example, at 14D, “Girl Scout cookie offering” can only contain the word MINTS, but since the entry is “not as wide” as the others, it should be read as [THIN] MINTS. Similarly, at 16D, “Barely successful avoidance of calamity” can contain the word ESCAPE, but what phrase do you know that would describe such an avoidance? That’s right; the answer is [NARROW] ESCAPE.
Now you burn some additional calories by getting out your thesaurus and solving the other three theme clues, making sure to note that, in the south, the entries MENU and EATERY cross each other in the cruelest way.
■ 17A: The next time you are at a cocktail party and someone asks how you got there, try answering “Why, by CARIOLE, of course! What did you do, take the bus?” You will either spark a lively conversation about horse-drawn transportation or you will clear the room.
■ 21A: Think about this one. If you’ve done something, then you do it “Again ... and again,” you’ve done it THRICE.
■ 32A: Wordplay alert! I stared at this one for a while before it hit me that the Dodge RAM is a “line” of pickup trucks. “Pickup line?” is a very clever way to clue that.
■ 28D: Don’t overthink this one. Today, a “French well” is not the kind that you dig; it’s the French word for a feeling of being “well,” or BIEN.
This is my first published puzzle. I’m pretty excited about my debut, but I think my dad is more excited. I remember him and my mom working on The Sunday Times puzzle when I was young, but I never had much interest in crosswords myself. It wasn’t until I was about 30 that I started solving these things, with some help from my sister. Five years later, I started constructing amusing (or at least mildly inappropriate) puzzles for my friends, usually to celebrate New Year’s. We also play crossword puzzle charades, where we take turns pantomiming the clues and then putting the answers into an empty solution grid.
This puzzle bears little resemblance to my original submission. In fact, with the exception of three short theme answers, there’s nothing left of the original. Even the grid size is different.
I started with the idea of squeezing extra words into a grid where they didn’t fit. The entire theme would consist of unclued answers that had to be thin enough (literally) to squeeze in. I thought of (skinny) JEANS, (narrow) BRIDGE, (narrow) MARGIN, (lean) BEEF, (thin) line, (thin) ICE, (thin) AIR and (slim) CHANCE. Once I settled on five symmetric theme answers, I had to go 16 wide with JEANS in the middle.
But Will thought the grid would look best if entire columns were thin instead of just individual answers. So, basically a complete rewrite. I’m still not sure which I like better, but Will and Joel were very helpful with the overhaul. I hope you like how it turned out.
A clever twist for a Thursday, Mr. Ganzell. I hope to see more from you.