As a pediatrician working in a hospital, I care for the most sick and vulnerable children. In the past these children were often uninsured or underinsured, but we have made progress. Children’s health insurance coverage has reached historic levels thanks to Medicaid, the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) and the Affordable Care Act. The American Health Care Act could destroy that.
Children most at risk for poor health outcomes rely on Medicaid and CHIP — those living in poverty, with disabilities or chronic health conditions, and in foster care, as well as very young infants. Half of all Medicaid/CHIP enrollees in the United States are children — and yet we neglect to consider their welfare in the proposed health plan. And neglecting the welfare of children hurts our country and our economy.
Kids enrolled in Medicaid miss fewer school days, are more likely to attend and graduate from college, and grow up to be healthier adults who earn higher wages, pay more in taxes and have lower health care costs.
The American Health Care Act jeopardizes our nation’s children. We must put kids first in order to ensure the health of our country.
A recent article in The New Yorker (“On Health Care, We’ll Have What Congress Is Having”) explained why so many members of Congress hate, yes, hate the Affordable Care Act. They lost their access to the excellent Federal Employees Health Benefits Program, which covers federal employees, and were included instead in the less appealing Affordable Care Act, along with the unwashed millions.
They are still fuming. The lesson: One should never tamper with a politician’s benefits, lest he exact awesome revenge.
My view: Let them have their benefits program back. Then maybe they will be kinder to the rest of the folks.
President Obama bent over backward trying to bring the Republicans into the health care conversation. He jettisoned the public option in a New York minute to that purpose. The headline on this essay should have been used in 2010 to describe what the president wanted to happen.
Obstructionism is a dirty business, but for those who have engaged in it for eight years to now step up and call it out is the last way to accomplish anything bipartisan.
ROCHELLE L. ROTH, CONCORD, CALIF.
John Kasich gets my vote today for his sane, solution-focused plea to end partisan warfare on health care. I have never understood how or why health care has become such a divisive partisan issues. We all age; we are all vulnerable to illnesses and disabilities. No family is immune to addiction or mental illness.
Do conservatives feel exempt?  Do they need to deprive others to feel superior? We all benefit from a healthy population.
So let’s heed Mr. Kasich, end the civil war over health care (and other safety nets) and begin to heal.
The writer is the founder of Beit T’shuvah, a faith-based addiction recovery community.
Gov. John Kasich’s calm call for a bipartisan reworking of the health care law seems at first blush to be the “adult in the room” wisdom we desperately need. But it is in reality only marginally better than the partisan screeching he is trying to reason past.
While Obamacare could certainly stand some strengthening, the rational way to proceed is to improve it, not “repeal and replace” it, as Mr. Kasich advocates. Ted Kennedy used to preach the virtues of passing even an imperfect bill on important issues and then fixing any flaws. That is the true “adult” wisdom we need today.
The main reason that American health care costs have skyrocketed out of control is that medicine is no longer focused on healing the sick at affordable prices. Over the last 40 years, health care has grown into big business, and it is now on track to be the largest industry in the United States within the next few years.
The term “nonprofit” no longer applies to many health care providers. Many are public companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange and aim to maximize shareholder value and profits. They have contributed heavily to state and federal political campaigns, and they pay hundreds of millions of dollars to a vast army of Washington lobbyists.
Like it or not, the only solution is a nationwide single-payer health care system.
