Updated, 7:58 a.m.
Good morning on this wind-whipped Thursday.
At 31 Chambers Street, there’s a treasure chest.
It’s filled with 220,000 cubic feet of “gems” that tell the story of our city’s centuries-old past.
Maps. Photographs. Film spools. Birth, death and marriage certificates. Books from 1645, penned in Dutch with the letters faded and pages frayed.
They’re all part of the Municipal Archives, a vast collection housed inside what was once the Hall of Records, but is now the Surrogate’s Courthouse.
Among the millions of photos and documents in the storerooms below New York City’s municipal library, Edward I. Koch, Michael Jackson and Muhammad Ali are captured at the peak of their powers.
We stopped in front of a section on Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia and discovered not one, not two, but three files dedicated to his … artichoke war.
We leafed through the folder, which contained meticulous data on artichoke consumption (“17,640,000 artichokes annually”), memos from the mayor — his notes scribbled in the margins — and letters from the Commission of Merchants on Artichokes and Cantaloupes.
In another room was a group of letters written by schoolchildren in 1943 for “I Am An American Day,” which captured a portrait of life in New York City during World War II.
And in the Conservation Lab, where preservationists were cleaning maps of Brooklyn drawn when it was still its own city, was a large black safe decorated with big, silver knobs. The safe creaked as it was opened using a five-digit code. Inside are many of the city’s oldest government documents on slavery and on New Amsterdam.
You can learn more by perusing the archives’ blog, For the Record, which shares new tales from the vaults every Thursday. You can also explore in person: The archives are open to the public, and beginning today, it will offer extended hours on Thursdays.
The archives have had an increase in visitors lately. The commissioner of the Department of Records and Information Services, Pauline Toole, told us about a surge in birth certificate inquiries, since the presidential election, by people interested in applying for dual-citizenship in other countries.
No hidden gems here, just a lot of wind.
As you read this, there’s a good chance that it’s the warmest (and windiest) part of the day. Temperatures are expected to fall throughout the morning and settle around 43.
But the wind won’t stop, and snow could return tomorrow.
Hair forecast: Pre-spring fling.
• Scoreboard: Knicks dispel Magic, 101-90. Nets bind Kings, 109-100.
• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Thursday Briefing.
• Looking ahead: Saturday night, you can see The Orchid Show, an exhibition exploring the role of the flowers in Thailand, after hours at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.
• Devils at Capitals, 7 p.m. (MSG+). Rangers at Bruins, 7 p.m. (MSG). Islanders at Stars, 8:30 p.m. (MS+2).
• For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide.
• Roads: Check traffic map or radio report on the 1s or the 8s.
• Alternate-side parking: in effect until March 12.
When the Waldorf Astoria closed on Wednesday, we were reminded of another landmark New York City hotel, one that opened its doors 114 years ago this week.
The Martha Washington, a women-only establishment at 30 East 30th Street, was a progressive concept at the turn of the 20th century, when women were expected to stay at home tending to family. But they were also, slowly, expanding their options — staying single, pursuing education and becoming professionals.
Nurses, doctors, artists, teachers, bookkeepers, stenographers, businesswomen — even one female official from Tammany Hall — took note. And before the 650-person residence even opened, there was already a waiting list hundreds of ladies long. Rooms went for $1.50 a day.
“The plan of having girls to take the place of bellboys was thought of, but it was decided that the work of carrying hand baggage to and from the rooms would be too heavy for girls, so boys are to be employed,” The New York Times reported in 1903. A year later, 14 women replaced the bellboys.
The lodging remained exclusively for women until 1998. Last year, it became the Redbury New York.
New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late morning. You can receive it via email.
For updates throughout the day, like us on Facebook.
What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday.
Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra Levine and Jonathan Wolfe, on Twitter.
You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.