If the idea of cozying up to Russia strikes you as harmless, or all those Syrian refugees are too far away to seem real, the HBO documentary “Cries From Syria” is something you ought to watch. But be prepared for an unrelenting blast of misery without a lot of context.
The film, which is being broadcast on Monday night, draws on the mass of footage shot by journalists and citizens with cellphones or other devices since Syria descended into civil war in 2011. We see bombings as they happen. We see mangled bodies in still-smoking ruins. The documentary, by Evgeny Afineevsky, presents the perspective of the rebels fighting the government of President Bashar al-Assad, who is supported by Russia, and it does not hold back in depicting the horrors being inflicted on civilians all over the country.
Images of the aftermath of a chemical-weapon attack in Ghouta in August 2013 are especially gruesome. There’s a reason such weapons have been condemned by civilized countries everywhere for decades.
Mr. Afineevsky gives the film a geographical framework, moving from one beleaguered city to the next, and divides the piece into thematic chapters — “The Dawn of the Revolution,” “Civil War,” “The Journey in Between” and others. The film, though, doesn’t convey the complexity of Syria’s dismaying orgy of self-destruction.
The rebels, too, have been guilty of atrocities, and the fractured nature of the revolution has left the United States and other outsiders unclear on whether and how to intervene. But perhaps that is one of Mr. Afineevsky’s points — that the civilians being killed or driven from their country by the war are victims of forces no one really understands. Certainly the final segment, which includes the plight of refugees, is both heart-rending and frustrating. The film offers no solutions and suggests no courses of action; maybe that’s because there are no clear-cut ones.
“Cries From Syria” includes a brief segment on the White Helmets, the volunteer group that has garnered praise for its rescue efforts at bombing sites in Syria. Netflix is now streaming a short documentary on that same group, titled “The White Helmets,” which won the Oscar last month for best documentary short.
The film makes a fine companion to “Cries From Syria,” though, in a way, it, too, is short on context. We see various rescues, but we don’t learn much about what is available for the victims once they’re pulled from the rubble pile. How do you treat badly injured people in cities where hospitals themselves have been bombed?
