The Sheridan Expressway, a brainchild of the former city planner Robert Moses, displaced thousands of people and divided neighborhoods when construction began in 1958. The highway has been called a mistake and community groups have been clamoring for changes to it since 1999.
Also called Interstate 895, the expressway runs for just over a mile, connecting the Bruckner and Cross Bronx Expressways. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo announced on Sunday that he was allocating almost $700 million to overhaul the highway, making it greener, prettier and easier to cross. The total price tag, he said, would be $1.8 billion.
But something has happened in the half-century since the expressway opened in 1963: the neighborhood adapted.
Alexandra Arias, 49, who uses the Sheridan to commute to work at La Guardia Airport, said the state had no reason to invest in a tree-lined boulevard when other problems, like poverty and drug abuse, were so much more pressing.
“We have green space!” she said, naming three parks already in walking distance.
And scrapping the highway would affect the many businesses, including garages and car repair shops, that have sprung up alongside it over the decades.
Yeissel Martinez, 29, a secretary at Sheridan Garage on Freeman Street, was not a fan of the proposal. “They’re not thinking about the people that use the highway — us, the regular ones,” she said, adding that the garage depended on customers from the Sheridan.
But Cynthia Meneses, 50, is tired of the chain-link fences, concrete dividers and the cacophony of traffic that have long separated residents from the Bronx River. She works as an aide at Public School 75, close to where the Sheridan branches off from the Bruckner, and loves Mr. Cuomo’s plan.
She said pollution from vehicle exhaust had probably worsened her asthma. And she worried that the speeding vehicles presented a danger to children. “I think the money is worth spending on that, because to me, the safety is the number one thing,” she said.
The Southern Bronx River Watershed Alliance also favors the proposal. The coalition backed a 2013 report that recommended turning the highway into a boulevard.
“We understand that the South Bronx is under threat of gentrification,” said Elena Conte, the policy director at the Pratt Center for Community Development, a member of the alliance, adding that the project would require constant consultation with residents. “It has to be extraordinarily intentional,” she said.
The neighborhood has already seen changes in recent years. Developers of affordable housing are increasingly drawn to the area, and two well-appointed parks have opened alongside the Sheridan. Starlight Park, with playground equipment, athletic fields and tree-lined walkways, opened in 2013 after years of renovations. Concrete Plant Park, formerly the site of a concrete plant, opened in 2009.
The Bronx River itself, once considered a polluted backwater, is now home to ever-growing populations of fish — and even a couple of beavers.
At Gustiamo, a company that imports goods from Italy, Danielle Aquino-Roithmayr called her boss in Sicily after she heard the news. On the other end of the line was the owner, Beatrice Ughi, 64, who travels to Italy regularly.
Though Gustiamo is a bit of an outlier amid the carwashes and auto-repair shops, it has been beside the expressway for 17 years.
At a small playground nearby, Hiram Echevarria, 33, said he was happy with the overall changes in the neighborhood.
Mr. Gales said he, too, appreciated the recent work done on Starlight Park, where he was enjoying the bright sunshine on Monday afternoon. But he remained suspicious of big, expensive projects like turning the expressway into a boulevard.
