WASHINGTON — Rain is usually an outdoor performance’s worst nightmare. But on Wednesday morning at the Tidal Basin here, members of the Boulder Philharmonic were enveloped in the most delightful kind of showers imaginable. Seated under Japanese cherry trees near the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial, squinting slightly against the bright sunshine, a quintet of wind soloists was playing a breezy minuet by Haydn while periodic gusts of wind shook loose hundreds of petals, sprinkling the players and their audience of tourists and stroller-pushing parents in a gentle swirl of pink.
The musicians were playing in the park as part of Shift, a new weeklong festival of American orchestras presented by Washington Performing Arts and the Kennedy Center. Running through Saturday, this is the inaugural edition of what is planned as a yearly showcase of ensembles from around the country. It is also the reincarnation of the Spring for Music festival, which had a popular four-year run at Carnegie Hall before running out of funding in 2014. Judging by the events I witnessed over the course of two days, the shift in location has preserved much of the earlier festival’s joy and artistic excellence and infused it with an additional note of urgency.
Like its predecessor, Shift aims to foster local pride as well as a bit of friendly competition. The current festival features the North Carolina Symphony, the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra and the Brooklyn-based orchestral collective the Knights in addition to the Boulder ensemble. Orchestras arrive with retinues of fans, who, armed with color-coded bandannas, form good-natured cheer squads at their hometown ensembles’ performances.
But this being Washington, these groups could also use the opportunity to elbow (gently) their elected representatives and remind them of the vital work the groups do back home, and former senators and current members of Congress could be spotted at concerts. Whenever a presenter mentioned the newly endangered National Endowment for the Arts, cheers rang out from the stage and auditorium.
Perhaps the politicians in attendance even read the editorial in the festival’s program, which laid out impressive statistics on the diverse contributions made by American orchestras. At a time when classical music has to fight persistent charges of elitism, it is worth pointing out that more than a quarter of the 28,000 or so performances each year across all 50 states are free.
But it’s the perceptions of ordinary listeners that the festival seeks to change most of all. Each orchestra was invited to present an outside-the-box event in addition to a concert at the Kennedy Center. The Boulder players, for instance, offered a birdsong-theme musical hike through Rock Creek Park, as well as the chamber performances under the cherry trees. In its main stage program on Wednesday evening, the North Carolina Symphony held fast to an admirable idea: to perform only music by composers associated with its state.
Unfortunately the resulting concert lacked any substantial work to show off what seemed to be a high level of playing. Affable, upbeat works by Robert Ward, who died in 2013 at 95, bracketed a program of approachable but diffuse Americana, with a picturesque piece by Mason Bates and a soft-focus reverie by Sarah Kirkland Snider accompanying a soft-focus video meditation on memory by Mark DeChiazza. If there was a highlight, it was Caroline Shaw’s self-effacing violin concerto, “Lo,” with the composer as soloist.
The North Carolina players also presented “unChAMBERed,” an evening of what has come to be known as indie-classical music, at the Smithsonian American Art Museum. The mix of idioms wasn’t always successful. DM Stith’s rendition of Gabriel Kahane’s folk-mod ballad “Hard Circus Road” was delightful, as was Ms. Shaw’s own performance — this time as a singer — of her setting of three folk songs with string quartet accompaniment.
But the 13-song cycle “Unremembered” by Ms. Snider with Mr. Stith joined by the vocalists Shara Nova and Padma Newsome, was an overlong exercise in candy-floss-Gothic angst. Its setting of dark poems by Nathaniel Bellows — among them, visions of an abandoned slaughterhouse, a martyred swan and a copse of trees haunted by the memory of a suicide — proceed to the accompaniment of spare orchestral gestures, repeated as in a trance. Listening to “Unremembered” alongside the (lamentably much shorter) songs by Ms. Shaw highlighted the difference between sincerity and being overearnest.
Sincerity also made for an engrossing song recital given by a cast of stellar soloists at the National Gallery of Art earlier on Thursday evening. On Friday, these artists were to perform in the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra’s presentation of “Creation/Creator,” a new oratorio by Christopher Theofanidis. For their short sets on Thursday, accompanied by the Atlanta Symphony’s conductor, Robert Spano, at the piano, each singer was invited to choose songs related to Mr. Theofanidis’s theme and to offer brief introductory remarks.
