MUMBAI, India — A young Kenyan woman is pulled from a taxi by a group of men and beaten. A mob storms into a mall and attacks two Nigerian students shopping there.
The two attacks this week in Greater Noida, a suburb of New Delhi, were said to have been fueled by unsubstantiated reports that African students had sold drugs to a young Indian student who later died of an overdose.
The attacks on the students follow several episodes of violence against Africans in recent years, raising questions about racial attitudes in India. The attacks also highlight a pervasive lawlessness in India, where mobs made up of majority groups commit violent acts against members of minority groups, often incited by rumors of wrongdoing.
“I am increasingly worried about the ease with which mobs get formed and act very irrationally and cruelly in a short time period on the basis of no information,” said Siddharth Varadarajan, editor of The Wire, an online news site.
Abhinandan Singh, additional superintendent of police in Greater Noida, said in a telephone interview that there was no evidence that any African students were involved in the death of the young Indian man, or even that he died of a drug overdose.
Mr. Singh said a candlelight vigil for the man was being held Monday night when troublemakers in the crowd convinced the mourners to charge into the Ansal Plaza mall and attack the Nigerian students someone had spotted inside.
Increasing numbers of students from Africa have come to India to study in recent years, with several thousand of them in the Delhi area. The students attacked by the mob were enrolled at Noida International University.
As their numbers have increased, rights advocates say, so have the attacks. In 2014, a mob beat three African students at a New Delhi train station. Last year, a mob attacked and stripped a 21-year-old Tanzanian woman in north Bangalore whose car showed up at an accident scene shortly after a Sudanese man had run over a local woman.
But mob violence is not restricted to Africans. In 2015, a crowd of Hindus attacked and killed a Muslim man near Delhi after a rumor circulated that he had cow meat in his refrigerator. Hindus consider the cow a holy animal, while Muslims, who do not, may eat beef.
Recently, the angry relatives of patients who died in public hospitals in the Mumbai area have beaten up doctors they accused of malpractice, prompting a physicians’ strike.
Indian society needs to look within and examine “why they hate Africans so much,” said Abdou Ibrahim, senior adviser to the Association of African Students in India. The young woman who was pulled out of her taxi and slapped, identified only as Maria, “is thinking if she should quit her studies and go back, she is so traumatized,” Mr. Ibrahim said.
Mr. Varadarajan said the attacks on Africans served as a warning to Indians that their country was riddled with some of the very same racism that they had suffered from in the West.
“The fact is the kind of ignorance and irrational fears you see would rival the feelings and fears of the worst racists in the West,” he said.
The police, having reviewed closed circuit television footage of the mall violence, had identified 44 people involved in the attack, Mr. Singh said, and had arrested five of them, ages 22 to 35.
In the video footage, several men can be seen hitting the two Nigerians with stools and garbage cans. Mr. Singh said the attack stopped only when police officers showed up.
One of the injured students had been released from the hospital, while the other was still being treated, though his condition was said to be improving. The young woman had also been discharged from the hospital, but she was “still in total shock,” Mr. Singh said.