While there’s plenty of action in the new Wolverine movie “Logan,” this scene, where Wolverine (played by Hugh Jackman) is giving Professor X (Patrick Stewart) his medication, takes the X-Men franchise to a more fragile place. The director James Mangold wanted to make a superhero movie that felt more like a family drama, and during a recent interview he explained how and why he made that happen with “Logan.” Here are excerpts from that conversation.
Much of this film is darker, deeper and more intimate than what many have come to expect from an “X-Men” film. How did you get there?
Ultimately the goal for both Hugh and I was to do something very different, something more humanist, something more naturalistic and something more evocative of a genre which has inspired me for a long time: the American western. We have satisfying action and a sense of shape to the story. But we’re also, like in the most successful westerns, moved. And I think it’s really important that movies not only dazzle us, but also, if you expect them to last, to touch us.
This film is rated R in terms of violence. Can you tell me about that?
Hugh wanted to deliver for fans something that he had heard them endlessly asking for, which was visceral, physical action. We wanted to fulfill the kind of vision people had for the fight sequences. You have a character with blades coming out of his knuckles, but up to this point, the films rarely showed what damage they were doing.
For me, what was most interesting in getting the studio to O.K. an R rating was something entirely different. They suddenly let go of the expectation that this film is going to play for children. And when they let go of that, you are free in a myriad of ways. The scenes can be longer. Ideas being explored in dialogue or otherwise can be more sophisticated. Storytelling pace can be more poetic and less built like attention-span-deficit theater.
Did the studio say yes to an R rating after “Deadpool” or before?
It was before, but I think you’re right to look at “Deadpool” as being one of the films that may have helped us. I think “Deadpool” was in the can and the studio had seen it. I think they felt confident that it was going to be commercial but they made the commitment to allow us to be R before that came out.
With this relationship between Logan and Charles, you turned a superhero movie into a family drama in a sense.
I was trying to make a film about the thing that Logan was most frightened of. I did not think that would be another superhero. I didn’t think it would be the destruction of the earth and I certainly didn’t think it would be his own demise, which he might even be looking forward to. I do think that in some way confronting him with the most eternal love, which is a father and a son or a mother and a son or daughter, that would be the ultimate challenge.
Is there really no post-credit scene in this film?
No. I think in every juncture my collaborators and I were asking ourselves, What do folks normally do on movies like these? Let’s do the opposite. What does the score sound like? Let’s not have ours sound that way. They’re usually shot not on location but on a stage with a lot of green screen. We shot on location; when characters are driving, they’re really driving with the wind in their hair. We made an effort to defy what had become a set of clichés that define the superhero film in this era. And one of them is the “extra scene.” It’s gotten to the point where it’s like I’m refusing to serve cheesecake after my meal. Well sometimes I don’t want cheesecake.