ARTECH: ADVENTURES IN ART & TECHNOLOGY at 459 West 14th Street (through April 29). On March 1, an intriguing new children’s center opened its doors in Manhattan. On April 29, it will shut them, leaving small visitors just seven more weeks to design, construct, experiment and explore. Presented by the Meatpacking Business Improvement District, this 8,000-square-foot pop-up learning hub draws on the resources of both the Children’s Museum of the Arts and the New York Hall of Science. At a Velocity area, for instance, children can create tiny vehicles, then investigate physics by sending them down ramps of different shapes. Other exhibits include a portable planetarium; a station to make the animated images known as GIFs; a Build It area with components from the design kit Rigamajig; and installations featuring artist and scientist collaborations. Admission is free, but requires timed tickets. One consolation: Though ARTech will go away soon, the museums that created it won’t.
BALLET HISPÁNICO EN FAMILIA at the United Palace of Cultural Arts (March 11, 2 p.m.). You don’t have to know Spanish to understand this title, and children don’t have to know dance to enjoy the program. This show from the acclaimed Latino company, free for those 12 and younger, consists of excerpts from its repertory, including Annabelle Lopez Ochoa’s flamenco-inspired “Línea Recta” and Gustavo Ramírez Sansano’s “Flabbergast,” about his first encounter with the United States. It concludes with a Q. and A.
FAMILY GAME NIGHT at the American Museum of Natural History (March 14, 6-8 p.m.). Don’t expect Scrabble or Trivial Pursuit. This after-hours event at the museum, recommended for families whose children are 7 and older, involves more unusual fun, from the physical (an obstacle course and a giant version of Twister) to the technological (virtual reality games and computer games). Highlights include a riddle-posing robot and chances to play against scientists in games that involve their specialties.
HOUSE PARTY: MOONWALK at BRIC Arts Media House (March 11, noon to 5 p.m.). NASA meets Michael Jackson at this family festival, which reflects both the moon walks made by astronauts and the one that was Jackson’s signature dance move. Children’s activities include making Jackson-inspired music videos; decorating a single glove to imitate his style; designing rocket ships; and watching “Liftoff!,” shadow puppetry from Drama of Works. Free with an R.S.V.P., this Brooklyn event culminates in a dance party.
NEW YORK INTERNATIONAL CHILDREN’S FILM FESTIVAL (through March 19) The good news: It’s not all sold out. The festival enters its third weekend with tickets available for several programs, including “Animators All Around,” a panel at 3:30 p.m. at Scandinavia House in Manhattan. Recommended for children over 8, it will feature the directors Mark Osborne, Elizabeth Ito and Rawan Rahim showing film excerpts and sharing their secrets.
READING INTO HISTORY FAMILY BOOK CLUB: ‘SUGAR’ at the New-York Historical Society (March 12, 2-4 p.m.). Sugar is both the endearing name and the enduring burden of the 10-year-old heroine of this novel by Jewell Parker Rhodes. A former slave in 1870, Sugar has no family and still feels tied to the sugar cane crop on the plantation where she’s been raised. Ms. Rhodes will visit to discuss her book, which explores Sugar’s friendship with Chinese workers who have been brought in to help with the harvest. Recommended for ages 9 through 12, the event will include looking at documents and images that relate to Reconstruction.
