A crowdsourced portrait of New York City at its noisy, gentrified, garbage-strewn best.
New York is made up of 66,000 blocks, each a little world unto itself. To know them all is to know the city in its infinite variety.
It’s impossible, but we try. Just about every year, as the mayor offers his State of the City address, we ask readers of The New York Times to paint a crowdsourced municipal portrait: Tell us the State of Your Block.
This year, nearly 1,200 of you obliged, from well over 100 neighborhoods across all five boroughs, submitting letter grades and critiques and bonbons for issues like scaffolding and sirens, trees and trucks and trash, stray cats and shopkeepers.
We supplemented these dispatches by examining the 2.4 million service-request calls to 311 that residents made last year. Now we know which block, for example, generated the most calls about illegal parking (44th Street between 10th and 11th Avenues in Manhattan, take a bow), dead animals (15th Street between Eighth Avenue and Prospect Park West in Brooklyn, who knew?), poison ivy (Dunton Street in Jamaica Estates, Queens) and public drinking (Gadsen Place on Staten Island).
The findings we present are hardly scientific.  And many 311 calls from one block can simply indicate one very angry resident. Between the human inclination to use surveys as an opportunity to complain — the average grade readers gave their block was a C-plus — and our dive into the 311 database, there was inevitably some accentuating the negative.
As wave after wave of redevelopment and renovation sweep across the city, New York gets shinier, cleaner, safer.
But there are downsides: Many New Yorkers have been forced out of places where they lived for years. And even some readers who remain described a creeping soullessness that has accompanied the flow of money into their neighborhoods.
The traffic light on Metropolitan Avenue at Olive Street in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, turns green. One by one, the trucks stacked up on Metropolitan lurch and loudly belch their way forward. Inside Abe Rubenstein’s apartment, the room buzzes and vibrates.
Trucks, jackhammers, lovers’ quarrels: This city offers an infinite variety of sonic assaults.
1. Masjid al-Aman, a mosque in East New York, Brooklyn, that like many mosques summons the faithful to prayer through roof-mounted loudspeakers, five times a day (83 calls to 311).
One recent chilly morning outside the mosque, the muezzin’s rising call filled the air. It was 5:39 and still dark. Men filed into the red-carpeted sanctuary and knelt toward Mecca to pray.
Mr. Rahman, 33, said he had suggested that the mosque’s leaders reduce the volume. “You don’t want to cause animosity, and already Muslims are a target,” he said.
Last spring, after a city noise inspector measured the call to prayer at above the legal limit, the city asked the mosque to turn it down, too. The mosque’s lawyer claimed exemption under a city code covering bells, chimes and organs at houses of worship. But a judge disagreed and issued a $450 fine.
2. The Sabbath siren that sounds (like an air-raid horn) every Friday evening at Congregation Bais Yaakov Nechemia D’satmar, a synagogue in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn (61 calls to 311).
When the siren goes off at the busy intersection of Myrtle and Bedford Avenues, those in the traditional garb of Hasidic Jews quicken their steps to get home. At a Chinese restaurant across the street one recent Friday, Danielle Bowden waited out the 90-second horn blast with annoyance. “If you’re really practicing your faith, you don’t need a siren,” Ms. Bowden, 26, a pastry chef, said.
The city has issued a noise violation to the synagogue; the synagogue is fighting it.
3. A building in the Bronx that houses two storefront churches — one Spanish-speaking, the other with a largely African congregation (27 calls to 311).
The Spanish-speaking church, Congregación Cristiana del Bronx, features an amplified band with a full drum kit. The African church, Blood of Jesus Ministry, holds late services several nights a week.
Katheryn Acevedo, 37, lives directly above the churches on East 180th Street and said she would have moved out long ago if she had the money.
The pastor of the Spanish church, Miguel Guzman, said his church had a special sound system that “prevents noise from getting outside the church.” The pastor of the African church, Ernest Amoateng, said he had addressed the issue by stopping Friday night services by midnight instead of 3 a.m.
4. A Hindu temple, Shiva Mandir, in East Elmhurst, Queens (17 calls to 311).
The temple’s president, Robin Mahabir, said he suspected that all of the complaints came from one neighbor across the street.
At the house in question, the front door was adorned with quotations from the Quran. A man answered the door and was asked about the temple. “They’re the ones making noise” was all he said.
Some tasks of municipal governance are immensely daunting: End homelessness, create an equitable school system. Others seem simpler: Where people generate litter, give them a litter basket.
A spokeswoman for the Sanitation Department, Belinda Mager, said the city’s 23,500 municipal trash cans “can be misused, leading them to be filled up quickly with household or business waste.” Last year, she said, the city placed or replaced 541 litter baskets in response to requests to 311.
Many New Yorkers, it turns out, love their blocks.
Graffiti may seem like a bygone issue in the city, but there were over 12,000 calls about it to 311 last year. The block with the most complaints is Clinton Street between Delancey and Rivington Streets on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, where dripping obscenities and half-decipherable signatures adorn rolling gates, doorways, fire hydrants and A.T.M. screens. The sign for Miledy’s Beauty Salon is so heavily tagged that it can barely be read.
“We clean it off and they tag it the next day,” said Jennifer Javier, the shop’s owner.
In the Bronx, there is a pedestrian bridge over the Bruckner Expressway that has become a local legend.
From end to end, it has long been an obstacle course of canine excrement.
In the past year, a two-block radius in the vicinity of the bridge drew 77 dog-waste complaints, the most in the city.
In recent weeks, though, Mr. Taylor has noticed an improvement, around the same time that curb-your-dog signs went up bearing the name and likeness of State Assemblyman Marcos A. Crespo. Mr. Crespo said his staff had been pressing both the State Transportation Department, which owns the bridge, and the city’s Sanitation Department to clean the walkway more frequently.
At night, Mr. Taylor said, the bridge is unlit and doubly treacherous. “I’m like this with my flashlight,” he said, waving his phone back and forth over the walkway.
In Flushing, Queens, there is a block that generated 464 blocked-driveway complaints to 311 last year, the most in the city.
Of those, 414 concerned a driveway that serves two connected houses, next door to El Ranchito de Daisy Salvadoreño, a Salvadoran takeout restaurant.
It is marked with orange cones and signs that read “Please Do Not Block the Driveway Thank You” and “No Parking/Do Not Block Driveway” and are widely ignored by customers of the restaurant.
One recent afternoon, a car pulled up and blocked the driveway. Its passenger ran into the restaurant. A police car, which had just driven by a few minutes before, returned and whooped its siren. An officer told the car to move. A few minutes later, the customer left the restaurant with his bag of food.  The officer in the police car laughed when approached. “I can’t comment,” he said.
The man with the driveway lives in the house on the left, closest to the restaurant. Last year, he submitted a four-page article to The Times entitled “The Issue on Blocked Driveways.” It was not published.
The man, who declined to give his name, spoke though his screen door. As he described his plight, a minivan pulled up and blocked his driveway and two passengers walked into the restaurant.
“This is a high-problem area,” the man in the house said.
Sometimes, the State of the Block improves in unexpected ways.
In Windsor Terrace, Brooklyn, a building site has been surrounded by a green construction fence for 10 years. “Anticipated completion fall 2014,” a sign reads.
One night last year, the fence sprouted a beatific vision in purple. “A wonderful artist came in and painted a breathtaking mural of Prince soon after he died,” Leah Miles, 44, wrote.
A reader in Fort Greene, Brooklyn, Luke Poethig, reported the arrival of a new kitten at the Lafayette Grocery and Dairy. It turns out that there are five new kittens. Midnight, the slinky black cat with white face patches, gave birth to them in a cardboard box in the back room.
