While there may be some negligible errors in “The Gestapo: The Myth and Reality of Hitler’s Secret Police,” by Frank McDonough (March 12), the message is clear that with only 15,000 Gestapo police, they were able to control 66 million Germans, or over 4,000 per Gestapo member.
The reason was equally clear, namely that there was little opposition to the regime and, in numerous cases, collaboration. The figures destroy the myth that a majority of Germans opposed the Third Reich. Unfortunately the same can be said for the eager collaborators in conquered nations, who not only assisted the SS but participated in the Holocaust.
Anti-Semitism was not forced on Germans and the inhabitants of conquered nations but was welcomed, with the resultant murder of six million Jews.
In his essay “Literature by Degree” (Author’s Note, March 12), Benjamin Markovits sends a frightening message when he asserts as a matter of fact that how teachers judge their writing students “is based almost purely on taste.” To be sure, those of us who teach writing have preferences, but all teachers worth their salt bend over backward to make sure they don’t produce clones, don’t dictate one style of writing to a class. When it comes to questions of point of view, structure, clarity, there is enough leeway to accommodate a variety of good students.
The writer is chairman of the department of literature at Sarah Lawrence College.
In recent years, dozens of limitations on abortion rights were passed by a majority of states, while Planned Parenthood was severely attacked. Unfortunately, Gillian Thomas’s review of Marjorie J. Spruill’s “Divided We Stand: The Battle Over Women’s Rights and Family Values That Polarized American Politics” (March 12) gives no context for the successful rightist war on women. That context is the sharp decrease in democratic traits. In 1980, there were 13 billionaires in the United States; in 2016, there were 540. In 1965, the income ratio of C.E.O.s of the top 350 firms to that of their workers was 20 to one. By 2014, it had mushroomed to 296 to one. Nearly one-third of workers were unionized in the 1960s, but only some 10 percent are so today.
The attack on democracy was led by the rule of money, the war on labor unions, voter suppression — and the war on women. The most democratic countries (the Nordic ones), in contrast, had the strongest labor unions and the best women’s rights. Democracy, but not oligarchy, needs strong women’s rights.
The writer is a professor emeritus of political science at California State University, Northridge.
Thanks to Judith Newman for a great column (Help Desk, Feb. 26). I am not alone in my obsession with lighting; having a guest bed; drinking tea and coffee at certain times during the day; and always having soft covers and sweaters around. I might have to move to Denmark. Fortunately, I got old and don’t have to work anymore, so I can indulge in my hygge needs most of the time. As you can imagine, I don’t get much else done.
In his review of “Caught in the Revolution: Petrograd, Russia, 1917 — A World on the Edge,” by Helen Rappaport (Feb. 26), Owen Matthews goes in a few lines from Alexander Kerensky to the efforts to “prevent the Bolshevik Revolution.” Kerensky was a leader of the February 1917 revolution, becoming the chairman of the Socialist provisional government of Russia. The Bolshevik Revolution ousted him in October (November, New Style) 1917, resulting in a Communist government under Vladimir Lenin. The review is not inaccurate, but how many readers today know that Lenin overthrew a democratic government, not that of imperial Russia?
Lisa Brown’s graphic rendition of how to read Proust (Sketchbook, March 5) is hilarious.
It took me six months and every ounce of determination I could locate, borrow or steal to get through his prose. It was tantamount to slogging through a brier patch in a submarine.
