Two people have died following an outbreak of listeria linked to a popular artisanal raw milk cheese made in upstate New York, the authorities said this week.
The deaths occurred in Vermont and Connecticut, local officials said. Four other people in New York and Florida reported feeling sick after eating Ouleout, the artisanal cheese, which is produced by Vulto Creamery in Walton.
Illnesses started on dates from Sept. 1 of last year to Jan. 22, the Food and Drug Administration said. All six people were hospitalized and two people died.
Vulto Creamery, which produces Ouleout, said it was recalling the product, and, as a precautionary measure, three other soft washed-rind raw-milk cheeses: Miranda, Heinennellie, and Willowemoc. “We are very busy working on this recall with F.D.A. and our customers,” the creamery said in an email without offering details on the cause of the outbreak.
Listeria monocytogenes is a health risk often connected to unpasteurized dairy products. It can cause serious and sometimes fatal infections in young children, pregnant women and the elderly, the Public Health Department in Connecticut said.
“Although healthy individuals may suffer only short-term symptoms such as high fever, severe headache, stiffness, nausea, abdominal pain and diarrhea, Listeria infection can cause miscarriages, stillbirths and fetal infection among pregnant women,” a statement said.
Vulto Creamery began contacting clients on March 3, asking them to return purchases of Ouleout after being informed of a listeria strain in a sample, the health department said. It issued a recall on March 7 and extended it to the three other brands.
The deaths highlighted concerns over safety regulations around artisanal cheese production in the United States, particularly around the raw-milk cheese segment, which re-emerged only about a decade ago, experts say. The outbreak has also revived a continuing debate between the virtues of raw-milk cheese, which aficionados say tastes better, and safety. Some customers swear only by pasteurized-milk cheese.
Europeans have eaten raw-milk cheese for hundreds of years. In France, for example, 15 percent of its cheese is made of unpasteurized milk, according to French agricultural statistics. The thinking is that when milk is cooked, or pasteurized, many of the flavor-rich enzymes are destroyed.
Washed-rind cheese is made by washing and curing the cheese in beer and other solutions, helping create its pungent flavor.
More than half of artisanal cheese produced in the United States is made of unpasteurized milk, Mr. Yescas said, adding that there are a number of ways in which the cheese could be contaminated.
Listeria, he said, could originate from the wood boards used to age the cheese, the water supply or improper sanitation, like walking in dirty boots. “It’s hard to pinpoint,” Mr. Yescas said.
In the United States, regulations on raw-milk cheese are less stringent than in Europe, where more steps are required to ensure that there is no contamination, he said. Here, there is only a single national standard for raw-milk cheese production, Mr. Yescas said, which requires that the cheese be aged for at least 60 days to block E. coli from developing.
“We need to take a look again at the 60-day rule and have a consensus with the scientific community, regulators and cheese producers,” Mr. Yescas said.
Mr. Vulto eventually moved to Walton, near the Catskills, where he opened his cheese production facility.