Each family that runs its own business also has its own culture, say two psychologists who work with wealthy families. And understanding those cultures — which these psychologists break down into three groups — can make it easier to resolve intergenerational or cross-cultural conflicts that arise as the business matures and expands.
The psychologists, James Grubman and Dennis T. Jaffe, last year published a book that offers a framework for understanding the three cultural approaches that they say prevail in family businesses. The “individualists,” who tend to be clustered in North America and Western Europe, foster creativity at the employee level. The “collective harmony” view, which prevails in parts of Asia, views family and business as an integrated whole. And the “honor” culture, which dominates in Latin America and elsewhere, places a primacy on family loyalties.
As these psychologists explain in their book, “Cross Cultures: How Global Families Negotiate Change Across Generations,” an appreciation of these three paradigms can help ease the dynamics between older and younger generations, who may have grown up in different cultural milieus, and between business partners from different parts of the world.
And while no one culture is said to be superior to the others, they are clearly defined in their rules and ways of operating. Not understanding those rules can mean friction when members of different groups interact.
The individualist culture is about being creative and striving for success on your own. Accountability is key, and performance is measured. Just because someone is part of a family business does not mean he or she will one day run the company or even be in a senior position.
Dr. Grubman and Dr. Jaffe, an associate with Wise Counsel Research, which serves family offices and other wealthy clients, describe this type of culture as individualistic, rational and focused on human dignity. The family is supportive, but wants each member to reach his or her full potential.
This culture is said to be prevalent in the United States, Canada, Australia and Northern Europe.
The entrepreneurs behind Zappos, the shoe company, are a good example. They let their employees test out ideas and see what happens. This can lead to great innovations — and financial rewards — that wouldn’t be achieved otherwise.
But there are risks to an individualistic culture. One is that people may go off in different directions and achieve nothing. Another: that family members do their own thing and that a successful family enterprise is taken over by outsiders.
Dr. Jaffe said he was working with two brothers who have separate but related businesses. When he asked them how they planned to pass the businesses to the next generation, they said they wanted their children to create their own companies.
The collective harmony culture is prevalent in East Asia. Family businesses from this culture are based on principles that put a premium on duty and respect for family, but also for the community at large. Children who are called into the business have great respect for tradition, but are also given autonomy to run their own areas within the larger family enterprise.
The downside is that these businesses can be slow to innovate, because of the emphasis placed on harmony and respect for what has gone before.
Both individualist and collective harmony cultures evolved out of the honor culture, which is essentially tribal. In the hunter-gatherer phase of human history, the tribe was the only group you could trust. Members deferred to a chief, who had total power but who cared for those in the tribe.
In the context of family businesses, the honor culture persists in Latin America, Africa and the former Soviet Union. It is also present in places like South Korea, with its chaebol — the family-controlled conglomerates, like Samsung, that have immense economic power.
The leader’s children do not find their own way in the world. They work in the family business but without the autonomy of children in a harmony culture. All major decisions need to be approved by the leader.
These companies are very hard to change, and they struggle to adapt when the outside world challenges their dominance.
Dr. Jaffe said the research that he and Dr. Grubman had done suggested that President Trump was deeply rooted in an honor-based culture. This, he said, may help explain why his approach is so different from that of recent presidents, who have been more individualistic.
“He’s so honorbound,” Dr. Jaffe said.
While this may help explain Mr. Trump’s need for loyalty among advisers, it does not mean that he — or anyone from an honor culture — cannot be successful in an individualistic culture.
All three cultures, as Dr. Jaffe and Dr. Grubman see them, are valid ways to run family businesses. Where it becomes difficult is when they clash.
Clashes among these three cultures are common and, outside the political realm, avoidable only when the family understands what culture it comes from.
There is nothing wrong with rocking the boat, but when those different groups come together, they need to work harder to speak to each other with respect, at least if they want to avoid tipping the vessel over and drowning.