While the precise amount of Mr. de Blasio’s legal debts was not immediately clear, the $11.6 million in city contracts to pay the outside counsel hired by the Law Department suggests that the board’s ruling could severely hamstring Mr. de Blasio’s attempts to raise money for the fund. For example, partners at Debevoise & Plimpton, which provided legal services to the city in the investigations, were contracted at $850 an hour.
At that rate, the mayor would have to raise money from 17 people to cover an hour of legal work.
“Legal expenses can burden public servants,” the conflicts board said in its ruling, known as an advisory opinion. “However, contributions to legal defense funds to defray those legal expenses must be viewed as gifts to those public servants.” The board has the power to impose fines if its guidance is not followed.
The mayor said Wednesday that he would be open to changing the law to explicitly allow legal defense contributions larger than $50, but that first he wanted to discuss the ruling with the board.
Asked about the prospect of legislation on legal defense funds, a spokeswoman for the City Council speaker, Melissa Mark-Viverito, said only that the council was “reviewing the advisory opinion.” A spokesman for the State Assembly speaker, Carl E. Heastie, was similarly circumspect.
Mr. de Blasio addressed the board’s ruling at a two-hour news conference in Long Island City, Queens, taking unfettered questions for the first time since he upbraided reporters last week for asking about issues outside his selected topic of the day.
As if intent on showing that he could weather the hot seat, the mayor took about 40 minutes of questions on topics including fetid-looking school lunches, the actions of federal immigration officials in local courthouses, and metzitzah b’peh, a circumcision ritual practiced in the ultra-Orthodox Jewish community in which a mohel uses his mouth to suck blood away from the incision on an infant’s penis. In some cases, the practice has transmitted herpes from mohel to infant.
The mayor had called the news conference to herald a drop in the city jail population — down 18 percent over all and 23 percent on Rikers Island, he said — and discuss a $10 million city investment to provide temporary employment to inmates leaving city jails after serving a sentence there.
But the timing, less than an hour after the conflicts board issued its ruling, ensured that there would be several questions on the legal defense fund, which has not yet been set up. Mr. de Blasio did not explicitly say whether he had requested the ruling by the board, and Wayne G. Hawley, the board’s general counsel, declined to say who had asked for it.
“The decision speaks for itself,” Mr. Hawley said.
Beyond any legal defense fund, Mr. de Blasio could use money that was raised for a 2013 Democratic primary runoff that did not ultimately occur — though much of it has already been spent. Funds in the runoff account are governed by state election law and can be spent on legal fees related to criminal matters (something barred for other types of campaign accounts that are subject to city law).
A campaign filing in January showed that $212,070 had been paid since last August to two law firms. A spokesman for the campaign, Dan Levitan, said the firms represented people associated with the campaign on matters related to the state and federal investigations, not the mayor. The runoff account contained $117,105 as of early January. Mr. Levitan would not say if any funds had since been spent on Mr. de Blasio’s personal lawyers.
Barry H. Berke, a partner at Kramer Levin who was retained to represent Mr. de Blasio during the investigations, did not respond to a request for comment.
