Real Estate|A Warm and Cozy Feeling in Ossining, N.Y.
A Warm and Cozy Feeling in Ossining, N.Y.
Grace O’Shaughnessy is from Dutchess County. Omar Lopez grew up in Bushwick.
The two met at the College of St. Rose in Albany when she was a freshman and he was a senior. They dated long distance while he earned a master’s degree in education at Harvard; they settled in New York while she worked toward her master’s degree at Columbia University’s School of Social Work.
For four years, the couple — who married two and a half years ago — rented a one-bedroom in a Harlem brownstone, where the monthly rent was in the $1,600s.
But they couldn’t afford a bigger place in Harlem. They considered going deep into Brooklyn or Queens, but that would mean lengthy work commutes to midtown. They figured they might as well try the suburbs.
“Over the years, I have become much more of an outdoorsy person,” said Mr. Lopez, 30, a recruiter at the Relay Graduate School of Education. “In the city, it is such a production to be in nature, so I always appreciated visiting my in-laws in the Hudson Valley.” Ms. O’Shaughnessy, 28, manages a training program and works as a therapist at Community Healthcare Network.
Unfamiliar with towns within commuting distance of Manhattan, she contacted Suburban Jungle, a service that consults with home buyers to find suitable suburbs.
Their budget was up to $350,000. They considered heading farther north for a bigger house or to Connecticut for lower taxes, but Suburban Jungle suggested Ossining in Westchester County, and referred them to Hillary Landau, a licensed saleswoman at Houlihan Lawrence.
The first house they saw, on a leafy residential block, was about a mile from the train station — walkable if need be.
It included three bedrooms, two bathrooms, a finished attic, an unfinished basement, a classic front porch and a patch of green. The driveway wasn’t usable for parking; the next-door neighbors had an easement to allow for access to their parking spot in back.
Kemeys Cove, a 1974 complex where a two-bedroom was $329,000, was well-located but dated. The two were unhappy about paying for amenities they knew they wouldn’t use, like a pool.
Another single-family house, well below budget, looked “rural and cool” in the photos, Ms. O’Shaughnessy said, but the layout felt far too open, with wood paneling everywhere. Route 9A ran behind the house. The rural yard was overwhelming.
“I thought, we are going to be spending our whole lives taking care of the lawn and the trees, and updating this ‘70s house,” she said. “We wanted something manageable.” That property later sold for $242,000.
In the meantime, the sellers added a driveway that consumed what used to be grass. “I guess it’s better than parking on the street,” Ms. O’Shaughnessy said.
“I grew up in a house with creaky floors, and the pipes would clank, but there’s something that feels solid and well-built about this house,” Ms. O’Shaughnessy said. Some of the rooms have unappealing wallpaper; the master bedroom closet, oddly, doubles as a door to the adjacent bedroom. “We felt, we can deal with this,” she said.
Mr. Lopez was surprised to find that friends and family consider homeownership to be such a signal of life progress.
