Packed away was a huge collection of paperwork, photographs and recordings — more than 600 hours of demo tapes, concerts and even poetry readings — that spanned most of Reed’s career. He had spoken “not one sentence” about what to do with it all, Ms. Anderson said, and her first instinct was simply to put it all online. But soon she began looking for an institution that could maintain the material properly and also make it accessible to the public.
She found that institution in the New York Public Library, which on Thursday — what would have been Reed’s 75th birthday — announced its acquisition of the Lou Reed Archive for its performing arts branch. The contents will be made available to all visitors to the Library for the Performing Arts, at Lincoln Center, as soon as it is fully cataloged and prepared, which will take at least a year.
The library declined to specify the terms of the acquisition, which is the latest example of a boomer-era rock idol’s getting the full literary-archive treatment, after Bob Dylan’s papers went to institutions in Oklahoma and Bruce Springsteen gave his to Monmouth University in New Jersey.
Jonathan Hiam, curator of the library’s American music and recorded sound collection, said that the Reed archive represents “a big statement that we think that this music, popular music, is as important as anything else we’re collecting.” On the library’s storage shelves, Reed’s tapes of “Pale Blue Eyes” and “Sweet Jane” will sit near Arturo Toscanini’s papers and a lock of Beethoven’s hair.
Reed was no sentimentalist when it came to his own back pages, telling collaborators that he destroyed drafts of his work to keep the focus on his final product. But the archive, as left to Ms. Anderson, is still vast, occupying 300 linear feet of shelf space.
And then there are reams of legal papers and the mundane accounting of a life on the road: receipts for a club sandwich at the Tokyo Hilton, a tape deck bought from an electronics shop in Phoenix. Yet even those details, Ms. Anderson said, show an important side of Reed.
Yet the archive will still be of value to students, scholars and journalists, who have never had much access to Reed’s personal papers, said Johan Kugelberg, a curator and editor whose collection of Velvet Underground materials, donated to Cornell University, was until now the largest such archive held by an institution.
The heart of the archive, and the material that is likely to provide the most surprises for fans and scholars, is the audio collection. There are about 3,600 audio and 1,300 video recordings, in formats that reflect the evolution of the music industry over a half-century, from reel-to-reel tapes and cassettes to digital audiotapes and, finally, computer hard drives.
The recordings date to the earliest days of Reed’s career in New York, in the mid-1960s, when he was starting what would become the Velvet Underground and working as a staff songwriter at the budget label Pickwick International. One tape captures Reed playing a reverent acoustic version of Mr. Dylan’s “Don’t Think Twice, It’s All Right” from around this time.
There are mysteries in the tapes. A reel of Velvet Underground recordings has handwritten notes like “delightful” and “gas” that might be from Warhol, said Don Fleming, the archivist that Ms. Anderson hired to go through the archive before turning it over to the library. And in May 1965, Reed mailed himself a five-inch reel-to-reel tape, perhaps an attempt to establish copyright; the box remains unopened; what’s on the tape is unknown.
Parts of the archive, like this one, are “still a puzzle,” Mr. Fleming said.
Ms. Anderson and Mr. Fleming said that the process of going through the archive began about three years ago. She approached the library early last year, after reading an article in The New York Times about a library program to digitize archival material.
The first batch of Reed’s archives, containing his paperwork, photographs and record collection, were handed over in December, and are being sorted and cataloged in Queens. A library spokeswoman said that the rest of the material was expected later this year, and would probably take another year to process.
Ms. Anderson said that the library’s mandate of making its collections available to the public was central to her decision to place the archive there. But she also felt that it all simply belonged in New York.
