Credit...Photographs by Craig McDean. Styled by Jason Rider.
Beck, Kendrick Lamar and Tom Waits articulate the creative impulse.
The response was a kind of koan, and I should admit some reluctance in offering up my little parse of it here: The main point of sharing it now is so that it might find a home in you as it has in me. Even so, here’s how I hear it: Asked about the inspiration for a particular line for a particular song, Cohen answered, instead, with the most persuasive explanation I’ve encountered of what artistic inspiration might actually involve. At critical moments, from our depths, out of an impulse not for glory, not for wealth, not for fame, not for power, but out of an appetite to serve — serve something larger than ourselves, however one might define it — the emergency inside us finally speaks. Like all emergencies, this one, which I understand Cohen to be saying is a crisis of feeling, could result in casualties. Instead, worded and heard, it becomes a moment when lives might be saved, starting with our own. In Cohen’s vision of inspiration, these moments of articulation aren’t instances of the artist-as-god swooping in from on high. Rather, they are offerings that arise from below, things given from one person experiencing a state of emergency to another, at the critical moment.
As a delivery device for moments of inner emergency, no art form can approach the immediacy of popular song. A novel cannot assault you while you wait in line at the supermarket; a painting cannot reach out and turn your head as you walk on by; a poem’s feet cannot chase you down the street; a movie cannot screen itself.  All other art lives and dies in a medium that mandates we engage if we are to receive its gifts. Songs live in the air. Ears don’t have lids that can keep the songs there.
At 67, Tom Waits, author of 20 albums and some 300 songs; at 46, Beck Hansen, author of 11 albums and more than 250 songs; at 29, Kendrick Lamar, author of six albums, about 130 songs and a complicatedly calculated number — something around 200 — of collaborative songs with other artists: These three American songwriters of three different generations — all, as it happens, natives of Los Angeles — are masters of engaging with our susceptibility to the power of the form, the mysterious way that a few minutes of recorded time can communicate, as nothing else can, with the force and depth and suddenness of a blow.
 Or what are people for? My questions were something like: Where does your music come from? How do you know you have a song? I appreciate that it’s a little embarrassing, but as we’re living in a political moment that’s more than a little embarrassing, frighteningly so, the force of music has been, over the past few months, very much on my mind. I’ve been listening to music more compulsively than I have since I was a teenager, with a kind of desperation, listening in a state of emergency, with a need to hear, and through hearing feel, a sense of understanding, a sense of a shared world.
Calvin Klein Jeans jacket. AG hoodie. Joseph pants, $335, joseph-fashion.com. Novesta sneakers, $90, gentrynyc.com. Falke socks, $30, communitie.net.Credit...Photograph by Craig McDean. Styled by Jason Rider.
“This” was “good kid, m.A.A.d. city,” his major label debut, a bildungsalbum that told the story of growing up in one of America’s most dangerous cities and which, upon its release in 2012, found Lamar still living there, on his mother’s couch, in Compton, Calif. When we met, he was on a couch in a snug recording suite in Santa Monica where, later that evening, work would continue on new music in the wake of 2015’s “To Pimp a Butterfly.” It’s a record that draws as deeply and as knowledgeably on the music of his hometown as it does on the history of jazz. Lamar, who self-defines as a musician and a writer, not a rapper, nonetheless produces a torrent of language that is as lyrical as it is technically sophisticated. His flow, a term that can seem all too hopefully applied to a great many rappers’ lines, is uncommonly fluid, descended, in its dexterity, variety and vigor, from one of Lamar’s influences, Eminem. And yet, Lamar’s energy and intensity are absolutely his own, and aimed at a radically different set of human concerns, social and spiritual. “To Pimp a Butterfly,” about which college courses are already being taught, won four Grammys, went platinum and included President Obama’s favorite song of 2015, “How Much a Dollar Cost” — 2017’s answer: even more than we knew. One of its six charting singles, “Alright,” written by Lamar as a message of hope, was taken up as an anthem by the Black Lives Matter movement, and the song’s refrain, “We gon’ be alright,” was chanted in 2016 by protesters at rallies against the candidate who became the president of the United States. His performance of the song at last year’s Grammys — a performance of such rage and musicality that you can’t not watch twice, that I’ve watched three times just between these em dashes — sounds less and less like uplift and more like marching orders.
The rapper and songwriter on the stories he tells — and the streets of Compton, Calif.CreditCredit...Photograph by Craig McDean. Styled by Jason Rider.
In the little recording suite, Lamar, whose face was boyish despite that night’s beard, who is small of stature but carries himself with uncomplicated gravity, was resplendent in canary-yellow from head to toe save for the white socks peeking out of his apricot slippers. Looking like a doge in a painting by Tintoretto, his hood remained up and tight around his face as he spoke.
Lamar has said in various moments that his records reflect his preoccupations. I asked him what’s been on his mind.
I wondered if the new record would engage directly with that conflict.
“It’s very urgent,” Lamar replied.
I asked him what that urgency would sound like. A Pro Tools recording session had been open on the studio console when I walked in, a work in progress that I wasn’t going to get to hear. The colorful Jenga-like arrangement of blocks on the screen represented the song’s elements, an array one wished one could, like a text, read. Lamar sat in silence for a time. Muffled beats from adjoining recording suites rose and fell in the background.
“You have kids?” he asked.
I told him I had a daughter, seven months old.
“This is what goes on in my mind as a writer. One day, I may have a little girl. And it’s a girl in particular — funny you said that.  She’s gonna be a child I adore, I’m gonna always love her, but she’s gonna reach that one point where she’s gonna start experiencing things. And she’s gonna say things or do things that you may not condone, but it’s the reality of it and you know she was always gonna get to that place. And it’s disturbing. But you have to accept it. You have to accept it and you have to have your own solutions to figure out how to handle the action and take action for it.
Beck’s own evolutionary history as a musician has its roots in various epochs of the American past. “I wasn’t a kid in the garage learning Zeppelin riffs or how to play the Eddie Van Halen part,” he told me. “I was trying to figure out how to do Blind Willie Johnson and these impossible blues players.” No less than the blues, early hip-hop was a defining influence, and the intersection of these idioms is easy to listen to in his first hit, “Loser” (1993), with its slide guitar loop and its kick-snare beat. Though Beck’s records through the years have tended toward maximalism, a kind of meticulous sonic gorgeousness, melody remains central to his art. And if you listen to him cover the 1920s country-blues classic “Corrine, Corrina” in a spare, haunting fashion, the clarity of his reading and the depth of his bare, reedy voice can be heard echoing through his last record, “Morning Phase,” which was in the works on and off for nearly a decade.
I wondered if there was a certain relief in that.
The artist on his creative approach — and the future of music.
“Yeah, that was a weird thing. A weird, inexplicable thing,” he said. “My natural bent can go to an acoustic thing, melodic, much more introspective.” But for his new record, in the works for four years and scheduled to come out this spring, Beck has finally realized that “really happy” set of songs. He says these are the hardest to write.
Given Beck’s ability to produce such a range of music, I wondered when he is happiest as a musician. Is there a place where a song is, for him, more alive?
I told Waits I hadn’t.
Although the expression wasn’t known to me, of course the feeling was, at least as a listener: that elemental feeling, a door swinging open in the self. Waits’s body of work has the remarkable ability to clear a space, to usher you into a very different field of emotion from its first chord. If you listen to a great record like the Grammy-winning “Bone Machine,” from 1992, the sources are varied — blues, show songs, work songs, hymns, “the whole ceremony,” as Waits puts it — but central to what makes Waits unique as a creator of songs is how his voice has managed to incorporate all those genres, including the mariachi music his father, a high school Spanish teacher, loved, into its very texture. An instrument of subtle melodic grace and brutal rhythmic power, his voice breeds metaphors as much as it delivers unmistakable sounds. It’s a worn leather bag, a broken chair, a lost dog that has just found his owner, a day without rain, a children’s choir with strep throat and the purest producer of deep feeling I’ve encountered. The last one isn’t a metaphor, I realize. More prosaically, Waits has a falsetto and a basso, a holler and a croon. It’s a voice that can take in the full breadth of human experience, on songs like “A Little Rain” or “Last Leaf,” managing, in its gentleness, to find new ways, through story and through image, to put the listener elsewhere, to put them deep inside a song.
I was curious, given our moment in time, if historical or political change affects the music Waits writes.
We ended the call and said goodbye, but late one night an email came in from him with the following story. It seemed to explain, if not everything, just enough.
