The father of an undocumented immigrant accused of raping a fellow student this month at a Maryland high school has been detained by the federal authorities, the latest development in a case highlighted by the Trump administration as a reason for pursuing a crackdown on illegal immigration.
Officers with Immigration and Customs Enforcement arrested the father, Adolfo Sanchez-Reyes, on Friday after a review of his immigration history found he had entered the United States illegally, the agency said on Monday. Mr. Sanchez-Reyes, 43, is a native of Guatemala, the agency said, and is being held at a detention center in Maryland.
Mr. Sanchez-Reyes is the father of Henry E. Sanchez-Milian, 18, who with another student, Jose O. Montano, 17, was charged with forcing a 14-year-old girl into a bathroom at Rockville High School and raping her in a stall, the authorities said. Immigration officials said last week that Mr. Sanchez-Reyes’s son was a Guatemalan citizen and living in the United States illegally.
Mr. 
Mr. Sanchez-Reyes has been ordered to appear in immigration court, the authorities said.
The case, which had received extensive coverage from the local news media and Fox News, has become a lightning rod in the debate over undocumented immigrants and so-called sanctuary cities. The high school is in Montgomery County, Md., where municipal leaders have defied President Trump’s calls to crack down on illegal immigration.
Government officials and the police there have said they will not inquire about someone’s immigration status and will follow a “don’t ask” policy.
On Monday, Attorney General Jeff Sessions, in response to a question about the case, spoke out against a proposed law in Maryland to make it a “sanctuary state.” State legislators have introduced a bill in response to Mr. Trump’s immigration policies that would prevent the local authorities from investigating possible immigration violations.
The Maryland bill was approved by the House of Delegates and is now being discussed in the State Senate. Both legislative bodies are controlled by Democrats. Gov. Larry Hogan, a Republican, said last week that he would veto the legislation.
At a briefing last week, Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary, said the rape case showed the need for the president’s restrictive immigration position.
