One recent morning, Nadia Lopez, a Brooklyn middle-school principal who became an internet celebrity two years ago — and as a result has been a guest of Ellen DeGeneres, Barack Obama and Drew Gilpin Faust, the president of Harvard, as well as an author — received a flood of text messages from family and friends who were outraged by an article in The Daily News titled “Brownsville Is Brooklyn’s Worst Neighborhood for Children.” For seven years, Ms. Lopez has run Mott Hall Bridges Academy in Brownsville to great acclaim, having gained national attention when the blog Humans of New York profiled a student who talked about what a profound influence she was.
Part of the challenge of working in low-income urban communities is the fight against the perception that they are doomed and immiserating, an exercise that has required more energy in the age of President Trump, who has made use of the loaded term “inner city” to invoke the image of nightmare places where death always comes at gunpoint and schools are always synonymous with failure. The News’s article was pegged to a new report from the Citizens’ Committee for Children of New York, a nonprofit advocacy group whose purpose was to highlight both the deficits in Brownsville — its 40 percent poverty rate, nearly twice that of New York City on the whole, has remained unchanged during Mayor Bill de Blasio’s administration — and its strengths, which are easy for outsiders to overlook.
When I visited Ms. Lopez in her office to talk about what has changed in Brownsville and what hasn’t over the past several years, she spoke about how disheartening it was to see constant attacks in the news media, ones she believes were then internalized by children who would see themselves as hopeless and without value. Her mission involves a deft finesse between showing children the larger world of affluence — she takes students to stores and restaurants in Park Slope and Williamsburg so that they might know how the salumi half lives — and inculcating in them a sense of investment in their own neighborhood, so they might aspire to do well but ultimately return to the place they were brought up and improve it.
“If kids have access and exposure they can change a trajectory,” she said, “but you can’t know what to ask for until you know what there is to want.” When Ms. Lopez takes the children through moneyed Brooklyn, they are consistently amazed that you can go to a store where the candy isn’t behind plexiglass and eat in restaurants where you sit down and the food is actually brought to you.
For years, residents of Brownsville have complained that there is virtually no such place in their neighborhood — nowhere to go to share a meal for a birthday or anniversary. This spring, a culinary institute that will train people who live in the area for food careers without charging tuition will open on Belmont Avenue with a restaurant conceived in part by the renowned Danish chef Claus Meyer. The restaurant is not intended as a place for 25-year-olds venturing over from Bushwick on the L train, but for people who live in the neighborhood, and the prices will reflect the market.
All along Belmont Avenue, in fact, are signs of revitalization that do not resonate with the horrors of gentrification, a reality to which Brownsville is largely immune because of a high concentration of public housing and an absence of the kind of townhouses that have shifted the fortunes of Crown Heights and Bedford-Stuyvesant. Last summer, with the support of the Dream Big Foundation, a nonprofit that assists new businesses in poorer parts of the city, a large, modernist-looking cafe opened called 3 Black Cats. It was started by three sisters — Diana, Ionna and Melissa Jiminez — who grew up in Brownsville until their building was torn down and they had to move to public housing in Williamsburg. Diana had always loved to bake and sold her cakes through an informal network of friends and neighbors that then expanded through social media.
The cafe has held at least one fashion show and invited local musicians to perform, and it holds classes in entrepreneurship. One of the most promising ideas generated from those classes, Pernell S. Brice III, Dream Big’s executive director, told me, came from a woman who is trying to build, as he put, “Amazon for prisons.” Having had relatives in the system, and with expertise on what is needed and the special requirements of packaging prison shipments, the woman is devising a plan for a company that would offer inmates a catalog of things — books, shoes without any metal — that they would use while they are away.
Down the block from 3 Cats is Made in Brownsville, the venture of Quardean Lewis-Allen, who grew up in the neighborhood and came back after getting a degree at the Harvard Graduate School of Design. Made in Brownsville is a nonprofit that trains 14- to 24-year-olds in graphic and product design, videography and other marketable means of communication, offering apprenticeships from which they can build well-paying creative careers.
Mr. Lewis-Allen has been an important presence in the neighborhood, overseeing local students who designed a youth center from a shipping container, which will soon open on an empty patch of grass on Chester Street. He has developed a meme, too: #NotGentrification #JustGood.
Not long ago he had a group of students survey residents about what they wanted on Belmont Avenue, which historically had been a major shopping thoroughfare. Overwhelmingly, he said, they wanted fewer churches and more places to sit and have coffee.