Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York likes to trumpet his record as a criminal-justice reformer, pointing to the reduction in the state prison population and the closing of 13 prisons under his watch. A lot more needs to be done, but Mr. Cuomo has shown an understanding of the need for humane justice policies.
So it was all the more inexplicable that his budget for 2017-18 called for slashing family visiting hours at New York’s 17 maximum-security prisons, a hugely destructive move that would save the state budget a tiny amount of money.
No one disputes how important these visits are to the inmates and their families. Research shows that prisoners who get regular visits from their families are more likely to do well upon their release, are less likely to commit new crimes and may even be less violent while in prison — keeping people safer and reducing costs to taxpayers. For children in particular — more than 100,000 of whom have a parent behind bars in New York — in-person visits are a crucial part of developing healthy, long-term bonds with their incarcerated parents.
New York was once a pioneer of enlightened visitation policies, establishing visiting hours seven days a week in the aftermath of the prison riots at Attica in 1971. But prison overcrowding in recent decades meant more visitors and led to cutbacks in visitations at medium-security prisons to weekends and holidays only.
The budget proposal would cut visits at maximum-security prisons from seven days a week to three, which would eliminate the jobs of 39 corrections officers, saving a meager $2.6 million a year, out of an annual corrections budget of more than $3 billion. In place of face-to-face visits, inmates and their families are being offered video conferences, which are no substitute for in-person contact.
Making visits to upstate prisons can be difficult for inmates’ families, who are disproportionately poor and often have inflexible work or child-care schedules. But many make the trip anyway. Ending visits on all but Friday, Saturday and Sunday would only worsen the long lines and weekend overcrowding that already afflict many prison visiting rooms.
Fortunately, the proposed visitation cut has not been well received in Albany. Neither the State Senate nor the Assembly cut visiting hours in their budgets, and Mr. Cuomo’s office says he will back off this proposal.
That would be the right move. The small cost of maintaining visiting hours makes an enormous difference in the lives of imprisoned New Yorkers. If Mr. Cuomo wants to leave his mark as a justice reformer, he should be making it easier for prisoners to stay connected to their families.