277 pp. Atlantic Monthly Press. $25.
It’s always pleasing to see attention paid to the work of Walker Percy, and Michael Knight’s impressive new book of fiction, “Eveningland” — a so-called story cycle set in and around Mobile Bay, Ala. — pays plenty. Has it really been 56 years since the publication of Percy’s National Book Award-winning novel, “The Moviegoer,” wherein the New Orleans executive Binx Bolling drifts between work and play in existential torpor, trying with limited success to find points of attachment in the world before returning, ultimately, to family?
To judge from “Eveningland,” that spiritual territory has changed little since I left the Deep South in the 1980s. Knight’s first story, “Water and Oil,” is deft and wonderful, wholly original, and the second, “Smash and Grab,” is sharp and fresh with an ending like something out of O. Henry or Thomas McGuane, skating just along the edges of a physical violence that is subordinate to the story’s emotional violence. And then, happily, Percy’s influence begins to lap against the scenes and voices and perspectives, as if Binx Bolling were now living on Mobile Bay and facing the same challenges he did in 1961: What is the meaning of life, and, oftentimes, What shall we have for dinner?
In “Eveningland” as in “The Moviegoer” — also for that matter as in Richard Ford’s “The Sportswriter,” another accomplished book that paid tribute to Percy — the characters are afflicted with the sort of double-dose malaise it seems only prosperity or comfort can generate. The protagonists of Knight’s stories trouble themselves with country club tennis matches and attempts at elaborate dinner party preparations, like New South zombies walking at dusk beneath draping tendrils and trellises of Spanish moss. How long can a place and a people, or a subset of people like the middle- to upper-class white suburbanites here, stay the same? As in “The Moviegoer,” they reach for family ties — fraying, disintegrating, even in the once tightly connected South — as an instinctive response to their spiritual vertigo. And as in “The Moviegoer,” Catholic catechisms come and go as quick as rain showers, and just as insubstantial.
Knight doesn’t hide his debt: There’s a character here named Percy, and the book’s epigraph comes from “The Moviegoer.” Yet Knight is not trying to be Percy. It’s true that his characters dwell in a bewildered questioning numbness; more than one seems to be considering, and late in life, This is what life is all about? But they are more restless, a little more on edge than Binx Bolling was, as befits their place in the 21st century.
One of the important points of departure for Knight, I think, comes from his craft choices. Knight pays careful, writerly attention to the details of desperation. His characters — often entombed in middle-age despair — in their weakened, even futile attempts to shift position, if not actually escape, give a reader the sensation of watching the lateral movements of blobs of life wriggling beneath a microscope.
Life is lonely as hell for Knight’s characters. They’re isolated from one another, to one another; they exist in silos, walled off with no real exits. The compression of his writing dials up the corresponding emotions — anger, yearning, regret — proportionately. If this is the New South, though, the staples of older Southern lit are still here. Shotguns make repeated appearances. (In one story, reminiscent of the masterly Barry Hannah, a cuckolded husband hides in the closet with a 12-gauge.) And natural forces are always on the horizon, even if the threat they pose is more secular than it used to be — the South has changed a little, after all, so that a hurricane’s course may not be a function of God’s wrath anymore. Police, ineffectual and disengaged, populate a fair number of pages. People need help, but no help is to be found. Dogs, too, frequent the chapters — Popcorn, Clarence T, Mutt — vessels of tired and often unnoticed longevity in which faithful endurance, largely mute, can be stored, though for naught.
Endurance matters, in “Eveningland.” Even young people, but particularly the old and very old, find themselves nosing toward the end of things, battered, bruised and taking meager stock. It’s a shadowy time for almost everyone. What they find redeeming, near the end of their journeys, sometimes feels to a reader less hopeful than the treasures procured — hard-gotten — by Binx Bolling and his own predecessors (Nick Carraway chief among them). Knight’s characters have carried the torch further, but their steps seem heavy. They seem almost frightened, and the evening is getting late.