JAKARTA, Indonesia — It looks like a horror movie. As a villager slices open the belly of a python, a man’s body emerges, after it had been swallowed whole by the giant snake the day before.
The video of the episode emerged after a search party in the remote Indonesian village of Salubiro, on the island of Sulawesi, glimpsed the shape of shoes in the belly of the python. After chasing the snake and killing it, the Indonesians sliced open the python, revealing the body of the villager, whose name was Akbar.
A graphic video clip of men cutting up the python to retrieve the victim’s body was posted to YouTube.
“As humans push further into wildlife, habitat conflict like this is more likely to occur as both humans and wildlife require space,” said Farwiza Farhan, the chairwoman of Forest, Nature and Environment of Aceh, an environmental organization.
A screengrab from a video showed a villager cutting open a python to reveal the body of a man.
Plantation workers like Mr. Akbar are often the most at risk. A 2013 report by Eyes on the Forest, a coalition of environmental organizations on the island of Sumatra, found that over 12 years, 60 percent of tiger attacks in a region in Riau Province had occurred in concessions where developers had recently cleared the forest.
The report found that the tiger attacks resulted in 27 human deaths, as well as eight dead tigers. Marauding elephants also regularly wander into villages in plantations throughout Sumatra, killing workers.
Sulawesi, a heavily forested island in eastern Indonesia, is much less developed than Sumatra, but it has undergone a major expansion of palm oil plantations over the last decade, which could make python attacks like the one that occurred this week more likely, experts said.
Pythons are known to attack humans, and can kill them by squeezing them until their hearts stop, but this represents a rare case in which a python succeeded in swallowing its human victim.
“This is an unfortunate incident,” Mr. Azmi added.
