Alongside its well-publicized drive to dominate original content, Netflix is quietly transforming our television experience in another, perhaps just as profound way. Already this year it has added series from Argentina, Britain, Canada, Japan, Mexico, South Korea, Spain and Turkey to its American offerings. The United States may be tightening its borders to other countries’ citizens, but for now, at least, their television shows are flooding in unmolested.
Netflix has a lot of competition in this area. But it has programmed foreign series more aggressively than other general-interest streamers like Amazon and Hulu, and while smaller specialty sites may have larger offerings in Asian soap operas (“DramaFever”) or British dramas (AcornTV), Netflix’s scale gives the shows it acquires a greater potential impact.
Not all of the shows deserve that showcase — a fair share of the Netflix offerings are risible melodrama of interest strictly for variety’s sake, or to homesick expats from the show’s countries of origin. But there are diamonds — or at least, say, tourmalines — to be found. A pair of series added to the service in December without much fanfare, “Fauda” from Israel and “Nobel” from Norway, are both better than and distinctively different from most of the American TV you’re watching at the moment.
“Fauda” is the latest gritty, naturalistic thriller turned out by the Israeli TV industry, a major supplier of ideas and concepts for American TV. (Other examples, like “Hostages” and the wonderful “Prisoners of War,” the model for “Homeland,” can be streamed from Netflix and Hulu.) Its premise is simple: a Palestinian terrorist, thought to be dead, emerges from hiding to attend a relative’s wedding and an Israeli team — led by the agent who thought he had killed the terrorist years before — is sent to kill him again.
The mission goes bad, of course, and its ugly consequences play out across 12 tense episodes. “Fauda” is a thriller, and it includes plenty of violent action, but the battles and chases have a frighteningly casual, lived-in feeling. There are no phalanxes of black SUVs, just beaten-up vans and rattling cars carrying combatants dressed in T-shirts and sandals and bearing weapons that look like they came from the bargain bin at the gun fair.
“Fauda” is also a family drama, in a way that American thrillers can’t really duplicate. The opposing sides live in such close quarters, and with so much shared history, that wives, children, cousins and girlfriends get caught up in the danger in believable ways, without the manufactured plot twists American dramas employ to put family members in jeopardy.
“Nobel” is slicker than “Fauda,” more American-style in its production values and editing. But it has a similar seriousness of purpose and a ground-level common sense about family and organizational dynamics that American dramas — hyped-up and contrived even at their best — seldom achieve.
The title is a reference to the Nobel Peace Prize, which hangs in the background of the story like a guilty conscience. The eight-episode series traces a geopolitical conspiracy that ties together oil interests, humanitarian organizations, the Norwegian government and, centrally, an elite Norwegian special-forces unit whose work in Afghanistan involves it in murder and cover-ups back home.
Like “Fauda,” “Nobel” is about the effects of violence on a society, but from the opposite perspective: the Norwegians, smug about the peacefulness and order of their lives, are shocked by the sudden intrusion of murder and scandal. What distinguishes both shows, for viewers accustomed to American TV, is that they make political violence feel like a sad and dangerous reality rather than a heroic video-game fantasy.