BEIJING — Big political gatherings are intended to inspire a combination of awe and national pride, and the annual full sessions of the National People’s Congress in Beijing are no exception. Guards wear their best uniforms; every button is polished to a shine. Long rows of red banners flap in the breeze on the roof of the Great Hall of the People, an imposing building on Tiananmen Square.
What happens inside the congress, which lasts for less than two weeks, has mostly been decided in advance by the Communist Party. The roughly 3,000 delegates are here to rubber-stamp major decisions and offer usually harmless suggestions about their pet causes.
The National People’s Congress draws representatives from all over China, including some nominally representing Taiwan, the self-governing island that Beijing has long claimed. Most of these legislators are Communist Party members and functionaries. But there is another contingent that is larger than even the biggest provincial delegation: the People’s Liberation Army.
Mao famously observed that power grows from the barrel of a gun, and that adage is reflected in the presence and visibility of the military at the heart of Beijing. While most delegates arrived in clumps on Sunday morning for the start of the congress, the generals arrived in a 200-strong phalanx, wearing crisply pressed uniforms and many of them carrying briefcases.
The Great Hall of the People was built in 1959, the most grandiose of a burst of buildings erected during the feverish Great Leap Forward. With thousands of Chinese and foreign journalists now showing up to cover the congress, the building’s managers have resorted to stretchy tape and smartly dressed security officers to keep unwanted guests out of important meetings.
The Great Hall meetings preserve rituals from a mostly bygone era of extreme regimentation in China. One leftover custom: the highly synchronized young women who still use almost identical motions to pour hot tea into cups at the Great Hall.
The Great Auditorium of the Great Hall can seat about 10,000 people, but the most sought-after seats are those allocated to the Communist Party leadership on the stage at the front of the room. While China’s ideology has been shifting toward a marriage of Chinese nationalism and socialism, the favored color scheme remains a vivid Communist red.
What really counts in China is what happens behind the curtains, not in the sessions of the National People’s Congress. Delegates vote on legislation that the central government has drafted during the preceding years under instructions from the Communist Party.
These days the Standing Committee of the Congress, which meets much more often than the full legislature, has some skill in drafting laws, but the full annual session is virtually free of serious dissent from official policy.