Ballets have been inspired by fairy tales, myths, poems, novels and Shakespeare plays, among other things. But never by a documentary that exposed the harrowing conditions at a state prison for the criminally insane.
“Let’s do the waiting room, and then we’ll do the strip search,” its choreographer, James Sewell, told a troupe of dancers as he and Mr. Wiseman watched a rehearsal together on a winter’s day in New York.
The ballet — which is to have its premiere this weekend in Minneapolis, where Mr. Sewell’s company, James Sewell Ballet, is based — had an unusual genesis. Mr. Wiseman, 87, said he had grown fascinated by dance and movement while making documentaries about American Ballet Theater, the Paris Opera Ballet and a boxing gym. But he said he found the subjects of most ballets less than compelling.
He shared his idea with Jennifer Homans, the dance critic and historian who in 2014 founded the Center for Ballet and the Arts at New York University; the center serves as a sort of think tank to dream up new directions for ballet, foster academic and artistic work, and connect dance to other fields. She invited Mr. Wiseman to be in the first class of visiting fellows, and put him in touch with Mr. Sewell — whose work has grappled with other dark subjects, including Abu Ghraib, the prison in Iraq where Americans tortured detainees.
“This is the whole point of the center: to encourage work like this,” said Ms. Homans, whose 2010 book, “Apollo’s Angels,” traced four centuries of ballet but ended with the warning that “ballet is dying.” The center, which has drawn fellows from many disciplines, got a new lease on life last fall when the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, which helped establish it, gave it a second $2 million grant to keep it operating through at least 2019.
The film opens with a chorus of joyless, dazed, bow-tied inmates singing “Strike Up the Band” in a nightmarish variety show with the guards. Mr. Sewell took that as the jumping-off point for his ballet — but he decided to switch the idiom.
The guard acting as master of ceremonies in the film seemed to have “an Ed Sullivan complex,” Mr. Sewell said. “He was into theater, and he had his theater company. We’re a ballet company. So I kind of translated that he’s now Diaghilev, he has a Diaghilev complex.” He was referring to Sergei Diaghilev, the founder of the Ballets Russes.
An off-kilter pas de deux pairs a swan that might have floated over from “Swan Lake” and the Faun from Vaslav Nijinsky’s “Afternoon of a Faun.” To stage the strip search, Mr. Sewell turned to one of the most famous scenes in classical ballet: the Kingdom of the Shades in Marius Petipa’s “La Bayadère,” with its entrance of a line of ballerinas in white.
The strip search, he said, “is like the entrance of the Shades: coming in one by one, taking off the shirt and taking off the pants.” Mr. Pickett’s music for the scene echoes Ludwig Minkus’s score for “Bayadère” — if played as a sad, slightly sour Tom Waits-meets-Kurt Weill waltz.
“Titicut Follies” caused quite a stir — embarrassing officials by drawing attention to the horrifying prison conditions, but also raising questions about privacy for showing mentally ill prisoners stripped naked. It was banned for years by a Massachusetts court after a judge described it as “a nightmare of ghoulish obscenities” — a phrase that, Mr. Wiseman said puckishly, he was tempted to quote for a cinema marquee.
Mr. Sewell said that he had asked people with experience in the mental health field whether his choreography looked right. “The last thing we want to do is be making fun of people,” he said.
Mr. Sewell said that he hoped that the ballet would retain the power of the film.
