President Trump’s recent outlandish, incendiary, unsubstantiated claims that President Obama illegally tapped his communications should not be allowed to stand unchallenged by Republicans.
Mr. Trump’s Twitter statements are a transparent attempt to deflect negative attention from himself and appeal to the conspiracy-ridden sensibilities of some of his Obama-hating base. This is the man who for years promoted false claims that Barack Obama was not an American citizen by birth.
Democrats who challenge Mr. Trump’s latest unsubstantiated claims may be perceived as simply engaging in partisan politics. That is why Republicans — Republicans who know better — need to speak out against Mr. Trump’s reckless, irresponsible behavior.
ANN DIAMOND, BAR HARBOR, ME.
Over the weekend President Trump claimed that his campaign’s internal communications were bugged. Now it’s a “sacred election process”!
CHRIS WEINMANN, NORWICH, VT.
The biggest concern is not who talked with which Russian about what or whether Trump Tower was bugged. It is, instead, the mental state of the president of the United States. President Trump’s tweets at 6:35 a.m. on a Saturday show us a man we would hesitate in trusting with life-or-death decisions for those around him, let alone the globe.
The content of the tweets (accusations with no evidence); their form (loosely and poorly worded); their affront to precedents and decorum; and their seemingly impulsive release without review or apparent concern for their impact: All these force us to ask whether the president is fit to govern.
Diagnostic speculation is irrelevant. The president’s own public behavior raises compelling questions about his fitness to exercise his awesome power and responsibility.
EDWIN B. FISHER, CHAPEL HILL, N.C.
The writer is a clinical psychologist and professor in the Gillings School of Global Public Health at the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill.
President Trump’s latest tweet accusing President Obama of an illegal wiretap appears to have crossed a line that could allow a swift and exact judicial remedy. To knowingly and recklessly accuse someone of a crime falsely and publish the accusation is libel. A strong argument could be made that this tweet is outside the protection of the president’s official immunity.
I think it would be prudent of President Obama and the Democratic Party to investigate the possibility of a judicial remedy to this outrageous accusation.
JOE THRASH, AUSTIN, TEX.
Rather than getting caught up in constant refutation of false tweets by President Trump, the media would be well served by invoking “Hitchens’s razor,” formulated by the journalist Christopher Hitchens: “What can be asserted without evidence can be dismissed without evidence.” It should suffice to publish such tweets with an accompanying statement that they are unsubstantiated. Done.
MOUNTAIN LAKES, N.J.