YOU KIND OF WANT the fashion designer Rick Owens to be a monosyllabic, misanthropic recluse. It’s what the embodiment of his clothes should be, if we were going by some unwritten aesthetic script. After all, the fashion Owens presents four times a year, for men and women, on the grand Paris stage, isn’t free and easy. It isn’t simple. It often looks like rags: Precious fabrics, like cashmere, are pilled and laddered, and leather is repeatedly washed to give it the texture and appearance of a prehistoric animal’s skin. There is something monstrous about his gothic garments, with their strange, disturbing proportions attenuated and exaggerated, draped like ectoplasm clinging to thin limbs. When people wear them head to toe, as Owens’s most enthusiastic followers frequently do, they don’t look human. They look other.
“Troll clothes for the most desperate lemmings in the fashion herd,” one observer wrote in 2008 on The New York Times’s On the Runway blog. Owens appreciated the sentiment so much that he ran the phrase on his website, alongside near-universal plaudits from the rest of the fashion world.
But there’s something unexpectedly soft about Owens, both the man and his clothes. In person, he’s preternaturally tanned (he holidays in the United Arab Emirates, “the shortest flight to the most sun”), and his voice, a languid Californian drawl, redolent of the state where he lived until the age of 42, softens his doomsday portents. It adds both a humanity and a note of wry humor that collapses any perceived pretension. And in person, those clothes collapse too, in on themselves, softly wrapping the body in protective layers of felted fabric and down padding. Up close, his arch silhouettes prove light and pliable to the touch, seductive.
In the middle of the last century, the couturier Cristóbal Balenciaga was first applauded, then deified by the fashion press for achieving the selfsame, and his approach influenced an entire generation of designers. Owens’s technique has stealthily proved just as influential.  But then he also, to my knowledge, didn’t confess to an interviewer that he dyes his own hair.
He smiles, but thankfully doesn’t stop talking. Owens is 55, and was born in Porterville, Calif., a small city in the San Joaquin Valley. He moved to Los Angeles after graduating high school, originally studying fine art at the Otis Art Institute of Parsons School of Design, then dropping out after two years. “I wanted to be an artist at the beginning,” he says. “But then I didn’t think I had it in me. I didn’t think I had the intellectual stamina for it, so I decided to be a fashion designer, because that was frivolous and easy.” Owens smiles wider. He is, again, deflating the myth that has grown around him. He doesn’t take himself as seriously as his work would lead people to believe. Unlike many fashion designers, however, Owens is able to articulate, precisely and vividly, what he’s trying to do with his clothes, namely talk about those big, overarching themes affecting humanity, and offer something different in the fashion landscape. When he talks, he makes you take him seriously. And he likes to talk.
The designer begins his day by answering a few emails, taking a shower — and dyeing his own hair.
Heroism for Owens isn’t about the barrel-chested jacket or thigh-gripping pants. It isn’t about any cliché of dressing. Owens has created collections inspired by Nijinsky’s performance in “Afternoon of a Faun,” and by the athletic silhouette of Fred Astaire. In both he used drapery instead of tailoring, garments twisted and captured in motion, seemingly frozen in frenzied, balletic movement. He also jokingly stated a collection was inspired by “tops” and “bottoms” — not the garments, but rather the words denoting sexual preference in the gay vernacular. (Owens is bisexual.) For spring, Owens produced a remarkable collection, pumped with eye-socking colors of putty pink, peppermint and sulfuric yellow. But it was the silhouette that made the strongest impact: jackets abbreviated high on the torso, pants billowing organically around the leg, like a fusion of languid ’30s styles — Owens loves that period — and wide-cut skater trousers. It seemed totally out of place at a moment when other men’s wear designers showed either generic sportswear or predictably straight suiting.
Yet for all those disparaging comments about fashion lemmings, and the hordes of devotees clustered outside Owens’s shows in his most extreme looks, a core of his business comes from older, fashionable women and men, for whom a skinny-sleeved asymmetric Rick Owens jacket is the dernier cri of off-duty elegance. He also has a substantial celebrity following, although he doesn’t care about things like that. He’s often dubbed a “cult designer.” “I hear the word cult used a lot,” he admits. “Which means you have a following, but you never hit the popular big time.” But by his own estimation, Owens is not a cult designer. Like the Chanel jacket in the ’50s, his leather biker jacket has become part of a uniform of our times. Pay attention, and you’ll see it endlessly copied.
Owens’s output is prodigious. Alongside his men’s and women’s runway lines and their commercial offshoots, he creates two accessibly priced secondary lines: Lilies, a range of jersey-focused women’s wear, and Drkshdw, a more unisex streetwear incarnation that began as a denim collection. He also has a fur line, Hunrickowens. (From 2003 to 2006, Owens was the creative director at the French furriers Revillon Frères.) Owens designs nearly every facet of a contemporary wardrobe — outerwear and sportswear, accessories and shoes. Or, rather, redesigns it.  With odd protrusions of rubber or leather, they resemble fossilized animal remains strapped to the body. His gloves sometimes have wings of leather, like dorsal fins. He also designs furniture. His dramatic pieces resemble great altars of Carrara marble or prehistoric slabs of 500,000-year-old petrified wood. A bed he designed looks like a sarcophagus crafted from alabaster, and weighs over a ton. Even Owens’s toilets, in each of his three homes, look like chalices of marble.
OWENS’S FASHION EXPERIENCE began in the commercial world of Los Angeles. After dropping out of art school, he worked for a factory that copied designer clothing in shoddier fabrics. In 1994, he started his own line, selling directly to retailers. He didn’t stage his first show in New York until 2002. A year later, he relocated to Paris. He still doesn’t speak French, which he doesn’t mind. “I was just as isolated in Los Angeles as I am in Paris,” he says. Owens is somewhat reclusive: He doesn’t go out much, his life revolving around his home, the gym and a couple of nearby restaurants. He lives and works in a single building, the former headquarters of the French Socialist Party, on a grand square opposite the French parliament. The only windows in his studio overlook the quiet, deserted garden of the former Ministry of Defense.
Here, his aesthetic is complete. The floors and many walls are raw concrete. Owens gutted the building when he moved in, but didn’t do much else. Raw wires hang from the ceiling. I’ve visited him here three times, in three different years. Eventually I understood I wasn’t standing in the middle of a renovation. It was already complete. Owens lives with his wife of a decade, French-born Michèle Lamy, who is a creative force behind many of Owens’s endeavors. She codesigns a jewelry line with Loree Rodkin under the Owens umbrella named Hunrod (“Hun” is Owens’s pet name for Lamy, combined with Rodkin’s surname). She also collaborates with Owens on the design of his furs, and on his acclaimed furniture line, an exhibition of which is currently on view at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles.
Preamble aside, Owens isn’t feeling particularly dour. It’s early December, and he’s planning his fall 2017 men’s wear collection, which he’ll show a month later in Paris. He named his previous two collections “Mastodon” and “Walrus.” They concentrated on the primordial, with thoughts about mankind going the way of the dinosaurs. This season the theme is “Glitter.” “It’s going to be about joyful abandon,” he says. The show is inspired by glam rock, full of down-pumped silhouettes with a theatrical bent, a hint of Bowie, possibly meeting Wagner, whose music Owens loves. There are lots of operatic trains. It doesn’t contain sequins, or beading or, indeed, any glitter. “Sequins in a collection called ‘Glitter,’ ” says Owens, making a face at such banality. He’s saving the embellishment for his next collection, he says. It’s going to be called “Dirt.” “It was what can be as transgressive as possible for me,” Owens says. “Whenever I do anything transgressive, it’s never out of anger or just provocation. There’s usually something well intentioned, there’s a well-intentioned spirit behind it.” Owens pauses. He's worried he’s talking too much again.
He says it lightly. Then he stops talking.