Kurt Moll, the imposing German bass whose theatrical flair and cavernous low notes allowed him to plumb the serenity, humor and ferocity of a wide array of operatic characters created by Mozart, Strauss and Wagner, died on March 5 in Cologne, Germany. He was 78.
His death was announced in Munich by the Bavarian State Opera, which said that it followed a long illness. The illness was not specified.
Mr. Moll’s 6-foot-2 frame was made to measure for many of the basso profundo roles he came to own on the stages of the world’s leading opera houses. He was his generation’s pre-eminent Baron Ochs in Strauss’s “Der Rosenkavalier,” mixing humor with a distinct tinge of menace in his portrayal of the character, a boorish lecher who gets his comeuppance.
Mr. Moll’s Ochs is preserved on a number of acclaimed recordings and videos, in performances led by conductors including Carlos Kleiber, Herbert von Karajan and James Levine.
It was not a role that came easily to him.
Mr. Moll once offered an insight into his approach to singing opera while discussing how, in Wagner’s “Tristan und Isolde,” he tackled the part of the melancholy King Marke, who loses his bride to his would-be heir.
“His monologue contains some of the most ravishing music ever written, but it’s also very long and very inward,” he said. “If the bass isn’t careful, he will find that his audience has fallen fast asleep by the end of it. You can stand there in your beard, and that beard will seem to get longer and longer as you sing.
He did not initially set out to become a singer. Born on April 11, 1938, in a small town near Cologne, he studied the cello as a child but planned to become a businessman or industrialist. It was a school chorus master who first recognized his vocal talents and persuaded him take up singing seriously. He enrolled in Cologne’s conservatory, and set out on a career.
After starting out learning his craft in regional German opera companies in Aachen, Mainz and Wuppertal, he joined the Hamburg Opera in 1969. He sang 70 different roles there within the span of five years.
He had a breakthrough as Sarastro at the Salzburg Festival in 1970, and began to develop an international reputation. Soon he was singing with leading companies in Munich, Vienna, Paris, Berlin and London as well as at the Teatro alla Scala in Milan, the Bayreuth Festival in Germany and the Metropolitan Opera in New York, with which he sang 128 times.
He is survived by his wife, Ursula. Information about his other survivors was not immediately available.
Mr. Moll bid an emotional farewell to the opera stage in 2006 on the last night of the annual Munich Opera Festival at the Bavarian State Opera, singing the small role of the Night Watchman in Wagner’s “Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg” — a part he had sung nearly four decades earlier as a young performer at the Bayreuth Festival.
