There was widespread, bipartisan acknowledgment of this reality the last time lawmakers managed to pass a comprehensive immigration bill. In 1986, President Ronald Reagan signed into law the Immigration Reform and Control Act, which outlined a carrots-and-sticks approach to reducing the number of undocumented workers in the American labor force. The bill offered a pathway to citizenship to roughly 2.7 million people who had been living in the United States without permission, set in motion an era of tighter controls at the border and made knowingly hiring undocumented people a crime.
Soon after the 1986 bill passed, employers and undocumented workers settled into a routine that was well understood in sectors like construction, hospitality and agriculture, which rely heavily on undocumented labor. Workers got fake papers from a thriving forged-documents industry. Employers accepted them at face value, which is as much as they’re required to do under the law.
A decade after the amnesty bill passed, Congress, alarmed by the rapid growth of a new generation of undocumented workers, started a pilot program called E-Verify, intending to make it harder to employ undocumented people.
The system, which was designed to allow employers to cross-reference an applicant’s work-eligibility documents against government records, remains voluntary for most employers two decades after its rollout. E-Verify has been criticized as an intrusive tool that can hurt workers who are wrongly flagged. But the fundamental reason it has not been embraced as a nationwide standard is that even in this era of deepening xenophobia in American politics, there is little appetite among lawmakers to hold employers accountable. Mr. Trump’s flurry of executive orders on immigration have been silent on the issue.
The budget request the Trump administration submitted to Congress last week includes a $2.6 billion down payment for the wall, $1.5 billion to ramp up detention and deportation operations and $314 million to hire immigration agents. Meanwhile, a proposal to make E-Verify compulsory nationwide is allocated a paltry $15 million.
