Cristina Verger, a wedding and event planner, arrived at the Hotel Boscolo in Milan eager to mix business with pleasure. With the hotel’s room rates topping $2,000 a night, her expectations were high.
But a series of small mistakes by the staff accumulated to nearly ruin what should have been a relaxing stay. It started when Ms. Verger, who was born in Italy but lives in New York, spoke in Italian at check-in but the receptionist would answer only in English.
The next morning, she ordered a cappuccino and a croissant to her room. The coffee “was lukewarm, brown water,” she said, and the pastry was stale.
Such problems do not rise to the horror of bedbugs in the sheets. But with sky-high room rates that promise five-star comforts, amenities and services, high-end hotels and restaurants need to be mindful of the reputational hit they can take when they fail to pamper their guests. In turn, those guests need to know how they can salvage an experience that isn’t going the way they expected.
To avoid bad memories, travel professionals and hotel employees say, guests should sound the alarm early.
Mark Ellwood, a contributing editor at Condé Nast Traveler and the author of several travel books, said that going to the general manager with specifics such as an employee’s name, where the problem occurred and when it happened gave credibility to a complaint.
Mr. Ellwood also advised people to register for a hotel’s loyalty program before going. It shows the guest is a frequent visitor, or has the potential to be.
And the complaints of high-end travelers are usually of the type that can be avoided — and would seem easy to fix. What should travelers do, particularly when what they want is a great experience and not the free nights or drinks that get rolled out to make amends?
Ms. Verger said that during her stay at the Hotel Boscolo, she sought out a manager to fix her problems — and they were fixed. Most memorably, she said, the day after her disappointing breakfast, she got a cappuccino to her liking and fresh, tasty pastries.
Ms. Verger’s story struck a chord with me. It reminded me of similar hotel problems I’d had. Over Presidents’ Day weekend, I was with my family at the Four Seasons in Baltimore, where rooms range from $350 a night to over $2,500.
On the first night, we waited nearly an hour for ice and water to be brought up. On the second day, we returned to our room at 3 p.m., and it hadn’t been cleaned. On the third day, we had to talk our way into brunch in the hotel restaurant — even though we were staying there.
There was another time, at the Ritz-Carlton in Miami Beach, where my wife and I were celebrating a birthday without our children. Rooms with a view of the ocean hover around $1,000 a night in the winter.
We had a beautiful beachfront room on a high floor. We also had a family with small, stampeding children next door. When we asked the front desk if it could move us, our only option was a room on a low floor overlooking noisy Collins Avenue. We declined.
None of these mishaps ruined our trips, but they were frustrating — and remain memorable.
When asked about the shortcomings of my stay at the Four Seasons in Baltimore, Julien Carralero, the general manager, said that a guest with a problem, however small, should call a manager at once.
Setting expectations ahead of time also helps. Sase Gjorsovski, general manager of the Ritz-Carlton hotels in Miami Beach and nearby Bal Harbour, said that people should call the hotel in advance to state their preferences.
“This allows our guest relations team to best tailor and anticipate their needs, including anything from preferred room location to special celebrations or reservations,” he said.
Being calm when something goes wrong certainly helps. David Fox, a vascular surgeon in Manhattan, was relaxing over lunch during a medical conference at the Palazzo hotel in Las Vegas. He ordered a favorite dish — linguine with clam sauce — and a glass of wine.
That was the clam sauce from his lunch, soaking his blazer. Instead of standing up and yelling, Dr. Fox remained calm — “No one was going to die here,” he recalled — and waited to see what the staff would do.
The next day he received a $500 gift certificate for Barneys New York to buy a new blazer. Dr. Fox never used it, he said, but the gesture stuck with him.
Not all restaurant mishaps have such happy endings. And restaurants themselves have different problems from hotels because most people are there for just a few hours, not a few days.
Drew Nieporent, owner of the Myriad Restaurant Group, which includes Nobu, Tribeca Grill and Bâtard, says guests should sense early if the service or food isn’t what they expect, and take action. For example, if they haven’t received anything from their order in 20 minutes, they should say something.
