JERUSALEM — Israel’s government on Thursday approved the establishment of a new settlement in the West Bank for the first time in more than two decades, and also laid the groundwork for further expansion despite a request from President Trump to hold off on settlement activity.
It was not immediately clear whether Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had received a green light from the White House for Thursday’s announcement. Mr. Trump’s public request to hold off on settlements came during a meeting between the two leaders at the White House last month, after a series of moves by the Israeli leader to approve thousands of new housing units in the occupied West Bank.
Previous administrations viewed the settlements as an obstacle to peace, and the Palestinians and much of the world consider them a violation of international law.
But it was not immediately clear whether the approval of the new settlement was meant to be a provocative move to scuttle the prospect of a revival of peace talks. Mr. Netanyahu said he was following through on a pledge he made a few weeks ago to 40 settler families who were evacuated from the illegal Amona outpost in the West Bank. That outpost was removed by court order because it was built on privately owned Palestinian land.
Some analysts have speculated that the move could be a one-off gesture meant to appease settlement advocates before Mr. Netanyahu acquiesces to the Trump administration’s call for restraint, part of its push to revive long-stalled peace talks. In Israel, Mr. Netanyahu’s flurry of settlement announcements has widely been seen as catering to the right wing of his governing coalition.
In other moves meant to mollify the right wing, Mr. Netanyahu’s office announced that some 220 acres of land in the center of the West Bank had been declared “state land,” making it eligible for more settler housing, and that technical difficulties had been removed, allowing the marketing of some 2,000 housing units out of the 5,700 recently approved.
“Today’s announcement once again proves that Israel is more committed to appeasing its illegal settler population than to abiding by the requirements for stability and a just peace,” Hanan Ashrawi, a member of the Palestine Liberation Organization’s executive committee, said in a statement.
For years, Israel refrained from establishing new settlements, under pressure from previous American administrations and in deference to peace efforts with the Palestinians. But it has continued to expand existing ones.
In addition, Israel recently passed contentious legislation paving the way for the retroactive legalization of settlement outposts that were built without government authorization on private Palestinian land. The law is intended to prevent future evacuations like that of Amona.
The new settlement is to be built in the Shilo area, where a string of outposts and settlements cuts across the West Bank horizontally in what critics describe as a bid to prevent a contiguous Palestinian-controlled territory and to create Palestinian cantons.
Israeli officials gave no details about when construction might begin, and all settlement construction must go through several stages of approval.
Israel and the White House have been negotiating for weeks to try to reach an understanding on slowing or curbing settlement construction in the West Bank — so far, by all accounts, without conclusion.
Mr. Trump has been vocal about his determination to forge a comprehensive Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement. Early forays into the region by Jason D. Greenblatt, Mr. Trump’s special representative for international negotiations and his point man in the settlement talks, have been a study in diplomatic even-handedness.
Mr. Greenblatt was in Jordan this week as an American observer at an Arab League summit meeting. He posted photographs on Twitter of his meetings with regional leaders including President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority and foreign ministers from Jordan, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and North African countries.
In a video clip of the meeting, Mr. Greenblatt can be heard asking the rabbi, in basic Hebrew, for advice on how to go about his new and weighty role. The rabbi told him that God helps those who try to do good things.
On a previous visit to Israel and the West Bank in mid-March, Mr. Greenblatt posted photos of his meetings with Mr. Netanyahu and Mr. Abbas, as well as those with Israeli students, with Palestinians in the Jalazoun refugee camp near Ramallah and with religious leaders. He did not mention or post any photographs of his meeting with representatives of the settler movement, whom he met in Jerusalem rather than in a settlement.