LONDON — On Wednesday, Britain’s prime minister, Theresa May, is to deliver a letter to the president of the European Council, Donald Tusk, informing him that after 44 years of membership, her nation is leaving the European Union. Approximately two years later, after negotiating the terms of that departure, the union will lose at a stroke “an eighth of its population, a sixth of its G.D.P., half its nuclear-arms cache and a seat on the U.N. Security Council,” as Susan Watkins, the editor of New Left Review, noted recently.
Although Lexiteers have little patience for the national nihilism of “Davos Man,” the globalist elite, we are no xenophobes. We voted Leave because we believe it is essential to preserve the two things we value most: a democratic political system and a social-democratic society. We fear that the European Union’s authoritarian project of neoliberal integration is a breeding ground for the far right. By sealing off so much policy, including the imposition of long-term austerity measures and mass immigration, from the democratic process, the union has broken the contract between mainstream national politicians and their voters. This has opened the door to right-wing populists who claim to represent “the people,” already angry at austerity, against the immigrant.
The union’s structures and treaties are designed accordingly. The European Commission is appointed, not elected, and it is proudly unaccountable to any electorate. “We don’t change our position according to elections” was how the commission’s vice president Jyrki Katainen greeted the victory of the anti-austerity party Syriza in Greece in 2015.
The European Parliament is not a real parliament. It is not a legislature; its deputies neither offer manifestoes nor carry out the ideas they propose to voters. Elections in improbably large constituencies, with pitifully low turnouts, change nothing. As a Parliament staff member said at the European Research Seminar at the London School of Economics, “The only people who listen to M.E.P.s are the interpreters,” referring to the members of the Parliament.
The European Council, an intergovernmental body where decisive legislative power actually lies, especially for Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, comprises member countries’ heads of state, who generally meet just four times a year. They are not directly elected by the inhabitants of the nations whose fate they decide. As for the union principle of “subsidiarity,” a supposed preference for decentralized governance, it is ignored in all practical matters.
Whatever the union could have been, since the 1980s it has made neoliberal economics an integral part of the project. By doing so, the union transformed itself into what the German sociologist Wolfgang Streeck has called “a powerful engine of liberalization in the service of a deep economistic restructuring of social life.” The single market, the Maastricht Treaty, the single currency and the Stability and Growth Pact combined to impose policies of deregulation, privatization, anti-labor rules, regressive tax regimes, cuts to welfare and financialization, and put them beyond the will of the people.
Noting that the tools of Keynesian economics, upon which social democracy relies, are now illegal in Europe, even The Economist got queasy, writing that this arrangement “feels politically very dodgy.” As for the European Union-United States trade deal, the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, it reads like Hayek’s midcentury fantasy come to life, potentially empowering corporations to sue elected governments for daring to listen to what their electors want.
Another key institution of the neoliberal union is the European Central Bank. Unelected and unaccountable, the bank’s governors are committed by treaty to favor deflation over growth, to prohibit state aid to stricken industries and to enforce austerity measures. Likewise, the single currency acts as an economic chokehold on entire regions of Europe, which can neither devalue their currency (as sovereign nations can) to become competitive nor grow their way out of stagnation because they are forced by austerity to shrink their economy.
In extremis, elected national governments are effectively forced out and replaced by compliant technocrats, as George Papandreou of Greece and Silvio Berlusconi of Italy discovered. Sitting atop it all is the European Court of Justice, which issued rulings that the workers’ right to strike was subordinate to employers’ right do business freely. Hayek must be smiling.
It has been a colossal error by Davos Man left-wingers to think of nation-states as embarrassing anachronisms hostile to democracy. Far from being a threat to democracy, the nation-state is the only stable underpinning we have yet devised to sustain the commitments, sacrifices and levels of social trust that a democracy and a welfare state require.
Rather than leave the field to the nativist right, some of us on the democratic left are going with them.