Cultural, economic and social divisions don’t just spring up overnight — a point illustrated by three books on our list this week: Joan Didion’s “South and West” (notes from a 1970s road trip), Marjorie J. Spruill’s “Divided We Stand” (the story of the National Women’s Conference of 1977 and its aftermath), and Tressie McMillan Cottom’s “Lower Ed” (a deep dive into students who attend for-profit colleges). Iconic buildings don’t just spring up either, as Wendy Lesser’s engaging biography of the architect Louis Kahn makes clear. Philosophy takes time too: in the 35 years’ worth of essays and fragments that make up “Other People: Takes and Mistakes,” David Shields establishes himself as a funny, vulnerable and humane 21st-century Socrates. Had it with gravity? Head for outer space: via Jaroslav Kalfar’s debut novel, “Spaceman of Bohemia” (for adventurous adults) and Jon Agee’s picture book “Life on Mars” (for adventurous kids).
DIVIDED WE STAND: The Battle Over Women’s Rights and Family Values That Polarized American Politics, by Marjorie J. Spruill. (Bloomsbury, $33.) The National Women’s Conference in 1977 was a high-water mark of political feminism and a turning point — but not for the reasons the organizers had hoped. A small but savvy coalition of foot soldiers led by Phyllis Schlafly mobilized against the Houston conference’s aims, and their successors reshaped gender politics and party lines in America. Spruill, a historian at the University of South Carolina, tells the timely story of four days that inspired a socially conservative backlash.
HARMLESS LIKE YOU, by Rowan Hisayo Buchanan. (Norton, $24.95.) In Buchanan’s lyrical first novel, Yuki, a sensitive and lonely teenager, has persuaded her parents to let her remain in New York to pursue a career as an artist when they return to Japan. The first of the novel’s two alternating strands follows Yuki’s artistic education through the bohemian romance of New York City in the 1960s and ’70s. The second, set in the present, is narrated by her adult son, Jay, who was 2 years old when Yuki left him and his father and moved to Berlin to devote herself to her work.
THE NIGHT OCEAN, by Paul La Farge. (Penguin Press, $27.) La Farge’s provocative, intricately plotted novel is a many-voiced tale of the horror writer H.P. Lovecraft, his teenage acolyte Robert Barlow and the diary Lovecraft supposedly kept of their love life together. Dashing and cleverly imagined, it is a mystery wrapped in a hoax, part literary parody, part case study of the slipperiness of narrative and the seduction of a good story.
EVERYTHING BELONGS TO US, by Yoojin Grace Wuertz. (Random House, $27.) The intertwined lives of South Korean university students in the late 1970s animate this rich portrait of a country emerging from the aftermath of war. Complete with optimistic title — a sentiment steeped in irony, we soon learn — Wuertz’s debut novel is a “Gatsby”-esque takedown. Happiness is secondary to this generation; it is a luxury, as is love.
LOWER ED: The Troubling Rise of For-Profit Colleges in the New Economy, by Tressie McMillan Cottom. (New Press, $26.95.) Some two million Americans are enrolled in for-profit colleges, up from 400,000 in 2000. They are disproportionately nonwhite and female. They graduate with more debt than students who have attended public and nonprofit institutions, and are more likely to default on their loans. Cottom, a sociologist, has written the best book yet on the complex lives and choices of these students. In so doing, she questions the fundamental narrative of American education policy: that a postsecondary degree always guarantees a better life.
OTHER PEOPLE: Takes and Mistakes, by David Shields. (Knopf, $28.95.) These essays and fragments, written over 35 years, are funny, vulnerable and triumphantly humane. Shields is our elusive, humorous ironist, something like a 21st-century Socrates, who happens to be particularly interested in sex, sports, selfhood, actors and fiction (all of which Plato’s character Socrates also discusses, for that matter). All good writers make us feel less alone. But Shields also makes us feel better.
FISH GIRL, by Donna Jo Napoli. Illustrated by David Wiesner. (Clarion, $17.99; ages 10 and up.) A mermaid imprisoned in a boardwalk aquarium gains courage from a friendship with a human girl her age and manages to escape to a life outside. The surreal and sometimes unsettling story is grounded by the three-time Caldecott medalist Wiesner’s soft, realistic artwork, and Napoli’s spare text transports us inside Fish Girl’s head as she pieces things together.
LIFE ON MARS, written and illustrated by Jon Agee. (Dial, $17.99; ages 4 to 8.) “Nobody believes there is life on Mars. But I do.” A young astronaut, armed with a box of chocolate cupcakes, searches for flora or fauna on the red planet in Agee’s quirky picture book. Along the way, he’s beset by doubt and buoyed by hope. His quest leaves us with fresh mysteries about our ultimately unknowable and inexhaustibly interesting universe.