When the Islanders rookie right wing Josh Ho-Sang is looking for inspiration, he does not immerse himself in hockey. Instead, he turns his attention to the soccer field.
Ho-Sang wears No. 66, the number of his hockey idol, Mario Lemieux, but credits his style to his childhood soccer hero, Cristiano Ronaldo.
Ho-Sang, 21, views the game through a prism different from most, and he prefers it that way.
Ho-Sang made his home debut Monday night in a messy 8-4 loss to the Carolina Hurricanes after having joined the Islanders for six games during their nine-game trip. He scored his second N.H.L. goal — his first came at Edmonton on March 7 — late in the second with an assist from Anthony Beauvillier, and he assisted on Calvin de Haan’s goal earlier in the period.
And early in the game, when had control of the puck several times, he heard a variation of the “olé, olé, olé” chant often heard at soccer games, using his name instead.
With sterling play at both ends of the ice, Ho-Sang is quickly making the case for his roster spot to become permanent.
Recalled from Bridgeport of the American Hockey League because of injuries to forwards Casey Cizikas and Alan Quine, Ho-Sang has brought an extra burst of energy to the surging Islanders, who are 15-8-3 since Doug Weight took over as head coach after Jack Capuano was fired on Jan. 17.
With 14 games remaining, the Islanders (32-25-11) are already counting on Ho-Sang’s contribution as they make a push for a third straight playoff spot. The Islanders are in the race for the final Eastern Conference slot, battling the Toronto Maple Leafs and the Tampa Bay Lightning.
Weight has been impressed by Ho-Sang’s poise, talent and attention to details.
Ho-Sang, who grew up in suburban Toronto, also brings an unusual family lineage to Brooklyn. His father, Wayne, is from Jamaica, and his great-grandfather was from Hong Kong. Ho-Sang’s mother, Ericka, was born in Chile, and her parents were Russian and Swedish. Ho-Sang was raised Jewish.
The Islanders took a chance on Ho-Sang, a brash scorer in the Ontario Hockey League, with a first-round pick in 2014. Many teams avoided choosing Ho-Sang because of reports of discipline issues and concern he may have been more focused on making flashy plays than on winning.
But Ho-Sang has been proving his critics wrong since he overslept on the opening day of training camp in 2015, leading the Islanders to send him back to his junior team.
The most controversy Ho-Sang has generated so far in the N.H.L. has been choosing to wear No. 66, which has been worn by only one other N.H.L. player since Lemieux retired in 2006. Ho-Sang’s decision was debated on social media, sports radio and Canadian television.
This season, his first in the A.H.L., Ho-Sang had 10 goals and 26 assists in 48 games. Ho-Sang made it a point to praise Bridgeport Coach Brent Thompson and his staff.
His work ethic has caught the attention of the Islanders captain, John Tavares, who knows well the pressure of expectations.
Ho-Sang always found his solace on the ice.
