Beaches, prosperity and an intellectual zest.
Maybe it’s no surprise that the Santa Cruz region was the highest-ranked metropolitan area in California in the latest Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index.
For the ranking, researchers conducted more than 350,000 phone interviews nationally in 2015 and 2016. People were asked about their cities, jobs, health and social lives.
California was well represented, with seven metropolitan areas among the top 25 of nearly 190 surveyed. The Santa Cruz area was No. 3 overall, followed by San Luis Obispo, No. 7, and Santa Barbara, No. 12.
Geographical gifts, it would appear, don’t hurt. All three are perched near the Pacific and graced by rolling hills. They are also home to highly regarded university campuses — Cal Poly San Luis Obispo, U.C. Santa Cruz and U.C. Santa Barbara.
So what California city ranked lowest? Chico, which was No. 183 in the nation, one notch above Flint, Mich.
Mr. Witters said Chicoans reported the highest rate of stress in the nation. “The negative emotions are really crummy in Chico,” he said.
Reached by phone, Chico’s mayor, Sean Morgan, bristled at the result. Chico, in the northern Sacramento Valley, offers a California State campus and the 3,670-acre Bidwell Park, he pointed out.
• Naples, Fla., was the No. 1-ranked city, followed by Barnstable Town, Mass., two places that also hug a coast.
• How California’s biggest cities lined up: San Diego, 22, San Francisco, 31, San Jose, 39, Los Angeles/Long Beach, 53, and Sacramento, 68.
• Inland cities clustered toward the bottom half of the ranking, with a notable exception: Visalia, which ranked 25th overall.
The agricultural town of about 130,000 people has a lot going for it: a year-round farmer’s market, a minor-league baseball team, a symphony.
“Visalia is very much one of those cities that, although we’re growing, it definitely feels like you’re part of the fabric of the community,” said Allison Mackey, a city spokeswoman.
Mayor Eric M. Garcetti was re-elected on Tuesday, defeating 10 little-known rivals, The Los Angeles Times reported. Incumbents in other elected offices across the city held leads as votes were being tallied.
Measure S, a fiercely contested initiative that would have curtailed larger real estate projects, appeared set for defeat, The Times reported. And a countywide sales tax increase to pay for homeless services appeared to earn the two-thirds majority needed to pass.
See more of the newspaper’s election coverage.
On a peak in the Hollywood Hills, a single pine tree stands against the horizon.
Craig Smith, a music producer in the Silver Lake neighborhood, shared a picture he captured at sunset while hiking in the area about a month ago.
Legend has it that the broccoli-shaped tree was the only one to survive a 2007 fire in the hillsides.
It became a symbol of endurance. Blank journals were left under the tree that filled up with messages from visitors — some plaintive (“I am longing for romance”), others inspirational (“Life is incredible, savor every second.”).
Somewhere along the way people began calling it the Wisdom Tree.
It has lately, to the annoyance of some, become a selfie destination. But for those who make the hike, it offers another delight — one of the best views of Los Angeles.
