Asian-Americans confront stereotypes about their community.
How do we get students to consider perspectives different from their own? How do we get them to challenge their own biases and prejudices? If, as Atticus Finch famously said, “You never really understand a person until you consider things from his point of view … until you climb into his skin and walk around in it,” how do we get our students to do that?
Teachers traditionally turn to literature, history and current events to open up these conversations, but it’s always helpful to have a bigger toolbox to tackle such important and difficult issues. That’s why we pulled together these 26 short New York Times documentaries that range in time from 1 to 7 minutes and tackle issues of race, bias and identity.
To help teachers make the most of these films, we also provide several teaching ideas, related readings and student activities.
In the comments, we hope you’ll share how you use these films in your own classroom.
These films come from four different series published on Nytimes.com from 2015 to 2017.
A Conversation on Race — This series of short films features everyday people as they discuss issues of race and identity in America.
Who, Me, Biased? — This series takes a closer look at the unfair effects of our subconscious.
Confronting Racist Objects — Millions of racist objects sit in the homes of everyday Americans. What is their place today? This series features stories about reconciling, reclaiming and reinterpreting racist objects.
Hyphen Nation — What makes someone American? How do you define American identity? In these films, nine American citizens describe their struggle to belong in a nation that both embraces and rejects them.
The latter three series were produced in collaboration with “POV,” television’s “longest-running showcase for independent non-fiction films.” For more educational resources from “POV,” visit its website.
Sometimes the best way to prompt reflection and discussion after watching a film is simply to let students share their personal reactions. The four open-ended questions we use in our weekly Film Club are intended to encourage thoughtful and honest dialogue. Students might write a response first, or meet in partners or small groups before discussing with the class as a whole.
While students watch the film, they can take notes using our Film Club Double-Entry Journal (PDF) to help remember specific moments.
Different film topics might appeal to different students and classes. If you plan to watch one or more of these films as a class, you can do a quick survey to decide which film in a series to watch. Or, if students are watching on tablets or laptops, you can let them decide individually or as small groups which film or films they’ll watch.
If students do end up watching different films, you can have them share their observations and reflections with the rest of the class in a jigsaw activity or class share.
What is implicit bias? NYT/POV's Saleem Reshamwala unscrews the lid on the unfair effects of our subconscious.
These 26 films raise all sorts of questions about how we see other people, how they see us, and even how we see ourselves.
Extending classroom discussions with formal activities can help push the conversation forward and help students draw connections between their own lives and the ideas expressed in these films. Here are just a few possibilities that can be used before, between or after watching.
• Checking on Stereotypes — an activity in which students identify stereotypes they’ve experienced or heard and share specific ways to break down these preconceptions (from Teaching Tolerance).
This short documentary features interviews with white people on the challenges of talking about race.
For most of these readings, Facing History provides connection questions or even a related lesson plan.
A native American in Ohio has waged a decades-long struggle against a baseball team's racist logo.
A native American in Ohio has waged a decades-long struggle against a baseball team’s racist logo.
• What can we do in our individual lives to make sure others are treated with respect and dignity, and not based on stereotypes and prejudice?
• What can we do as a class or as a school to make sure our community is welcoming of people from different backgrounds — different races, ethnicities, religions, disabilities, gender and sexual orientations?
• And what about as city, state, nation or world? What can we do to make a difference in promoting equality and understanding across divides and in the face of intolerance?
Then, as individuals or as a class, students can come up with their own plans of action to challenge stereotypes and fight against discrimination.