With Mayor Bill de Blasio freed from the weight of possible criminal charges connected to fund-raising practices, his path to re-election appears cleared of all but one notable challenger: Paul J. Massey Jr., a real estate sales executive and first-time candidate.
But after several months in the running, Mr. Massey, a Republican, is still on a steep learning curve.
Despite a robust and well-paid staff, Mr. Massey has not articulated positions on many key city issues; failed to notice the timing of the City Council speaker’s state of the city speech before scheduling his first news conference at the same hour (his staff rescheduled it after being alerted to the conflict by a reporter); and misspoke about the mayor and town halls at a Republican debate, saying the mayor never held such events, when at that moment the mayor was in fact holding one.
And after an event in Queens to start a five-borough “launch week” for his campaign, Mr. Massey did not bring City Hall reporters along to observe him shoveling snow in the Bronx or visiting a school in Brooklyn. Reporters from The Staten Island Advance were not invited to his stops on Staten Island.
Of all the challenges, the spending has been the most apparent. Absent loans to himself, which have reached about $2 million, Mr. Massey has spent more money on campaign staff, consultants and fund-raising than he has taken in, according to campaign filings.
Over the last reporting period he doled out $389,000 to campaign workers; spent $278,000 for consultants; and used $37,000 for executive recruitment. The filings included $12,000 for advertising and $2,000 for campaign materials — modest sums for a mayoral candidate — and did not account for his introductory campaign video, the cost of which will figure into a future filing. Mr. Massey’s campaign is managed by David Amsterdam, a real estate executive with little political experience.
Mr. Massey’s campaign disputed the notion of any early stumbles and said he was sticking to a strategy and pointed to poll numbers — a 59-to-25 deficit in a head-to-head race with the mayor — as an indication that the hitherto unknown executive was gathering momentum.
“When one in four New Yorkers support Paul Massey’s candidacy even before the campaign is in full swing, you should probably be giving us credit for doing a lot right,” said Mollie Fullington, a campaign spokeswoman.
E. O’Brien Murray, a Republican political operative who managed the campaign of former Representative Bob Turner of Queens, offered his own assessment. “From the beginning there has always been a question of the number of consultants he is hiring without having the appropriate leadership in place to run a campaign,” said Mr. Murray, who also advised Joseph J. Lhota’s 2013 mayoral campaign.
Mr. Murray said Mr. Massey had so far been taken advantage of by consultants and had “nothing to show” for all its spending.
Mr. Massey, who earned millions as a real estate sales executive and until recently lived in Westchester, still has months to go before the Republican primary, should there be one, to hone his message, meet New Yorkers and increase his name recognition.
In an interview on Monday, Mr. Massey pointed to the latest fund-raising figures — about $860,000 over two months — as a sign that his campaign was resonating with New Yorkers. “There’s a groundswell of support for my candidacy; I’m feeling that,” he said.
He said he had no problem with the level of spending — “I’m all about bringing the best team to the table” — and said that the campaign so far had been successful.
The most recent filings showed that 95 donors gave Mr. Massey the maximum allowable contribution of $4,950, amounting to more than half his total for the two-month filing period. The forms also showed that a few additions to his stable of Republican consultants, including Harold E. Doley III, the campaign’s top African-American aide (paid $15,000), and Michael Fragin, an Orthodox Jewish aide (paid $5,000), both assigned to community outreach.
Mr. Massey also got a boost on Monday: Eric Ulrich, a young and charismatic city councilman who had been considering running for the Republican nomination, bowed out of the race.
Mr. Massey still has a long way to go, though. When he attended the St. Patrick’s Day parade, he could not walk behind a banner, since they are not permitted for candidates or elected officials. 
Mr. Massey has not always been comfortable with the harsh light of a campaign or the sort of get-to-know-you questions asked of a candidate. He seemed uncomfortable during his stump speech — mostly attacks on Mr. de Blasio — during a recent Republican forum in Brooklyn. He fumbled a reporter’s question about his ideas regarding stop-and-frisk policing and, in an interview last month, struggled to name his favorite city neighborhood.
“I love the low-density neighborhoods,” he said finally. “The Village, the West Village. There’s a lot of history there."
The mayor’s campaign, for its part, has seemed eager for a re-election fight against Mr. Massey, whose persona and high-dollar donations allow them to highlight their own message: a mayor battling “powerful forces” on behalf of the less fortunate.
“The last thing New York needs is a multimillionaire, Republican real estate executive from Westchester County who can’t or won’t say where he stands on stop-and-frisk, our schools, President Trump, or protecting immigrant families,” said Dan Levitan, a spokesman for the mayor’s campaign.
Mr. Massey has distanced himself from Mr. Trump, a ready-made boogeyman in a general election in New York City, by saying his wife was a Hillary Clinton supporter.
On Monday, Mr. Massey told the story of a woman he had met on the Staten Island Ferry: a mother who trekked from Staten Island to Harlem every day to bring her daughter to a Success Academy charter school, because none were available near her home.
The anecdote appeared tailored to his campaign: It highlighted both the woman’s hard work, which he called "an example of one of the greatest things in New York,” and charter schools, which he has vowed to support, where Mr. de Blasio has not.
But he could not recall the woman’s name, and his campaign later said staff members had not written her information down.