For months, markets had seemed almost immune to political turmoil in the United States. But on Monday, they reflected a creeping skepticism among investors.
The failure of President Trump and Republicans to move forward with health care legislation has provided a reality check. What else is less certain? Tax reform? Infrastructure investment?
After sagging last week, stocks opened lower on Monday but recovered to end the day little changed. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, which fell as much as 1 percent during the day, closed down just 0.1 percent. Since Election Day, the S.&P. 500 is up more than 9 percent.
Asian and European markets recovered on Tuesday morning as markets looked to overcome the misgivings.
Of course, the questions about changes to American tax rates still remain.
Mr. Trump repeatedly promised on the campaign trail to lower the corporate tax rate to 15 percent. That number was modified to “anywhere from 15 to 20 percent” after he was sworn in as president.
Now, the target rate has been bumped up again, according to people involved in the conversations. It has moved to a minimum of 20 percent and is likely to be a bit higher, Andrew Ross Sorkin writes.
It could even be as high as 28 percent.
That would mean the investments that companies had been planning, based on an expectation of a lower tax rate, would become much harder for them to justify.
• The big question, if Jay Clayton is approved as chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, is how aggressively he wants the agency’s staff to pursue cases that involve major Wall Street financial institutions.
• President Trump named Makan Delrahim, a former government antitrust enforcer and corporate lobbyist, to lead the Justice Department’s review of mergers and acquisitions. Mr. Delrahim is expected to take a more free-market approach to antitrust enforcement.
No stranger to controversy, Carl C. Icahn has already been attracting scrutiny of his role as an adviser to Mr. Trump.
Now he has been pulled into the high-profile trial of William T. Walters, the Las Vegas gambling kingpin charged with using nonpublic information while trading shares of Dean Foods.
Prosecutors want the judge in the case to permit new evidence of potentially improper trading in shares of Clorox by Mr. Walters. They allege that Mr. Walters could have made profitable trades in Clorox stock in 2011 based on tips he might have received from his friend, Mr. Icahn.
Mr. Icahn has not been charged with any wrongdoing in the case and prosecutors are seeking to admit the additional evidence solely to strengthen their case against Mr. Walters.
“Pimco has always been family to me, and, like any family, sometimes there are disagreements. I’m glad that we have had the opportunity to work through those.” — William H. Gross, the bond investor.
Mr. Gross and Pimco, the company he built into one of the biggest asset managers in the world, have agreed to settle a lawsuit over his ouster in 2014. In his lawsuit, Mr. Gross claimed that he had been wrongfully pushed out as the chief investment officer by a “cabal” of greedy partners among the company’s top executives.
The terms were not disclosed, although people briefed on the matter say that Pimco will pay more than $80 million to the William and Sue Gross Family Foundation. Mr. Gross will also add from his own fortune to make the contribution total more than $100 million.
Saudi Arabia announced a sharp tax cut for its state oil company, Aramco, as part of an effort to make it more appealing to international investors before an initial public offering.
Estimates of the company’s worth have varied hugely, from $400 billion to $2 trillion, but the tax rate will help pin it down.
The tax rate has been lowered to 50 percent from 85 percent and will be applied retroactively to Jan. 1, according to a royal order. The company also pays a 20 percent royalty on revenue.
The tax cut comes after intensive discussions with international bankers about how the offering should be structured. Bankers and independent specialists said the cut would help increase the cash flow available for dividends to future investors.
They also suggested that various Saudi interest groups were reaching a consensus on how to divide the profit and dividends.