Skip Williamson, a rambunctious creator of underground comics that merged his radical politics with his love of scatological humor, died on March 16 in a hospital in Albany, near his home in Wilmington, Vt. He was 72.
The cause was renal failure, his daughter Molly Hiland Parmer said.
For the underground cartoonists of the 1960s and ’70s, sex, drugs, profanity and violence were as common as superheroes in mainstream comics, and Mr. Williamson was among the most provocative. His characters were often visual grotesques, like Snappy Sammy Smoot, a dandy with googly eyes, gigantic red (or pink) lips, pomaded black hair and a delicate mustache. Smoot’s naïveté placed him in counterpoint with the era’s changing politics and mores.
Mr. Williamson found President Richard M. Nixon a particularly inviting target for caricature, distorting him a few degrees more than editorial cartoonists did. In a two-panel cartoon published in Class War Comix, Nixon wonders how to react to a phony newspaper article that accuses Vice President Spiro T. Agnew of killing thousands by flatulence.
The protesting outside the convention — and the violent response by the Chicago police — radicalized him, and his work. He waded into the protests, he said, and was tear-gassed.
Mervyn Wilton Williamson Jr. was born in San Antonio on Aug. 19, 1944, and grew up in Austin, Tex., Lynchburg, Va., and Canton, Mo. His father was a humanities professor and minister, and his mother, the former Rhodie Lott, was a homemaker.
When he was a boy, his troublemaking led his grandmother to nickname him after Percy Crosby’s mischievous comic strip character Skippy. Mr. Williamson’s high jinks extended to stealing comic books from a local candy store and drawing Mickey Mouse in the margins of a notebook, which led to his being disciplined by his third-grade teacher.
Still, Mr. Williamson loved to infuriate his strait-laced, professorial father with his love of comics. “I made comics because it was an anti-intellectual behavior,” he says in the documentary.
In 1961 he sold his first cartoon, to Help!, a satirical magazine founded by Harvey Kurtzman, whose irreverent, pioneering work at Mad magazine in the previous decade made him a prominent influence on future underground cartoonists like Mr. Williamson, R. Crumb and Gilbert Shelton. The cartoon showed two garbage cans in New Orleans that are identical but for their signs.
As underground comics surged in popularity in the late 1960s, Mr. Williamson and his fellow cartoonist Jay Lynch created Bijou Funnies, a comic book that showcased their work and that of other artists.
Mr. Lynch died on March 5.
Mr. Williamson never gave up on Sammy Smoot and the gallery of other characters in his comics — or comix, as underground practitioners preferred to spell it — but the genre faded. He found work at men’s magazines like Hustler, Gallery and Playboy, where he was an art editor and created a comics section, Playboy Funnies.
In later years, he began to paint large acrylic canvasses and had shows at the Vinson Gallery in Decatur, Ga., and the Eyedrum Art & Music Gallery in Atlanta.
Two years ago Mr. Williamson married Adrienne Morales, who survives him, as do his daughters, Ms. Parmer, Nikki Williamson Weiner, and Megan and Rita Williamson; two grandchildren; a sister, Rhonda Baker; and his brothers, Joseph and Alan. His previous marriages ended in divorce.
Mr. Williamson’s sympathies might have rested with the Yippies for a while, but he had little trust in politicians of any stripe.
