All hail Snap’s initial public offering.
For the past several years, the technology public offering scene has been lackluster. Sure, there have been a few tech companies with difficult-to-pronounce names (like Nutanix and Apptio) that managed to make it to the stock market. But those were relatively few and far between, especially considering that there has been a surge of privately held tech companies valued at $1 billion or more, many of which seemed poised to take the I.P.O. market by storm.
Now, one of the most highly valued of that crop of private tech companies, Snap, has finally debuted on the public stock market, potentially heralding an opening of the floodgates for other tech start-ups.
Katie Benner and Michael de la Merced, reporters for The New York Times, have been covering Snap’s progress toward its I.P.O. for months. Snap is best known for the ephemeral messaging app Snapchat, though it has evolved into a self-described camera company. Katie and Michael have reported stories on Snap’s chief executive, Evan Spiegel; have examined the company’s advertising business; have dissected Snap’s financials; and have even looked at how people in Southern California, where Snap is based — are anticipating an outpouring of I.P.O. wealth.
On Wednesday, Michael reported that Snap priced its offering at $17 a share, higher than an expected range of $14 to $16. That put the company’s valuation at $24 billion, in the same ballpark as companies such as Micron Technology. The investor demand for Snap shares comes despite the company’s losses — more than $500 million last year — and questions over its user growth.
On Thursday morning, the first day of trading for Snap on the New York Stock Exchange, the stock leapt 41 percent upon its debut and ended the day up 44 percent, writes Michael. For some investors, the reception strains credulity, considering Snap’s lack of profits and other concerns. Yet by making it to the stock market in the first place, Snap has already notched a victory.