SATURDAY PUZZLE — It’s such a relief to me that crosswords are a “cool” thing to do now.
For a very long time, crosswords were thought to be the pastime of the older generations, and not at all a cool thing to do. Solving was seen as a fussy, snooty, solitary endeavor, something your mother or father did, if not your grandparents. It was something to do after you had settled down into the easy chair of life, not for those who were busy carving their initials into a young life of their own.
If that had continued, crossword making and solving might have died out. But curiosity and a love of wordplay are very human things, and young people who witnessed the older generation solving crosswords took an interest. And now here we are: Not only are hundreds of people ranging in age from teenagers to 90-year-olds gathering today in Stamford, Conn., for the 40th American Crossword Puzzle Tournament, but we have two college students offering us a very fresh puzzle to solve. This is also not their first publication. Both Sam Ezersky, a student at the University of Virginia, and David Steinberg, a student at Stanford University, are already veteran constructors. It is, however, their first collaboration.
It’s a great one. There are a whopping 12 fresh entries, and there may be complaints that some of the entries are not in one’s wheelhouse if you are older than, say, 30. I take issue with that. Your mileage may vary, but there is always a way to figure things out, whether you use the crossings to slowly understand that the answer to Wiz Khalifa’s song is “We DEM Boyz,” or whether you need to look something up. Sure, opening with “LIFE OF PABLO” might be a low blow to those who aren’t familiar with Kanye West’s work, but the album reached No. 1, and it was reviewed right here in The Times by Jon Caramanica. It would be just as unfair to say that the clue “Subject of the 1942 film musical ‘Yankee Doodle Dandy’” for COHAN is not a good clue and entry because it occurred before Mr. Ezersky and Mr. Steinberg were born. But they clearly know about it, and now you know about more recent songs by artists like Wiz Khalifa and Kanye West. I call that both a fair trade and a win-win, because now you know more than you did before.
So what we wind up with is a puzzle that will not fall easily, but which rewards its solvers with fill like LIFE OF PABLO, ICE CREAM BAR, BATTERY ACID, ROE V. WADE, JACKED UP, NOBODY CARES and LAID AN EGG. Little-to-no junk, although SEEPY is admittedly a bit out there as an adjective. A fair amount of sleight-of-hand clues, like “Classic case of making life choices?” for ROE V. WADE and “Introduction to bio?” for ABOUT ME.
All in all, an excellent Saturday puzzle by two young men who give me faith that this pastime of ours will carry on.
■ 17A: This was a new one to me, and I have watched nearly every episode of “M*A*S*H.” Also, the only person in my vicinity who was in the military served in South Africa, and they drank tea. But now I know that people in the military sometimes call coffee BATTERY ACID.
■ 24A: What does it say about me that I first had “Get a ROOM!” before “Get a LIFE!” and then finally “Get a CLUE!”, which is the correct answer?
■ 33A: I had to think about how I felt about this one, and I decided it was a good bit of wordplay. The case of ROE V. WADE is a touchy one, but it is about a famous legal case, and it is about the idea of choice. So “Classic case of making life choices?” works for me.
■ 63A: The EMUs have a very strong union, and are likely to object to a clue like “Exotic jerky meat.” I’m a fan of biltong, but have never consumed EMU.
■ 14D: I didn’t know the plotline of “No, No, NANETTE,” but I already had the two Ns, so I guessed and bought myself the northeast corner.
■ 39D: Clue of the Day for me. “Introduction to bio?” sounds like a high school class, but today it’s the introduction to a bio that might appear at the back of a book or online, and the answer is ABOUT ME.
Sam Ezersky: My first of many collaborations with David! We talk a lot outside of crossword meetups and we’re on the same wavelength solving each other’s puzzles … so it was only a matter of time that we’d take up themeless construction together.
It’s so interesting to see the different strategies that constructors follow for filling an open grid; in my case, I usually stack/interlock two to three seed answers and build the black squares around them as I go. David, on the other hand, created a rough skeleton for the entire grid after slotting LIFE OF PABLO (our seed) at 1A. He designed the top half of the grid, including the aforementioned black square layout and I pieced together the bottom, beginning with NOBODY CARES as a fresh and constructor-friendly entry.
I really fought for MAJORDOMO / BIZARRO / ?????JOB (now JACKED UP) to avoid the proper noun build-up near the southwest, but nothing would budge. Still over all pleased with how this turned out, especially with my clues for ROE V. WADE and ABOUT ME staying intact, among others.
For those of you competing at the A.C.P.T. with me, I hope this puzzle serves as a nice morning warm-up — good luck to all! Thanks to David for showing me some masterful techniques, and to Will and Joel, with whom I’m excited to work alongside after graduating from U.V.A. in May!
David Steinberg: Always a pleasure to work with Sam! Collaborating is often a tricky process because constructors have such different styles, but with Sam, things work really smoothly since we have the same tastes in fill, clues, etc. In fact, Sam was the one who suggested building a puzzle around LIFE OF PABLO in the first place, and I was quick to jump on the idea!
I’ll be back in Pleasantville this summer working with Will and Joel for the few weeks before Sam takes over full time. I’m so excited for him! Anyway, I hope you enjoy our puzzle, and I look forward to seeing many of you at the A.C.P.T.