The political drama around the federal courthouse in Manhattan did not end with the sudden, unexplained turnabout of President Trump in firing Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York.
While that prominent post always gets attention, one candidate frequently mentioned as a possible successor to Mr. Bharara could sharpen the scrutiny to new levels: Marc L. Mukasey, a former prosecutor who now works in white-collar criminal defense.
As it happens, Mr. Mukasey has represented Roger E. Ailes, the former chairman of Fox News, who has long had a mogul-to-mogul relationship with Mr. Trump.
Whomever Mr. Trump nominates to replace Mr. Bharara will inherit an investigation of Fox News.
A federal grand jury sitting in Manhattan is expected to soon hear testimony from at least two witnesses about business practices at Fox News when it was led by Mr. Ailes, according to two people with knowledge of the matter. Mr. Ailes, who was forced out in July amid revelations of multiple accusations of sexual harassment, has denied those charges.
The current inquiry, which began in September and appears to be in an early stage, may be focused, at least in part, on settlement payments, a person with knowledge of the matter said.
One of those subpoenaed, according to the two people, is Mark Kranz, the former chief financial officer for Fox News who oversaw the network’s finances when it paid millions of dollars in settlements. Mr. Kranz was appointed to his position by Mr. Ailes in 2004, and resigned last year, a week after Mr. Ailes had done so.
Mr. Ailes helped prepare Mr. Trump ahead of debates in last year’s campaign. In 2014, Mr. Trump intervened in a dispute between Mr. Ailes and a former aide who said he had damaging information about Mr. Ailes and the network.
The second witness subpoenaed by the grand jury is not Ms. Tantaros, Mr. Burstein said, but another client he had previously represented and refused to name.
Fox News did not have any comment on Monday. In February, the network said in a statement that it had been in communication with federal prosecutors for months, and would cooperate with the inquiry, the first known criminal investigation associated with the Fox harassment claims.
It is customary for presidents to replace the United States attorneys, but it appeared that Mr. Bharara would stay on: He met with Mr. Trump after the election and said he was asked to remain as the head of the office. But on Friday, the Trump administration instructed nearly all federal prosecutors appointed by President Obama, including Mr. Bharara, to resign.
Mr. Bharara refused. He said in a Twitter post that he was fired on Saturday, and did not resign.
Mr. Burstein said he was perplexed by the shifts at the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan.
He said that if Mr. Mukasey were to be appointed to replace Mr. Bharara, he would certainly have to recuse himself from any involvement in a case that touched a former client.
In an email, Mr. Mukasey, a former federal prosecutor who is a partner in Greenberg Traurig, said he would have no comment.
Mr. Mukasey’s firm has handled real estate development matters for the family of Jared Kushner, who is married to Mr. Trump’s daughter Ivanka. Among his partners is Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former New York mayor and vigorous advocate for Mr. Trump during the campaign.
