The cover of the first issue of Lucky Peach in 2011. The magazine will print its final issue in the fall.
When it first appeared in 2011, Lucky Peach was something new: an irreverent food magazine that broke down barriers between journalists and cooks. Founded by two veteran writers, Peter Meehan and Chris Ying, and a successful chef, David Chang, it ran articles and recipes from creative minds all over the culinary landscape and beyond.
But that alliance eventually pulled apart. On March 13, Mr. Meehan, the editorial director, told the staff of more than a dozen that there would be just two more print issues of the quarterly magazine, and that the lights at the Lucky Peach office in Chinatown in Manhattan would go out in May.
In an interview last week, Mr. Meehan said that the company had arrived at a crucial moment in its growth, which amplified creative differences among its partners, as well as differences in financial strategy.
News of the closing was reported on March 14 by the website Eater. In a subsequent letter to readers on Lucky Peach’s website, Mr. Meehan adopted the simultaneously funny and gut-wrenching language of a father explaining to the children that Mom and Dad were splitting. “Your mom and I have been meaning to talk to you for a while,” he wrote.
Lucky Peach has 30,000 print subscribers and has published 22 issues. And it has been growing, according to figures from Mr. Meehan: Print subscriptions rose 20 percent in 2016; advertising sales in the first quarter of that year were up by 127 percent over those a year earlier.
The staff had just started to produce branded content (articles sponsored by advertisers), the first of which will appear in a suburbs-theme issue in May. The company recently built a kitchen in its office and hired a test-kitchen director.
“The lesson here isn’t that print is doomed,” Mr. Meehan said.
Mr. Chang declined to discuss what led to the closing. But he said he was trying to keep all options open as the magazine wound down.
Lucky Peach plans to publish its final issue, a 200-page retrospective with a mix of previously published articles and new writing, photography and art, in the fall.
The magazine has won several journalism awards, runs a website that drew 750,000 unique monthly views in January and has produced four cookbooks.
The fourth in that series, for which the company signed a seven-figure book deal, is an egg-theme cookbook that will be published in April. The book’s author, the novelist Rachel Khong, joined the magazine as managing editor in its second issue and left as an executive editor in 2016.
The magazine’s contributors, who were often given space to experiment with style and voice, agreed, as did many readers who expressed their grief on social media.
Brian McMullen, who designed the Lucky Peach logotype, was the magazine’s first art director, producing its first three issues. Collaborating with Walter Green, he helped establish the unmistakable Lucky Peach visual aesthetic, apparent in its first issue, which was rich with art and illustration, but decidedly not in the glossy, airbrushed style of other food magazines.
Mr. Green, who stayed on for several years as art director, found his design inspiration in the archives of Spy and Mad magazine, and in the work of illustrators and artists like Daniel Clowes.
“There were definitely times when each of us had our own idea of how the magazine should be, or look,” he said.
