Time Inc. is in the market for a suitor.
The publisher of Time, People and Sports Illustrated magazines has requested formal bids by next week, two people briefed on the plans said. The potential inquirers include the Meredith Corporation and a group led by Edgar Bronfman Jr, managing partner at the investment firm Accretive.
Time Inc. has already rejected a preliminary takeover bid from Mr. Bronfman that valued it at about $1.8 billion, and the company is still not certain that it will sell itself. It is also considering bringing on an investor.
Furthermore, the board is undecided as to whether it will sell the entire company or sell individual publications, according to Bloomberg, which earlier reported the request for bids.
The move comes as Time Inc. is trying to become a more digital organization. Like many competitors, it has faced steep declines in print advertising and circulation.
Looking for a low-cost way to invest, but eager to avoid “sin stocks”? Two new exchange traded funds are offering a conservative, evangelical approach to investing.
This includes what the funds call the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender “lifestyle,” which puts them at odds with nearly all of corporate America. Most Fortune 500 companies include sexual orientation and gender identity in their nondiscrimination policies.
Shares of Berkshire Hathaway, whose chief executive, Warren E. Buffett, has been a major donor to Planned Parenthood, would not make the cut, said Robert Netzly, the chief executive of Inspire Investing, the company that introduced the funds.
Amazon also would not pass muster because it had supported gay marriage. “Any company that takes a hard-line approach” to the issue would not pass the test, Mr. Netzly said.
Travis Kalanick, the chief executive of Uber, apologized after a video showing him in a verbal altercation with a driver of his company was made public. The video, reported earlier by Bloomberg, shows Mr. Kalanick using obscenities and being dismissive of the driver’s complaints.
It is a difficult time for Uber. The company has opened an internal investigation into its workplace culture, and Mr. Kalanick’s taking part in President Trump’s economic advisory council provoked a backlash that led to him quitting the panel.
“This is the first time I’ve been willing to admit that I need leadership help and I intend to get it,” he wrote in an email to employees after the video surfaced.
Separately, Sterling Jewelers, the parent company of Kay Jewelers and Jared the Galleria of Jewelry, is also facing questions about its company culture. Hundreds of its former employees have described sexual aggression, gender discrimination and abuses of power within the company, according to newly released documents that are part of a private class-action arbitration case.
The accusations, earlier reported by The Washington Post, emerged from a suit against the jeweler focused on discrimination against women, rather than sexual harassment. Sterling is accused of denying women equal pay and promotional opportunities.
In their statements, several women said they had reported sexual harassment but had been ignored. One said that her colleague had been raped by a manager, but that the victim didn’t report the attack because of a fear of retaliation.
Legal experts said the case had raised further questions about the arbitration system.
• Snap, the parent company of the disappearing-messaging app Snapchat, is expected to price its initial public offering. The company has said it plans to price shares at $14 to $16, giving a valuation of as much as $22.2 billion. But bankers are telling investors that Snap could price at $17 to $18 a share, Business Insider reports, citing people with knowledge of the matter. Over the past few years, Snap has repositioned itself as a modern-day camera company and has been working on a drone that could help its users to take overhead images.