Technology companies are scrambling to assess how badly their core products may have been compromised in the wake of the latest disclosure of the American government’s snooping capabilities.
WikiLeaks released documents on Tuesday that appeared to show that the Central Intelligence Agency had acquired an array of cyberweapons that could be used to break into Apple and Android smartphones.
It also put another fissure in the relationship between intelligence agencies and Silicon Valley — a relationship that had already fractured when Edward J. Snowden disclosed that the federal government was hacking major technology companies. Relations also cracked after Apple resisted a Justice Department request for help accessing the iPhone of one of the attackers in the 2015 shooting in San Bernardino, Calif.
Questions on the Saudi Aramco I.P.O.
Investment bankers and Saudi officials are pushing ahead with the potentially huge initial public offering of Saudi Aramco, the national oil company. But for many investors, there are still more questions than answers.
Is the company worth the $2 trillion that the Saudis insist it is? Or just a small fraction of that, as some bankers and international oil experts say? Will the royal family allow the kind of transparency that investors are demanding?
Not everyone is sure that the offering will go smoothly.
Investment bankers say the value can be determined only after the Saudi government outlines the protections that minority investors will enjoy, the taxes they will have to pay and Saudi Aramco’s cost structure. Complex assumptions must be made about oil prices and demand over the coming decades.
The Saudi government depends on the company for most of its revenue, meaning the management of Saudi Aramco is entwined with the state. The company has never released the kind of financial statements that Western companies routinely do, which could make disclosure difficult.
Still, there is no shortage of incentives to make the offering a success — the Saudis are planning to raise $20 billion to $100 billion.
The culture at the hedge fund Bridgewater Associates may be strange at first, but employees apparently get over it.
The atmosphere at the hedge fund has been the focus of articles in The New York Times and in The Wall Street Journal. Dozens of former Bridgewater employees have described a workplace where the emphasis on challenging others can lead to humiliation.
Bridgewater did, however, confirm two episodes reported by The Times. In one, a top executive was accused of lying on a video that was seen broadly by employees. In another, at least one employee was fired in a group email by Mr. Dalio, who later said that the firing was not to be taken seriously.
The wave of cases aiming to prevent discrimination in lending in the United States could soon slow to a trickle in the face of the Trump administration’s deregulatory fervor.
Consumer watchdogs and regulators had raised serious concerns about biased practices in some communities after banks pulled back from mortgage lending following the financial crisis. Regulatory efforts were stepped up and the Justice Department set up a separate fair-lending unit.
For now, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau remains a bright spot for advocates. The agency has pursued a host of fair-lending cases since its founding in 2011. But its fate is unclear amid uncertainty over whether the Trump administration could limit its enforcement powers.
Bankers have been frustrated by what they perceive to be an overzealous enforcement of fair-lending rules. They have struggled to interpret what regulators want and are looking for a swing back in their favor.
The Justice Department “will be a lot more selective in the cases that they pursue, and it’s unlikely they will get involved in cases unless there’s out-and-out evidence of discrimination,” said Alan Kaplinsky, a partner specializing in consumer financial regulation at Ballard Spahr.