MOSCOW — Marita Phillips grew up in England aware of her Russian ancestry, yet not fully realizing that her bloodline sprang from the two men who dominated the Russian Empire in the early 19th century.
Her forebears did not exactly get along. Czar Nicholas I and Alexander Pushkin — revered for establishing the language and style of modern Russian literature — sparred repeatedly in St. Petersburg, the imperial capital. The isolated czar suspected that Pushkin’s popular poems damning despotism helped inspire an anti-monarchist uprising, which he crushed on the day he assumed the throne.
Nicholas’s grandson and Pushkin’s granddaughter met in the South of France at the end of the 19th century and married. Ms. Phillips, 62, is a descendant of the match, which so scandalized the royal family that the couple never returned to Russia. The great-great-great-granddaughter of both the czar and Pushkin, she remembers her formidable grandmother being related to practically every royal in Europe, including Queen Elizabeth II of England. That same grandmother once gave her a paperback version of a Pushkin fairy tale.
He does not emerge as a particularly appealing character. Impulsive, irreverent and bawdy, he treats women badly and gambles with money cadged off friends. He mocks the Dutch ambassador, Jacob van Heeckeren, for adopting a dashing young French officer, Georges d’Anthès, who later proved to be Pushkin’s nemesis.
“Poet and Czar” pays homage to Pushkin, with several of his poems linked to developments in the plot read aloud in Russian. Scrawled pages from his diary flashed across a backdrop behind the principal singers and large chorus.
Ms. Phillips put the words of one love poem into the mouth of the gay Dutch ambassador serenading d’Anthès. The scene is meant to stress that even those who despised Pushkin used his words to express their emotions — and it also takes a jab at modern Russian politics, given the toxic environment in the country for gay people.
At the Novaya Opera Theater, Ms. Phillips’s family tree was hung on a backstage bulletin board to deflect charges of cultural carpetbagging.
“They probably thought it was fake,” she deadpanned.
Some audience members objected to Ms. Phillips, a foreigner despite her glittering ancestry, showing Pushkin gladly accepting his own demise. “I feel like a Muslim was telling me the story of Jesus Christ,” said Sergei Markov, a former chief executive of the Russian National Orchestra.
Ms. Phillips responded that she had avoided writing a straight historical piece, instead attempting to use Pushkin’s fate to explore the idea that an artist, unable to create as a result of burdens like debt and marital strife, might welcome his own passing.
Some Russians in the audience found the idea of delving into the man behind the literature a welcome departure. Sergei Korotkevich had come for the music, but was taken by the story line. “Pushkin was not just a bronze bust,” he said.