PARIS — For 30 years, the French couturier Christian Lacroix spent every fashion week sequestered in a studio in Paris, diligently conducting last-minute fittings and approving final looks for a runway show. This week, he has spent his days in the Opéra Bastille, carefully studying the costumes and sets he has designed for a different kind of production: the Paris Opera Ballet’s new staging of George Balanchine’s “A Midsummer Night’s Dream,” which is scheduled to open March 9, just as the Paris collections come to an end.
Namely, stage design. Growing up in Arles, a centuries-old city in Provence that once served as a Phoenician port, Mr. Lacroix studied art history, with the idea of becoming a curator. But his first love was costuming.
Two years ago, Benjamin Millepied, then the director of dance at the Paris Opera Ballet, approached Mr. Lacroix about its new version of “A Midsummer Night’s Dream.” Created in 1962 for the New York City Ballet and based on Shakespeare’s charming comedy about the transforming power of love, the two-act work was Mr. Balanchine’s first original full-length ballet, and, with sylvan sets by David Hays and sugarplum-like costumes by Karinska, a stylistic departure from his spare, modernist oeuvre.
Initially, “Benjamin wanted something less 19th century” than what Mr. Balanchine had first mounted, Mr. Lacroix said. As a starting point, Mr. Millepied gave Mr. Lacroix videos of a New York City Ballet performance in the early 2000s, when he danced the role of Oberon, the king of the fairies, and a 1967 filming supervised by Mr. Balanchine. Mr. Millepied wanted “something more opulent than what’s usually done,” Mr. Lacroix said.
Mr. Lacroix sketched sets inspired by the romantic Pre-Raphaelite movement of late 19th-century England, “with a magic forest with green and blue trees, and a tableau with giant flowers, like in Victorian books,” he said.
For the wedding scene, he conjured a neoclassical palace, “like in an ancient lithograph, very rococo.” For the costumes, he proposed “big chiffon dresses with lots of draping, in peach and rose,” and “tutus all white and classic” and “lots of gold, like Louis XIV at Versailles. It must be gleaming! It must shine!” A final selection was approved after several back-and-forths with Mr. Millepied; Aurélie Dupont, the former Paris Opera Ballet étoile who is now director of dance; and the trust.
To help execute the costumes, the Paris Opera Ballet received donations from two 19th-century-era suppliers: Sophie Hallette, the lacemaking company in Caudry, France, and Swarovski of Wattens, Austria. Both have worked with the dance company for decades.
Sophie Hallette provided embroidered floral lace in iridescent metallics, snow white and “bonbon pink,” according to Maud Lescroart, the company’s marketing director. Swarovski sent more than 200 different types of stones, including a newly developed “special motif for the organza butterfly wings, which combines crystals in three blue hues,” said Nadja Swarovski, the company’s communications head.
