Even after Alanna Smith capped off a huge rally to put Stanford in position to reach the Final Four, there was work to do.
And Erica McCall did the job.
Smith’s layup with 23 seconds capped Stanford’s comeback from a 16-point deficit in the second half, McCall swatted a last-second shot, and the Cardinal edged top-seeded Notre Dame, 76-75, in Lexington, Ky., on Sunday to reach its first Final Four since 2014.
The Irish had the ball under their own basket with 2.2 seconds left, and Arike Ogunbowale caught an inbounds pass and drove to the basket. McCall blocked her shot from behind.
Brittany McPhee scored 27 points as the second-seeded Cardinal (32-5) faced the Irish in the N.C.A.A. tournament for the third straight year. After losing in 2015, the Cardinal have now beaten the Irish twice in a row.
Stanford Coach Tara VanDerveer invoked Kentucky’s horse racing history to describe a game in which her team trailed, 47-31, in the third quarter.
Smith, who finished with 15 points, drove for a basket with 51 seconds left, then added her biggest shot of the game for the go-ahead score.
Stanford then denied Notre Dame’s Lindsay Allen and Ogunbowale on successive attempts in the final 15 seconds.
Ogunbowale finished with a team-high 25 points, and the Irish (33-4) put the ball in her hands as they sought a sixth Final Four appearance in seven seasons.
The Cardinal are going to the Final Four for the 13th time, and they will aim for their third national title under VanDerveer.
Among those in the crowd at Rupp Arena was Jon Samuelson, whose daughter Karlie scored 15 points for Stanford. A day earlier, he was at the Bridgeport Regional to see another daughter, the UConn star Katie Lou Samuelson, help the Huskies win their 110th straight game.
Stanford will face the winner of the Stockton Regional, either South Carolina or Florida State, in the national semifinals in Dallas on Friday. If Stanford and UConn keep winning, the Samuelson sisters will meet for the title.
“It’s an amazing feeling to be back, and we’re ready to play,” said Karlie Samuelson, a senior guard.
BULLDOGS OUTLAST BAYLOR Morgan William scored a career-high 41 points, and No. 2-seeded Mississippi State upset top-seeded Baylor, 94-85, in overtime, winning the Oklahoma City Regional and reaching the Final Four for the first time.
William, a 5-foot-5 guard, sent the game to overtime on a layup with 22 seconds left in regulation after Baylor used a 7-0 run to take a 75-73 lead.
Victoria Vivians scored 24 points, and Teaira McCowan added 10 for Mississippi State (33-4). Kalani Brown scored 27 points, and Nina Davis had 18 for Baylor (33-4), which lost in the round of 8 for the fourth consecutive year.
Mississippi State will play Connecticut or Oregon in the Final Four.