271 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $26.95.
Blues is the archaeology of the American dream. In Hari Kunzru’s new novel, “White Tears,” the blues — the music born of slavery — represents the excavation of a promise the country broke the moment that promise was made. But the story’s narrator, Seth, and his friend Carter don’t realize they’re archaeologists, don’t know they’re excavating broken promises; still in their 20s, they think they’re big-shot music producers collecting and processing random sounds. In some ways the two are very different. Carter is charismatic, volatile, coasting through Manhattan’s pleasures on the fumes of apparently inexhaustible family money. Seth is introverted and intimidated by any personal interaction, let alone one that takes place in society’s higher ether: “I pass through the world, but I leave no trace.” Together, though, they seem to have what it takes as a team, sharp white boys on the hustle and at the precipice of major commercial success, initially sharing little regard for anything older than the latest phone or anything that can’t be commodified. In other words, they’re young Americans.
A month after Seth makes a routine excursion through Washington Square to record the sonic detritus of park life, the partners isolate on the playback a song that doesn’t belong, sung by a singer who wasn’t there, that sounds as if it has floated in from a distant past. As a hoax and for the sake of provocation, the two make a viral hit of the recording by passing it off as a lost blues classic sung by a lost blues legend they invent — until a strange online exchange alerts them that the song and its singer may be real. As Seth and Carter seek to solve the mystery of the recording, what follows is a haunting, a possession and an exorcism at no small human cost.
Teaming up with Leonie, Carter’s sister and the object of Seth’s unrequited crush, the men believe they’re in pursuit of the music, when the music itself is the pursuit, down a rabbit hole somewhere below the Mason-Dixon line. It’s the first of many signs that the characters have no idea what they’re dealing with: the harmonic memory of a country’s evil and of a dream betrayed before anyone hummed it, from which nearly all other post-19th-century Western music grew into other vibrant incarnations: ragtime, jazz, Tin Pan Alley, rhythm and blues, pop, soul, rock ’n’ roll, rap and hip-hop. Every time America listens to its music it comes to grips, whether we realize it or not, with the chapter of a story we haven’t wanted to hear for 150 years.
To the apparitions of history that Seth and Carter conjure, however, all those musical offspring are bastards of the pure thing that is the blues. “Authenticity” is a fetish, Seth realizes, that then becomes inauthentic by the very nature of fetishization. Nothing is authentic in America, the least authentic of countries: a Frankenstein nation with the arms of Africa here, the legs of Mexico there, the torso of Europe guided by the radar of Native American eyes. The most innocent of the characters and the one most burdened by conscience and good faith, Seth is set loose by his recording’s ghost voice onto a highway marked by a hundred crossroads, where countless Robert Johnsons and Blind Willies and Blind Lemons and all those menacing wailers named after wolves have sold their souls to the Devil. As the novel unfolds, we sense that Seth has secrets of his own to solve and promises of his own to keep. As his road keeps forking in time and outlook, he becomes Faulkner’s Joe Christmas in an era when identity is a mixtape, his voice increasingly interchangeable with that of the ghost who may or may not exist.
A little more than halfway through, when things happen that don’t entirely add up even on the book’s terms, the reader gets the feeling that the narrative relies on the author’s stellar writing a bit excessively. We feel ourselves skillfully maneuvered from this point to that rather than swept up by the novel’s momentum. And sometimes Seth is clueless enough to annoy the reader almost as much as he annoys other characters who are more annoying than he is; his attraction to Leonie may not exactly be a head-scratcher — she’s the beautiful daughter of a privilege that Seth never had — but it’s shallow and unworthy of him nonetheless. But in the final quarter the story regains its bearings, grasps us in its intensity and then gathers force, offering its strongest passages and revealing, in this Book of Secrets, the biggest secret of all, and one that often only a stranger’s perspective recognizes: the sense of possibility that was not only a young black bluesman’s in an unforgiving South but the Republic’s, the sense of possibility that hovers in every song heard just out of earshot, just beyond that edge of perception that the author has defined.
