LOS ANGELES — Jeanie Buss went to court Friday to stop what her lawyers called an attempt by her brothers Jim and Johnny to oust her as controlling owner and president of the Los Angeles Lakers, an allegation the brothers’ lawyers say has no basis in reality.
The matter came to a quick end when Jeanie Buss withdrew her request for a temporary restraining order in Los Angeles County Superior Court after the brothers dropped their request for a board meeting that she felt was a move against her. But the episode may just be the opening skirmish in a bigger family fight over one of the most-storied franchises in sports.
“It is good news for fans that Jim and Johnny backed down in court today, but I’m afraid it’s just the beginning,” Adam Streisand, a lawyer for Jeanie Buss, said in an email to The Associated Press.
The public spat comes about a week after Jeanie Buss ousted Jim Buss as the Lakers’ executive vice president of basketball operations and replaced him with Magic Johnson. She also fired Mitch Kupchak, the longtime general manager, and replaced him with the agent Rob Pelinka.
Under the structure set up by Jerry Buss, who died in 2013, Jeanie Buss is the team’s controlling owner and has final say, but her brothers have ownership stakes in the team.
Robert Sacks, a lawyer for the brothers, said the brothers have no interest in wresting control from their sister and that the court fight is unnecessary.
“Both Jim Buss and Johnny Buss hoped that any issues would be handled within the family,” Sacks said. He added that the brothers had said both verbally and in corporate documents that they supported keeping her as controlling owner.
Jeanie Buss’s filing said the brothers had requested that a board of directors meeting be held next week and had included a list of four proposed directors who could be elected there.
That list did not include Jeanie Buss, who is required to be a director in order to be the controlling owner. Buss took that as a sign that the brothers intended to oust her, and went to court to stop it.
Sacks said the brothers did want a board of directors meeting, but only because the organization was overdue for one.
The fight is just the latest round of negative news and upheaval for the Lakers, who for decades had an ownership and management structure that was the envy of the league.
An initial hearing in a potential probate trial between the siblings is scheduled for May. The possible family feud that looms is reminiscent of the Los Angeles Clippers, whose former owner Donald Sterling and his estranged wife, Shelly Sterling, got into an ugly probate-court fight over the ownership and sale of the team.
The Lakers have already had an ugly set of seasons, declining ever since their back-to-back championships in 2009 and 2010. They have had among the worst records in the league since 2013.