Politics|Will Gorsuch Join Justices in Time to Matter This Term?
Will Gorsuch Join Justices in Time to Matter This Term?
Senate Republicans are in race against the clock. They want to put Judge Neil M. Gorsuch on the Supreme Court in time to participate in at least some of this term’s cases, notably one on the separation of church and state.
If they are to succeed, they will have to move with exceptional speed.
The calendar is an obstacle course. The confirmation hearings started on Monday and will last several days. The last scheduled arguments of the Supreme Court term are set for the last two weeks of April, and the Senate leaves for a two-week break on April 7.
But in the last three decades, it has taken a median of 15 days from the start of the hearings for the Senate Judiciary Committee to vote, and another nine days for the full Senate to act, according to the Congressional Research Service. That works out to April 13, after the Senate is scheduled to leave town.
There are other ways to count. The last three Supreme Court justices waited an average of 78 days from nomination to confirmation. That works out to April 19, which is also during the planned Senate recess.
As it happens, April 19 is the day on which the court is scheduled to hear arguments in the term’s remaining marquee case, the one concerning the separation of church and state. The justices have treated the case gingerly, almost certainly because they fear a deadlock without a ninth justice.
The court agreed to hear the case, Trinity Lutheran Church v. Comer, No. 15-577, in January 2016, about a month before Justice Antonin Scalia’s death created the vacancy Judge Gorsuch hopes to fill. Other cases placed on the docket that day were argued and decided by the end of the last term, in June 2016.
But the court put the religion case on hold for more than a year, an extraordinary move. The case was finally scheduled for argument only when there were almost no more argument days left in the current term.
Under the court’s practices, new justices can only vote in cases they have heard argued.
If Judge Gorsuch is on the bench by April 19, he is likely to cast the decisive vote in the case, which may produce a major statement on the role of religion in public life. If he is not, the case may deadlock or be kicked down the road once again, to be reargued in the next term, which starts in October.
The case concerns a Missouri program that helps schools use recycled tires to resurface playgrounds. State officials rejected an application from a Lutheran church that wanted to participate in the program for a playground at its preschool and day care center.
The church argues that the State Constitution violates equal protection principles and the First Amendment’s guarantee of free exercise of religion. Missouri says states should have leeway to decide for themselves whether and how much to help religious groups.
What happens in the Trinity Lutheran case will help define the current term, which has been thin, slow and sleepy.
By the time the last term ended, the court had deadlocked in four cases, including important ones on immigration and public unions. And it had issued vanishingly narrow decisions in several others, including one on access to contraception.
But the court did manage to decide two big cases last June. One struck down restrictions on abortion clinics in Texas and reaffirmed the constitutional right to abortion. The other upheld an affirmative action program at the University of Texas in Austin and made it harder to challenge race-conscious admissions programs in higher education.
It has been a long time since the last weeks of June did not bring a Supreme Court blockbuster or three. But this term could end with almost no significant opinions.
The court had been scheduled to hear arguments in a major case on transgender rights on March 28. But a change in position from the Trump administration caused the justices to announce they would not hear the case after all.
The biggest remaining case of the term, aside from the one on religion, is probably Lee v. Tam, on trademarks that are viewed as disparaging. It presents intriguing First Amendment issues, and it will probably effectively determine whether the Washington Redskins are entitled to federal trademark protection.
When the court is back at full strength, its docket should become more interesting. Whether the current term yields at least one important decision may turn on whether and when Judge Gorsuch arrives at 1 First Street.