356 pp. Random House. $27.
The year is 1978, and that protester is named Jisun, who, along with Namin and Sunam, is Wuertz’s literary conduit for 1970s Korean history — a time when President Park Chung-hee’s fixation on economic recovery after the Korean War entailed suppressing all forms of political dissent and allowing inhumane working conditions to flourish. The title of Wuertz’s novel is therefore steeped in irony too: Under a program of authoritarian industrialization, everything belongs to something else — to country, to patriarchy, to capitalism. Wuertz has written a rich and descriptive case study — or a “Gatsby”-esque takedown, if you will — of 1970s South Korea. Reading “Everything Belongs to Us” is as much an education in sociology and history as it is a story about people, and the characters are so memorable they lend an intimacy to that history.
By contrast, her best friend, Jisun, is from one of the wealthiest families in the country and views her own privilege with disdain: “By the time Jisun arrived at the lauded gates of Seoul National University, she wanted to burn the whole place down. Not just for democracy or the repeal of the repressive constitution or anything else that the student activists shouted about every day. . . . She was fueled by personal vengeance.” Her sense of independence is intertwined with tearing down the establishment — a goal that Namin cannot understand.
Namin and Jisun befriend a young man named Sunam, a striver. He wants to be invited into the Circle, an elite secret society — “To survive, there was just one rule: obedience” — and when we first meet him, he has been tasked by the Circle to watch one of the protesters, who turns out to be Jisun.
Happiness is secondary to this generation; it is a luxury, as is love. Wuertz tries to contain a sociological history of Korea by structuring it around the romantic entanglements of her characters. These love stories are the most conventional parts of this book — familiar terrain that helps to situate the reader. Nevertheless, I’d argue that the novel could have stood on its own without all the romance — Wuertz has some stunning chapters that focus on the various ways different women navigate the patriarchal strictures of Korean society.
This is the story about Korea I’ve been waiting to read — a story not about the Korean War, but about its aftermath and emerging democracy, and it is a fine telling.