The train’s operation was halted in 1969 to make way for new development, then again in 2001 after a fatal accident. In 2013, it stopped a third time when a car derailed.
Now, Angels Flight, a two-car funicular on a steep slope in downtown Los Angeles, will give it another go. Mayor Eric Garcetti announced this week that a deal was reached with a private group to make safety upgrades and resume service by Labor Day.
Angels Flight was built in 1901 as a link between the stately Bunker Hill neighborhood and the downtown shopping district. The “magic chariot,” as a film narrator once called it, had a penny fare and traveled a mere 100 yards.
Through two World Wars, the Great Depression and the dawn of the space age, it ferried more than 100 million passengers.
But starting in the late 1960s, the railway remained mostly idle, buffeted by encroaching development, disregard and safety issues. In a low point in 2001, one of the cars broke loose and collided with the other, killing a man.
Richard Schave, a tour operator who campaigned for the latest revival, said a burst of unexpected publicity helped propel the project.
Last year, graffiti was scrawled on one of the dormant cars, an outrage to residents and city officials. “That was the moment when everyone on the team was like, ‘We have to get to yes,’” Mr. Schave said.
The campaign was further helped by the train’s cameo in the film “La La Land,” sparking renewed interest in the odd, orange-colored train car where Ryan Gosling kisses Emma Stone.
When it’s up and running, Angels Flight is expected to attract tourists as well as people who work and live atop Bunker Hill and want to get to the tacos and Thai food at Grand Central Market below.
Nathan Marsak, a local historian, said the railway represented a rare tribute to Los Angeles’s past as a center of technological vision.
About 100 miles east of Bakersfield, more than 500 spires of rock rise from the Mojave Desert.
They are the Trona Pinnacles, made of tufa, a variety of limestone that was shaped underwater thousands of years ago in now dry Searles Lake.
Frank Foster, a photography instructor at Victor Valley College in Victorville, shared a photo he captured late last year of the pinnacles set against the Slate Range.
The nearest town, about 10 miles north, is Trona, a dusty, isolated place of fewer than 2,000 people. It originated more than a century ago as a home for miners of borax from the dry lake bed. Today, the largest employer is the mining company Searles Valley Minerals.
An earlier version of this article misspelled the surname of a local historian. He is Nathan Marsak, not Marsack.