Islanders forward Anders Lee is enjoying quite the comeback season.
Lee, 26, has recovered well enough from the broken left fibula he sustained just before last spring’s playoffs to set a career high in goals. He scored again in Wednesday night’s showdown with the Rangers at Madison Square Garden, which the Islanders rallied to win, 3-2.
Lee’s steady and resilient play is a key reason the Islanders are in the playoff race with about two weeks remaining in the regular season. Lee had only one goal after the Islanders’ 18th game on Nov. 22 at Anaheim, Calif., but he has scored 26 times since, starting with the two goals he recorded against the Los Angeles Kings the next night.
A Minnesota native who played at Notre Dame, Lee recently worked his way onto the Islanders’ top line alongside the captain John Tavares, the only Islander with more goals than Lee this season.
Lee scored the Islanders’ first goal against the Rangers on Wednesday, banging a loose puck past Antti Raanta early in the second period for his 27th goal of the season to tie the score at 1-1. He also assisted on Andrew Ladd’s game-winning power-play goal at 12 minutes 38 seconds of the third.
Tavares has a way of making any skaters on his wings better. And with the 6-foot-3, 228-pound Lee unafraid to place himself squarely in front of the opposing net, it can only help Tavares.
Lee’s tenacity is emblematic of the gritty Islanders, who have reached the playoffs three of the past four years and are struggling mightily to make it four of five.
After losing the key veterans Kyle Okposo, Frans Nielsen and Matt Martin to free agency, the Islanders started the season haphazardly. They were 17-17-8 when Doug Weight replaced Jack Capuano as coach on Jan. 17. Their spirited and perhaps more relaxed play since then has them squarely in the race with time running short.
With Wednesday’s victory, the Islanders were 2 points behind Boston for the last playoff spot in the Eastern Conference. They host the Bruins on Saturday, a night after visiting the second-place Pittsburgh Penguins.
Lee’s contributions have impressed Weight, a veteran of more than 1,200 N.H.L. games and a winner of the Stanley Cup with the Carolina Hurricanes in 2006.
In addition to his on-ice work this season, Lee has had the type of team-building impact that made Martin particularly popular with fellow Islanders and the fans.
Last season, after Lee’s injury kept him out of the Islanders’ first playoff-series win in 23 years, he decided to start a charitable effort. He became the impetus behind a team gathering to raise money for pediatric cancer, held last Saturday at Barclays Center.
All the Islanders and their families stayed long after a game against the Columbus Blue Jackets to participate in Lee’s Jam Kancer in the Kan event, which generated about $100,000 for Cohen’s Children’s Medical Center on Long Island.
Lee decided on Kan Jam, a game he played at college in which participants earn points by flinging, then deflecting, a Frisbee into a specially designed can.
Lee said he discussed his mission with Martin, the bruising left wing who started a foundation during his six-plus seasons as an Islander. Martin signed with Toronto last summer.
The Islanders’ majority owner Jon Ledecky, who cheerily made the rounds during the Frisbee frenzy, lauded Lee’s efforts.
The Islanders will need more of what Lee has been exhibiting on the ice as the regular season heads toward its conclusion.
There are no easy games this time of year, and Lee embraces the challenge, driven by the potential reward of a return to the playoffs after experiencing only five postseason games against the Washington Capitals in 2015.
Rangers goaltender Henrik Lundqvist, who has not played since March 7 because of a hip muscle strain, said he would return during the team’s coming California trip. His backup, Antti Raanta, has played the last six games for the Rangers and also started against the Islanders on Wednesday.
The Rangers visit the Los Angeles Kings on Saturday, the Anaheim Ducks on Sunday and the San Jose Sharks on Tuesday. Coach Alain Vigneault said Lundqvist, 35, would start two of the three games.