PARIS — When the State Department released its annual human rights report last week, it contained many of the usual tough American judgments of other countries. Iran was criticized for restricting freedom of religion and the media; Russia for discriminating against minorities; Eritrea for using torture; Bulgaria for violence against migrants and asylum seekers. The list went on.
What was notably missing this year, however, was the usual fanfare around the report and a news conference promoting it by the new secretary of state, Rex W. Tillerson, as Democratic and Republican administrations have almost always done.
The State Department dismissed criticism of Mr. Tillerson’s absence, which came even from some Republicans. But for observers of American foreign policy, it was hard not to interpret the low-key rollout as another step by the Trump administration away from America’s traditional role as a moral authority on the world stage that tries to shape and promote democratic norms, both for their intrinsic value and to create a more secure world.
Interviews with more than a dozen former diplomats, professors, human rights advocates and international politicians, both abroad and in the United States, suggested that the United States under President Trump was poised to cede not only this global role, but also its ability to lead by example.
Many pointed out that America’s own actions over the years have already eroded its moral standing — Guantánamo Bay, the use of torture on suspected terrorists and the civilian casualties in Iraq and Afghanistan, to name a few.
But Mr. Trump’s administration stands alone, many experts said, for the divisiveness of its tone toward minorities and the media at home and toward Muslims and migrants abroad, its disparagement of NATO and the European Union and its praise of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, which have blurred distinctions between allies and enemies.
Mr. Trump himself recently put the United States on the same moral plane as Russia, when the Fox News talk show host Bill O’Reilly protested during an interview that Mr. Putin was a killer.
The comment alarmed many because it underscored an approach by Mr. Trump, like the rejection of migrants from certain predominantly Muslim countries, that has stripped much of the moral component from American foreign relations and left him being lectured by Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and others about his duties under international law.
Her foreign minister, Sigmar Gabriel, has gone one step further, reminding America of its moral duty as the most powerful Western country and one founded by Christian refugees.
Behind the rhetoric is the idea that moral authority — as amorphous and idealistic as that can sound — has imbued America with a special kind of clout in the world, with a power that is different from that wielded by autocrats and dictators or by big countries like Russia and China.
While the Soviet-era dominance across Eastern Europe undoubtedly was undermined by an expensive Cold War arms race with the United States, it was the Western Democratic system and America that many people looked to emulate, former diplomats said.
The acting State Department spokesman, Mark C. Toner, rejected any suggestion that the United States was walking away from its international obligations or that the administration’s statements and policies to date had diminished America’s standing.
Not all are so convinced. Though in its early stages, Mr. Trump’s presidency has for many called into question what kind of role America aims to play in the world, and even whether it wants to remain an example for other countries. Abandoning that role will have consequences, some are warning.
If America no longer presents an image of religious tolerance — a core component of its moral standing — it undermines its ability to make needed alliances, several diplomats said.
“Even in the days of George W. Bush, there was no feeling that Bush was against Muslims,” said Marwan Muasher, a former foreign minister of Jordan and now at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, where he is vice president for studies and oversees research on the Middle East.
For Hoshyar Zebari, a former foreign minister of Iraq, the initial decision to issue the migrant ban and include Iraq was utterly puzzling as well as deeply unfair, given how many Iraqis had fought on the same side as the Americans against the Islamic State and its precursors in Iraq.
Mr. Trump does seem to have been convinced of the importance of Iraq’s role in the fight against Islamic extremism, and the latest version of his immigration ban includes six predominantly Muslim countries, leaving Iraq off the list. Still, the anti-Muslim rhetoric “has emboldened extremists that this is the true face of America,” Mr. Zebari said.
Some of the policies Mr. Trump seems eager to pursue may also compromise America’s ability to lecture China about more tolerance toward Tibetan Buddhists or Uighurs, and Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey about a free news media or tolerance of the Kurds, they noted.
Not everyone agrees that Mr. Trump’s approach is a startling departure from America’s values, however.
Hubert Védrine, a former French foreign minister, noted that while Barack Obama may have been “more elegant” and “refined” in his words, he pursued many policies similar to Mr. Trump’s, like urging NATO members to do more.
Yet the idea of a moral component in American identity dates back to the pilgrims. The notion became a particularly strong principle in foreign policy after World War I, with the United States playing a leading role in the creation of global organizations.
That moral strand was strengthened by World War II, not only because of America’s part in helping to vanquish the Nazis, but also its postwar efforts to help rebuild Europe and form the United Nations.
Now, as America looks at minimizing its commitments to NATO and the European Union, there is the sense that it can no longer be counted on as a reliable partner.
“The most burning question overseas is, ‘Can we rely on the United States to keep its commitments, can we rely on you to lead in the way we expect, are you going to consider the interests of your allies when new deals are made?’” said Michèle Flournoy, the former under secretary of defense for policy in the Obama administration.
Instead, Mr. Trump seems intent to pursue a “what’s in it for us?” approach to foreign policy much closer to that of Russia, where threats and lethal power are its chief points of leverage and where international relations are often viewed as a zero-sum game. Where that leads is anyone’s guess.
“What is very different is that the Trump administration says very bluntly that ‘America has no responsibility in the world and it will pull back,’” said Laurence Nardon, who runs the North America program at the French Institute for International Relations in Paris, a prominent think tank.
