To save himself from a miserable home life, Stephan Wolfert joined the Army. And to save himself from the Army, Mr. Wolfert became an actor. He has merged these experiences in “Cry Havoc!” at the New Ohio Theater, a full-bore autobiographical solo with a meddling co-writer named William Shakespeare.
The piece is directed by Eric Tucker of Bedlam, a theater company that specializes in antic versions of Shakespeare and other literary classics. Mr. Tucker also helped to shape “Cry Havoc!” through Bedlam’s outreach program for veterans.
Onstage, Mr. Wolfert leaps and prowls as he describes his experiences during the Persian Gulf war of 1991 (he served stateside) and the post-traumatic stress that still dogs him. He remains concerned by the lack of services available to veterans struggling to make the transition to peacetime life.
Mr. Wolfert is a puckish performer with a lithe build. Through his eyes we feel the terror of Fourth of July fireworks, the shock of sudden movements, the consolation of alcohol. Sometimes he offers sympathetic digressions from his own experience, like the tale of an African-American soldier in World War I or a discussion of the rape of female soldiers.
Throughout, he peppers this material with lines from Shakespeare, a lot of them. And that’s a problem. It isn’t that the verse defeats Mr. Wolfert — he’s busy and leans heavily on gesture, but he has a real passion for the language. (And he manages to make it through several fervent orations without spitting. Impressive.) Yet taken out of context, the brief quotations lose force, diminishing from battle cry to T-shirt slogan.
The longer speeches get in the way, too. Sometimes Mr. Wolfert will offer genuinely persuasive analyses, like dark and insightful readings of Antony’s speech in “Julius Caesar” or a section of “Henry V,” but mostly the iambs gum up his own story.
Yes, this is a great speech. Yes, Mr. Wolfert delivers it nicely. But it was Mr. Wolfert’s particular question in his particular voice that I wanted to hear. Identifying with Shakespeare’s characters helped him make sense of his own life. But with that accomplished, this show should give Shakespeare a furlough.
After Mr. Wolfert concludes his monologue — with a fast-forward dance recap — stagehands create a ring of chairs and the audience circles up for a combination of talk-back and group therapy. Mr. Wolfert asks the veterans in the house to identify themselves and elicits their experiences, giving each a hug. Then he broadens the conversation to audience members related to veterans, audience members affected by war and finally everyone else.
This coda is affecting, also protracted and self-congratulatory. It certainly isn’t theater and yet it works as a reminder of what theater does so well and what it did for Mr. Wolfert. In feeling empathy for others, he was able to better understand and forgive himself. He wants that for everyone. The obligatory sharing can feel strained. Less strained: the quality of mercy that motivates it.