City Center, 131 W. 55th St.
So this is what Manhattan looked like in the tipsy yesterday of Prohibition, when drinking was an illicit thrill you couldn’t get enough of, and the world was best seen through a martini glass — preferably of cut crystal and filled to the sloshing point with bathtub gin. The view, I must say, is divine.
Imbibe freely, all you kombucha-swilling health nuts of the 21st century, of the cocktail being served at City Center, where the delirious Encores! concert production of Cole Porter’s “The New Yorkers” runs through Sunday. The only hangover symptom you’ll feel is the blush that comes from having laughed incontinently at jokes that don’t seem all that funny in the daylight.
Directed by John Rando, with a choice cast of singing shtick artists, “The New Yorkers” makes the most puerile silliness seem deeply sophisticated and high sophistication look sublimely silly. It evokes those hedonistic early talking pictures, before the censors got their hands on Hollywood, when nobody appeared to have been told that the Jazz Age was over.
Don’t be fooled, though. This blithe and boozy production is a product of painstaking theater archaeology, by a team led by Jack Viertel, the Encores! artistic director. Working from salvaged, in some cases long-lost scripts and scores, Mr. Viertel, Mr. Rando and the music director Rob Berman have reanimated a show that seemed eternally down for the count after it ended its 168-performance Broadway run in 1931.
The effect is of attending one of those glamorous rooftop nightclubs where bright young things in black tie and tinsel gathered in the wee hours in Busby Berkeley and Astaire-Rogers movies. The floor shows that Fred and Ginger enjoyed in those films must have been a lot like “The New Yorkers,” a musical steeped in the energetic world weariness for which the name Cole Porter became a byword.
Porter’s accomplices in creating this show included its star, Jimmy Durante; its book writer, Herbert Fields; and the New Yorker magazine cartoonist Peter Arno, who with E. Ray Goetz devised the original story. Arno was famous for his lascivious drawings of top-hatted sugar daddies and décolletage-flashing gold diggers.
An unwelcome throwback to a best-forgotten era of sexist naughtiness? As it turns out, no one is merely a sex object in this tale of a romantic collision between high (really high) society and the underworld of bootleggers. Men and women alike have prodigious and actively indulged appetites for anything that might further the pursuit of a good time.
Alice Wentworth (the lady on the examining table, played to sparking soubrette perfection by Scarlett Strallen) has fallen hard for a hunky speakeasy-owning gangster, Al Spanish (Tam Mutu, in tasty shades of noir). Alice’s mom, Gloria (Ruth Williamson), and pop, the filthy rich Windham (Byron Jennings), don’t object to the liaison; they have their own dubious love affairs to focus on (with their torrid lovers played by Tyler Lansing Weaks and Robyn Hurder).
And what does that have to do with the story? Really, need you ask? The plot here is just an excuse for talented singers, dancers and joke-slingers to show up in (and step out of) the gladdest of rags (Alejo Vietti did the costumes) and do do that voodoo that they do so well.
Such numbers are rendered with equal measures sass and satin by the Encores! orchestra, framed onstage by the white deco drapes of Allen Moyer’s set, and perfectly matched by Chris Bailey’s antic and graceful choreography. The lyrics and dialogue lean toward shameless double-entendres and smutty schoolboy puns.
Of course, love is talked about, endlessly and exhaustingly. But it’s not the first subject on everybody’s mind here. Nor, all evidence to the contrary, is the joy of gin.
What “The New Yorkers” celebrates above all are the hard-loving, hard-playing characters of its title. When Ms. Strallen and the cast close the show with a goose-bumps-raising rendition of “I Happen to Like New York,” there’s no doubt that what you’re hearing is a city’s sacred national anthem.