Did you grow up obsessed with musical theater? On long car rides, we would always listen to the “Blues Brothers” soundtrack and try to emulate everything that Aretha Franklin was doing. There was soul and grit in it that I think a kid from the suburbs really needed.
Your first professional stage role was playing Natasha in the original production of “Natasha, Pierre & the Great Comet of 1812,” which is now also a Broadway hit. Was there a moment during its run that you realized the show was catching on? Once we started running, it was this wonderful little secret, because it was performed in such a tiny, Off Broadway theater. There was a night that everybody was acting weird, and I asked, “What’s going on?” Brittain Ashford was like: “You don’t want to know. We’ll tell you after.” Stephen Sondheim was there, but I couldn’t see him.
I’m sure you had many more illustrious visitors during your run in “Hamilton.” When the Obamas came, that was pretty special. When we visited the White House, I got to watch Chris Jackson sing “One Last Time” right in front of the portrait of George Washington, while Barack and Michelle Obama are sitting right there.
The final scene in “Hamilton,” where Eliza reconciles with her dead husband’s legacy, is pretty emotionally overwhelming. Did you need to rush back to your dressing room and decompress in silence? Some days. Doing a show eight times a week is kind of like doing yoga or tai chi. A vinyasa is the same every single time you do it, but depending on how you’re feeling, it tells you a lot about what’s happening in your life. So, there were days where I’d come offstage and be like, “Let’s go out and drink.” But you learn little tricks here and there. Some nights I’d say to myself, “I don’t know if I can watch my son die.” But you learn that you don’t have to go there every night; the writing does that.
“Amélie” originated as a French comedy film in 2001. Why do you think people are still thinking about it? It helps that there are no iPhones in it. It’s set in a time where pay phones still existed. It really asks a great question: What have we lost since then?
Does it ever frustrate you as a performer to look into a theater and, invariably, see someone in the audience glancing at a cellphone? I wonder, is there ever room where people desire a break from that phone? Have we gone so far that we aren’t even excited to turn it off? When I go into a theater, I’m very excited to turn off my phone. But then, of course, I get anxiety.