In the moments after South Carolina clinched the first Final Four berth in team history, Coach Frank Martin found his 74-year-old mother, Lourdes, and finally let down his guard. The scowl softened. The lips that breathed fire now curled upward in stupefaction.
The tears were unstoppable. They misted the eyes of forward Chris Silva, who went up into the stands to hug his family; of Martin’s wife, Anya, wearing an oversize garnet T-shirt reading “Cut The Net”; of Darius Rucker, the rocker born in Charleston, S.C.
Their shining faces offered versions of the same sentiment: How could this be happening? How could South Carolina, a No. 7 seed out of a football conference, have crashed the biggest stage in college basketball?
Indeed, meet the Gamecocks, who toppled second-seeded Duke, third-seeded Baylor, and now, on Sunday afternoon at Madison Square Garden, Florida, the No. 4 seed. In the first matchup between Southeastern Conference teams in the round of 8 since 1986, South Carolina got the better of its rival, 77-70.
The Gamecocks, winners of the East Regional, became this year’s second newcomer to the Final Four, joining Gonzaga, a top seed that advanced on Saturday. They will face each other on Saturday in Glendale, Ariz.
The Bulldogs, at least, had often been on the doorstep. Before this four-game run, South Carolina had not won an N.C.A.A. tournament game in 44 years. Some were not sure it had even deserved an at-large selection this year, having lost six of its final nine games.
But once in, the Gamecocks rediscovered the defensive tenacity that was their staple. They knew their intensity could be unsettling to some teams, that if they found a rhythm offensively, they could go far. But this far?
Florida was not going to quake before South Carolina’s defense, though. The Gators had already faced it twice this season, winning the last matchup by 15 points on Feb. 21. But with only 37 hours since Florida’s overtime win over Wisconsin, which ended early Saturday morning, fatigue was going to be a concern.
It did not seem that way in the first half, when Florida’s hot shooting carried it to a 40-33 lead. The Gators went 7 of 12 from 3-point range, and their length inside and quickness on the perimeter were giving the Gamecocks problems.
For nearly eight minutes in the locker room at halftime, South Carolina players sat waiting for Martin to enter and scream. Instead, he let them try to figure things out on their own. The players spoke to one another calmly, repeating one word: relax.
Finally, Martin entered. He had always vowed to handle things differently the next time he had a chance to go to the Final Four. He blamed himself for Kansas State’s failure to advance out of the round of 8 in 2010, when he was the Wildcats’ coach.
He had committed a cardinal sin, by his standards, in the day between the round of 16 and the round of 8: He had lightened up his intensity in practice.
With his team down by 7 points on Sunday, Martin needed to tap every last resource of energy his team had. He has an image he likes to evoke in times like this — an image of a rope being strained in a tug of war.
They did not. As great as Florida shot the ball in the first half, the Gators went cold in the second, missing all 14 of their attempts from 3-point range. A stretch of 10 straight missed field goals by Florida enabled South Carolina to take the lead with 11 minutes 28 seconds remaining.
It would remain close until the final minute, but two turnovers by Florida killed any chance of another miraculous ending. Sindarius Thornwell (26 points) and P. J. Dozier (17) led South Carolina, while Justin Leon (18 points) led Florida.
Martin climbed up to cut down the net as Frank Sinatra’s “New York, New York” played. He had started his career as the interim coach for a junior varsity team in Miami, Lourdes said, still dabbing at tears.
“He was born to coach,” she said.
And in the locker room, the South Carolina players were already trying to envision what a crowd of 70,000 fans in Glendale might look like.
