Loïc Prigent, a journalist and filmmaker, has collaborated with Le Bon Marché on a line of items printed with comments that he overheard at the Parisian department store.
PARIS — Attention, Paris shoppers: Loïc Prigent has been eavesdropping on you.
In 2011, the highly regarded journalist and fashion documentary filmmaker (“Signé Chanel,” “Le jour d’avant”) started chronicling on Twitter all the hilarious, inane and occasionally (unintentionally) profound fashion chatter he overheard — mostly in French, sometimes in English and mainly during fashion week.
Now Mr. Prigent, 43, has 225,000 followers and counting on Twitter. Last year he condensed 2,000 or so favorite sound bites into a book, “J’adore la mode mais c’est tout ce que je déteste” (“I Love Fashion, but It’s Everything I Despise”). And now, Mr. Prigent is taking his concept to Le Bon Marché, the Left Bank specialty store owned by LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton.
The best of what he overheard during his visits to the store — 30 or so bons mots — have been emblazoned on a range of items, including postcards, mugs, totes, T-shirts and baseball caps. (If the filmmaker has a signature item, it would be the ball cap). The items in the collection, on sale through April 2, are priced from about $1 to $30.
Totes printed with some of the comments gathered by Loïc Prigent.
How long did it take to compile this project?
I would hang out at Le Bon Marché for a couple of hours a week over a couple of months, culminating during the Christmas season. Sometimes what you hear is completely over the top, like the Assemblée Nationale deputy who’s so used to giving orders and being obeyed, he’s lost when he has to buy a sweater: “How would I know what my size is?” Or the woman who tells her husband: “Calm down, chéri. It’s just a suit. You’re not buying a building.” One friend tells another: “The coat’s sublime. When you wear that, nothing bad can happen to you.” You hear a nice mix of emotions.
What’s the best place to eavesdrop at Le Bon Marché?
The bookstore. There are people who come there every day to read. They dog-ear the pages and then are put out when the book they’re reading has been sold. I also love the kitchen department, because these wealthy Parisian women don’t really cook, but the conversations about dishcloths and knives are fascinating. It’s a real Bunny Mellon moment, even if it’s not that quotable.
What do you buy at Le Bon Marché?
I’m a guy: I only shop if I have to buy something precise. So it’s regular men’s white T-shirts, a toy for a kid and books — when Romain [Romain Ducuing, senior sales consultant in the store’s book section] recommends them, I know they’ll be good. The Grande Épicerie is hysterical. They sell two kilos [over four pounds] of truffles a day, which surprised me. And they have the most precise local foods. It’s geeky. It’s comforting. I may be from Plouescat, artichoke land, but if I were from Turkey, it would be the same.
What’s your favorite line from this collection?
The sales staff shared some classics. My favorite would have to be “C’est vous la caisse?” It’s shorthand for asking if this is the cash register, but the phrasing is also cruel. It’s basically, “Are you the one with the backside the size of a truck?” It’s been a running joke for years. Every salesperson has heard it. They make it their own. Most just reply, “Yep, that would be me.” It’s kind of empowering, actually.
Does what you overhear ever exasperate you?
I always think it’s funny. I came to Paris from Brittany precisely to hear this kind of stuff. Putting it on Twitter was simple — not new, just fun to do. There are some things you just can’t capture on film, but when you read it, you realize it’s hysterical. It’s just fun and lighthearted.
What would you never hear at Le Bon Marché?
I think you hear everything; it’s a hub of Parisian lifestyle. There’s the lady who answers her phone with: “Hello? I can’t talk now. I’m at the Bon Marché so I’ll just say yes to whatever you ask,” or another who says: “No, I can’t try it on. I’m on the phone bidding at auction.” The one who wanted Champagne for a selfie was an Asian shopper. Another woman refused to leave at closing time because she needed a scarf before flying to Moscow that evening. There are people from all over, especially during fashion week. Plus, it’s Paris: We have imagination!
Do you think fashion people hold back around you now?
Maybe, but not always the ones I’d expect. You’d think marketing people would be more guarded, but they’re not. I don’t feel I’ve ever betrayed anyone, though. I try to stay funny and celebrate the frivolity and fun of fashion.