LONDON — The low point came one summer when Henry Lewis was working at a burger joint, Henry Shields at a pub and Jonathan Sayer at a call center.
They had been friends since acting school — so close, and so broke, that they were still living together several years later — but the improv comedy they had been perfecting just wasn’t drawing big enough crowds.
So at 2 a.m. one night after work they decided to try something different. Within a few weeks, they had banged out the script for a spare-no-sight-gag farce that has become an improbable long-running West End hit, spawning productions in Budapest, Paris, Rome, Tokyo, Istanbul and now a transfer to Broadway, where it is backed in part by J. J. Abrams (the director of “Star Wars: The Force Awakens”), who is enthusiastically promoting the show.
The story behind “The Play That Goes Wrong,” which is now in previews at the Lyceum Theater and is scheduled to open on April 2, is the story of college chums, each now just 28, who bonded over a shared fondness for the TV series “Frasier” but embraced a decidedly more old-fashioned approach to comedy.
The play is a spoof of the theatricalized murder mystery. (Think “The Mousetrap” or any other dusty whodunit.) A talented-only-in-their-own-imaginations octet of actors gathers to stage the drama, and then, as the title suggests, everything goes horribly, but laughably, awry.
In this Broadway-bound British play, anything can go wrong, and often does. It is a farce that knocks down more than its own fourth wall.
Mr. Lewis, Mr. Shields and Mr. Sayer wrote the show and starred in it in London and on a British tour, alongside a cast that has largely been with them from the beginning, and has reunited to reprise the same roles in New York. They plan to stay for six months; if the production, which cost $4 million to capitalize, is a hit, they expect it will be recast locally.
Their initial passion was long-form improv, which they honed at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art (Lamda). An early effort, in 2009, was “Lights! Camera! Improvise!,” in which the audience would suggest a film genre, a title and a location, and they would create a story. They performed constantly, at venues with names like Hen & Chickens, and learned to cultivate the art of humiliating themselves to make others laugh. “We’ve lost all sense of shame,” Mr. Shields said.
They see themselves as actors, who seek laughs through storytelling and characters, rather than as comedians working with jokes. They aim big — big props, big gags, big falls — and dangerous. Improv taught them that audiences like wondering whether a performer might bomb: “There’s a level of danger and risk that heightens the experience,” Mr. Shields said. And there is a parallel thrill at wondering if a character in “The Play That Goes Wrong,” their first scripted play, might get hurt. “A sense of jeopardy massively helps,” Mr. Sayer said.
Given the number of pratfalls — bodies are dropped, scenery collapses — audiences often ask if actors ever get injured doing the show. “People are obsessed with that,” Mr. Sayer said. It turns out the answer is yes. Dave Hearn once dislocated his shoulder; Nancy Zamit broke her foot; Mr. Sayer has had several concussions; and most recently, midway through a Broadway preview, Mr. Shields hurt his neck and was replaced by an understudy.
The cast has a safe word (“cabbage”) to use when the show needs to be stopped, because so many characters yell “stop the show!” that those words have lost their meaning. Mr. Shields frets that if the set were really to catch fire, audiences would stay in their seats, laughing; he tells the story of a magician who died when his audience thought an onstage inferno was part of the act.
The show that became “The Play That Goes Wrong” was first performed in 2012 at the Old Red Lion Theater, which is one of those classic London institutions: a pub theater. In this case, the theater is above a bar that claims to have been founded in 1415, and to be the site where Thomas Paine wrote part of “Rights of Man” in 1791. London has a thriving fringe theater scene in such small and dumpy, but affordable, spaces.
The space hasn’t changed all that much since the trio and several other college friends rented it for a few weeks over that Christmas season. They could afford only the 9:30 p.m. slot, and because the theater was used by multiple shows each night, they had to rebuild their set in 20 minutes before every performance. Nothing could be bolted to the floor, so actors would crouch behind set pieces to hold them up.
The theater has just three rows of seats, and the first performance had an audience of 20, only four of whom paid for their tickets.
In a show with a lot of falling furniture, if they weren’t careful a patron’s toes could get nicked. And the tight quarters made for a brutal intimacy between actor and audience.
The show was so short (45 minutes) that the actors had to pad at the end by doing Q. and A.s in character — but it was a success, enough that they were invited back the following year, and then to the Edinburgh fringe festival. Along the way, Mark Bell, their physical theater professor at Lamda, joined them as the play’s director; they added a second act, and all the gags got bigger. “The fire in a coal scuttle was small, and now it’s a massive pyro,” Mr. Shields said.
A sequel, “Peter Pan Goes Wrong,” followed in the West End, and a third show, “The Comedy About a Bank Robbery,” is still running there. Now they fantasize about doing a musical.
They are giddy about making their Broadway debuts — Mr. Shields had never been to New York before arriving for rehearsals — but also unsure what to expect of the American response.
