All musicians have to adjust their performances to the various qualities and sizes of the halls where they play. Pianists are forced to make additional adjustments, since they play on instruments that are, however fine, hardly ever their own.
The fast-rising pianist Rafal Blechacz may have made some miscalculations in calibrating to the modest-size Kaufmann Concert Hall at the 92nd Street Y for a much anticipated recital on Sunday afternoon. The 900-seat hall, though invitingly intimate, has quite bright acoustics. And during the feisty passages of the pieces he played, Mr. Blechacz (pronounced BLEH-hatch) tended to go for steely-sounding climaxes and clangorous fortissimo chords. Even in Bach’s Four Duets he would sometimes thump out a sturdy bass line or accent.
I don’t mean to overstate this sole drawback in his beguiling, lucid and brilliant playing. His insightful and technically formidable accounts of works by Bach, Beethoven and Chopin made clear why, at 31, Mr. Blechacz is one of the major artists of his generation. And there was something charming about watching this slender young man as he dropped his arms into bursts of thick chords.
Mr. Blechacz came to international attention in 2014 for winning the Gilmore Artist Award, bestowed every four years on a pianist whose work has been evaluated in secret by a team of traveling judges. He is the most recent name on the impressive roster of seven Gilmore winners, including Kirill Gerstein, Piotr Anderszewski and Leif Ove Andsnes.
On his new Deutsche Grammophon recording, a Bach program, Mr. Blechacz includes the seldom-heard Four Duets. In a brief accompanying video, he cogently discusses the intricacies of these short pieces, written in just two voices, and he gave lively, beautifully delineated accounts on Sunday.
After an elegant performance of Beethoven’s episodic Rondo in G (Op. 51, No. 2), in which Mr. Blechacz relished this sly piece’s ventures into wildness, he turned to that composer’s monumental early Sonata in C major (Op. 2, No. 3). In this work, you hear a young composer determined to simultaneously honor and upend the Viennese Classical sonata heritage. Mr. Blechacz dispatched the brawny passages of octaves, chords and dizzying runs in the first movement, and then drew out the wistfulness of the Adagio, with its unquiet currents lurking below. Some audience members giggled out loud during the amusing moments of the impish scherzo and spiraling finale.
After intermission, Mr. Blechacz turned to Chopin, whose works have been central to his career. He conveyed the daring flights of imagination in the Fantaisie in F minor, yet revealed the subtle structure that holds the work together. His melting sound lifted the yearning melody of the sublime Nocturne in F sharp minor (Op. 48, No. 2). He ended with a fearless performance of the Sonata No. 2 in B flat minor (Op. 35, “Funeral March”). His approach to the first movement emphasized the unbridled turbulence of this dark, intense music. The flinty sound he summoned in the most fraught passages certainly conveyed its hurtling angst. But I wonder if he knew how harsh such a climactic passage sounded in this particular hall.