In New York City, the arrival of a major snowstorm offers a high-stakes challenge for state and city officials. This time, for once, there were few complaints.
The late-winter storm on Tuesday was less severe than expected, with only about seven inches of snow falling in Central Park. But officials had taken a cautious approach after learning painful lessons during recent storms.
Schools were closed. Aboveground subway service was shut down. Snow plows were plentiful. Many New Yorkers were stuck at home or had difficulty commuting, but there was no fiery criticism about stranded trains or unmanageable piles of snow as there had been in past storms.
Even Mayor Bill de Blasio and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo put aside their long-running feud and coordinated the storm response, which was generally met with good will. Still, some New Yorkers wondered if the city had become less tough in the face of storms and had lowered the bar for closing schools and suspending subway service.
On Monday, Mr. Cuomo announced that the Metropolitan Transportation Authority would offer only partial subway service on Tuesday along underground routes. Mr. de Blasio and transit advocates supported the move, though it left many working-class residents who live outside Manhattan struggling to get to work.
“I think the M.T.A. did a great job given what was expected,” said Veronica Vanterpool, an authority board member and executive director of the Tri-State Transportation Campaign, an advocacy group. Forecasts on Monday had predicted as much as two feet of snow in the city.
Although many New Yorkers believe the mayor runs the subway, the transportation authority is controlled by the governor, leaving the fate of a crucial service in the hands of a state-run agency. The mayor said Mr. Cuomo’s office had informed him of the decision before making an announcement — unlike in 2015, when Mr. de Blasio learned that the subways were closing around the same time the public did.
For Mr. de Blasio, the storm offered a leadership test during an election year, and he took an aggressive approach both to snow removal and in the decision to close schools. And since the storm came late during a mild the winter, the city had more than enough money for snow removal — and available snow days at school. The cost of clearing city streets of snow and ice is about $1.8 million per vertical inch, according to the city comptroller’s office.
On Tuesday, Mr. de Blasio defended the decision to close schools, saying it was necessary for safety reasons and to keep people off the streets so that snow could be cleared.
Mr. de Blasio announced the decision at noon on Monday, the earliest in recent memory that the city had made the call to close schools for a snowstorm. Still, his record on closing school is similar to his predecessor’s. This was his fourth snow day so far. Former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg had three snow days in his third and final term.
But over the longer term, it appears that the frequency of snow days has drastically increased. In 2014, when Mr. de Blasio defended not closing schools on a day when many parents kept their children home, he told reporters that, at that point, New York City’s schools had been closed for snow only 11 times since 1978.
“That suggests a kind of consensus in this town that we can handle a lot,” he said.
As for the subways, it was only the second time the authority closed all aboveground service for a snowstorm. It is a new approach after the agency was criticized in 2015 for closing the entire subway system for a snowstorm for the first time in its 110-year history. But officials have also sought to avoid what happened during a 2010 storm, when trains were stranded in the snow.
On Tuesday, the authority received criticism from some Metro-North commuters who were stuck in the city after the railroad suspended service at noon. Mr. Cuomo said the closure was necessary because the storm was stronger north of the city where the railroad runs.
Jim Cameron, the founder of Commuter Action Group, an advocacy group for Metro-North riders, said the agency should have done a better job of telling riders what to expect on Tuesday.
