That’s nice and probably true. But there’s another, less high-flown reality: many writers become journalists because they can’t get anything done without a deadline. They need an editor breathing down their neck, demanding a story at a certain time, or else.
I myself am an editor who sometimes has to breathe down a reporter’s neck for a story. But once in a while, I am a reporter who writes articles herself. And then I understand all too well how hard it is to finish anything. There’s always more I could do. If only I had more time!
She obliged, wagging her finger at me and insisting I finish it by Monday.
And guess what? I did.
Several years ago, I wrote a column about deadlines. I noted that the only reason I finished it was because if hadn’t, I would have let down my colleagues and endangered my reputation. How, I wondered, could we bring that same sense of urgency to our personal creative projects — the ones that no one asks for but that are deeply important to us?
In a kind of meta-answer to that question, I wrote a book called “The Big Thing: How to Complete Your Creative Project Even if You’re a Lazy, Self-Doubting Procrastinator Like Me.” The book itself was my creative project.
A Big Thing is personally meaningful, has no firm deadline, is large and complex, and requires sustained concentration. It could be a book, a business, a charity, an artwork — or any number of creative efforts. What they have in common is that they are big and scary and carry a high rate of failure. If we don’t do them, we can comfort ourselves with the idea that if only we had put the effort into finishing them, they would have been brilliant and world-changing.
One way to help yourself finish a Big Thing is to create fake accountability. To counteract your fears and paralyzing perfectionism, it can be useful to find people to collude with in your push toward completion.
I had some measure of real accountability with my book because I had a book contract, but I still procrastinated on it. All too often I napped or played with my cat or read mysteries when I should have been working on it. Anything I put down on paper was nowhere near as fine as the vague idea in my mind. I preferred vague and perfect to specific and flawed.
So one day I put an ad in the Craigslist gigs section saying that I would pay someone $200 to call me every day for a week, once at 7 a.m. to make sure I started working on my book, and again at 9 a.m. to make sure I had kept at it.
I got about 80 responses to my ad, and I ended up hiring a young dairy farmer named Lisa Tanner in Washington State. She called me every day at 4 a.m. her time, just as she was preparing to milk her cows, Maggie and Annie. And she called me again at 6 a.m. her time, 9 mine, as she was getting ready to wake her seven children, ages seven months to 13 years old.
I got an extraordinary amount of work done that week.
It’s true I could have neglected to do the work or (perish the thought) lied to the dairy farmer about my progress. But I found that I simply couldn’t let Lisa down. And I didn’t want to waste my money, either.
As I finish this column that I was unwilling to write, I am grateful I have the energy of the newsroom pushing me to get things done. And I continue to search for ways to bring that same urgency to my personal creative aspirations. I know it will be a never-ending struggle. For me, the newsroom is a great motivator because I hate letting other people down. But let myself down? I do it all the time.