Mike Hopkins, a dutiful steward on the sidelines with Syracuse Coach Jim Boeheim for more than two decades and Boeheim’s designated successor, accepted the head-coaching job at the University of Washington on Sunday.
Several hours later, Syracuse responded by extending Boeheim’s contract beyond 2017-18, when he had said he would retire and end his tenure at 42 years. The flurry of activity — a day after the Orange were eliminated from the N.I.T. — was especially striking for a program that has generally epitomized consistency.
Hopkins, 47, had been appointed as the team’s coach in waiting, first in 2007 and then again, more formally, in June 2015.
But Hopkins’s sudden departure on Sunday threw that timetable into turmoil. Though Boeheim has reiterated his intention to retire after next season, the new contract extension calls for him to stay on indefinitely.
Syracuse Athletic Director John Wildhack had recently said in an ESPN Radio interview that the plan for the coaching transition remained in place.
Hopkins has flirted with leaving before. Always, though, he returned to Boeheim’s side. When Boeheim was suspended for nine games last season after N.C.A.A. violations, Hopkins assumed his role in the interim. He is considered one of the nation’s top recruiters, responsible for bringing in players like Carmelo Anthony, Gerry McNamara and Jonny Flynn.
In a statement released Sunday, Hopkins thanked Boeheim, who coached him as a collegian from 1989 to 1993. Hopkins had coached under Boeheim at Syracuse since 1995, and with the United States Olympic team in 2012 and 2016.
“The timing is right for me and my family to make this move,” Hopkins said.
Washington fired Coach Lorenzo Romar last week after 15 seasons. Romar, whose team was 9-22 this season, had recruited the third-best incoming class in the country, according to ESPN’s rankings, although that rating largely depended on a commitment from Michael Porter Jr., a top prospect who has indicated that he will reopen his recruitment.
Washington’s athletic director, Jennifer Cohen, said in a statement that Hopkins’s résumé and reputation made him stand out.
