LONDON — The American International Group said on Wednesday that it planned to open an insurance company in Luxembourg within two years to assure that it can serve European clients after Britain leaves the European Union.
London has been a European beachhead for many financial companies, particularly those from the United States, to serve clients in Europe.
But last June, Britons voted to leave the European Union, a decision that could force companies to move operations to a country in the bloc to continue to sell products to European clients.
Part of those negotiations would include whether financial companies would be granted so-called passporting rights to be able to continue to sell their products into Europe from Britain without having to open a new subsidiary.
A number of financial companies with their European headquarters in Britain are already examining the availability of office space as part of contingency planning, particularly if such passporting is not granted.
Dublin, Frankfurt and Paris are among the cities thought to be under consideration by several financial companies.
The British bank HSBC has already said it may move as may as 1,000 people to Paris depending on the outcome of the negotiations, and the Swiss banking giant UBS has indicated that it also could move jobs out of London.
On Wednesday, A.I.G. said it would open a new subsidiary insurance company in Luxembourg to “ensure continued smooth operation” of its business in Europe and Switzerland. It would have a separate insurance subsidiary to provide insurance in Britain.
A.I.G. currently has a single insurance company in Britain, with branches in Luxembourg and other parts of the European Union, as well as Switzerland.
The insurer said that it would continue to support its European business from Britain, which it considers a core market and is the home to its largest operation in Europe.
“This is a decisive move that ensures A.I.G. is positioned for whatever form the U.K.’s exit from the E.U. ultimately takes,” Anthony Baldwin, the chief executive of A.I.G. Europe, said in a news release.
The insurer said it expected to have the new structure in place in the first quarter of 2019, subject to approval by regulators.
A.I.G., which currently has three employees in Luxembourg, declined to say have many people might move as a result of the change.
