A man approached me in the Lexington Candy Shop, a luncheonette on the Upper East Side of Manhattan that has not changed much since it opened in 1925. This was the time we had set for an interview, but I took the man for just another middle-aged New York dad until I registered the melancholy blue-gray eyes and sweetly electric smile that won over a generation (mine) of young women.
In a corner booth, Andrew McCarthy, the 54-year-old actor, writer and television director known for his roles in 1980s movies like “Pretty in Pink” and “Less Than Zero,” made steady progress on a burger and fries as he discussed his latest project: a young-adult novel called “Just Fly Away” (Algonquin Young Readers). It’s about family secrets, and it’s written from the perspective of a 15-year-old girl.
Between bites Mr. McCarthy imagined the pushback he may have to endure for his choice of protagonist.
He recalled his high school years as a time when he felt uncomfortably “separate.” He had no real interests, he said, and not much luck with girls.
“I finally felt like, ‘There I am,’” he said.
Readers of his best-selling travel memoir, “The Longest Way Home,” know that by his 30s he had stopped drinking and rediscovered that feeling of “there I am” by going it alone to far-flung places. He kept a notebook and spent a year trying to persuade a travel magazine editor to give him a shot. He has since published dozens of travel essays and has won awards, including the 2010 Travel Journalist of the Year from the Society of American Travel Writers.
Before dedicating himself to his young adult book, Mr. McCarthy spent seven years working on a novel “about a married guy who had a one-night fling and had a child and spent 25 years keeping it a secret.” It was terrible, he said. Then, one day, while waiting for a plane to take off, he started writing from the point of view of his favorite character, the 15-year-old daughter.
His protagonist, Lucy Willows, lives in an unnamed New Jersey town based on Westfield, where Mr. McCarthy’s family lived until he was 15, when they moved to Bernardsville. Furious at her father after learning about her secret half brother, Lucy jumps on a train to New York City and ends up on a solo journey to Maine.
Mr. McCarthy said he had not read any of the recent, similarly realistic young adult novels by the likes of John Green and Rainbow Rowell, who have become publishing juggernauts. But he has embraced the idea of writing for a teenage audience. “I thought, if there’s truth in this, it would be a book for that extraordinary teenage moment in life, because everything is so important, it’s life and death, and you’re the only one who’s ever gone through it,” he said.
He tested a draft on a teenage neighbor, who told him Lucy’s voice sounded legitimate.
After lunch, we headed to Teavana, where he ordered a takeout darjeeling. “My wife is Irish,” he said. “I now drink tea all day.” While we sat on a bench in Central Park, at times saying nothing, I recalled his description of a teenage character in “Just Fly Away”: “a loner who likes to mingle.” It’s the vibe Mr. McCarthy gives off.
In addition to writing and directing for television, Mr. McCarthy has also become a somewhat reluctant stage dad. His daughter, Willow, played Matilda in the Broadway production of “Matilda the Musical,” which closed on Jan. 1.
Five auditions later, she won the part that she played for eight months.
In the meantime, his oldest son, Sam, has acted in a few TV shows. “It’s everything I said would never happen to my children, and now here I am,” Mr. McCarthy said.
He stared serenely into the distance.