Jerry Birbach, a Queens firebrand whose struggle to block a proposed low-income housing project in his Forest Hills neighborhood in 1972 augured a white middle-class backlash to the liberal urban agenda and helped propel Mario M. Cuomo’s political career, died on Monday in Boca Raton, Fla. He was 87.
The cause was complications of surgery, his grandson Jared S. Pinchasick said.
The planned housing project was a hulking experiment in racial integration that urban planners called scatter-site housing — in this case, three 24-story towers to be occupied mostly by black and Puerto Rican tenants in a largely white, Jewish neighborhood of private homes and garden apartments.
When construction began in 1971, the project galvanized Mr. Birbach and his neighbors and became a national flash point for white resistance in the wake of the civil rights movement and commitments to racial integration.
Mr. Birbach, a paunchy home renovator who lived four blocks from the proposed project’s site, managed the opposition as president of the Forest Hills Residents Association. Mr. Cuomo, a relatively obscure Queens lawyer at the time, was the mediator recruited by Mayor John V. Lindsay’s administration to broker a compromise.
During months of negotiations, some civic leaders preached racial harmony and sought a middle ground. But the project’s opponents resented having to bear the brunt of decisions dictated, as they saw it, by government liberals cloistered in Manhattan.
Mr. Birbach and his followers insisted that they were not racists; rather, they said, they feared that a sudden influx of hundreds of poor tenants would cause a crime wave in what they saw as a stable, middle-class sanctuary.
Mr. Birbach led angry protests (rocks and torches were thrown, but he disavowed sabotage to construction equipment), was arrested at City Hall, hinted at violence and threatened that if the project proceeded, he would lead a mass exodus — and even sell his own home to blacks.
In 1972, Mr. Birbach challenged State Senator Emanuel Gold, who represented Forest Hills, in a Democratic primary but lost. In a debate between the two, Mr. Birbach was “jowly, gruff, unprepared — but effective!” Mr. Cuomo wrote in his book “Forest Hills Diary: The Crisis of Low-Income Housing” (1974).
The New York City Housing Authority’s decision to build on a vacant patch at 62nd Drive and 108th Street in Forest Hills even reverberated in the 1976 presidential campaign.
Asked about the policy of placing low-income housing in middle-class communities, Jimmy Carter, the Democratic candidate, said he would not force racial integration that would disrupt the “ethnic purity” of a neighborhood. He was denounced for the phrase, which he said was misunderstood, and he apologized.
By the time he was enlisted by City Hall, Mr. Cuomo had already mediated a dispute between the city and residents of Corona, Queens, over construction of a school that would have displaced homeowners. At times, though, with divisions in each camp, it was unclear whom to negotiate with.
Mr. Birbach repeatedly demanded that the project be scaled down to a garden apartment complex for older residents. Ultimately, it was cut nearly in half, from the 840 apartments originally proposed to 432, with 40 percent of the units reserved for the elderly. The towers ended up being 12 stories tall.
The city also adjusted maximum income levels and transformed the project into New York’s first cooperative public low-income housing, in which residents were shareholders.
As a result, 15 years later, 65 percent of the residents were white (compared with 12 percent in all public housing in the city), and 3 percent were receiving public assistance (compared with 27 percent in public housing citywide).
In the mayoral race four years later, Mr. Cuomo lost to Edward I. Koch, who had aligned himself with the Forest Hills protesters.
Abraham Joseph Birbach was born on Aug. 5, 1929, in Manhattan to Samuel Birbach, a baker, and the former Esther Silber.
He grew up in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn and graduated from Eastern District High School. He attended City College, where he studied accounting, but had to leave before graduating to support his family after his father died.
He later renovated and rented out Manhattan brownstones for a living. After the Forest Hills dispute, he completed a graduate degree in urban studies at Queens College.
Besides Mr. Pinchasick, Mr. Birbach is survived by his wife, the former Sherrie Fox; a daughter, Lori Pinchasick; a son, Steven; six other grandchildren; and three great-grandchildren.
Mr. Birbach and his wife moved from Queens to Long Island in the 1980s and retired to Florida in 2006.
After a time, Mr. Birbach let bygones be bygones. In 1982, he voted for Mr. Cuomo for governor. He even called him later to ask him to recommend one of his grandchildren to law school. And 15 years after the compromise was struck, he was reflective about a fight that he still considered worth having embarked on.
“Forest Hills was the first time that anyone stood up for the middle class,” he told The New York Times in 1988.
On his 85th birthday, Mr. Birbach hired a bus and took the family on a “This Is Your Life” tour of his past: the site of the Lower East Side tenement, on Attorney Street, where his parents lived when he was born; Public School 50 in Williamsburg (which the comedy team the Ritz Brothers also attended); his brick house in Forest Hills; and the one in Holliswood.
The Forest Hills housing project was not on the itinerary.