DHAKA, Bangladesh — The police in Bangladesh said they foiled an apparent bombing attempt at a checkpoint of Bangladesh’s elite police force on Saturday, less than a day after an attempted suicide attack outside another police facility.
A young man, suspected to be involved in a militant group, was shot while crossing a Rapid Action Batallion checkpoint, and the police found two bombs in his bag, said Lieutenant Colonel Tuhin Mohammad Masud, a R.A.B. officer in eastern Dhaka.
The Islamic State extremist group said it was responsible for the botched suicide attack on Friday, which brought an apparent end to an extended lull in militant activities.
On Thursday, police made a bloody raid on a hide-out in Chittagong that they said was used by militants affiliated with a branch of Jamaat-ul-Mujahedeen. The branch is widely understood to be affiliated with the Islamic State.
Four suspected militants, including one woman, and a 6-month-old were killed in the raid, said Noor E Alam Mina, the superintendent of police for Chittagong district.
Officials said that security had been increased at international and domestic airports and that prisons in the country had been placed on alert.
An unknown assailant carrying a bomb entered the battalion’s compound, where a few troops were staying and some construction was going on, said Commander Mufti Mahmud Khan, a spokesman for the unit.
Two officials confronted the assailant and the bomb exploded, wounding both officials and killing the assailant, Mr. Khan said. The police suspect that the assailant “was a member of a militant organization” but are not certain which one, he said.
A bomb squad came to the spot to collect evidence, but the body of the assailant had been scattered over a large area, according to The Daily Star, an English-language daily newspaper.
After an attack on a restaurant last year, Bangladesh’s elite police forces conducted waves of arrests and killings of suspected militants, and there was an end to the small-scale attacks that had become commonplace in recent years.
But reports of attacks on members of religious minority groups have resumed in recent weeks, among them the killings of a Sufi spiritual leader and his daughter and a Bangladeshi Christian. Neither crime has been officially linked to extremists.