It took the young architect and designer Fabrizio Casiraghi two years to collect and create objects for one perfectly eclectic space.
When the architect and designer Fabrizio Casiraghi was in school, he studied urban planning. It turns out this comes in handy for projects that are worlds in and of themselves.
To date, most of the 30-year-old’s work has been commercial: the restaurant Cassio in Hong Kong, the Elizabeth Street Trudon boutique in New York and the Café de l’Esplanade in Paris, where deputies from the French parliament tend to linger on green velveteen chairs. But as striking as these interiors are, they reflect the brand’s taste as much as the designer’s. It wasn’t until two years ago that Casiraghi was given a tabula rasa to fabricate a private space entirely from his imagination.
Eventually, of course, he did have to consider those things, and Desselle — who normally lives in a stark white space in Paris — insisted that Casiraghi think hard. And so the designer set off on a two-year odyssey in search of the objects and the materials that would transform this apartment into something both surprising and familiar. Among his loot: hand-painted tiles from Sicily, white crystal sconces by the Venetian craftsman Barovier&Toso and an ashtray by Gabriella Crespi. What he couldn’t track down, he created himself, including an Italian steel bathroom mirror, scaled to fit the wall, a cane-covered grating for the apartment’s ancient radiators and panels of lacquered wood for the library.
Nowhere is that aesthetic admixture more apparent — or more fundamentally Venetian — than in the apartment’s main salon, where the Qing dynasty meets the Italian midcentury, the storied Novecento Italiano. An elaborate screen from 18th-century China frames a room whose defining feature is a languorous velvet sofa by Azucena, the Milanese design firm established in 1947 by the architects Ignazio Gardella and Luigi Caccia Dominioni. Azucena masterworks embody the cool modernism but quiet comfort of the Italian midcentury ideal: its optimism, utility and luxury. But in a time when, as Casiraghi puts it, “everybody loves midcentury,” the craftsmanship of this sofa runs the risk of getting lost in rooms entirely decorated in the popular, seemingly universal style. Hence the African masks, an electric blue painting by the postwar American artist Sam Francis — striking in a setting otherwise dominated by shades of beige and soft pink (“Without it,” Casiraghi says, “the room’s equilibrium is all off”) — and the Chinese screen, with its green accents, offering an aesthetic rarely seen in Venice.
