NAUCALPAN DE JUÁREZ, Mexico — The 90-minute drive down the Florida Turnpike from Palm Beach Gardens to Doral after the Honda Classic is gone, replaced this season by a three-hour charter flight to Mexico, where golfers will compete in this week’s World Golf Championships event.
The change in venues prompted the predictable laments stateside. But to wax rhapsodic about the good old days when golfers decamped to Florida for the month of March to gear up for the Masters is to turn a blind eye to the game’s evolution.
Since 1999, when the inaugural World Golf Championships event was held outside San Diego, the game has gone global. At that first match-play event, 39 of the 64 participants, or 61 percent of the field, were from the United States, and five of the top 10 golfers in the world rankings were Americans. This week, 29 of the 70 participants, or 41 percent of the stroke-play field, are from the United States, and four of the top 10 are Americans.
Four years before he became the 45th president of the United States, Donald J. Trump bought the Doral resort, a regular tour stop since the early 1960s, and spent $250 million on renovations to the grounds, only to lose the tournament when Cadillac’s sponsorship contract ran out last year.
Grupo Salinas, a Mexico City-based collection of companies primarily involved in retail, television and telecommunications, signed on as a sponsor in a seven-year deal and brought the tournament to Club de Golf Chapultepec.
The club is in an affluent neighborhood in Naucalpan, just outside Mexico City. At a venue with five-star accommodations and fine dining, the players are enjoying all the comforts of home — and apparently none of the residual discomfort from recent demonstrations elsewhere protesting Trump’s trade and immigration policies toward Mexico.
Aside from reporters and fans untrained in course etiquette, the main hardship confronting the players is the altitude; the city is more than 7,000 feet above sea level. As Phil Mickelson warmed up on the range Tuesday, the empty water bottles scattered around his bag increased in inverse proportion to the number of balls in his pile. Jordan Spieth said he played nine holes and felt as if he had played 18.
Then there is club selection, which can be tricky given how far the ball travels in the thin air. Rory McIlroy, returning to competition after being sidelined since mid-January with a rib injury, marveled that he was hitting shots with his 8-iron that traveled 210 yards.
“It’s so hard to get used to and trust in your mind that that club is going to hit the ball that far,” he said.
Golf has come a long way since Ben Crenshaw, Raymond Floyd and Lee Trevino competed in the Mexican Open in the 1970s and ’80s. Back then, the tournament was the rare PGA Tour event where English was not the primary language spoken.
The excitement created by being so close to the best players in the world was driven home Tuesday when wide-eyed children slipped under the gallery ropes to ask Mickelson for autographs while he was playing a practice round.
The top-ranked Mexican in the men’s rankings is Roberto Diaz at No. 472. The most famous Mexican golfer remains Lorena Ochoa, who retired from the L.P.G.A. Tour in 2010 when she was No. 1.
Seeing the best players in person made a big difference to Scott, who recalled attending a men’s professional event in Australia when he was 10.
“It was a real buzz for me,” Scott said.
In 1981, a boy whose father belonged to Club de Golf Chapultepec ran home from school to attend the Mexico Open and meet Trevino, the Mexican-American star. Thirty-six years later, John Sutcliffe can remember the exact spot where the introduction took place. Sutcliffe is covering the event this week for ESPN and ESPN Deportes, an assignment that has brought his life full circle.
Sutcliffe listed the names of Hispanic golfers from humble backgrounds who became stars in the sport: Chi Chi Rodríguez, Seve Ballesteros, Ángel Cabrera and Trevino. He said Mexico contained a wealth of potential rags-to-riches stories.
This week’s tournament probably will not introduce the game to the underprivileged. A few dozen children, all members of the inaugural First Tee of Mexico, attended a clinic conducted Tuesday by Spieth, but they were mostly the offspring of Club de Golf Chapultepec members.
One of the lucky recipients of a golf shoe signed by Spieth was a son of Inés Sainz, the Mexican sports reporter just back from interviewing the tennis star Rafael Nadal, who is competing at this week’s ATP Tour stop in Acapulco.
And, yes, Sutcliffe added, the fact that Trump National Doral’s loss is Mexico’s gain is an added bonus.
