DealBook|Morning Agenda: Who Will Lead A.I.G.?
Morning Agenda: Who Will Lead A.I.G.?
Who will lead American International Group?
With Peter D. Hancock’s resignation as the insurance company’s chief executive, announced on Thursday, there is no clear successor, but there are plenty of suggestions as to who could take the helm.
Including Mr. Hancock, A.I.G. has run through five chief executives since Maurice R. Greenberg was forced out in 2005, and whoever takes the job now will not be short of problems.
FT Lex notes, however, that even under new management, there would be no clear path to a breakup and, regardless, A.I.G. needs to improve its underwriting standards.
Mr. Hancock’s replacement will also need a better handle on risk and communication, says Reuters Breakingviews. The departing chief executive never brought under control the way A.I.G. priced risk, Tom Buerkle argues in the column.
There are other issues. Last month, A.I.G. reported a $3 billion loss in the fourth quarter — some of that came from older business, but $1.2 billion stemmed from larger-than-expected losses in 2016 and 2017, sending a warning to the board.
■ Peter Zaffino, the chief executive of the insurance broker and risk manager Marsh, which is part of Marsh & McLennan.
Airbnb is now valued at $30 billion, making it the second-most valuable private company in the United States (behind Uber).
The $1 billion it raised in a recent financing round indicates clear interest in its business, which is profitable and not burning through investor money to pay for its operations — unlike many other technology start-ups.
But will the company go public?
That is the question that has long been asked of Airbnb. It is being asked again after the debut of Snap, another company that was highly valued before its debut.
Brian Chesky, Airbnb’s chief executive, said in November that he was not opposed to an I.P.O., but that he had no immediate plans for one.
The company may have enough to deal with for the moment — it is expanding and moving into other businesses, like payments, property management and restaurant reservations.
It also faces opposition from the hotel industry which, in the United States, wants to make a concerted effort to rein in Airbnb and encourage enforcement actions against it. The American Hotel and Lodging Association has argued in a report that Airbnb’s growth is driven by commercial operators, rather than people offering home shares.
President Trump may have railed against hedge funds during his campaign, but they are not holding it against him.
When the Canadian fund Castle Ridge Asset Management (not to be confused with a Greenwich, Conn. firm with a similar name) makes its debut, it will do so at Mar-a-Lago, Mr. Trump’s members-only club in Florida.
And the organizer of the event is hoping that the president himself may even stop by.
“He is invited. Whether he comes or not is in the air,” David S. Goodboy, the founder of the Palm Beach Hedge Fund Association, said.
• The Labor Department will today release its jobs report for February. Analysts say they do not expect as many job gains as there were in January, but they still foresee a healthy increase. Only a huge surprise in the unemployment figures is likely to dissuade the Federal Reserve from raising interest rates.