Many people are familiar with you as a prime target of Gamergate, a harassment campaign against women in the video-game community.  It’s terrifying, right? The thing Gamergate taught me is that there’s nothing I can’t handle. What is someone going to do: Call me ugly? Threaten to kill me? I already deal with all of that on a daily basis. I realized I needed to do this in a business meeting after election night, where I couldn’t even concentrate because I was so upset. I knew I wouldn’t feel good about just making video games for the next four years.
So Trump’s victory reoriented you? It helped me come to the conclusion that Republicans are very, very effective at getting people to go out there and vote with their emotions. That’s a real failure of the Democratic Party. I look at my own party, and I see that we’ve taken this technocratic, academic, elitist liberal class philosophy as far as it can go, and we got our butts kicked — and I don’t know what else to do other than get involved myself.
Do you really think Democrats need to take pages from the Trump playbook? I would say we need to speak with our hearts more. The typical Democratic way of talking about, say, wealth inequality is to bring out Robert Reich, who will give a cute academic presentation. But at the core, wealth inequality is about people’s dreams for their families and their children. It’s friends my age who are dying to have a child and don’t know if they can afford to do that. The Democratic Party tends to have this hypereducated ruling-class mentality, and we need to realize that’s not making us connect with a lot of voters.
Considering the internet culture leading up to the election, some have said 2016 was a banner year for internet trolls. Do you think that’s accurate? Absolutely. I’ve rarely talked about Obama’s share of the blame for the rise of the alt-right and Gamergate. I had two separate calls with the White House, and they were telling me they had some ideas they were putting together to address Gamergate without needing to go through Congress, and nothing came of it. And what happened is a lot of people learned that there are no consequences to harassing women.  We don’t even have that.
Do you think Melania Trump’s cyberbullying campaign will do anything? No.
In college, you volunteered for Senator Trent Lott, a Republican. What has changed for you since then? I still quite enjoy watching Fox News because I think it makes me think through my arguments and make sure I’m on the right side. I can’t think of any Republican policy I would agree with off the top of my head, but I do think that a sense of personal agency about your choices is good, in general.
