Boston Symphony Orchestra musicians will get the chance to spend three to six months in Leipzig, Germany, performing with the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra and the Leipzig Opera, and playing Sunday cantatas at St. Thomas’s Church, where Bach was the cantor.
Their counterparts in the Gewandhaus Orchestra, meanwhile, will get the chance to spend time in New England playing with the Boston Symphony, and possibly with the Boston Pops or at Tanglewood, the orchestra’s summer home in the Berkshires.
The unusual musician exchange, which is to begin in 2018, is one of the new details, announced this week, of an unusual five-year collaboration between the two orchestras, which will both be led by Andris Nelsons beginning next season. The ensembles are trying to make a virtue of a necessity of the modern music world: the fact that maestros are rarely wedded to one orchestra. They are embracing their connections to promote the star conductor they will share.
The first signs of their partnership will be heard next year, when the orchestras will present “Freaky Friday”-like programs trading the repertoires they are most closely associated with. The Gewandhaus Orchestra will play composers with ties to Boston, including Stravinsky, Copland, Carter and Bernstein, while the Boston Symphony will perform works by Leipzig-based masters like Bach, Schumann and Mendelssohn.
In addition to the exchange program for orchestra musicians, there will be a small exchange between students in the ensembles’ academies: the Tanglewood Music Center for Boston, and the Mendelssohn-Orchesterakademie for Leipzig. The Bostonians will visit Leipzig in 2018, and the Leipzigers will return the favor the following year. The ensembles are co-commissioning new works by the German composer Jörg Widmann and the American Sean Shepherd, among others.
It is a somewhat unusual tack. Most orchestras try to overlook their maestros’ other gigs, as if they were infidelities. Boston and Leipzig are hammering out what amounts to a joint custody agreement.
But they do share a history. Symphony Hall in Boston was modeled on one of the Gewandhaus’s former halls. Boston’s first conductor, Georg Henschel, was trained in Leipzig; the conductor Arthur Nikisch led both orchestras; and Charles Munch, who led the Boston Symphony from 1949 to 1962, was concertmaster in Leipzig from 1926 to 1933.