Most people, including many who live on St. John, never get all the way out to the East End. It’s not that far, about a half-hour’s drive from Cruz Bay. But in a lot of ways, the East End is its own island. The last census found only 51 people who lived there, on a little finger of rock and beach close to British waters. The beaches are smaller here. The vegetation is drier, with more cactuses.
The most distinctive feature is the mangroves, which line some of the bays along the south shore. From the road, they look like ordinary brush growing alongside the water. But with a snorkel and a mask, you can see an underwater forest come to life. 
We parked our car on the side of the road just a few steps from the water and got in. Then we made our way slowly along the shoreline, stopping every couple of feet to look closely at what was stirring inside the intricate network of roots before us: lobster, fish of different sizes and colors, fringed coral that danced in the current. It was unlike any snorkeling experience I’d ever had.
After all that patient waiting and looking, we needed a drink. We had a couple of options. The first was the Shipwreck Landing in Coral Bay, a small development that doesn’t quite pass for a town. We had good fish tacos and beer for lunch there and managed to snag a table looking out onto the water. There was also a place I had heard about but never seen. And it was a little less conventional. Angel’s Rest isn’t always in the same spot, as it’s a 40-foot pontoon boat. But usually you can find it and its captain, Peter, anchored somewhere in the water near Hansen Bay.
We parked our car along the side of the road (there is only one road that far east) and walked through an opening in a fence onto the beach. We seemed to be crossing private property, but no one was there to hassle us. We swam up to Peter’s boat, climbed aboard and ordered. He was out of beer that day. Tequila, vodka or rum punch, or shots of Fireball were all that was on the menu. Brendan apologized to Peter as he handed him a soggy 20-dollar bill. “If you hand me dry money, you’re getting back wet change anyway,” Peter said. I forked over more of that wet change for a second round, and Brendan dove in the water after a sea turtle.
I was still taking it slow.
Caneel Bay, on North Shore Road in Cruz Bay. Expect to pay at least $650 for an ocean-view room. Rooms not overlooking the water are cheaper but not ideal; caneelbay.com.
Rhumb Lines, in Cruz Bay. Entrees, $23 to $37; rhumblinesstjohn.com.
The Longboard, in Cruz Bay. Small plates, sushi, $15 and up; thelongboardstjohn.com.
La Tapa, in Cruz Bay. Entrees, $36 and up; latapastjohn.com.
Little Olive food truck, near the tennis courts in Cruz Bay. Sandwiches, gyros, salads, $8 to $12.
Angel’s Rest, floating in Hansen Bay, East End. Drinks, shots, $5.