WASHINGTON — In a city that seems to be perpetually undergoing cultural and political transformation, there are certain parts of life that stay constant: paralysis on Capitol Hill. The occasional appearance of a butter-stick-size panda cub. The predictably unpredictable Washington Metro.
And now there are the steady chants of people who protest.
Only weeks into the administration of President Trump, many residents of this heavily Democratic area who once attended the occasional protest have adopted resistance to the Trump administration as a lifestyle. They go to weekend marches, organize with friends after work or get together to send batches of postcards to the White House.
“Protesting is the new brunch” sounds like an inscription on a T-shirt — and, thanks to the internet, it is. But it’s also a phrase traded among friends at bars, at work or on the walk home from yet another demonstration. “See you next weekend,” people say.
Another sign of an uptick is the crowd at All Souls Unitarian, a Washington church where social justice and worship have long gone hand in hand. Each Sunday service has attracted about 200 more people than before the election, said the Rev. Dr. Robert M. Hardies, the church’s senior minister. The 2,400 people who attended the first service after the Jan. 21 Women’s March on Washington set a record.
There are now so many weekend demonstrations to choose from that people who want to participate are running out of weekend hours. So they are figuring out how to squeeze in a protest during the workday. During the recent A Day Without a Woman protest, Wajiha Rais, a 25-year-old lawyer, used her lunch hour to attend. She grabbed a sign that said “Keep your tiny, tiny, tiny hands off my uterus” and stood in Lafayette Square outside the White House with women who had taken the day off.
Another demonstration last week against a revised version of Mr. Trump’s travel ban was held at 8 a.m. outside the Customs and Border Protection headquarters and dispersed within the hour.
Leah Muskin-Pierret, 22, who described her work as advocacy on Middle East policy, often attends protests. She said she had noticed newcomers who were willing to attend protests, even if the gatherings ended quickly.
Protesting has always been a way for people to find community and celebrate their cause, according to Rachel L. Einwohner, a professor at Purdue University who studies the sociology of protests. Ms. Einwohner said the recent popularization of the term “the resistance” by liberals might have had a lot to do with how easily it blended with modern pop culture. The prevalence of Princess Leia signs at the Women’s March is one example, she said.
The concept of resistance is also a more accessible idea for people who cannot attend a big march or travel to a demonstration.
These days, she said, resistance can be as simple as deleting the Uber app.
Others are finding small ways to stay active by mixing social activism with social activities. Megan McPeak Davis, a school psychologist, said she was motivated to start organizing her network of friends and acquaintances hours after she returned home from the Women’s March in Washington. She created a private Facebook group — Nasty Women Make Plans — and, following the guidance set by organizers of the march, invited a group of friends over to meet and figure out what to do next. For her, it was a more serious version of a book club.
It’s also not uncommon for friendship and the occasional romance to blossom. Brendan Orsinger, a 35-year-old activist, said that he met a love interest last year after they had both been booked and put in handcuffs for civil disobedience at the Capitol.
“We ended up dating,” he said.
The love did not last. Mr. Orsinger met someone else — at another protest.
One obstacle is protest fatigue. Ms. Muskin-Pierret, who attended the early-morning protest, called the problem of weariness “so real,” and Ms. Jones, the college professor, said “self care” was becoming an important element of her routine.
