‘DAVID MAMET’S THE NEW DAVID MAMET PLAY’ at the Highline Ballroom (March 7, 8 p.m.). The veteran improvisers Hunter Nelson and Terry Withers take on the dramatic stylings of David Mamet in this show, which they cheekily claim is a workshop of that playwright’s latest, ever-evolving script. Performing at a pace to match the brisk tempo of Mamet classics like “Glengarry Glen Ross” and “Speed-the-Plow,” Mr. Nelson and Mr. Withers invite audience members to join them onstage and fill out the show’s cast.
A NIGHT OF COMEDY TO BENEFIT PLANNED PARENTHOOD at the Stand (March 7, 8 p.m.). This evening of stand-up at one of the city’s best comedy clubs features the comic and actress Janeane Garofalo, who recently released a new stand-up special on the streaming site Seeso; Big Jay Oakerson and Dan Soder, hosts of the SiriusXM show “The Bonfire”; Bonnie McFarlane and Rich Vos, hosts of the podcast “My Wife Hates Me”; and the stand-up Jessica Kirson. The show, a benefit for Planned Parenthood of New York City, will be preceded by a happy hour at 6 p.m. and include a prize raffle.
PREVIEW SCREENING OF ‘LOVE’ at the 92nd Street Y (March 6, 7:30 p.m.). Vanessa Bayer, a “Saturday Night Live” cast member, moderates a panel with the creative team behind “Love,” the Netflix romantic-comedy series about the intricacies of 21st-century dating, which will soon debut its second season. After a preview screening, Ms. Bayer will lead a discussion including Judd Apatow, a co-creator of the show; Paul Rust, a co-creator and co-star; and Gillian Jacobs, who stars as Mickey Dobbs.
‘SISTERS THREE’ at Magnet Theater (March 3, 7 p.m.). Elena Skopetos and Elana Fishbein play more than a dozen characters each in this joke-dense play about three adult sisters reluctantly convening for a family reunion, only to discover a new side to their family’s complicated history. Written by Ms. Fishbein; Ms. Skopetos; and the show’s director, Peter McNerney, the play — with its incredible pace — is matched by the fantastic performances of its two leads. Performances continue through March on Fridays at 7 p.m.
