KABUL, Afghanistan — A feud that began when one police commander in western Afghanistan was accused of killing the civilian son of another has set off days of clashes, leaving four police officers dead, Afghan officials said.
Fighting between the sides continued Monday in Maimana, the capital of Faryab Province, as officers loyal to each of the commanders fired heavy weapons at one another’s houses in and around the city, local officials said. Each faction was from a different unit of the same provincial police force and represented a rival political party.
It was another indication of strife in Afghanistan’s shaky coalition government, which combines ethnic-based factions that in some cases have never quite moved past the civil war they fought in the 1980s and 1990s.
The latest outbreak began on Saturday when the head of Faryab Province’s police antiterrorism department, Ahmad Shah Malang, killed the son of Nizam Qaisari, the police commander in Qaysar, a neighboring district, according to the governor. The son, Burhanuddin Qaisari, a second-year law student at Herat University, had come home to Maimana during school vacation.
The provincial governor, Sayed Anwar Sadat, said that Mr. Malang killed the student in a city park. When Mr. Qaisari came to retrieve his son’s body with a contingent of armed officers, a gunfight with Mr. Malang’s men broke out.
“When his family went to the park to take the body, illegal armed men loyal to Malang opened fire on them,” the governor said. He said eight city police officers were wounded when they tried to intervene.
Mr. Qaisari returned with reinforcements and attacked Mr. Malang’s home, the governor said. Four police officers were killed and six wounded in that battle, he said.
Mr. Malang, the commander accused of killing the student, is a member of the Jamiat-i-Islami party, aligned with the country’s chief executive, Abdullah Abdullah. The Faryab governor and the aggrieved father, Mr. Qaisari, belong to the Junbish-i-Milli party, followers of the first vice president, Abdul Rashid Dostum.
The enmity between those parties has an ethnic dimension, because Jamiat is largely a Tajik party, and Junbish is largely Uzbek.
“They are turning this into an ethnic fight,” said Governor Sadat, accusing the Jamiat party of bringing tanks and militia reinforcements from neighboring Balkh Province to support Mr. Malang.
A spokesman for the Junbish party headquarters in Kabul, Bashir Ahmad Tayanj, accused Jamiat of bringing the Taliban into the fight as an ally.
Reached by telephone in the midst of the fighting in Maimana, Mr. Qaisari was at turns angry and on the verge of sobs.
Messages for Mr. Malang seeking comment were not answered. Aides said he was busy with the fighting. But later, Governor Sadat’s spokesman, Ahmad Jawed Bedar, said that Mr. Malang had been taken into custody by the Afghan National Army and taken away by helicopter in the investigation of the killing of Burhanuddin Qaisari.
The governor said that senior Afghan military and police officials were trying to broker a cease-fire. But other officials said Maimana was under a state of emergency as fighting continued on Monday, preventing any meaningful mediation.
Karim Yuresh, a spokesman for the overarching Faryab provincial police force — to which both of the warring commanders belong — said the episode apparently began as a misunderstanding. Mr. Qaisari’s son had gone to the park for target practice, and Mr. Malang and his men responded to the sound of gunfire. The ensuing fight left Mr. Qaisari’s son dead, but the subsequent clashes also cost Mr. Malang two cousins, and both sides vowed to exact revenge, Mr. Yuresh said.
Vice President Dostum, the founder of the Junbish party, has his own problems with the government. He is under investigation by the attorney general in connection with the kidnapping, rape and torture of a political rival, Ahmad Ishchi, in November. Nine of his bodyguards, including the chief of his security detail, Gen. Abdul Sattar, have been charged in that case, although General Dostum has not.
The bodyguards refused to submit to arrest, and the Kabul police surrounded General Dostum’s compound in Kabul in February in an armed standoff that lasted several days. Government officials ultimately agreed to a compromise in which the attorney general was allowed to interview seven of the nine bodyguards, but not General Sattar, in General Dostum’s compound, instead of taking them into custody.
Infighting has long embarrassed the Afghan government. Even in Kabul, armed conflict among government followers is common, as evidenced by several recent clashes there. The Taliban often use the infighting in their propaganda.