As a landlord, Vision Property Management has had a reputation of not responding promptly to tenant complaints about major problems with its rent-to-own homes. Vision, a national company, has also been accused of not being responsive to concerns raised by local property code officials.
So it may not be surprising that the company, based in Columbia, S.C., has kept a congressman waiting as well.
Interest in firms like Vision that are engaged in some variation of seller-financing has been growing among lawmakers and regulators. In January, Representative Elijah E. Cummings, Democrat of Maryland and the ranking member on the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, sent a letter asking the chief executive of Vision Property Management to respond to reports by The New York Times and other news organizations that documented the “financial and physical harms” caused by its business practices.
But nearly two months later, neither Vision nor its chief executive, Alex Szkaradek, has responded to the three-page letter, according to a person who was briefed on the matter but was not authorized to speak publicly because the matter is still pending. This person said a representative for Vision had indicated that it intended to comply with the document request by week’s end.
Vision is being represented by lawyers from Buckley Sandler in Washington, including a former Maryland attorney general, Douglas F. Gansler. Valerie L. Hletko, a partner at the firm, said in an email that Vision was cooperating with Mr. Cummings’s inquiry.
In Maryland, a state legislator introduced a measure to better regulate rent-to-own landlords to make sure they are renting habitable homes and not trying to pass off major repairs onto their tenants.
Legislators and regulators are examining whether seller-financing firms are taking advantage of lower-income residents by selling them homes in need of major renovation and repairs in deals lacking basic consumer protections.
Vision, which owns more than 6,000 homes in two dozen states, is one of the largest operators of rent-to-own homes in the nation. In December, The Times detailed how two children living in a Vision home in Baltimore had tested positive for elevated levels of lead in their blood.
Lead poisoning is a problem in older, poorly maintained homes that were built when lead paint was widely used.
In recent years, seller-financed home sales have grown in popularity in poorer neighborhoods as lower-income Americans have had more difficulty obtaining mortgages from banks and as private investment firms have stepped in to offer alternative financing. New firms peddling such homes continue to crop up on online.
Companies like Vision have collectively bought tens of thousands of formerly foreclosed homes, many sold cheaply by Fannie Mae, one of the two giant government-backed mortgage finance firms.
Like many companies in this corner of the housing market, Vision markets its homes on a website, with most of the transactions taking place either over the phone or by email. Sometimes the photos of the properties are several years old and do not reflect what they actually look like.
Mr. Cummings, who also sent a letter to Fannie Mae inquiring about its home sales, is not the only elected official from Maryland to target the rent-to-own business.
In February, a Maryland state delegate introduced a bill to require rent-to-own landlords to provide the Maryland attorney general’s office with copies of all leases signed in the state and post a performance bond to guarantee that tenants do not incur losses making repairs on a home while it is being rented.
The delegate, Samuel I. Rosenberg, a Democrat from Baltimore, said the measure was intended to prevent rent-to-own landlords from “selling damaged goods” and “taking advantage of people who have limited resources.” Mr. Rosenberg said he introduced the measure after reading about Vision’s business practices in Maryland in The Times.
Kendra Harrell, a single mother with two young children who moved into a Vision home in Baltimore in 2014, had testified at a Feb. 28 hearing on the bill that Vision had been unwilling to help her make repairs to a badly damaged roof. She said it would cost $13,000 to repair the roof — money she does not have.
Last week, that committee voted down the measure, even though the Maryland attorney general’s office had submitted a letter in support of the proposal. Some legislators suggested that problems with landlords of rent-to-own homes could be addressed with stepped-up enforcement by local officials. Mr. Rosenberg said he intended to revise the bill and introduce it in the next legislative session.
Still, Vision is drawing scrutiny elsewhere. The Wisconsin attorney general, for instance, opened an investigation into Vision after several investigative news stories by WFRV-TV in Green Bay, and complaints have been registered with the attorney general’s office in Pennsylvania.
On the federal level, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau opened an investigation last year into Harbour Portfolio Advisors of Dallas, one of the largest sellers of homes through contracts for deed, a high-interest, long-term installment contract. The agency opened its investigation several months after The Times wrote about Harbour Portfolio and a revival in contracts for deeds and other seller-financed home sales in the aftermath of the financial crisis.
In a contract for deed, the legal title to a home does not pass to the buyer until the final payment is made. The buyer is typically required to make all repairs, pay taxes and bring homes, which are often run-down, into compliance with local building codes. In many respects, contracts for deed and rent-to-own deals are similar.
Vision continues to buy homes. Property records show the company bought several hundred homes last year alone — and renters continue to cycle into and out of its properties.