A stolen Etruscan vessel will be returned to Italy thanks in part to the efforts of a hunter of looted antiquities.
Last month, Christos Tsirogiannis, a Greek-born researcher who has spent more than a decade poring over auction and antiquities catalogs trying to identify stolen Greek and Roman artifacts, spotted an Etruscan amphora for sale at a Midtown Manhattan gallery.
Mr. Tsirogiannis, of the Scottish Center for Crime and Justice Research in Glasgow, combed through an archive of 13,000 photos and documents seized in 2002 from an Italian antiquities dealer, Gianfranco Becchina, who was convicted in 2011 of trafficking in looted objects. He spotted several photos of the very same vase.
As he has done several times in recent years, Mr. Tsirogiannis contacted the Manhattan district attorney’s office, which seized the dual-handled vessel, featuring a nude satyr and draped youth, from the Royal-Athena Galleries. It dates from 470 B.C. and is valued at $250,000.
The item was forfeited willingly, officials said, and on Thursday it was formally returned to the Italian consul general in New York, Francesco Genuardi, who said it would be displayed at the consulate before being housed permanently at the Polo Museale del Lazio in Italy.
“When looters overrun historic sites, mine sacred spaces for prized relics, and peddle stolen property for top dollar, they do so with the implicit endorsement of all those who knowingly trade in stolen antiquities,” the district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., said during a ceremony.
On Feb. 10, Mr. Vance’s office said, it returned an ancient marble sarcophagus fragment dating to 200 A.D., and depicting a battle between Greek and Trojan warriors, that was stolen from Greece in 1988. That item was also seized from the Royal-Athena Galleries, based on information provided by Mr. Tsirogiannis.
Since 2014, Mr. Vance’s office says it has repatriated five coins dating to 515 B.C. to Greece; a second-century Buddhist sculpture valued at more than $1 million to Pakistan; and two bronze statues and four carved artifacts dating to the 10th and 11th centuries A.D., valued at several millions of dollars, to India.