LONDON — Wading into an escalating diplomatic feud, the European Union warned Turkey on Monday that a constitutional amendment to drastically strengthen the president’s powers might harm the country’s longstanding bid to eventually join the bloc.
European Union officials also urged Turkey to avoid inflammatory rhetoric like the recent declarations by President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who said that Germany and the Netherlands had demonstrated Nazi-like behavior in blocking Turkish officials from campaigning in those countries.
Membership talks with Turkey have been moribund, but the prospect of Turkey’s eventually joining the European Union has also long been dangled as an enticement to closer ties.
The warning, delivered in a statement by two officials of the European Commission, the European Union’s executive arm, was the bloc’s strongest collective response yet to a sustained verbal assault from Turkey.
The comments have infuriated officials in Germany and the Netherlands, where Turkish migrants and their families make up a sizable minority.
Also on Monday, the Venice Commission, which advises European leaders and studies democracy under the rule of law, issued a report that said the referendum risked giving an excessive concentration of power to the presidency, harming checks and balances and judicial independence.
The report also expressed concern that the change would take place during a state of emergency that was declared after a failed coup attempt against Mr. Erdogan in July.
On March 5, Mr. Erdogan accused Germany of engaging in Nazi-like behavior after the government of Chancellor Angela Merkel, citing security concerns, canceled rallies at which Turkish government ministers had planned to urge Turkish voters living in Germany to vote yes in the April 16 referendum.
The remarks infuriated officials in Germany, where awareness of the crimes of the Nazi state is enshrined in school curriculums and public commemorations.
On Sunday, Mr. Erdogan said that “Nazi remnants” were in the Dutch government, after it refused to allow two of his ministers to hold rallies in the Netherlands.
His inflammatory comments came at an acute time: Voters go to the polls in the Netherlands on Wednesday to elect a new Parliament, and the Freedom Party led by the far-right, anti-immigration politician Geert Wilders is expected to make a strong showing, possibly coming in first place.
“This rejection also fully applies, of course, to friendly countries such as the Netherlands,” she said, adding that “these comparisons are completely misleading” and “trivialize the sufferings” of the victims of Nazism.
Nazi Germany occupied the Netherlands from 1940 until the end of War II in 1945.
At a news conference in Rotterdam, the Netherlands’ prime minister, Mark Rutte, said he did not think that Turkey was trying to interfere in his country’s elections, but he added that his government would not be intimidated by bluster.
“We tried to de-escalate the situation,” Mr. Rutte said, but Mr. Cavusoglu complicated matters by citing the Dutch elections as the reason he was denied permission to fly to Rotterdam.
Mr. Rutte said he was grateful for expressions of sympathy from Ms. Merkel, from European Union officials and from the French foreign minister, Jean-Marc Ayrault, among others.
Ankara, nonetheless, escalated its rhetoric on Monday. Turkish officials said the Netherlands’ ambassador to Turkey, who is out of the country, should not return. They also threatened to revisit an accord with Europe that has eased the passage of migrants to the continent.
Numan Kurtulmus, a deputy prime minister, predicted that the Netherlands would have to apologize to Turkey for blocking Mr. Cavusoglu from flying to the country, and for expelling the family affairs minister, Fatma Betul Sayan Kaya, after she had entered by land from Germany.
“You will see that, in the end, they will come to the point where they will apologize,” Mr. Kurtulmus said, without elaborating, according to the Turkish state-run Anadolu News Agency.
The Turkish Foreign Ministry also said it had summoned the Netherlands’ top diplomat in Ankara, the capital, as a formal protest against the treatment of the family affairs minister and what it called a “disproportionate” use of force against protesters at a rally in Rotterdam that ended on Saturday with several arrests after clashes with the police.