Baseball|Astros Are Still Waiting to Win a World Series Game. That May End.
Astros Are Still Waiting to Win a World Series Game. That May End.
The Houston Astros hired Jeff Luhnow to run their baseball operations after the 2011 season, the same winter the Chicago Cubs hired Theo Epstein to run theirs. Both men had earned championship rings already — Luhnow for growing the St. Louis Cardinals’ farm system, Epstein for building the Boston Red Sox. Then Epstein won another title last fall.
The Astros, who have never won a World Series game in their 55 seasons, are still waiting. But if our forecast holds true for this season — and when has a writer ever made a bad prediction? — they will have a chance to do so this October against the Cubs.
Houston’s overloaded offense has a Cubs-like feel to it, with a mix of young stars in their prime and veterans who give matchup advantages to Manager A. J. Hinch. It is an ideal setup to keep everyone fresh and engaged while exploiting any possible weakness in an opponent.
“A. J.’s going to have a lot of ability to look at who we’re facing and really craft a unique lineup for that starting pitcher to give us a chance to win,” Luhnow said.
Now Hinch has plenty of choices. Around the homegrown core of Jose Altuve, Carlos Correa, George Springer and Alex Bregman, the Astros added Nori Aoki, Carlos Beltran, Brian McCann and Josh Reddick over the winter, plus the Cuban star Yulieski Gurriel last summer. Evan Gattis has power, Jake Marisnick has speed, Marwin Gonzalez has versatility. How will the pieces all fit?
Hinch has it all, it seems, including a deep bullpen — all, that is, except certainty in the rotation. Shoulder trouble spoiled Dallas Keuchel’s follow-up to his 2015 American League Cy Young Award season. Lance McCullers has the stuff to be an ace, but an elbow strain held him under 90 innings last year. Charlie Morton looked terrific this spring, but has never been durable.
That was a reference to fruitless off-season trade talks for a top starter. But just like the Cubs in 2016, the Astros have a deep well of prospects to address whatever issues arise in the regular season. Luhnow has adamantly refused to deal Bregman, but will still have the inventory for the pivotal summer deal that makes his team the A.L. front-runner.
Luhnow’s Seattle counterpart, Jerry Dipoto, makes more trades than any other general manager. The activity — around a foundation of Robinson Cano, Nelson Cruz, Felix Hernandez and Kyle Seager — should lead to the end of a 15-season playoff drought, the longest active streak in the majors.
The Mariners added the National League hits leader, Jean Segura, to play shortstop, but will bet on Jarrod Dyson and Mitch Haniger — untested as starters — to flank Leonys Martin in the corner outfield positions. The names lack star power, but address a critical need.
Improved speed and defense should help the pitching staff, where the newcomer Drew Smyly is expected to make a major impact. Seattle is also counting on a better version of Hernandez after a winter workout program designed to strengthen his lower half.
For now, anyway, the Astros and the Mariners are both chasing the Texas Rangers, who won the West the last two seasons. The hard-hitting Rangers had the A.L.’s best record last season, at 95-67, but needed help at the back of their rotation. Signing Andrew Cashner and Tyson Ross — former Padres who rarely stay healthy — did not do much to address it.
The Angels improved their defense and could be a sneaky contender. But with a perilously thin rotation, they still seem more likely to squander another prime season of Mike Trout. Good thing Trout is still, incredibly, only 25 years old and signed through 2020. Here are more amazing facts: The Oakland Athletics have just one homegrown everyday player (designated hitter Ryon Healy) and no homegrown starting pitchers until the injured Sonny Gray returns.
Oakland’s center fielder, Rajai Davis, ended last season as a near hero for the Cleveland Indians, tying Game 7 of the World Series with a homer in the eighth inning and driving in a run in a doomed, last-gasp rally in the 10th.
The Indians are back for another run after surprising the industry with a three-year, $60 million contract for Edwin Encarnacion, the former Toronto slugger. Encarnacion replaces Mike Napoli (now with Texas) and joins a strong offensive group of Francisco Lindor, Carlos Santana and Michael Brantley, who missed the postseason after shoulder surgery.
A rotator cuff injury to second baseman Jason Kipnis is worrisome, but the Indians have enough thump to support Corey Kluber and the Central Division’s best pitching staff, fortified by the returns of Carlos Carrasco and Danny Salazar and the bullpen tandem of Andrew Miller and Cody Allen.
The Detroit Tigers did almost nothing over the winter, sticking with a largely veteran roster that was eliminated from playoff contention on the final day of last season.
They’ll have a chance, because their older players — Miguel Cabrera, Justin Verlander, Ian Kinsler, Victor Martinez — are still excelling. But they need more dependability from the back of their rotation, a problem that also haunts the Kansas City Royals, who face even more urgency to win.
With much of their 2015 championship roster facing free agency, the Royals traded Dyson to Seattle and closer Wade Davis to the Cubs. They did re-sign starter Danny Duffy (five years, $65 million), but must sort out the futures of first baseman Eric Hosmer, third baseman Mike Moustakas, center fielder Lorenzo Cain and shortstop Alcides Escobar while also dealing with their grief over starter Yordano Ventura, who died in a car accident in January.
The rebuilding Minnesota Twins and Chicago White Sox round out the Central, with Chicago closely monitoring trade interest in three of its veterans with All-Star pedigrees: starter Jose Quintana, third baseman Todd Frazier and outfielder Melky Cabrera.
The White Sox’s reconstruction began in December with the trade of starter Chris Sale to the Red Sox, who have two other aces: Rick Porcello, who just won the A.L. Cy Young Award, and David Price, who is likely to miss at least a month with elbow inflammation. You may have heard that another David — Ortiz, the celebrated designated hitter — is now retired.
Besides the pitching upgrade, Dombrowski said, the team should benefit from a full season of Andrew Benintendi in left field and Pablo Sandoval at third base. Hanley Ramirez will move to Ortiz’s D.H. spot, and the Gold Glover Mitch Moreland will take Ramirez’s place at first base. With those changes and three returning everyday All-Stars — Mookie Betts, Xander Bogaerts and Jackie Bradley Jr. — Boston should take the East again.
The Toronto Blue Jays won a wild card last season and should do so again, though it may be too much to expect their rotation to be as sturdy as it was last year. Blue Jays starters led the majors in innings and the A.L. in earned run average (3.64), so a slight regression seems likely. The team will miss Encarnacion’s bat, but Kendrys Morales is a viable replacement.
The Yankees and the Baltimore Orioles are both managed by sticklers for detail who routinely squeeze more wins from their rosters than they should. Both teams have rickety rotations but bullpens that their managers know how to use, Buck Showalter’s playoff blunder (Zach Britton is still waiting to pitch) notwithstanding.
Give the third-place spot to Joe Girardi’s Yankees, who have the more reliable No. 1 starter (Masahiro Tanaka) and young sluggers like Gary Sanchez, Greg Bird and Aaron Judge to help spark a budding revival. The Orioles have the most wins in the A.L. since 2012 and are used to being underestimated — but strikeout-prone hitters, a crumbling rotation and an almost total lack of team speed will hurt.
The Tampa Bay Rays have an intriguing rotation but a deeply flawed offense that lost one of its best performers, second baseman Logan Forsythe, to the Dodgers in a January trade.
That pitcher is Jose De Leon, and it will be fun to track his development once he arrives to stay, with the screwballer Brent Honeywell possibly soon to follow. In the meantime, if the Rays falter, they could have another valuable trade chip in Alex Cobb, a potential free agent who is healthy after a long recovery from Tommy John surgery.