Henry Purcell’s “Dido and Aeneas” and Benjamin Britten’s “Curlew River” aren’t an obvious pair. They may both be short English music dramas centered on the suffering of a woman, but they are otherwise so different that putting them together begs some explanation. The link is Mark Morris.
When the Tanglewood Music Center asked Mr. Morris to direct the Britten in 2013, that led to the plan of coupling it with his dance company’s beloved 1989 production of the Purcell. Watching “Dido” on a double bill with his “Curlew River,” you can see why the idea makes sense, and why Mr. Morris is an ideal director for both. New Yorkers are lucky that this pairing has arrived at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
“Curlew River” is an odd bird. An Anglican parable based on a Japanese Noh play, it could be tediously precious, stilted, all the emotion in its story (a Madwoman searches for her son) suffocated under layers of stylization. Not, however, in Mr. Morris’s staging.
The singers and instrumentalists wear basic white clothing: no costumes, no masks. (Mr. Morris’s dancers do not participate.) That they enter in procession, singing plainchant, is enough to make them seem like monks. That they remove their zori sandals and go barefoot is enough to suggest Japaneseness. The principal stylization is plainness.
These performers aren’t dancers, but Mr. Morris has them move. The chorus even does an endearing little Japanese folk dance. Their gestures are communicative, making the clear diction of the sung words even clearer; returning later in the story, the same gestures deepen and connect.
The placement and rearrangement of bodies focuses the drama and heightens the character of the chorus, whose members grow from laughing at the Madwoman to pitying her. By standing and sitting, they become water lapping at the banks of the river. Leaning on one another and swaying, they show the crossing of a ferry.
More Japanese touches — origami birds, a paper parasol for the Madwoman — risk triteness but keep blossoming into beauty. And amid an excellent cast, the tenor Isaiah Bell as the Madwoman gives a performance of exquisite poignancy. The scooping of his voice, up and down, could provoke laughter, but Mr. Bell makes you hear the grief in it, the text’s “wandering mind.” His hesitations pierce the heart, and his physical performance is no less delicate and affecting.
Mr. Morris has never shied away from spiritual subject matter. “Curlew” ends with “a sign of God’s grace,” the arrival of a spirit, and Mr. Morris’s stripped-down production allows you to hear it in Britten’s gorgeous score. Left alone, the Madwoman seems at once consoled and inconsolable.
“Dido” is rich with such ambiguities. Here, the singers and the instrumentalists are in the pit, and the characters are danced by Mr. Morris’s company. This division of duties allows for increased complexity. This work reveals how intricate simplicity can be, the gestural strategies of “Curlew” raised a few powers.
In 1989, Mr. Morris cast himself as Dido, the Queen of Carthage who falls in love with Aeneas and dies when he leaves to pursue his destiny, and also as the Sorceress, who plots Dido’s ruin. This doubling added layers of meaning, and the cross-gender casting, as in “Curlew” and its Noh precedents, supplied a distancing that refined and distilled emotion. Since then, Mr. Morris has sometimes split the roles, giving Dido to a woman and the Sorceress to a man. Now Laurel Lynch dances both parts (she’s the second woman to do so), both of which are sung by Stephanie Blythe.
Ms. Blythe is magnificent, but Ms. Lynch is timid, especially as the Sorceress, which is essentially a drag role. Because she is less lewd than the role calls for, and thus less funny, our complicity in Dido’s fate stings less. The production’s balancing of nobility and bawdiness, its profound conflation of tragedy and humor, sex and death, is off. Conducted by Mr. Morris with solid performances onstage and in the pit, “Dido” is still a masterpiece, but one from which something is missing. Not “God’s grace.” 