James Williams and Marc Wenderoff were married March 11 at the Parker, a hotel in Palm Springs, Calif. Barby K. Siegel, a friend of the couple who became a Universal Life minister for the event, officiated.
Mr. Williams (right), 63, retired as the general manager of the Los Angeles office of Edelman, a public relations firm based in New York. He is the vice chairman of the board for Point Foundation, the national scholarship fund for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender students. He is also a member of the board of CoachArt, a philanthropy based in Los Angeles that identifies coaches and mentors in the arts and athletics to meet with children affected by chronic illness. He graduated from the University of Wisconsin.
He is a son of the late Carolyn D. Williams and the late John T. Williams, who lived in Milwaukee. His mother, who had survived cancer, became the president of the Milwaukee chapter of the American Cancer Society, serving from 1964 to 1970. His father, who worked in Milwaukee, was a vice president with Continental Can, a can manufacturer based in Chicago.
Mr. Wenderoff, 59, is the managing partner for the Los Angeles law office of Quintairos, Prieto, Wood & Boyer. He graduated from George Washington University and received a law degree from California Western School of Law in San Diego.
He is a son of the late Joan Wenderoff and the late Morton Wenderoff, who lived in Boynton Beach, Fla. His father owned Royal Fresh Fish, a seafood wholesaler at the Fulton Fish Market in New York.
Mr. Williams and Mr. Wenderoff met in 1984 at the corner of Prince Street and West Broadway in SoHo. Mr. Williams had recently moved to New York from Chicago to pursue an acting career, while Mr. Wenderoff had recently returned to New York after completing his law degree in San Diego. Mr. Williams was in a store shopping for a shower curtain when he spotted Mr. Wenderoff, who was buying wine glasses.
“I couldn’t help but notice him,” Mr. Williams said.
They walked out of the store and were crossing a street when Mr. Williams saw a car speeding around the corner and heading toward Mr. Wenderoff, whom he promptly grabbed by the coat and pulled back to safety.
But such a day arrived in September 1994, when Mr. Wenderoff suffered a severe allergic reaction to medication, developed an infection and went into septic shock while at home.
He was hospitalized for two months, during which he slipped into a five-week coma.
By May 1995, Mr. Wenderoff was getting back on his feet. “I’m not a terribly spiritual person, but somehow I believe that all of the positive energy that James created saved my life,” he said.
In 1998, Mr. Williams’s job took him to Los Angeles, where Mr. Wenderoff, who hadn’t practiced law in well over a decade, passed the California bar exam.
