LAUSANNE, Switzerland — Inspired by the Russian doping scandal, a new nonprofit foundation is offering financial and legal assistance to whistle-blowers with information about cheating in international sports.
The foundation, Fair Sport, is working with the World Anti-Doping Agency, the global regulator of drugs in sports, and plans to help protect and advise people who have evidence that could inform the agency’s investigations as well as related government investigations into bribery, corruption or drug trafficking.
Whistle-blowers approved by Fair Sport’s board of directors — which includes a venture capitalist, a former United States federal prosecutor and a four-time Olympic speedskating gold medalist from Norway — will be eligible for assistance with a range of services, including housing, criminal defense, immigration applications and psychological counseling.
Drawing on private donations and commitments from international law firms to provide their services without fees, the organization is seeking to minimize the risk whistle-blowers face in speaking out, emphasizing confidentiality while empowering people who are jeopardizing their livelihoods and possibly incriminating themselves.
Fair Sport, registered as a nonprofit organization in both the United States and Britain, hopes to raise $3 million to $5 million this year, Mr. Koss said. A majority of the money will go toward whistle-blower expenses, he said, while some is expected to be used to vet candidates before the foundation agrees to help them.
Fair Sport is completing an agreement with WADA, the antidoping regulator, under which each may refer witnesses to the other. The foundation does not plan to conduct investigations itself aside from initially assessing the credibility of those it might help, Mr. Koss said; it will instead hand information over to WADA or the proper authorities.
That collaboration will supplement WADA’s new whistle-blower program, which solicits tips on cheating through a secure website that was started last week and outlines a protocol for handling them.
Fair Sport and WADA’s whistle-blower program both grew out of the cases of Yuliya and Vitaly Stepanov, a married couple who first spoke out about systematic doping in Russian track and field, and Grigory Rodchenkov, the former director of Russia’s national antidoping laboratory, whose tell-all account of Russia’s government-ordered cheating had major ramifications for Russia’s athletes and the global antidoping system.
The Stepanovs and Dr. Rodchenkov have left Russia and have lived in hiding in the United States, expressing concerns about their personal safety while relying on individual donations since leaving their jobs. They have been vilified in Russia, called traitors by government officials and the state news media.
Dr. Rodchenkov, who was essential to carrying out cheating schemes at the direction of Russia’s sports ministry, has also required a criminal defense lawyer since coming to America. The Justice Department has investigated Russian doping and Dr. Rodchenkov’s role in formulating steroid cocktails for distribution among top Russian athletes who competed in the United States for prize money.
“They took risks with not only their lives but also financially, and it became clear there was really no support for whistle-blowers,” said Bryan Fogel, a filmmaker who financed Dr. Rodchenkov’s move to Los Angeles in late 2015 and produced a documentary about the Russian doping scandal, “Icarus,” which was acquired by Netflix this year.
Mr. Swartz recruited a group of founders, including Edwin Stier, a former chief of the criminal division of the United States Attorney’s Office in New Jersey; Louisa Watt, a partner at the law firm Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft in London; and Mr. Koss, the Olympian, who is also a social entrepreneur and a physician who has worked with the International Olympic Committee.
Though many of the principal players are from North America, Mr. Stier said the foundation planned to establish relationships with investigators and lawyers throughout the world, hoping to be poised to protect informants of any nationality.
In addition to its collaboration with WADA, Fair Sport is also pursuing agreements with national antidoping authorities and law enforcement agencies, Mr. Koss said, hoping to refer witnesses while also soliciting referrals of credible whistle-blowers in need of assistance.
WADA has faced strong criticism over its treatment of the Stepanovs — who had approached the regulator with information on Russian doping as early as 2010 but ultimately turned to the news media when the regulator did not act.
Last year, as the doping scandal mounted, WADA committed to building out its investigation team, from one person to six. Five of those jobs have been filled, WADA said. Heading up the regulator’s new intelligence division is Günter Younger, a former employee of the German criminal police and Interpol.
At a congressional hearing on the Russian doping scandal last month, American lawmakers expressed concern that global sports officials had not done enough to support whistle-blowers and needed to improve their processes for doing so.
