Sure, “Saturday Night Live” has offered ample criticism of President Trump and his young administration. But in its latest episode, the program expressed confidence that he’ll be in office until at least 2018, long enough to see America decimated by an alien invasion force from the planet Zorblatt 9.
After a palpable absence last week, Alec Baldwin returned to play Mr. Trump in the “S.N.L.” cold open, which imagined him in a future year, visiting a military base and trying to dispense words of inspiration while the United States battles with an extraterrestrial adversary. It was an opportunity for a rousing “Independence Day”-type speech. So how did he start?
“I know this guy over here, he loves Trump,” he said, pointing at what turned out to be a charred corpse.
During a desk-side segment on “Weekend Update,” Kate McKinnon reprised her role as Attorney General Jeff Sessions, seated side by side with Senator Al Franken (Alex Moffat), the Minnesota Democrat and “S.N.L.” alumnus who has said that Mr. Sessions may have perjured himself in his responses to Mr. Franken’s questions at his confirmation hearing.
Mr. Moffat tried to get Ms. McKinnon to clarify her testimony: “I’m just a simple country laaaaar,” she explained.
“Are you saying lawyer or liar?” he asked.
For good measure, “Weekend Update” concluded with Pete Davidson taking potshots at various people associated with the Trump administration, including the White House adviser Stephen Miller (“He tries to project strength,” Mr. Davidson said, “but he looks like Fredo Corleone had been even sicker as a child”) and Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the deputy White House press secretary (whom Mr. Davidson called “one of those sweet Southern girls that you marry if you’re gay”).
Last week, the president’s son Donald Trump Jr. responded playfully to his portrayal on “S.N.L.,” writing in an Instagram post, “if you ever need a Don Jr fill in I’m available.” There were no immediate responses to this week’s episode from President Trump or the population of Zorblatt 9.