President Trump’s childhood home in Queens has sold at auction for $2.14 million. Take a tour of the home he lived in until he was 4 years old.CreditCredit...Chang W. Lee/The New York Times.
President Trump’s childhood home in Queens has been sold, in a transaction facilitated by a lawyer who specializes in shepherding real estate investments made by overseas Chinese buyers. The identity of the purchaser, who paid more than $2 million for the modest Tudor-style home, was obscured behind a recently created limited liability corporation, Trump Birth House. The sale closed on March 23.
In an email, Michael X. Tang, a lawyer registered as the representative for the corporation, said he was not permitted to disclose any information regarding the transaction. The $2.14 million sale price is more than double the average value of comparable homes in the area, according to the property site Trulia.
It is not known what will become of the property. Mr. Haghani said that while plans for a presidential library and a museum had been floated to him by representatives for the buyer, nothing had been made firm.
The pale yellow house was built in 1940 by Fred C. Trump, Mr. Trump’s father, a real estate developer. The president lived there from his birth to age 4, when the family moved to a larger home just behind the Tudor. The first home was sold last week by Michael Davis, a real estate prospector who bought it in 2016 for just under $1.4 million, with the intention of flipping the property.
Last month a penthouse in Mr. Trump’s Park Avenue building was purchased for $15.8 million by Xiao Yan Chen, known as Angela, the founder of Global Alliance — an organization that its website describes as specializing in connecting American companies with people in high levels of the Chinese government.
An association with the name Trump has had differing effects on properties around the world: On apartment buildings in Mumbai, India, it is a sought-after asset; on a Washington hotel, it poses a potential ethical quagmire; and on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, tenants of a Trump-branded complex so loathed the connection that last year the name came down.
In talk show appearances shortly before the auction, Mr. Trump spoke of possibly buying the property himself. Mr. Haghani said that while he did not know the true identity of the buyer, he did not believe that it was the president.