The Scottish playwright Zinnie Harris will be mighty busy this summer with a new play and two reworked classics at the annual Edinburgh International Festival, celebrating its 70th anniversary in August.
The lineup of the festival, which runs Aug. 4-28 and includes opera, theater, dance and both classical and contemporary music, was announced by the festival’s director, Fergus Linehan, in Edinburgh on Wednesday morning.
The opening event — a massive outdoor light and sound installation projected onto a number of the city’s buildings — will be entitled “Bloom,” a reflection of the festival’s roots. Created in 1947, partly in response to the end of World War II, the festival was intended to “provide a platform for the flowering of the human spirit,” in the words of Sir John Falconer, then the Lord Provost of Edinburgh and the festival’s chairman.
The world premiere of Alan Ayckbourn’s “The Divide,” a two-part play set in a dystopian future when men and women in England are forbidden contact in the wake of a devastating plague, is among the theater productions planned. The show is a coproduction with London’s Old Vic, which was one of the few companies to perform at the inaugural festival in 1947. “Flight,” based on Caroline Brothers’s novel about young Afghan refugees, will be presented by the Scottish company Vox Motus.
Ms. Harris’s works being presented this summer include “Oresteia: This Restless House,” a modern take on Aeschylus’ classic Greek tragedy about perhaps the most dysfunctional family of all; the show had a critically acclaimed premiere at Citizens Theater in Glasgow last year. She will also be represented with a new version of Ionesco’s “Rhinoceros,” to be presented with DOT Theater of Istanbul and performed by a cast of actors from Scotland and Turkey, and “Meet Me at Dawn,” a fable inspired by the tale of Orpheus and Eurydice, to be directed by Orla O’Loughlin, the artistic director of Edinburgh’s Traverse Theater.
The festival’s ambitious opera program will include a new production of Verdi’s “Macbeth,” created by Teatro Regio of Turin. (The Verdi opera was actually the opening act of the 1947 festival.) Stagings of “La Bohème” and “Don Giovanni” are among other opera highlights.
The music calendar is a crowded one, with a slew of offerings, from the Budapest Festival Orchestra and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra to contemporary musicians including PJ Harvey and the Magnetic Fields.
And fans of the subversive Australian cabaret performer and Edinburgh favorite Meow Meow will be happy to know that she will be doing a festival-long run of late-night shows this year. “Meow Meow’s Little Mermaid” promises to be a highly unique and somewhat naughty take on the Hans Christian Andersen fairy tale.