Clayton Yeutter, a lawyer who oversaw negotiations with Canada under President Ronald Reagan that became the basis for the North American Free Trade Agreement, died on Saturday at his home in Potomac, Md. He was 86.
His wife, Cristena Bach Yeutter, said the cause was metastatic colon cancer.
A farmer from birth, Mr. Yeutter, who was secretary of agriculture under President George Bush and, earlier, the United States trade representative under Reagan, negotiated complex economic deals with a bluntness more common in pastures than in politics.
Mr. Yeutter often employed that voice to argue for reduced restrictions on trade. Reagan appointed him trade representative in 1985, to succeed William E. Brock, who became secretary of labor.
Over the next four years Mr. Yeutter — his last name rhymes with “fighter” — helped guide a 1988 trade bill through a Democratic Congress onto Reagan’s desk for approval. (The president had vetoed an earlier version.) He helped begin the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations in 1986, which ultimately resulted in the creation of the World Trade Organization. And he persuaded the Japanese government to relax restrictions on American exports like citrus, semiconductors and beef in a series of aggressive negotiations.
Perhaps his greatest legacy as trade representative was the negotiation of the Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement, which was signed in 1988. The accord eliminated most tariffs and other barriers to trade and business between Canada and the United States.
“When you have an agreement in which economic activity is going to increase in both countries, there should be more jobs in both places,” he said.
The agreement was the backbone of Nafta, which included Mexico as a trading partner and became law in 1994. The United States Census Bureau, which collects such data, indicated that in 2016 Canada and Mexico were the United States’ second and third top trading partners (after China) for goods — for a total of $1.07 trillion in trade.
Nafta and other multilateral international trade deals, like the Trans-Pacific Partnership, have since become punching bags for many on both the left and the right. President Trump abandoned the Trans-Pacific Partnership on his first full weekday in office, and has promised to renegotiate Nafta.
Ms. Yeutter said her husband was “very distressed at the level of negativity toward international trade” during the 2016 presidential campaign.
“I think he hoped that it was a function of a lack of understanding of what international trade is, how critical it is, how impossible it is to undo and how detrimental it would be to undo,” she added.
As secretary of agriculture under Mr. Bush from 1989 to 1991, Mr. Yeutter passed a 1990 farm bill that dialed back some of the farm subsidies approved in 1985, creating a more market-oriented approach to agriculture policy.
He left that post to replace Lee Atwater as chairman of the Republican National Committee. He was named Mr. Bush’s counselor for domestic policy in 1992, and remained in that job until the president left office in 1993.
Clayton Keith Yeutter was born to Laura and Reinhold Yeutter, in Eustis, Neb., on Dec. 10, 1930. He grew up on a farm there that he would later operate before earning an undergraduate degree from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.
After graduating, he served stateside in the Air Force from 1952 to 1957, then returned to Nebraska to work on his farm. He earned a law degree in 1963 and a doctorate in agricultural economics in 1966, both from the University of Nebraska.
From 1966 to 1968, he was executive assistant to Gov. Norbert Tiemann of Nebraska. He then held posts in the Department of Agriculture and the Office of the Special Trade Representative.
In 1978, he became chief executive of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, overseeing a period of intense growth in his seven years there.
Mr. Yeutter’s first wife, the former Jeanne Vierk, died in 1993. That year he joined the international law firm Hogan & Hartson, now Hogan Lovells, where he worked until he retired in 2015.
He married Cristena Bach in 1995. Besides her, he is survived by three sons, Brad, Gregg and Van, and one daughter, Kim Bottimore, from his first marriage; three daughters, Victoria, Elena and Olivia Yeutter, from his second; nine grandchildren; and one great-granddaughter.