Illustrated. 532 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $29.95.
On Sept. 12, 1977, Robert Lowell, the most distinguished American postwar poet, died quietly and very suddenly in the back seat of a Manhattan yellow cab. He was 60 years old.
A towering figure in the world of letters — a two-time Pulitzer winner and the successor to Ezra Pound — Lowell carved a niche with reams of innovative poetry he churned out in bold, often experimental styles. His subjects were wide-ranging and epic: the Greek myths, the American Revolution. Fire is a recurring motif, along with themes like good and evil or friendship and death.
Jamison understands mania in both a clinical and a personal way. A professor of psychiatry at Johns Hopkins and an authority on mood disorders, she is also the author of the eloquent best seller “An Unquiet Mind,” about learning to live with her own manic depression. Now she aims to prove that Lowell’s illness and his poetic imagination often fused to produce great art. Terrified of going crazy, he nonetheless acknowledged that his episodes energized his creativity. “I write my best poetry when I’m manic,” he said.
In 1957, severely psychotic and on the verge of his fifth hospitalization, Lowell wrote most of “Life Studies,” his first confessional volume. He recognized that the work in it (including a 40-page prose section lamenting the remote mother who told him he’d been unwanted) was fresher, more radical and original than anything he’d done before.
But Jamison starts well before this artistic breakthrough, tracing the seeds of Lowell’s mania to the inexplicable bursts of anger that characterized his childhood. At prep school, where he was known for his wild mood swings, he was nicknamed “Cal” — short for the imperious Roman emperor Caligula. One minute he’d be picking a fight, the next he’d turn gentle and funny. Classmates said he was very smart, a voluminous reader whose sense of honor led him to identify with heroic figures including Jesus, Shakespeare and Napoleon. Loyalty was important to Lowell, and these same classmates remained friends for life.
In 1934, when he was 17, Lowell determined to be a poet; by the end of that year he had written 30 poems. Such productivity can be a symptom of mania, as Jamison notes elsewhere, though of course it can also just be a sign of ambition. (Lowell, the biographer Richard Ellmann once surmised, “was determined to be at the center of his age as he thought Hart Crane had been.”) By the early 1940s, however, he showed real evidence of the illness even as it remained undiagnosed. Lowell was then married to his first wife, the gifted young novelist Jean Stafford. They had an intense, tortured relationship, punctuated by heavy drinking and quarrels. When Lowell crashed their car into a wall, Stafford broke her nose and had to have several painful operations. Lowell survived unscathed, but the accident unhinged him and threw him “almost into a psychosis,” one doctor noted.
In 1949 he had his first full-blown manic attack in Chicago, where he supposedly dangled a friend out the window while shouting poetry. Later, when he was screaming obscenities through the open window, it took four police officers to handcuff him. “I was completely out of my head,” Lowell wrote. “Strange physical sensations — I was a prophet and everything was a symbol; then in the hospital: shouting, singing, tearing things up.” Provided at last with a diagnosis of acute mania, he was admitted to a psychiatric hospital. He remained for three months. After electroshock treatments he was released, but soon had another attack.
The couple had a daughter, Harriet, whom they both adored, and she proves to be a valuable and forthcoming source for Jamison and a refreshing presence for the reader. Lowell was a wonderful father, Harriet says, “present and loving . . . whatever his mental state, and wonderfully odd.” But his recurring illness was exhausting for everyone close to him.
The two were happy for a while. They married and had a son, and Blackwood became Lowell’s “muse,” Jamison writes. His 1973 book “The Dolphin” was inspired by her, and his final book, “Day by Day” (1977), was about the end of their relationship. Caroline had grown terrified of his rages; she hadn’t realized he was slowly going mad again. The lithium stopped working. Lowell became poisoned with it and had to be hospitalized. He and Caroline were fighting constantly; she was drinking. They separated. He flew to America in the hope of reconciling with Hardwick. They spent the summer in Maine together, and all the while he kept writing and rewriting. His work was everything to him, Harriet says. Even at his most jittery and disheveled, when his life seemed a total mess, he’d escape into writing and be healed.
What this makes clear is that the breakdowns aren’t the entire story: “The real life was full of unknowns and possibilities,” Harriet tells Jamison at one point. It’s a lesson Jamison might have done more to heed. Two narratives are at war in this book: one about Lowell’s mania and one about his enthralling private life separate from the psych wards.
I’m not sure Jamison appreciates all the remarkable material she’s accumulated. So often an anecdote, an observation, an interview is buried here, hidden by a tangent on, say, the history of mania going back to before Christ. Chapters need cutting. There is too much repetition.
Still, Jamison has amassed a wealth of fascinating research about Lowell, which should serve scholars for years to come: his medical history, hospital reports, vivid interviews with many of his doctors and close friends, as well as letters and notes including the revealing notebook Lowell kept in 1973.
