“This country is at war with Germany.” With those chilling words from Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, delivered over the airwaves on the morning of Sept. 3, 1939, Britain plunges back into the darkness of another world war. The English stiffen their collective spine and rally, as they always do. “We’re made of strong fabric, all of us,” declares Maisie Dobbs in Jacqueline Winspear’s new mystery, IN THIS GRAVE HOUR (Harper, $27.99). But the toll these fresh hostilities take on Maisie and her friends will be a severe test of their resolve, measured in more lives lost, more families torn apart and more shellshocked veterans returning home with “that look, that stare” in their eyes.
Having once served honorably as a spy, Maisie is soon recruited by the Secret Service to investigate the assassination of a Belgian refugee, one of the 7,000 to 8,000 Belgians who remained in England after the war. Winspear expands this criminal investigation into a far-reaching look at the contributions of Belgian citizens to the previous conflict, including the efforts of the wives, mothers and sisters of resistance fighters. “The Germans couldn’t believe old women could cause much trouble and only looked for the boys,” one veteran recalls with some satisfaction.
Stephen Dobyns hasn’t written a Charlie Bradshaw mystery in ages, so reading SARATOGA PAYBACK (Blue Rider, $27) feels like returning for old home week. When no-good Mickey Martin turns up dead on Charlie’s front sidewalk, the retired (and unlicensed) private eye has to sneak around Lt. Frank Hutchins of the Saratoga Police Department to investigate. He must also take time off from delivering the ransom money for Bengal Lancer, a stallion worth over a million bucks in stud fees, part of a vicious crime wave that has already cost some magnificent horses their heads.
Retirement doesn’t sit well with Charlie (“I’ve been reading and tinkering, and now I’m bored”). He’d much rather be buying a shotgun (“Its potency made up for Charlie’s growing sense of decrepitude”) or interviewing people like Bad Maud, a bartender at the Greasy Mattress biker bar. (Bad Maud used to be Good Maud, but that was a long time ago.) Charlie has lost none of his charm, nor Dobyns his wry wit, so consider this novel a rare gift.
What better setting for a Gothic murder mystery than 19th-century Edinburgh? Especially with “resurrection men” plundering the cemeteries and lady “undergraduettes” permitted to dissect cadavers at the university’s famed medical school. Kaite Welsh relishes these surroundings in her pungent first book, THE WAGES OF SIN (Pegasus Crime, $25.95).
Sarah Gilchrist is one of the few, brave women studying for medical degrees, but she blanches like a timid girl when she recognizes the corpse on her dissection table as Lucy Collins, a pregnant streetwalker she’d met at St. Giles’s Infirmary for Women and Children, the charity clinic where she serves as a volunteer. Welsh makes sure to introduce a bit of romance into her story (“There was a spark to him, a sort of magnetism,” Sarah says of her chemistry professor), but she’s primarily interested in the political and social conditions of the period — especially the “completely unnecessary” hysterectomies; the young women disowned by their families after being raped; the rickets and whooping cough endured by slum children; and the phosphorus necrosis that destroys the faces of women working in match factories. Welcome to the medical profession, Miss Gilchrist.
David Joy’s bleakly beautiful tales of the rapacious drug culture of the Appalachian mountain dwellers of Jackson County, N.C., have a dreadful consistency. Every day, it seems, there’s “another story of another man killing another man in another godforsaken town.” In THE WEIGHT OF THIS WORLD (Putnam, $27), a boy like Aiden McCall knows that “in time he would become his father” — a man who told his wife he loved her before shooting her in the head and killing himself. That alone should explain why Aiden would choose a brute like Thad Broom for his best friend, remaining loyal even when Thad returns from military service “malformed and hardened by bitterness and anger.” Their friendship forms the spine of this gorgeously written but pitiless novel about a region blessed by nature but reduced to desolation and despair.