PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — David Wright returned to the Mets’ camp Thursday wearing a team cap and sweatshirt, not a suit and a teary expression. He expressed no thoughts of retirement, at least not before he tries to recover from one more injury, this one an aching shoulder, at age 34.
His objective is clear. His prospects for meeting it are not.
At minimum, Wright is out for several weeks, and almost certainly for opening day, because he is unable to throw a ball without pain and is not yet ready to test himself at the plate. On Thursday, Wright sprinkled words like “if,” “should” and “hopefully” into his answers to various questions that all probed at the same unknown: Can he come back and play at a level acceptable to him and the team?
He said that he had consulted doctors, not fortunetellers, but that the experts had concluded he had a chance.
“It’s been told to me that if I do the rehab correctly, if I give it time to strengthen the shoulder to get it working properly, that everything should be good to go, obviously with some maintenance,” he said.
Wright was already trying to extend his career, after a serious lower-back injury and surgery on his neck, when he was found to have an impingement in his right shoulder on Tuesday. He said that his doctors had assured him that if he followed a comprehensive plan to strengthen the shoulder, he “very possibly” could get back on the field again.
Sandy Alderson, the Mets’ general manager, said Wright would not throw for about two weeks and then would begin doing so gradually. A recovery in time for opening day is most likely out of the question. But Wright refused to put a timetable on his return. He has received medical clearance to swing a bat and play as a designated hitter in spring training games. Wright de-emphasized that, saying his primary focus is to get the shoulder back to health first.
Already, he must perform a good deal of pregame maintenance on his back, including stretches and exercises before each game, a result of a chronic condition, spinal stenosis, that he was discovered to have in 2015. Last year it was determined that he had a herniated disk in his neck. Wright had fusion surgery to repair the problem in June, and he has not thrown a baseball since.
Since arriving at spring training last month, Wright hid from public view when he threw. Mostly that was because Wright was unsure what would happen, and the results were as bad as he feared.
Early last season, Wright struggled at times to throw the ball overhand with any velocity. Some of his throws from third base to first were looping underhanded tosses that set off alarm bells with team officials. At the time, Wright maintained that his shoulder was fine, but the throws indicated otherwise, and that led to tests and, eventually, the neck operation.
The current theory is that the neck issue led to the shoulder problem.
Wright met with Manager Terry Collins on Thursday morning and went over the player’s schedule. Collins later noted Wright’s frustration, but Collins said he was confident in Wright’s resolve to come back, even if it is not for several weeks.
“If you tell me I’ll have a healthy David Wright on May First for five months, I’ll take it,” Collins said.
Wright’s injuries have limited him to 75 games during the past two seasons — and counting — but he refused to indulge in self-pity.
“If this is the most adversity I am going to have to face in my life, it’s not that bad in the grand scheme of things,” he said.
The Mets owe Wright $67 million through 2020, as long as he continues to show up for work. Whether he will play is unknown. But Wright made it clear that he was not giving up, and he has even volunteered to play first base if that limits the demands on his arm.
