There’s a lot of power in having a morning routine. It reduces decision fatigue and can help you be more productive through the day.
You can also start the day more informed. Many New York Times readers do so by starting their days with the Morning Briefing. Last week we asked this group to tell us about their morning routines.
All told, 331 readers shared their routine with us. Among the most mentioned items: Coffee (126 mentions), prayer or meditation (84), running/walking (95) or exercise (94), breakfast (97) and planning the night before (35).
Below is some advice culled from Times reporting and offered by Times readers for each of these components of a successful morning routine.
The Times Cooking section has written directions on how to make specialties like cold brew coffee, Irish coffee and New Orleans Cold Drip. We’ve also written how to simply brew a better cup of coffee.
The Times has a lot of information on exercise in general that you can explore. If you’re getting a morning exercise routine in, though, we’d direct you to this guide on warm-ups and cool-downs and to our big guide on how to start running. If you want to start incorporating movement into your routine but time is short, you can check out this seven-minute workout.
I wake up and take a walk all year long, even in the hottest or most frigid temperatures (often I wear protective gear, no headphones, no cellphone, only me and my thoughts). I use this time to think about the day and recharge my batteries. I have my most creative moments during this time.
Here is Well’s guide to meditation and its series on staying mindful. Topics include being mentally present on the subway, while shoveling snow and being with your in-laws.
A comprehensive guide to prayer might be a bit, shall we say, complicated for this space. But if prayer is something you’ve been thinking about incorporating into your daily routine, we invite you to read this story of an author remembering how to pray; this New York Times Magazine feature in which a writer explores all the different ways he tries to learn how (and why) to pray; or even this Room for Debate feature from our Opinion section that explores whether atheists should pray.
My morning ritual includes reading morning briefings from roughly three or four news sites during which I often delve further into hyperlinks that offer much-needed background. Then I spend time in prayer including two or three devotionals and then exercise before my workday begins.
A lot of readers wrote in to talk about the advantages of starting their morning routine the night before, including picking out clothes, lining up emails to respond to, and preparing the next day’s food. We’ve written about the power of leveraging To-Do lists before, but it doesn’t necessarily have to be that itemized.
I prep for the next day the night before. I make overnight oats, or leave the ingredients for my omelet ready. I lay down my running gear for the morning before I go to bed and I make a mental map of what I am going to wear to work so I don’t spend time rummaging my closet in the morning. I have 3 roommates so organization is key.
If a healthy breakfast is part of your morning routine, by all means stick with it. But those who might skip it shouldn’t feel too bad. As The Upshot has explained in the past, there’s nothing magical about breakfast.
But for those who still enjoy it, we have a bunch of great breakfast recipes you can sort through here.
I always, always eat breakfast and make sure I am sitting down, with full service (plate or bowl and silverware and place mat), by my kitchen window. It may be only for 5 minutes some mornings but the point is I’ve had that moment.