The bride and groom were once the main attraction at a wedding. Then came the band. Couples spent months listening to tapes — yes tapes — or they booked a talented D.J. to coerce attendees onto the dance floor. Now the guests are enveloped in performances: from ballerinas to belly dancers; fire eaters to flash mobs; harpists to harpoonists.
“Couples want to give their guests full sensory and experiential moments that will be unforgettable,” said Amy Shey Jacobs, owner of Chandelier Events, an event planning and production firm in Manhattan. “Artistic performances are an added emotional layer that’s being incorporated into weddings as surprise elements to entertain everyone.
Hotels present performances that align with local traditions: for instance, a mariachi band or hula dancers. Couples hire entertainers who speak to who they are: opera singers for the highbrows; poetry pontificators for the romantics; or street and subway acts for the urbanites. Event planners, too, have a bag of tricks filled with techno dancers, synchronized swimmers, stomp troops and aerialists hanging on 40-foot rigs.
Those who think “fire, good” may consider illuming their guests’ experience with a three-minute fire-knife dance. The Hilton Waikoloa Village’s Lagoon Lanai gives newly wedded couples three Hawaiian performers for an indigenous island offering.
How It Works After the cake cutting or to commence the dancing, the blowing of a conch shell is heard to make sure everyone’s attention is drawn to the fire-knife dancer, who greets the crowd with a loud “Aloha!” Fast throbbing from one (about $700) or two drummers (about $915) happens simultaneously as the fire-knife dancer begins.
Why Couples Choose This Those who want oohs and aahs from their guests paired with an immersive, authentic element find big allures in acts such as these.
Sit back, relax, mill about, because these folks perform for up to seven hours. That is a long time to be in a bubble. Held at the Hotel Metropole Monte-Carlo in its Odyssey, an outdoor concept designed by Karl Lagerfeld in 2013, the space is part alfresco, part pool, part garden, part art mural.
How It Works Like Cirque du Soleil, entertainers perform minishows, which happen throughout the evening. Expect to see clowns on stilts do aerial acrobatics; electronic violinists play Top 40 hits and Vivaldi; futuristic characters à la “Mad Max” and “Back to the Future” enter on hoverboards while juggling; a floating bubble acrobatic act; and a Disney-like magical laser-and-light show, all while a British radio presenter plays M.C. Also expect to pay more than $20,000 for the show.
Memorable Moment “The aerial acrobatic part left guests, and the service staff, in awe,” Ms. Ling said.
Want the voice without the music? Turn to the harmonious vocal musings of the Virginia Gentlemen, an a cappella group from the University of Virginia. Dressed in navy sport coats, orange and blue bow ties for the university, crisp white button-downs and khaki pants, the group retains a visually pleasing and classic style of an era gone by.
How It Works For this specific wedding, 10 singers entered the ceremony during the presentation of the gifts and sang “Amazing Grace.” Booked for the entire wedding, they performed at the reception as well. The group’s performance will cost you $350 for three songs and $50 a song thereafter, plus travel expenses.
La Hora Loca, which in Spanish translates to the crazy hour, is an hourlong show in which performers such as stilt walkers, dancers or LED “robots” wear costumes while swinging to Latino music and classic hits.
How It Works Most shows take place on the dance floor during the last hour of the wedding reception and feature two to three performers who interact with guests. They hand out feather boas, sunglasses, hats, light sticks or whistles. The Hora Loca at Conrad Miami with the LED robots and dancers is about $900 to $1,000 for 45 minutes to an hour.
Why Couples Choose This “Having this energized performance during weddings has become a tradition in Latin culture,” said Ashley Gorden, the catering manager at the Conrad Miami Hotel. “The bigger and flashier the show is, the more fun guests have.” Last year the hotel did 15 Hora Locas for the 20 weddings they hosted, an increase of 35 percent from 2014. “It also makes for colorful photos,” she said.
Memorable Moment At the conclusion, thousands of cracker-size colored squares of confetti are shot out of a cannon.
Those who would rather shake their belly than their booty can hire Moroccan belly dancers to perform an authentic Arabian dance.
How It Works Right after appetizers have been consumed, but main courses have yet to be served, a small swarm of festively clothed dancers perform for 20 minutes. The first song is done solo, but by the second, they have moved to different tables and are wooing unsuspecting attendees to join in. The bride is the first to stand, then other guests follow. A couple can expect to pay about $100 a dancer.
Described as urban-horns-serenade meets New York City-subway-underground-bucket-percussion, Drumadics is a five-member street performing band that plays original music and then jams with the couple’s hired band.
How It Works An hour before the wedding ends, five or six street musicians, dressed in jeans and T-shirts, enter in the parade style of New Orleans, and move to the center of the dance floor to start their music mixings. They will cost about $5,000 for two 15-minute sets.
Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook (Styles and Modern Love), Twitter (Styles, Fashion, and Vows), and Instagram.