Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, author of “Americanah” and “We Should All Be Feminists,” remembers the hushed tones that accompanied her first period.
Ms. Adichie never fully understood the shame that was supposed to usher in womanhood, which made her hide her pads and made her friends apologize to boyfriends for having periods at all.
“I’m not going to have my daughter have that kind of shame,” she said.
In person, Ms. Adichie, 39, is warm and thoughtful, and also distinctly glamorous. She has spoken often about the pleasure she takes in fashion, and she is the face of Boots No7, a makeup brand.
Ms. Adichie has cultivated these two strands of her identity: the serious literary author and the fashion icon. In turn, she has been celebrated both by mainstream pop culture and the literati. She won a MacArthur fellowship in 2008, and her novel “Americanah” won the 2013 National Book Critics Circle Award for fiction and was chosen as New York City’s “One Book” for 2017. Her 2012 TEDx talk, “We Should All Be Feminists,” was sampled by Beyoncé in her music, and excerpts appeared on T-shirts at Dior’s Paris Fashion Week show last year. The pop and the literary threads are not opposites to her, and their merger is central to the way she presents her public self and her work.
“I think it’s very important that brilliant women step up and be hot babes,” Ms. Adichie joked in a conversation with the author Zadie Smith in 2014.
So in the past few years, she has become something of a star, flourishing at the unlikely juncture of fiction writing and celebrity. Her position was on full display during her visit to New York, where she started her book tour last week. She took the stage in front of a sold-out crowd at Cooper Union, and there was “this kind of unanimous scream,” said Robin Desser, a Knopf editor who has worked with Ms. Adichie for 12 years.
The main proposition of “Dear Ijeawele” is that feminism is a project that necessarily binds mothers and daughters, and that raising a daughter feminist has as much to do with what you tell yourself as what you tell her. Ms. Adichie’s first of 15 suggestions places a mother’s freedom and growth at the center of a daughter’s feminist education.
The book grew partly out of the desire of Ms. Adichie’s friend, called Ijeawele in the text, to teach her daughter “to take less of the nonsense” that past generations faced. Ms. Adichie wrote her friend a letter in 2015 and published it on Facebook last year.
She said she still wasn’t thinking of it as a book but simply wanted to start a conversation. The responses she received made her even more sure that it was an important piece to write.
Ms. Adichie wrote the letter before she was a parent, but now she has a 17-month-old daughter whom she is trying to raise as a feminist. She and her husband split their time between Nigeria, where she grew up, and the United States.
Ms. Adichie often comments on how race and gender play out in the United States, but her book does not tackle some of the meatier questions that have occupied the American feminist movement in recent years, most notably the role of transgender people.
Ms. Adichie has written about Hillary Clinton for The Atlantic and Michelle Obama in T: The New York Times Style Magazine, and last summer wrote a short story in The Times imagining Melania Trump’s experience on the campaign trail. Although she was an enthusiastic Hillary Clinton supporter in the election, she sees Mrs. Trump as a sympathetic character.
“I think there is some misogyny in the way she’s been characterized, and I think it’s ugly,” Ms. Adichie said. She becomes animated talking about the vitriol aimed at Mrs. Trump, in the same way she bristles when asked about how Mrs. Clinton was treated during the campaign. She is concerned with how society responds to powerful women across the political spectrum.
Ms. Adichie will not say what she’s working on next — “I’m very superstitious” — but continues to write and throw herself into her international speaking engagements. The satisfaction she takes in her work is at the heart of her proposal: To raise feminist daughters, mothers must take pleasure in their own achievements, follow both the challenges and delights of the work, and give themselves room to fail. Ultimately, as Ms. Adichie writes, they must be full people.