At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.75 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.89 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.61 percent.
Germantown School District, Wis., $84 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.
New York Urban Development Corporation, $319 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.
Boulder Valley School District No. RE-2, Colo., $284.9 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.
Lafayette, Ind., $55 million of sewage revenue bonds. Competitive.
New York Urban Development Corporation, $247.9 million of series A revenue bonds. Competitive.
New York Urban Development Corporation, $1.03 billion of series B revenue bonds. Competitive.
Antelope Valley Community College District, Calif., $150 million of 2016 election general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.
California Health Facilities Financing Authority, $287 million of revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.
Chesapeake, Va., $201 million of general obligation public improvement and refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.
Colorado Health Facilities Authority, $87 million of revenue refinancing and improvement bonds. Ziegler.
El Camino Healthcare District, Calif., $95 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.
Ford Foundation, $280 million of taxable bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.
Hamilton County, Ohio, $296 million of TriHealth Inc. obligated group project bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.
Million Air Township L.L.C., $149.7 million of general aviation facilities project special facilities revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.
Monroe County, N.Y., Industrial Development Corporation, $232.1 million of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.
New Albany-Floyd County School Building Corporation, Ind., $87 million of ad valorem property tax first mortgage bonds. Fifth Third Securities.
Ohio Housing Finance Agency, $113.7 million of mortgage-backed securities program residential mortgage revenue bonds. George K. Baum.
Ohio Water Development Authority, $400 million of water pollution control loan fund revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.
Oregon, $85 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.
Oxnard School District, Calif., $81 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.
Scranton School District, Pa., $60.5 million of general obligation bonds and notes. RBC Capital Markets.
University of Toledo, Ohio, $69.8 million of general receipts bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.
Washington Health Care Facilities Authority, $114.8 million of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.