Spend the night with a world-famous serial killer! That’s the promise, proffered with the hopeful luridness of a penny dreadful title, behind the site-specific “Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street,” which opened on Wednesday night at the Barrow Street Theater.
It must be said that the Tooting Arts Club’s deftly, uh, executed stunt of a show, which originated in London, delivers on its ingenious, if limited, objective. As directed by Bill Buckhurst, this latest version of Stephen Sondheim and Hugh Wheeler’s 1979 musical macabre puts its audience within throat-slashing distance of its sociopathic title character.
That means you’ll have the opportunity to look straight into the eyes of Mr. Todd, eyes that widen to expose 360 bulging degrees of whiteness when he’s especially excited. Portrayed by Jeremy Secomb like an animated refugee from Madame Tussauds Chamber of Horrors, this Sweeney has a habit of getting into the faces of the customers at the modest eating establishment run by his dear friend, accomplice and possible future victim, Mrs. Lovett (Siobhan McCarthy).
For an additional $22.50, ticket buyers can dine at these tables before the bloodletting commences. It goes without saying that pies are the plat du jour, though there is a vegetarian option. This concession to the snowflakes among us is something that Sweeney, a vengeful former convict who converts much of London’s populace into carcasses for Mrs. Lovett’s cuisine, would surely sneer at.
While I did not partake of this crusty fare, it seems safe to say that those who do are in little danger of serious indigestion, even psychologically. This “Sweeney” may raise your pulse rate. How could it not when a cleaver-wielding man leaps with pantherine ease onto the center of your table? Yet unlike almost every previous “Sweeney” I’ve seen (last count: eight), this one rarely penetrates your heart and mind.
What we’re presented with is a self-contained, darkness-steeped spook house. (Much of Amy Mae’s lighting comes from candles and lanterns.) And as with many amusement park entertainments, the jolts it elicits leave few aftershocks. This is “Sweeney Todd” as a date-night diversion. It allows you to squeeze your partner’s arm in delighted anxiety, without paying the price of insomnia to come.
At the same time, hard-core fans of “Sweeney Todd,” an exacting and combative lot, need not worry that one of the most exciting and innovative musicals in the genre’s history has been reduced to cheap thrills. .
Though the musicians here number just three, their performance (neatly supervised and arranged by Benjamin Cox) often allows you to grasp more clearly than usual the score’s brilliantly calculated idiosyncrasies of timing and phrasing. It’s often easier to understand the basics of anatomy, after all, by studying a skeleton instead of a fully fleshed body.
In a few cases, you may gain a new appreciation for the expansive psychological potential in Mr. Sondheim’s songs. Ms. Finke, who plays the virginal Victorian dream girl Johanna, delivers the pastiche ballad “Green Finch and Linnet Bird” with a twittering skittishness that adroitly signals a nervous breakdown ahead. And I enjoyed Mr. Taylor’s sparkling music-hall turn as the young, simple-minded Tobias.
Ms. McCarthy brings a jaded, film-noir calculation to a Mrs. Lovett who sizes up her prospects with furtive side glances. But you rarely feel the great, daft folly of her love for Sweeney, which means that this little old pie maker exerts the abstract fascination of a figure in a juicy crime story but little of the empathy that actresses as different as Angela Lansbury, Christine Baranski and Patti LuPone have brought to the role.
Nor does Mr. Secomb fully evoke the tragic obsessiveness (and woundedness) of Sweeney that makes the character easier to identify with than, say, Jack the Ripper. With his paradoxically buff and cadaverous physique, this Sweeney looks more like a natural-born killer than any I’ve encountered.
That high-decibel interpretation is not out of keeping with the production as a whole. This demon barber and his friends are here to rattle you with a sustained, cathartic “Boo!” that sends you into the night with few nagging worries that Sweeney may still be waiting for you, in your dreams if not your building lobby.