Our dance critics on recent performances around New York City.
Performed Thursday at Danspace Project, Manhattan.
Ms. Coates and Ms. Demers, professors at Yale, have been collaborating since 2011, each using her discipline to shed light on the other’s. They created a course together, the Physics of Dance, and wrote a forthcoming textbook based on that curriculum. While science tends to be viewed as more serious than dance, their approach revolves around collapsing hierarchies, giving equal weight to both.
Though at times too intent on explaining itself, “Incarnations” also explored more ambiguous terrain, notably in a monologue by the postmodern dance pioneer Yvonne Rainer. Ms. Rainer, 82, has commented on aging in her work, and here she played a grumpy Apollo with a failing memory, recounting a lifetime of divine intervention. Crashing through unexpectedly, the lengthy rant underscored our need for myths and heroes, as much as science, to make sense of the universe.
Performed Saturday at the 92nd Street Y, Manhattan.
If only Ms. Demers, who analyzed Ms. Coates’s movement with the enthusiasm of a sports commentator, had been at the 92nd Street Y, where the company Boomerang, led by Kora Radella, offered the premiere of “This Is a Forge” during the Harkness Dance Festival. What forces were at play in this grim, punishing duet between Massimiliano Balduzzi and Simon Thomas-Train?
Performed Wednesday through Saturday at New York Live Arts, Manhattan.
When Richard Move dresses up as Martha Graham, as this 6-foot-4 dancer has been doing since the 1990s, it’s quite a sight. But it’s Graham as a speaker that Move most potently embodies, delivering that great choreographer’s grand pronouncements, boasts and digs in a girlish voice that hides sharp teeth.
The voice was in excellent shape when Move opened the discipline-crossing series “Live Ideas 2017: Mx’d Messages” at New York Live Arts with “Martha@20,” a greatest-hits collection of Graham shtick sprinkled with topical updates. Move’s dancing as Graham seemed more waxen, and the expert help of the former Graham company members Katherine Crockett and Catherine Cabeen didn’t lift the excerpts from Graham choreography out of demonstration mode. The dry punch lines retain their bite, though, because Move believes in them.
