Joining up with the Great Loop, an intricate route that transforms half the United States into an island.
Before I set sail with Tim and Karen Bartel on their 52-foot Bluewater yacht, Let It Ride, I didn’t tend to think of water as a place. I learned my geography by that wooden map of the United States — the jigsaw puzzle of the lower 48 with the inset Hawaii and Alaska to the side. The puzzle-piece states were the places to go, and everything else was just negative space. You could not visit the compass rose in the corner, nor the unvarnished pine off the coast of Oahu. The winding Mississippi and proboscoid Great Lakes gave shape to the puzzle but didn’t qualify as destinations themselves. In a nation transfixed by the dream of the road trip, a river is just a reason for a tunnel or a bridge.
But if you let your eyes go blurry, you might imagine the inverse — the young woman hidden in the profile of the old hag. Inland water isn’t merely a breach in the freeway, but an intricate arterial network of its own, explorable by boat if you happen to have one. By this reverse image, the eastern half of the United States is an island, circumnavigable by water across the Great Lakes, down the Mississippi and into the Gulf of Mexico, then back up north along the shores of the Atlantic.
In 2016, some 150 boaters circled the length of this so-called Great Loop — setting sail from any point along the way and crossing their own wakes about 6,000 miles later. These Loopers, as they call themselves, are mostly retirees traveling as couples, on boats named things like Living Life and Last Chance. The culture coalesces around the A.G.L.C.A. — America’s Great Loop Cruisers’ Association — a club and online forum for all things Great Loop. I emailed the A.G.L.C.A.’s director in search of a boat to take me aboard for a couple of days. The Bartels, sight unseen, said they would let me ride along as they knocked off the Central Florida leg of their Loop. I had never traveled the United States by water.
Tim and Karen are in their mid-50s and wear Crocs and a lot of boat-themed shirts. They began in Ohio on Sept. 2 and set out from Fairport Harbor, bound for Fairport Harbor. Traveling Lake Erie up into Lake Huron, their boat continued north along Michigan’s shore, rounding the mitten at Mackinac Island before heading south around Charlevoix. Lake Michigan carried them into Chicago. From there, they passed through a chute of widening waters: the Calumet, the Illinois, the Mississippi. At Kimmswick, Mo., almost all Loopers stop at Hoppie’s, the last marina with gas until the Tennessee. Their progress from there was a series of detours — up the Cumberland, onto the Tennessee, to the Tenn-Tom — leading them eventually into the Gulf of Mexico near Mobile, Ala.
Along the shores of the gulf, there is a fork in the Loop where a boat must either circle the Florida Peninsula or cut across the state by the Okeechobee Waterway. Each route is preceded by the same open-water crossing: 200 miles from a small town on the panhandle called Apalachicola, through the gulf into Clearwater harbor. Tim and Karen crossed the gulf with another boat called Shell Bell, piloted by two Loopers who had done this leg before. They ran Let It Ride for 25 hours straight, taking turns napping in the cabin below. This was the longest Karen ever manned the wheel — alone for three hours, trailing Shell Bell’s light. Tim woke as the lip of a thick fog unfurled, and together they followed the radar to port. From Clearwater, they floated down to the start of the Okeechobee canal in Fort Myers. When I arrived at the marina in Fort Myers on Feb. 15, they had been living on the water for more than five months.
Florida springs fertile with retirees at play. Easy winter weather and the lack of state income tax draw the fixed-income set to the Sunshine State to wallow. Here are the last inheritors of the American dream — the people for whom Social Security is a birthright, whose 401(k)’s go according to plan. The cohort self-divides like any high school cafeteria — golfers, fishers, mah-jongg players — each with its own distinct leisure disposition. My own grandparents, at their snowbird home in Deerfield Beach, delight in nightly shows at their community’s clubhouse. My great-grandmother from the other side, who retired near Miami and smoked two packs a day until she died, played dozens of cards at bingo every night. Different strokes for different old folks, and the same can be said for the largely retired Loopers.
Tim maintains that most are not “fancy yacht people.” “Yacht,” in broader culture, has a starched connotation, but here on the Loop it’s just another type of boat that satisfies the limiting height and length clearances. American boaters, on the whole, are middle class; the pastime is most popular in the inland Midwest. But even within the hobby, Loopers are a subset. In harbor, they’re made visible by their multicolor burgees — white flags for boats attempting a first lap, gold for one Loop and platinum for two or more. Think of them, perhaps, as R.V.ers of the water — the sort of people who pay a mortgage on a three-bedroom home, trade it for a floating apartment and call it freedom. There’s something appealing about condensing your life into a space in which you can see everything at once: your bed, the sun, your spouse, your next meal, the fuel left in the tank, your route marked on the map. Life on the Loop is an improbable equation by which the complex variables of boating and aging combine to produce something much simpler.
We set out from Fort Myers in the afternoon, with all the informality of a morning commute. Without any Champagne toast or five-gun salute, Tim steered Let It Ride from the protected marina into the mile-wide span of the Caloosahatchee. Trawlers and yachts passed in the westbound direction as Tim steered up top at the big silver wheel. The scenery ahead was a test of proportions — a giant block of sky atop a hangnail of land. Though Florida may be low and flat, the water level on Lake Okeechobee is still higher than anywhere in the gulf or the Atlantic. Boats in both directions must ascend via lock, then descend once again after crossing the lake. Imagine the locks like escalators in a mall, moving passing boats across a multilevel concourse. The Okeechobee canal has five locks in total. Our first was the W.P. Franklin Lock and Dam, about 120 miles from the Atlantic. Tim radioed with two other boats on the approach: a snub-nosed trawler named Dana A and a sporty little vessel that Tim heard as “the Conch something or other.” After a series of brief negotiations, it was decided that Dana A would lock first, followed by the Conch and then Let It Ride. I buckled myself into the foam of my life vest.
The W.P. Franklin was a concrete chute with a solid gate at either end — a fully enclosed, refillable bathtub, sunken in the larger bathtub of the canal. It was as large a contraption as I had ever seen. Our three boats entered through the open gate at one end, lining up starboard with our hulls along the wall. A cormorant ripped through the air inside the chute, then swooped up and over the control hut. The lockmaster emerged in a pink sweat-proof shirt, her iPhone secure on a matching pink belt clip. She squatted atop the wall to chat with Karen below, before returning to her hut, where she signaled for the gate behind us to close. I sensed that we were sitting on the cusp of a climax — a terrible whoosh, an impressive rise in tide. Instead, the gate at the other end inched open, admitting brown water like a spill of diet cola. We bobbed as the stains on the wall disappeared, the water level rising a scant 36 inches. A little bit taller, we followed Dana A and the Conch upriver.
I left the upper deck and descended into the cabin. A big part of boating is aggressive cartoon snoozing — sprawling on the couch with a hat over your face, nodding in and out on the lilt of the tide. I woke to unstick my bare leg from the leather and again sometime later to a smell like barbecued cake; farmers nearby were burning sugar cane. I turned over on my stomach, then snoozed a little more. When I rose around 4, the sky looked like rain.
It took 10 minutes to pass through the Ortona Lock. Out its eastbound gate, Tim hung a sharp left, and we docked for the night at the River Forest Yachting Center. Marinas run the gamut from city-run favors to sprawling resorts with five-star amenities. River Forest was the former, a sparse disappointment — nothing nearby, no courtesy car — just hookups for the boat and a bathroom with showers. We were 70 miles from the Atlantic as the crow flies and a 10-mile drive from nearby LaBelle, so we ate on the boat at the kitchen dinette. Karen made a salad with honey mustard and poached chicken. Tim, who had a toothache, ate a bowl of instant pudding, followed by a can of cream soda with Crown Royal.
When dinner was over, we all lounged around the cabin. Tim browsed posts on the A.G.L.C.A. forum, talking offhand about the Looper disposition. He showed me a post from an aspiring Looper who was seeking donations to underwrite his trip. (“I would be honored to list you as a sponsor.”) The comments that followed made for a good old-fashioned ribbing. (“Wouldn’t that be great if we all had our trip paid for by others.”) Loopers, as a group, have unflashy tastes but seem to put faith in hard work paying off. Tim laughed as he showed me a story in Power & Motoryacht featuring a pair of “millennial Loopers” posing on their yacht, drinking sips of rosé. “It has been said,” the caption read, “that millennials are more interested in collecting experiences than possessions.” Karen had met this very same couple at Mackinac Island. She felt miffed, she said, by their eagerness to leave the conversation.
At night, I did more of that intermittent snoozing, watching the light of the moon off the water dance baconesque on the ceiling of the cabin. I woke early, took a shower, then fell back into sleep, dreaming of hermit crabs crawling through my suitcase. When I got out of bed for good around 11, I found Karen hunched over a hatch in the carpet, vacuuming water from the space beneath the floor. The battery was dead, she said; the boat wouldn’t start. It was normal, apparently, to carry water down there, but, she explained, she had to clear it out for the mechanic. Until he arrived, we would be stranded at the marina.
Tim sat at the table, clutching his jaw and smoking. His toothache had apparently worsened in the night, and now his whole posture seemed to pulsate with pain. Karen, from the hatch, called out, “Bucket full!” and Tim stood up to haul and dump the excess water. He sat back down, and the scene repeated on loop. I offered to do useless tasks like make sandwiches and pass bottled water from two feet away. I walked on eggshells, anticipating conflict, but the couple argued less on their broken-down boat than I argue with myself while out in the open of the world.
Tim and Karen met on Halloween ’84 at a bowling-alley bar called Animal House, midway between their hometowns in Ohio. Karen had never been on a boat, save for a school-sponsored trip to Lake Erie. Tim bought his first sailboat at 13, from a neighbor who won it in a radio contest. The couple married at Fairport Harbor Yacht Club, which grew into the center of their social life together, and eventually the start and end point for their Loop. Tim heard of the Loop from an older member at the club, a guy who did it with his family on a “houseboat-looking thing.” Tim decided that someday he would do it, too. On his last day of work at Sherwin-Williams’s headquarters in Cleveland, he docked Let It Ride in the water near his office, then motored down the Cuyahoga into retirement.
Though Karen was eager to share in his dream, she was an exception; the hesitant wife is a common Looper trope. The forums are rife with gear discussions, but there are just as many tips for persuading the ball and chain. (“Married to Ms. Manicure?” one blogger asks.) This gender dynamic is fast fading from our culture, along with the idea of retiring still married to your first spouse, and even the idea of retiring at all. As I sat on the deck awaiting the mechanic, I felt stricken by the thought that my peers and I might work until we die — perhaps blogging from our deathbeds for the AARP. I silenced these thoughts by snacking.
On my 4 o’clock trip into the kitchen to rummage, I noticed that Tim was missing from the boat. Karen said the marina’s maintenance guy lent Tim his truck so he could drive to LaBelle to see a dentist. I was waxing poetic on the depths of human kindness when Karen said she thought such generosity was normal. Maybe it was — on the Loop, or for baby boomers. It would take another day to get us back out in motion. The mechanic had to order a part, so we spent another night in the berth at River Forest, agreeing about “Seinfeld” and disagreeing about President Trump.
Back on the water, the wind was too strong to write by hand, and the sun was too bright to type notes on a screen, so I found myself forced into a retirement of my own.  The shapes of Central Florida were rectangular and flat. The colors were blue, and green, and green, and green. Nonsense flora lined the banks of the river — lanky palms with feather-duster heads, low and creeping prehistoric ferns. I went downstairs to look up “Spanish moss,” then back outside into the hat-hostile wind. The orange groves were dotted with doll-size fruit. The houses on the shore all had huge screened-in porches, airy cathedrals to exurban comfort. Water rippled toward us like a blanket at the beach being shaken free of sand.
For 15 minutes, Tim let me take the wheel. Driving a boat is not like driving a car. First, he told me, you don’t need a license. (Not exactly true.) Second, the propellers just push the boat forward while you estimate an imprecise angle for the rudder. The arc of a turn comes in minutes, not seconds, but luckily the water here is wide and time is slow. This is a different kind of travel or even living than I’m used to, inching gently forward with no schedule in mind.
A few years ago, just out of college, I had a long stretch of illness that took me much closer to death than I would have liked. Since then, I’ve lived life by a strange system of accounting, stockpiling experience like some shopping list for meaning. People have long sought fullness from their lives, but lately it has felt easiest to fill mine up by force: to bet a few hundred dollars on a trip to visit friends, to wager I’ll find meaning in a life-changing brunch. I concretize my efforts by posting online, leveraging the life-packaging apps at my disposal. Here I am, going for a jog, investing in the wellness quotient of my days. Here I am again, on a lazy Sunday morning, mandatorily reflecting on tranquillity and peace. I’m of the same kind as those millennials in Power & Motoryacht, flaunting my thirsty pursuit of carpe diem.
At times, this system of living can feel good — it’s more productive to actively reckon than to sit by and wait for satisfaction to arise. But most of the time, my system just feels bad. By checking off boxes against some abstracted timeline, I tend to think too much about what comes at the end. But here on Let It Ride, in my own pseudoretirement, I found it strangely easy to give up this train of thought. With a full life already behind us, it seems easy to trust that the rest will follow suit. Tim and Karen float forward in an easy routine, secure in what is here and unafraid of what may come. This sort of security used to be a promise, and I feel glad to have tried it, if just for a few days and maybe never again.
We awoke on Day 4 before the Moore Haven Lock, 78 miles from the edge of the Atlantic. We locked through the chute in a fast half-hour, moving at a clip toward Lake Okeechobee. Sometimes called Florida’s Inland Sea, it covers a space half the size of Rhode Island but is only nine feet deep, a tortilla of a lake. We cut through its center, flanked by tall grass. I lay heavy on the couch with my laptop on my chest, watching purple clouds spread over navy blue water. The thrum of the engine took me somewhere near sleep. A rectangle of sun spilled through the starboard-side door, swaying and moving against the grain of the carpet.  A roll of paper towel trembled gently on the counter. I dozed in and out all the way to Port Mayaca, where the fourth lock was open and Tim cruised right through.
When we reached the Atlantic, Let It Ride would dock in Stuart, where the Bartels would wait until the Northern weather warmed. By May, they planned to cruise past the Statue of Liberty, then up the Hudson to the Erie Canal. Touching down in familiar Lake Erie, they’ll cross their wake sometime in mid-June, swapping their white burgee for gold. After that, who knows, Tim said. He might even go back to work.