461 pp. Ballantine Books. $28.
It’s not always clear where to put the emphasis in the term “literary thriller.” Are we talking about especially well-written genre narratives, or especially propulsive character studies, or something altogether new and different? In the case of Dan Chaon’s marvelous hybrids, this lack of clarity has worked entirely to his advantage. Over the past two decades, Chaon (a National Book Award finalist for his 2001 story collection “Among the Missing”) has made a habit of pushing the boundaries, daring to try new things while returning to various signature motifs: parental death by suicide or disease; estranged siblings; fire-ravaged families; foster children and failed adoptions; people with missing arms, severed fingers, prosthetic limbs; childhood neglect; and more. His novels are populated with characters in the throes of introspective turmoil, consumed with the probability that they are living out their lives as lies, as if dressed in a stranger’s clothes. Rarely at home in their surroundings, they struggle to come to terms with who they are, wary of the possibility that there’s another life out there someplace, some other reality they might have known, that would have fit them better and made them whole.
In his haunting, strikingly original new novel, “Ill Will,” Chaon takes formidable risks, dismantling his timeline like a film editor and building the narrative with short, urgent chapters told from a few key perspectives. Intentionally fragmented, the structure echoes the illusive patterns of memory, how life-changing events return to us over long periods of time in vivid scraps and can be tweaked or embellished depending on where our lives are when we remember them. When we first meet Dustin Tillman, a psychologist in his early 40s, he informs a patient: “We are always telling a story to ourselves, about ourselves. . . . But we can control those stories. . . . Events in our life have meaning because we choose to give it to them.” There’s nothing theoretical in this declaration; it’s how Dustin himself has coped with a traumatic childhood. When he was 13, his parents, aunt and uncle were murdered in their Nebraska home. His adopted brother, Rusty, who was 19, was convicted of the crime based, in part, on Dustin’s testimony that it was a satanic ritual killing. (This was the early 1980s, when “satanic panic” and lurid insinuations of ritual abuse were all over the news.) Now, 30 years later, new DNA evidence overturns the conviction. Rusty is getting out.
The news of his exoneration puts Dustin and his cousins, who also lost their parents, on edge. With so many layers of familial pathology, it’s not surprising that Dustin has become a psychologist who practices hypnotherapy. We learn that in graduate school, he studied recovered-memory syndrome — a theory later debunked by professionals who agreed that in many cases, patients were making up their memories. Is it possible that Dustin, with his long habit of self-deception, has invented his as well, to mask his guilt over Rusty’s incarceration even if there was plenty to justify it?
When Dustin was 8, his parents adopted the orphaned, teenage Rusty (whose foster family had died in a fire), unaware that this act of goodness would have irrevocable consequences. From the beginning, Rusty displayed abusive, sociopathic tendencies that tormented his adoptive brother; Chaon brilliantly conveys Dustin’s childhood shame and the subtle ways it survives in the damaged adult he becomes.
Adoption figures into much of Chaon’s work, and he has spoken openly of his own adoption. I too am adopted, very happily so, and I believe that inside some of us adopted novelists there’s a small dark box we take out and open when we write. The mystery of identity sowed the seeds of our craft. For many of Chaon’s characters, identity is elusive as water. The missing limbs that so frequently feature in his work speak to the sense of loss and displacement many of us suffer when unexpected events disrupt our lives. This isn’t unique to adoptees, of course, but it may explain the visceral undercurrent that runs through Chaon’s books. Here is a writer who doesn’t shy away from difficult, confusing subjects or the troubling feelings that result.
He also doesn’t shy away from plot. When one of Dustin’s patients, a police officer on medical leave, begins investigating the seemingly accidental drowning deaths of a series of drunken college men, Dustin is unwittingly reeled into the drama, grateful for the distraction from his own realities: his wife’s terminal cancer; his ineffectual status as a husband and father; the probability of losing his rapidly maturing sons, Dennis and Aaron, to whatever baleful destinies they choose. The police officer develops a convincing theory that the serial drownings are being committed by a satanic cult — an association to Dustin’s past that devotes him to the cause just as his life seems to be falling apart.
“The little island that I’d built for myself, this family that had seemed so safe and stable, was dissipating beneath my feet,” Dustin says. “I watched as Aaron forked noodles into his mouth, and they were yellow like warning signs on a construction site. I felt a gaze pressing on my back.” Aaron, a freshman at Cleveland State who’s living at home, grows more detached, hanging out in his best friend’s basement instead of going to class. The boys share a grim outlook that promotes their heroin use and summarizes the lackluster gestalt of a generation. “What do you call that feeling when you’re certain that the world is doomed? It’s one of those feelings that’s physical, like low blood sugar or too much caffeine, a message from the lizard brain.” When the friend eventually disappears, potentially a victim of the serial killings, Aaron tries to track him down, hitting up his scary dealer at the ominous House of Wills, a former funeral home in the Cleveland slums and a circus of wickedness. The events that follow are rife with peril.
This is a dark, disturbing novel. Murder occurs not as a reactionary crime but as sadistic routine, carried out for some bizarre, unknown purpose. The characters are unapologetically flawed, in some ways exceptionally ordinary, damaged, unfulfilled and not particularly motivated to change. We’re not really sure what they long for, and I’m guessing neither are they. There is little pleasure in their lives, not even in Aaron’s drug use, which offers him only a sparkling, jagged sort of aliveness. Their language is real, authentic, broken. Emails, lists and emojis highlight their cryptic attempts to communicate. At some points their thoughts are printed in inch-wide columns running side by side down the page; at another, Aaron’s perceptions are conveyed in first, second and third person. The purpose is unclear, but the effect is stunning.
As the story spins toward its inexorable conclusion, only the reader ascertains what is happening — a sinking realization that rattles the psyche and interferes with sleep. I read the concluding sections with increasing horror; the ending, twisting in the author’s assured hands like a Rubik’s Cube, is at once predictable and harrowing. Somehow, it resolved nothing and left me shaken. I believed this could happen — I believed all of it — and the only thing more terrifying than that is the possibility of another Dan Chaon novel. I will be nervously looking forward to it.