Small rooms are in the DNA of a number of new hotel brands, including Moxy Hotels from Marriott and Vib from Best Western, that are chasing millennial travelers. Now house rentals are shrinking too with the rise of the tiny-house hotel.
Proponents of shrunken living spaces champion environmental and economic efficiencies. And while there is no standard definition of a tiny house, the Small House Society, a group that encourages simpler living, identifies those under 500 square feet as tiny, though many are less than half that size.
This spring and summer, eight new tiny-home hotels will open across the country colonized by Colorado-built Tumbleweed tiny houses, cute mini-R.V.s that look like cottages or cabins.

The downside to tiny-house living is, of course, the cramped quarters, as lampooned on the television show “Portlandia.” But fans say the houses offer amenities, including kitchens, that are missing from standard hotel rooms and that hotels equally challenge couples and families to live together in small spaces.
Many new tiny-house locales offer breathing room in park settings furnished with outdoor amenities like picnic tables and fire pits.
Mount Hood Tiny House Village installed five different house designs of “tinies,” as they are called, last May at a campground that also welcomes R.V.s and rents cabins. The 178-square-foot Atticus, with a bedroom, bath, kitchen and sleeping loft, is wood-sided and -paneled in classic, unadorned style. With a similar layout, and an extra 18 square feet, the more playful Zoe has pale blue siding and bright green curtains. Rates start at $129.
This year, the village’s owner, Equity Lifestyle Properties, is installing tiny-house rentals at three more campgrounds. Two units recently opened in the Verde Valley near Sedona, Ariz. In May, another five each will open in Leavenworth, a Bavarian-theme town in central Washington State, and in Tuxbury in southern New Hampshire.
Other, independently operated tiny-house hotels include Getaway, which opened seven tiny houses in upstate New York last summer. The proprietors keep the location secret until travelers book but admit to being on 20 acres in the Catskills with hiking trails nearby.
With names like Isidore and Columbia, the boxy Scandinavian-influenced houses with knotty pine or plywood walls have two-burner stoves, minirefrigerators, queen beds and electric toilets (from $89). The company’s original location, in southern New Hampshire, opened in 2015 with three houses, and both sites are poised to expand this year.
Not all wee dwellings take root in forests. Opened in 2013, Caravan in Portland, Ore., has six tinies in a variety of styles from cedar-shingled to one that looks like a train caboose (from $145).
Nor are they confined stateside. Hide, a seven-acre getaway in St. Donat in southern Wales, offers three yurtlike dwellings called “cabans” and plans to build three tiny houses this year. The first is expected to open in May.
