Illustrated. 217 pp. Sarabande Books. $19.95.
The first time I visited the Museum of Jurassic Technology in Los Angeles, I wandered entranced through galleries packed with curiosities to open a door onto an uncanny re-creation of a Central Asian courtyard, a rooftop columbarium of fountains and ferns, statuary and stillness.
And there I found myself face to face with a live Barbary dove on her nest, her small dark eyes inwardly focused on nothing more than the need to sit, the feathers on her crossed wings lifting in a dusty breeze curling up from the streets below. This dove was a prop on a set designed purely for the play of human imagination, and yet there she sat, knowing nothing of this purpose, concerned only with the eggs beneath her. Looking at her made my eyes spill with tears. So did this book, whose title is, aptly, a line from Prince’s “When Doves Cry.” I’ve spent decades reading books on the roles animals play in human cultures, but none have ever made me think, and feel, as much as this one. It’s a devastating meditation on our relationship to the natural world. It might be the best book on animals I’ve ever read. It’s also the only one that’s made me laugh out loud.
Passarello is a Whiting Award-winning essayist and former actor whose previous collection, “Let Me Clear My Throat” (2012), tackled the subject of the human voice in a series of essays that ranged from the Wilhelm scream to the apostrophized voice of a sentient ventriloquists’ dummy. Now, in “Animals Strike Curious Poses,” she has written biographies of famous animals from Yuka the mummified mammoth (37,000 B.C.) to Cecil the Lion (2015), taking in on the way a menagerie as various as Albrecht Dürer’s rhinoceros; Elizabethan fighting bears; Mr. Ed; a space-station spider; and the tortoise reputedly kidnapped by Darwin. The formal exuberance of this modern bestiary is exhilarating. In one extraordinary piece, Passarello pleats together the timeline of the history of electricity in America with that of the history of elephants in America, weaving light and darkness, electrocution and executions into a scorching meditation on the violence at the heart of modernity. In others she recreates the missing half of Christopher Smart’s poetic paean to his Cat Jeoffry, and supplies us with a deadpan transcription of Koko the gorilla signing a famously obscene theatrical joke.
It’s a lazy move to use an author’s background as a key to unlocking her work. But in its playful, performative, dramatic and fearless inhabiting of diverse voices and selves, this is an actor’s book. Despite her intellectual brilliance, Passarello rejects the dry style of the anthropologist or cultural critic: “In Berger’s thinking, little space exists for children,” she acutely observes in an essay on the animals of her own childhood. And this has political, as well as creative, import. For “Animals Strike Curious Poses” speaks of and for the voiceless hordes with whom we share the earth, shows us how we make sense of them and, crucially, how they make sense for us. “Up from the mummy on that ice-cave slab comes a linked chain of animals, all of them pointing backward,” she writes of the frozen mammoth. That’s what she is doing here, forging a chain of essays with themes that link and snap together, so that upon reading one essay, the others are carried up and along with it, the clear analytic coherence running through its wildly disparate essay forms being perhaps this book’s fiercest grace.
No matter how long-dead its animal subjects, this is a book with burning current relevance, and not just because we are living through the sixth great extinction. The essay on Dürer’s rhinoceros reflects on the lives of iconic images and their peculiar relation to truth, and makes early-modern Europe akin to our state today: “It was as if anything in your head could be confirmed by some far-flung report. Your wildest anxieties, your most God-forsaken imaginings — they could all be pulled out of the sky and made manifest in a woodcut of a nightmare beast, a fresh pox, or a folk tale.” The retelling of the story of St. Francis and the Wolf of Gubbio is an examination both of the nature of wolves and also of faith and belief in authority, and it fearlessly tackles the deepest questions of identity. Is a wolf still a wolf if it comes to your door to be fed? How is an animal a moral? How is a person a person?
“Animals Strike Curious Poses” is as much about our human frailties as it is about animals. It’s full of darkness, of course. How could it not be? Violence and incomprehension have marked our relationship with animals since before we made the distinction between them and us and started using them to think with. But of all the essays in the book, I love this one in particular for setting a single bright star against that darkness: that the voice of a starling, elaborating on the tune of a man, could be written in staves and bars, and then pressed into wax, then vinyl, then digitized, so that one wrong note might be heard and loved forever. It gives one hope that we humans might not be so lonely after all.