The 28-year-old artist and designer Katie Stout, based in Brooklyn’s Bedford-Stuyvesant, has dubbed her oeuvre “naïve pop,” which is apt, considering the inspirations for her chipper, animated furnishings: Dolly Parton, Raymour & Flanigan, Charlotte Perriand, bagels. With rugs that look like giant floppy hats thrown on the floor, intentionally droopy knit chairs and her Girl lamps, which evoke the female form in a way she terms “lumpy and imperfect,” her goal is to make subversive objects that are “feel-good” but “have self-awareness.” Many aren’t entirely functional, like the knit chairs, which are too soft to sit on.
The designer Chris Wolston likes to travel, and he resists planning everything out. He prefers, as he puts it, to “snake through the unmapped material landscape, discovering new practices and following them to the source.” This translates to visiting remote areas where everyday objects are still handmade. There, he learns to adapt such traditional processes as sand-casting and brickmaking for his own pieces, which are often made with unconventional materials — none, it seems, too lo-fi for Wolston. His heavily decorative Fetish lights are fashioned from neon tubing and sand-cast glass flecked with shards of glass from the trash, and he employs molds made from sewn-together pieces of foam to cast the legs for giant mirror-polished aluminum puzzle-piece dining tables.
Stockholm-based Anton Alvarez doesn’t merely create objects; he fabricates the tools behind them — the things that make the things. Last year, he unveiled a next-generation clay extruder that bears down with nearly three tons of force, squeezing out wobbly vases and sculptures like cake frosting. His enormous tubular thread-wrapping machine — it “sounds like a storm,” he notes — is capable of unspooling 10,000 meters a day of glue-coated Day-Glo string that wraps around anything that passes through it, binding pieces together to make benches, chairs or arches. “When I’m designing the machines I can be very free,” says the Swedish-Chilean designer on being the living master of a craft he seems to have invented.
