Who Decides What’s ‘Sexy’ — And Who Pays for It?
Credit...Photo illustration by Derek Brahney. Man: Holloway/Getty Images.
People magazine’s Sexiest Man Alive has always been less beholden to the bold strokes of bodily divinity. Mel Gibson, Tom Cruise, Harrison Ford: It’s their faces that have occupied each cover, not their bodies. The most recent winner, the country musician Blake Shelton, was an aw-shucks vision of the homespun white American male: plaid and beer and love handles, the kind of guy whose response to his win was “Y’all must be running out of people.” When his selection was announced in the fall, many women shared that perspective — and mobilized, offering “sexy” alternates in lighthearted protest. The issue wasn’t how Shelton looked so much as how he presented: as the Everyman, prized not in spite of his everyday appearance but because of it. (As Entertainment Weekly’s Dana Schwartz tweeted, “Blake Shelton is, at best, the sexiest divorced dad at this barbecue.”) The consensus replacements were the actors Idris Elba and Mahershala Ali, each more conventionally attractive, each also black. Other suggestions included Taika Waititi (sartorially exceptional, Maori) and Jeff Goldblum (charming, eccentric, 65 years old).
Originally, that which was “sexy” merely contained sex. The Oxford English Dictionary traces the word back to the British author Arnold Bennett and an 1896 letter about a work of art deemed too “seksy” to display. (Spelling aside, the word offered a much sleeker substitute for “sexful,” which appeared in print two years earlier.) Impregnating material with sexuality would soon prove itself a potent tool for advertisers. A landmark 1911 ad for Woodbury’s Facial Soap Company featured a man caressing a woman in a low-cut dress, with the tagline “A skin you love to touch.” Five years later, the ballerina Flores Revalles was front-page news after being photographed at the Bronx Zoo in a form-fitting gown with a snake coiled around her — her beauty, the story went, had tamed it.
And actual lust, it turned out, could be made almost indistinguishable from the lust for new products and new experiences. In 1950, the columnist Walter Winchell noted that producers of a show called “Fire Island, New York” worried their title “wouldn’t sound sexy enough.” It was one of the earliest cases of a slippage that has only grown, to the point where almost anything with a little extra oomph can be described as sexy — from a sexy new sports car to a sexy new legislative proposal. In the 1970s, a print ad for a Penril modem described the device as “versatile, dependable, compatible (maybe even sexy).” Because it’s hard to find the sensual side of a box, a woman in go-go boots served as a visual reminder. “Sexy,” more than anything, designates whatever we wish to acquire and consume, whether it’s an auto body or a human one.
This was not how women saw themselves. “What is a sexy woman?” Helen Gurley Brown asked in “Sex and the Single Girl” in 1962. “Very simple.  When Brown became the editor of Cosmopolitan, she delivered sex to women the same way Playboy did to men, with characteristic cover lines like “What’s Most Sexy About Men” and “Are You Sexy?” This was meant as an empowering alternative to the images found elsewhere, but its rapprochement of women and sex also wound up transforming both into one commodity. Sexy women were for sale: Women with enough money could be them, and men with enough money could have them. You, too, could be a modern woman, but only if you put in the man hours between the sheets. Even in the hands of women, “sexy” was still wrapped in the embrace of the market.
The market trades particularly on women’s dissatisfaction with themselves, reducing them to objects of allure that can always be improved with the purchase of a new lipstick. A sexy woman thus becomes bait — a line of thinking that, among this fall’s stories of predation, prompted several remarkable opinions. The designer Donna Karan wondered: “Are we asking for it by presenting all the sensuality and sexuality?” When the market holds both that women should aspire to be sexy and that a sexy woman equals sex, the moment a woman chafes at sexual attention is seen, to some, as a problem of her own making.
After more than 120 years of use, “sexy” resists overnight reconstruction. We may try to chip away at Venus’s stone curves, but the transformation is slow and complex. Women can lay their claim to it — Gurley Brown, Lansdowne, swooning Valentino fans — but a tradition of objectification persists. The women cheerily replacing Blake Shelton were reframing sexiness, but only very slightly; their choices still adhered to an obstinate commercial ideal. We can imagine deifying different bodies or a wider variety of them; we might even imagine a post-gaze society, where we lust after personality and spirit rather than external appearance. But all of this would require reimagining centuries of culture — and reconfiguring the billions of dollars of powerful market forces built atop them.