MELBOURNE, Australia — Billie Jean King said Friday that the Australian Open’s Margaret Court Arena should have its name changed because of Court’s derogatory comments about gay and transgender people.
“If I were playing today, I would not play on it,” King said at a news conference three days before the tournament begins.
King has often defended Court, and the arena, and her shift on Friday was her strongest criticism to date.
King said she originally supported giving the arena Court’s name, a move that was made in 2003.
“I was really for her to have it,” King said. She then paused.
King’s remarks appeared to catch tournament officials off guard.
As controversy mounted over the name of the arena last year, the host federation maintained almost complete silence in the face of calls for the name to be changed because of Court’s remarks about gay people and gay marriage, which recently became legal in Australia after receiving overwhelming support in a public referendum.
Tennis Australia broke that silence on Friday with the announcement of an initiative called “#Open4All” which would indirectly address Court’s vitriol by highlighting the sport’s tolerance.
“Tennis Australia, along with the rest of the tennis family, proudly live the values of equality, inclusion and diversity,” said Australian Open tournament director Craig Tiley.
Tiley announced that King had been named “Australian Open Woman of the Year,” and spoke of her legacy as a pioneer as she sat beside him at the podium.
The facility that hosts the United States Open in Flushing Meadows, N.Y., was christened the Billie Jean King National Tennis Center in 2006. King said she felt an enormous onus to live up to that mantle.
King cited a radio interview Court, 75, gave last May, in which she said it was satanic when children questioned their gender identity.
King said there was no coming back from those remarks.
“When she talked about children of transgenders being from the devil, that put me over the edge, I must say,” she said.
Though she received her annual invitation, Court will not attend this year’s tournament, saying she would watch it on television while vacationing. King expressed disappointment at her absence, said she had been looking forward to seeing her.
“I wish she were here so we could further this discussion,” King said of Court.
Tiley, who sat beside King as she articulated her objections, said her position was not awkward for the tournament.
Margaret Court Arena generally hosts five marquee matches per day through the first week of the tournament, and is sold as a separate ticket from the rest of the grounds. Whether or not any of the hundreds of players who might be assigned matches there would refuse to compete is yet unknown.
The first round of the Australian Open begins Monday.