LONDON — Kim Jones will leave his role as artistic director of men’s wear at Louis Vuitton after the fall 2018 catwalk show on Thursday, the French luxury house has announced, capping months of speculation that he might be departing and prompting questions about where in the fashion world he might go next.
Mr. Jones, an Englishman who held his position at Louis Vuitton for seven years, is the fifth major designer to leave a job in six weeks, including Phoebe Philo from Céline and Jonathan Saunders from Diane von Furstenberg in December. He is a Central Saint Martins graduate who founded his own men’s wear line in London, closing it in 2008 to become creative director of Dunhill and then moving to Louis Vuitton in 2011.
Mr. Jones has been widely applauded for revitalizing the Vuitton men’s wear line for a younger generation, mixing the house’s travel heritage (at the highest end of the price spectrum) with a more street-friendly style.
He pointed to Mr. Jones’ much-hyped (if controversial) collaboration with the New York-based skate brand Supreme last year as an example. Mr. Jones also brought several other collaborators into the Vuitton orbit, including the British artists Jake and Dinos Chapman and the estate of the punk-era artist Christopher Nemeth.
Backstage at his Off-White show on Wednesday, the designer Virgil Abloh said he had not yet heard about Mr. Jones’ departure, but he called him a friend and mentor figure.
“People think about the mix of sportswear and fashion now — he distinctly did that while a whole industry wasn’t really focused on sportswear,” Mr. Abloh said.
Less than 24 hours after news of Mr. Jones’ exit broke, rumors that Mr. Abloh was considered a possible candidate for the position at Louis Vuitton were being bandied about, but Mr. Abloh said that he had “no clue” about that.
Mr. Jones’s departure from the flagship brand of LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, the world’s largest luxury group by sales, kept front-row gossip percolating on Wednesday, the first full day of Paris’ men’s fashion week. Mr. Jones’s name had already come up, alongside that of Riccardo Tisci, in September as a possible successor to Donatella Versace at Versace. He has also been mentioned as a potential designer for Burberry, which, in October, announced that Christopher Bailey, its president and chief creative officer, would step down at the end of 2018, after 17 years at the brand.
In a trading call update Wednesday, Burberry’s chief financial officer, Julie Brown, said the company would not comment on speculation about specific individuals. Versace could not be reached for comment.