Maggie Nichols announced Tuesday that she, too, was sexually abused by the former U.S.A. Gymnastics team physician Dr. Lawrence G. Nassar, and that she was the first to report the abuse to the sport’s national governing body.
Ms. Nichols’s mother, Gina Nichols, said in a phone interview that her daughter finally felt comfortable speaking out after “living with this torment” for so long.
In speaking out, Ms. Nichols joins the former team members McKayla Maroney, Aly Raisman, Gabby Douglas, and more than 100 other women who say they were abused by the doctor.
The abuse began when she was 15 years old, Ms. Nichols said. At the time she was a rising star on the United States national team, aiming for a spot at the Olympics.
She reported the abuse to U.S.A. Gymnastics in the summer of 2015, she said, setting off an investigation into Dr. Nassar, who was fired that year.
But according to Ms. Nichols’s lawyer, U.S.A. Gymnastics waited five weeks to notify law enforcement, and did not report the reason for Dr. Nassar’s dismissal to Michigan State University, where he continued to practice medicine until he was arrested. Likewise, Michigan State did not alert U.S.A. Gymnastics when the university investigated Dr. Nassar in 2014, Mr. Manly said.
U.S.A. Gymnastics said in a statement on Tuesday that it was “entirely baseless” to suggest that it had attempted to silence athletes or keep the investigation secret, and that it never tried to hide Dr. Nassar’s misconduct.
Ms. Nichols retired in 2016 and has been competing collegiately instead.
When she announced that she would be leaving elite gymnastics, Ms. Nichols was a four-time United States medal winner and a member of the 2015 world championship gold-medal winning team, where she also won individual bronze on floor. She was not selected for the Olympic team, and said a knee injury was part of what prevented her from continuing.
“For me as a parent, I feel like what happened to my daughter was inexcusable, gross negligence,” she added.
Dr. Nassar pleaded guilty to sexually abusing gymnasts under the guise of medical treatment, and was sentenced in December to 60 years in prison on child pornography charges after more than 37,000 images of child pornography were found on his computer.
He is expected to be sentenced to 25 years or more on the molestation charges.
