MELBOURNE, Australia — On the eve of the Australian Open two weeks ago, Novak Djokovic, the president of the ATP player council, addressed more than 100 players to outline his vision for a better future for his constituents. His ideas reportedly included a new association to represent players’ interests in a more forceful, independent capacity that could recoup a greater share of profits from tournaments.
After the closed-door meeting dispersed, the word that echoed out from the room was “unionization,” and a possible restructuring of the ATP World Tour, which currently represents both men’s players and tournaments.
As the tournament got underway, players were asked for their thoughts on a union, and the idea resonated among men and women alike. Many players support trying to bring tennis more in line with other sports in terms of the percentage of revenue that goes to the athletes.
But among the WTA players, there were concerns that they would not be included in the discussions and that they currently had no leader like Djokovic fighting as passionately for their causes. Some suggested a joint union would be a solution in an era where the biggest events are combined.
The veteran player Mirjana Lucic-Baroni said she had been agitating for a union since joining the tour in the late 1990s.
If “everyone” means including players from the WTA and ATP tours, it will take unprecedented cooperation and a compromise in leadership styles. Djokovic was asked if he would join with the women, but generally declined to answer questions about the players meeting and possible unionization.
The men have been louder about complaints this decade and they hold several all-hands-on-deck meetings throughout the season for players to air ideas and grievances. WTA players tend to angle for change behind the scenes, as they did during their fight for equal prize money at Grand Slam tournaments in the mid-2000s, and do not meet en masse regularly like the men do.
Pam Shriver, who served as president of the Women’s Tennis Association from 1991 to 1994, when it functioned as a players’ organization separate from the tour, said Djokovic and players on the men’s tour would be making a mistake by trying to battle for more without the other half of the tennis population.
Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova, a former member of the WTA player council, said she believed many improvements the women have enjoyed, especially at events with equal prize money, were thanks to the work of men. In recent years, the ATP Player Council negotiated significant prize-money increases at the Grand Slam events.
Lucic-Baroni thought the opposition of some men to equal prize money at joint tournaments, a sentiment that Djokovic expressed in 2016, would prove an immediate obstacle to the players working together.
“There’s the difficulty, right there: if you think you deserve more money for the same stuff, we’re going to disagree right away,” she said.
Lucie Safarova, a current member of the WTA players’ council, said that sometimes the women do better on their own in the marketplace. She cited the recent deal to move the year-end championships to Shenzhen, China, where a prize money purse of $14 million will dwarf the $8 million the men now receive at their equivalent tournament in London.
The 10-member WTA player council does not have a president, and thus identifying a leader is tricky. Venus and Serena Williams have been major forces behind the scenes, particularly on the issue of equal prize money, but neither plays a full schedule of events anymore. Serena Williams is no longer on the council.
WTA chief executive Steve Simon said he was impressed with the younger generation’s attention to tour issues.
Elena Vesnina said that men were better at being “more pushy” about tour issues, and that her tour lacked a clear leader like Billie Jean King, who founded the WTA and began the fight for equal pay nearly 45 years ago.
Shriver said that with many top players already scooped up by agencies and management companies, which also own and operate tournaments, the deck was stacked against a young player with the independence to drive change.
Lucic-Baroni expressed frustration at players paying lip service to King without actually following her example.
Kristina Mladenovic, a women’s doubles champion at the Australian Open, said the players did not need a leader for battle, but an increased focus on off-court issues.
