WASHINGTON — Even as President Trump threatened to block the publication of a book detailing his slapdash approach to the presidency, his White House is scheduled to receive a cinematic, if belated, lesson on the failed precedent of prior restraint on the American press.
This particular lesson stars Tom Hanks and Meryl Streep.
Setting what is likely to be a landspeed record for stranger-than-fiction irony, the White House has requested and received permission to screen “The Post.” The movie recounts the Nixon administration’s attempts to stop newspapers from publishing portions of a classified government study about the Vietnam War.
Presidential administrations often seek to screen films, but this otherwise ho-hum request carried special significance this week.
The White House had no comment on the film schedule. Its request was confirmed by a representative for Fox Movies, the film’s distributor, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he said he was not authorized to speak about such agreements.
Screening requests by the White House are commonplace in modern administrations but are generally kept under wraps if the film is shown during presidential downtime. The news that the White House would screen “The Post” was first reported by The Hollywood Reporter.
There is no guarantee that the president will be in the room if, when or even where either movie is screened. Mr. Trump, who is described in Mr. Wolff’s book as, among other attributes, having a tiny attention span, has said that he has trouble sitting through movies and knows in the first five minutes whether he will enjoy a film. He will get up and leave if he realizes he will not.
Mr. Trump’s low regard for reporters has not found favor with the stars of “The Post,” who have grown increasingly vocal after the film’s premiere.
The Nixon administration accused The Times of violating the Espionage Act, and won a temporary court order in 1971 that blocked the newspaper from publishing more of what became known as the Pentagon Papers. That is when The Washington Post, led by the publisher Katharine Graham, stepped in.
Mr. Hanks, who plays Ben Bradlee, the former editor of The Post, told The Hollywood Reporter in December that he would not attend a White House screening of his own movie.
This White House has demonstrated a knack for scheduling movie screenings to match — or clash with — the news cycle it perpetuates: Last January, aides screened “Finding Dory,” about a family’s efforts to reunite, as protests against the administration’s immigration ban roiled the country.