Most countries treat subway systems as national assets. They understand that their cities are their great wealth creators and equality enablers and that cities don’t work without subways. The public-private corporation that runs Hong Kong’s subway expects 99.9 percent of its trains to run on time, and they do. (If you are traveling to the airport, you can also check your luggage at a central downtown train station and not see it again until you’ve landed at your destination. Imagine!) China has been feverishly building new metro systems in cities across the country, a recognition that subways are the only way to keep pace with the nation’s rapid urbanization and the needs of its citizens. And it’s not just new cities that are seeing major investments in their subways. Two decades ago, the decline of London’s Underground became a national crisis; now it’s moving toward running driverless trains. For that matter, Los Angeles — Los Angeles — recently embarked on a 40-year, $120 billion project to build out its mass-transit system.
New York City’s subway, meanwhile, is falling apart.  But even if you aren’t, it has probably become difficult to ignore all the stories about the system’s failure: the F train that was trapped between stations for close to an hour without power or air conditioning, the Q train that derailed in Brooklyn, the track fire on the A line in Harlem that sent nine passengers to the hospital. The cumulative impression of all these miserable underground experiences — and all these stories about miserable underground experiences — is that the situation is hopeless, that the subway cannot be fixed. The subway has been wrecked, and in this era of short-term thinking and government mistrust, public-works projects with benefits larger than any single mind can realize are no longer possible. But it is possible to fix the subway. And we must. Our failure to do so would be a collective and historic act of self-destruction.
All these problems lead to one really big problem: The trains are terminally late, obstructed daily by a cascade of system failures. During the first three months of 2017, three-quarters of the subway’s lines were chronically behind schedule. The worst offender, the 2 train, was late nearly 70 percent of the time.
For a delayed rider wondering whom to blame, it’s tempting to begin with the people you can see, the 7,000 or so men and women — track cleaners, inspectors, flaggers and other orange-vested M.T.A. employees — charged with preventing these incidents and keeping the trains moving. On a steamy morning in August, I sat among a small group of them in a dingy, defunct public elementary school in Gravesend, Brooklyn, that serves as the M.T.A.’s Transit Learning Center. Taped to the classroom wall were yellowing tabloid clips of a different kind of subway horror story — “MAN UNDER!, RAIL HORROR: HIT THIRD TRACK AND LIVED!” — a tableau that lent the one-day safety course, a requirement for all M.T.A. employees and contractors, some of the flavor of those grisly low-budget driver’s-ed videos designed to scare teenagers straight.
At point-blank range, subway cars seem invincible. In fact, they can be laid low by something as insignificant as a broken bolt or a can of soda — which, when resting against the third rail, might heat up and ignite a scrap of newspaper, causing a track fire, the source of hundreds of delays every month. Every inch of the system’s rails is supposed to be checked twice a week for imperfections. Much of this work happens overnight, when the frequency of trains on this 24-hour system decreases and workers are able to move more freely on the tracks. “While the rest of the city is sleeping, there’s a whole industrial ballet going on underground that most people have no idea about,” John Samuelsen, a track inspector who now runs the Transport Workers Union of America, told me. “It’s like friggin’ Brigadoon down there.” And yet a recent study found that only 3 percent of the tracks in stations meet the M.T.A.’s own standards for cleanliness.
In fact, the M.T.A. has often proved all too capable of spending money, with construction costs well beyond what other cities spend on similar projects. It’s fair to blame the whole New York political establishment — Cuomo, de Blasio and their counterparts stretching back decades — for presiding over the subway’s decline. But the real political problem is, at root, a structural one. The subway subsists on an ad hoc patchwork of taxes implemented and overseen by a governor who represents millions of voters well beyond the greater metropolitan area. Brennan estimates that New York City is responsible for 55 percent of the state’s revenues, but that doesn’t change a fundamental political reality for its governors: People who don’t ride the subway don’t want to pay for the subway. You might say the subway is a victim of the same rural-urban divide that has come to define American politics today. A more parochial version of this divide exists in the city itself, where representatives of car-centric outer-borough neighborhoods continue to fight congestion-pricing plans that could deliver hundreds of millions of dollars every year to the M.T.A.
Just this partial list — I haven’t included the platform doors, for instance — brings the total to about $111 billion. It’s a big number. But not when you put it in context. New York City and its environs generated $1.7 trillion in gross metropolitan product in 2016. That’s roughly 9 percent of the nation’s overall G.D.P. How much of that activity is dependent on the subway? About a year before Hurricane Sandy, a state-funded group of scientists and engineers produced a comprehensive (and as it happens, prescient) report on the damage that a hundred-year storm surge could cause to the system. One of the study’s authors, Klaus Jacob, a geophysicist at Columbia University, told me that losing the subway for a month would cost the city about $60 billion in lost economic output.
The subway has made a lot of people very rich. And without carefully constructed zoning laws that foster inclusive growth, it can create the kind of gentrification that contributes to America’s growing income divide. That divide has been especially acute in New York City. The Fiscal Policy Institute, an economic think tank, reports that between 1980 and 2015, the share of the country’s income going to the wealthiest 1 percent increased from 10 percent to 22 percent. In New York City, it went from 12.2 percent to 40.9 percent. The subway can help narrow that divide by doing what subways do best: increasing density. For all the recent growth in neighborhoods like Dumbo and Williamsburg, large pockets of the city remain underpopulated and underdeveloped. Many of these neighborhoods already have good subway access. One of them is in a section of Brooklyn called East New York.
East New York is predominantly black and Hispanic, with a small South Asian community. Its median household income is about $35,000, and some 35 percent of its 35,000 or so residents live below the federal poverty level. East New York was gradually hollowed out by the same cycle of disinvestment that ate away at a lot of formerly middle-class neighborhoods in New York and other American cities over the course of the 1960s and ’70s. The city’s manufacturing jobs had disappeared, and the white middle-class flight from the neighborhood was underway, helped along by avaricious real estate brokers who issued alarmist warnings about East New York’s future. In the process, East New York became a victim of what economists call spatial, or geographic, inequality: As its population shrank and its demographics changed, stores closed and city services declined, perpetuating the cycle of poverty.
His instinct was right. “Trains started at Yankee Stadium and went down the D line to 36th Street, then switched over to the N line to Coney Island, then continued through the Coney Island terminal, before switching to the Q line to Brighton Beach,” Diamond told me. This sort of move wouldn’t be possible in most other cities, where subway lines operate independently, but in New York they overlap and intersect, making a single, cohesive, interchangeable whole. “It was actually pretty brilliant,” he said in a reverent tone, as the blue sky in front of us began to darken.