The show, and the tour, can go on. The dancers and stage managers of American Ballet Theater, who voted earlier this month to authorize a strike as contract talks grew tense, have reached a tentative agreement with the company, their union announced Tuesday.
The deal was reached as Ballet Theater set out on a tour, which began as planned on Tuesday night, at the Kennedy Center in Washington. The tour will take the company to Detroit; Lincoln, Neb.; Chicago; and, in March, to Asia.
The tentative agreement, reached between Ballet Theater and the American Guild of Musical Artists, which represents roughly 90 company dancers and stage managers, will raise the salaries of the lowest-paid dancers the most. Those dancers, in the corps de ballet, will get raises of 4 percent in the first year, 3 percent in the second year and 3 percent the third year under the agreement. (Corps members currently get paid from a little more than $1,000 a week to $1,900 a week, depending upon seniority.) The company’s better-paid soloists will not get raises in the first two years, and will get a 1 percent raise in the third year of the contract.
The agreement will also lead to increased payments to retirement plans — a major sticking point in the talks. The company eliminated payments to defined contribution retirement plans for a year after the recent recession hit, and then restored them at half their previous level — 3.75 percent of income, down from 7.5 percent, the union said. The new agreement calls for the company to increase its contribution to 4 percent in the third year of the new contract.
The company’s management disputed some of the figures, but declined to say which ones. Kelly Ryan, a spokeswoman for the company, said, “we don’t want to comment on specifics.” She said that the company was pleased that it had reached an agreement.
The agreement must still be reviewed by the union’s board of governors.
“We are very pleased to successfully conclude these negotiations and I know that these dedicated artists are now looking forward to embarking on a successful U.S. tour,” Leonard Egert, the national executive director of the Guild, said in a statement.