What Does It Take to Stop Accepting Pollution as the Price of Progress?
The first time I heard the phrase “pollution refugee” was more than two decades ago, when I lived in Mexico City. My home office sat in a garden of roses and bougainvillea, but it was shrouded in unremitting haze. The city’s air in those days was so contaminated by lead, ozone and other chemicals that birds dropped dead in the smog — and I developed a wheezing cough after games of basketball. On a rare blue-sky day more than a year after I arrived, I gazed, for the first time, at one of the snow-capped volcanoes that rise above the city. Hard to believe: 17,694-foot Popocatépetl had loomed there all along. The next day, the smog returned. I would see the volcano only once more before I moved away.
Around this time, in the 1990s, officials in another heaving capital, New Delhi, began to anticipate an air-pollution crisis of their own, a looming threat to public health that could have grave economic consequences as well. A 1997 government white paper identified the main culprits (vehicle exhaust and industrial emissions) and outlined urgent actions to avert the smog-choked fate of Mexico City, among the world’s most polluted metropolises at the time. But the Mexican capital led the way. Over the next two decades, the city government enacted a series of measures (limiting traffic, shutting down coal-fired plants, mandating cleaner fuels and catalytic converters) that have cut pollution by more than 50 percent. These days, it’s no longer a surprise to see Popocatépetl.
The Delhi action plan urged similar long-term policies, but few of them were carried out. More than 20 years later, the toxic morass hanging over the capital this winter has been so thick that even Delhi’s chief minister, Arvind Kejriwal, criticized it, calling his region “a gas chamber.” He blamed the hazardous haze on the seasonal burning of crop stubble in neighboring states, while others condemned the 13 thermal power plants around the overcrowded capital. At one point in November, when pollution levels were 20 times the World Health Organization’s safe level, the city’s plan to use smog-dispersing helicopters was grounded — by the smog itself. The government undertook some stopgap measures, closing schools, shutting kilns and factories and banning trucks. But a statue of Mohandas Gandhi in a Delhi park seemed girded for the struggle ahead: Antipollution campaigners had fitted the mahatma with a respirator mask.
Dirty air has been seen as the unavoidable byproduct of economic growth ever since the coal-stoked advent of the industrial age. The soot-stained “fogs” of 19th-century London seemed to bring about, as Charles Dickens wrote, “the death of the sun.” The perpetual smoke that enveloped Pittsburgh, the musclebound center of American industrial power, reminded one 19th-century writer of “hell with the lid taken off.” Back then, residents of these industrial capitals had little idea about the dangers of inhaling soot and smog. Indeed, many Londoners took pride in their “pea soup” as a symbol of progress and prosperity.
In recent years, Beijing has been the embodiment of the city besieged by air pollution, an economic juggernaut with episodes of smog so extreme that they have earned their own sobriquet: “airpocalypse.” Now the mantle passes to India. In the past two years, Delhi has had only eight days when pollution levels have met W.H.O. safety standards, according to Usman Nasim, a researcher at the Delhi-based Center for Science and Environment. And Delhi is probably not the most polluted city in India. Recent data suggest that four other Indian cities have higher average levels of PM2.5, microscopic airborne particulates that are especially harmful to humans.
The old logic about pollution — that it is the price of progress — has shifted, even in the developing world. Tackling air pollution in countries still dependent on coal (as both China and India are) takes an abundance of political will — and money. Shutting down dirty factories, cleaning up industry and shifting toward renewable energy can initially drive up costs and impede growth. But researchers are finding that pollution can be an even bigger drag on growth over the long term. It not only damages a country’s image and hurts its ability to attract talent, tourists and investors; air pollution also exacts heavy losses in health expenditures, labor losses, agricultural activity and premature deaths. (The W.H.O. estimates that air pollution causes close to a million deaths per year in both India and China.) Over all, the World Bank estimates that air pollution already drains at least $55 billion worth of labor output alone from the Indian economy every year.
Such economic tidings, environmentalists hope, will push India to finally rise above its fractious politics and fragile institutions to tackle endemic pollution. The signs, however, are not all promising. India’s former environment minister himself dismissed what he called a “misleading” W.H.O. report that listed more than 30 Indian cities among the world’s 100 most polluted — and rejected another scientific study linking air pollution to mortality.
Looking at how India and China deal with pollution crises raises the question of which type of government might get better results: democratic or authoritarian? Even in India, environmentalists marvel at China’s ability to mobilize its bureaucratic machinery. But the reality is messier. China’s pollution crisis, which grew out of its three-decade pursuit of economic growth at all costs, festered in a closed one-party system that suppresses information and public opinion. It was considered almost revolutionary in 2012 when the U.S. Embassy, defying Beijing, continued to share real-time pollution data online from its own air-quality monitor. My family lived in Beijing for four years, at a time when every winter morning was a roll of the dice: crisp blue skies or apocalyptic smog-scape. My sons knew that if they could not see the building across from us, 100 yards away, school would be canceled. For them, a smog day was just like a snow day, only spent indoors — next to the air purifiers.
How, then, did China suddenly declare its “war on pollution” in 2014? There were factors beyond the poisonous smog: a slowing economy, a crippling coal addiction, a fed-up middle class clamoring for better quality of life. Above all, it was economics. China’s Ministry of Environmental Protection estimated that pollution in 2010 cost the economy around $227 billion, or roughly 3.5 percent of G.D.P. Despite resistance from industry and local governments — China is not a monolith, after all — the country has shut down coal-burning factories, doubled down on renewable energy, created a dense grid of air-monitoring stations and exposed thousands of officials for violating environmental laws. This is all good, but so far, much of the effort has focused on the region around China’s showcase city, Beijing.
Pollution will still plague Asia’s two largest capitals for years to come. When Delhi’s worst smog subsided this winter, The Times of India ran the headline: “Air Quality Very Poor — and It’s Good News.” Beijing, for its part, rang in 2018 with another bout of hazardous smog. My family and I left that city three years ago for Shanghai, where the air, though still dirty, was better for our children’s lungs. A few months ago, we left China altogether for a cleaner Asian city, where we wake up to the sound of tropical birds singing in the flame tree outside, happy to call ourselves pollution fugitives.