The scrutiny followed changes that Facebook announced in January to its News Feed, the scrolling screen of content that the social network’s more than two billion members see when they log in to the site. After months of criticism over the harmful effects of the social network, Mr. Zuckerberg said Facebook wanted to emphasize more “meaningful” content, such as photos and posts that friends and family have interacted with, and would play down articles from publishers. At the time, Mr. Zuckerberg acknowledged that the shift might cause people to spend less time on Facebook, at least in the short run.
That has already proven to be true in some instances, Facebook revealed on Wednesday. The shift to more meaningful content has just started rolling out, but the company made other changes last year as a precursor to the latest moves, including cutting down on viral videos. In response, Facebook users over all reduced the time they spent on the platform by roughly 50 million hours a day, Mr. Zuckerberg said, which translates to about two minutes a day for each of the company’s 1.4 billion daily users.
Mr. Zuckerberg said these declines were just fluctuations as Facebook made changes to its platform. Over all, the total number of people who use Facebook monthly jumped 14 percent in the fourth quarter to 2.13 billion users, which is a rate of growth that is far higher than that of many other social media companies.
“We have a responsibility to fully understand how our services are used and amplify the good,” Mr. Zuckerberg said.
Facebook also continued to spend ferociously over the fourth quarter, with capital expenditures reaching $2.3 billion. The company said its number of employees increased 47 percent from a year ago to 25,105 people.
Facebook spent much of last year grappling with questions about whether it had become a force for ill. The company disclosed that it been manipulated by Russian agents who were trying to sway the result of the 2016 elections; Facebook faced a grilling by lawmakers on Capitol Hill over the situation.
