Politics|‘I’m Running,’ Romney Says Privately, but as a Trump Friend or Foe?
The political resurrection of Mr. Romney appears unstoppable in a state where he was not raised and where he has not lived for most of his adult life. Mr. Romney, a Michigan-reared former Massachusetts governor, who was successfully treated for prostate cancer last summer, is beloved here as the savior of the Salt Lake Winter Olympics and as Mormon royalty.
Utahans saw Mr. Trump as a far cry from his predecessor from four years earlier.
A sixth-generation Utahan who will say only that he did not vote for Mr. Trump or Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Cox all but encouraged Mr. Romney to be a voice of opposition when needed.
That is precisely why Mr. Trump aggressively wooed Mr. Hatch to run for an eighth term, even flying the 83-year-old senator out to Salt Lake City last month, hoping to block Mr. Romney’s return.
Just how far Mr. Romney is willing to go to confront Mr. Trump, though, is very much in question. After his Salt Lake speech, Mr. Romney embraced Mr. Trump when it appeared he was in the running for secretary of state, even submitting to a frog leg dinner with Mr. Trump at Jean-Georges in Manhattan.
“I think there is a willingness on both sides to say, ‘Look, we may disagree on stuff, we may have problems from our past, but what we ought to be looking toward is our future,’” Mr. Herbert said.
But Mr. Hughes came away stunned from a private meeting late last year with Mr. Romney, who seemed unaware that the protests by National Football League players during the national anthem had contributed to the league’s woes with fans, according to a Republican to whom Mr. Hughes mentioned the conversation. It was, to the speaker, an indication that Mr. Romney remains somewhat insulated by his wealth.
The contrasting expectations for how Utah Republicans want Mr. Romney to handle Mr. Trump reveals not only the fault lines of the party as it eyes the 2020 race for governor (Mr. Cox and Mr. Hughes are both considering campaigns for the open-seat race) but also the nuances within the church over how differently Mormons view the president.
And while Mr. Romney is not expected to face a competitive race in the general election, the demographics in this state are changing as non-Mormon transplants move in and some natives drift from the faith of their families.
Jenny Wilson, whose father once ran against Mr. Hatch, reflects this shift. A member of the Salt Lake County Council, Ms. Wilson is the likely Democratic nominee in the Senate race. She was “baptized Mormon,” as she put it, but is no longer active in the church.
The overwhelmingly white, Republican and male power structure of the state is outdated, she argued.
“My interest in running for office is about offering a different voice,” she said, noting that there were no Democrats in the state’s congressional delegation.
In the slope-side lobby of the St. Regis resort in Deer Valley last weekend, a mix of Utah and Washington contributors gathered for a ski fund-raiser for Mr. Hatch, the proceeds of which may eventually find their way to a political institute he plans to build.
Not far from the hot-chocolate bar, Mr. Hatch, clad in a patterned ski sweater, helped hand out Olympic-medal-style awards to participants.
Most everyone in attendance expected Mr. Romney to run. And Gordon Smith, a former moderate Republican senator from Oregon who is from a prominent Mormon family, crowed a little over how the only apparent impediment had been swept away, with the defenestration of Stephen K. Bannon, who had harshly criticized Mr. Romney.
