WASHINGTON — President Trump on Wednesday abruptly shut down a White House commission he had charged with investigating voter fraud, ending a brief quest for evidence of election theft that generated lawsuits, outrage and some scholarly testimony, but no real evidence that American elections are corrupt.
Mr. Trump established the commission after his repeated insistence, without credible evidence, that widespread voter fraud explained how Hillary Clinton received about 2.9 million more votes while he won the presidency in the Electoral College.
It is an issue that continues to resonate with his base voters, and Mr. Trump has mentioned it in recent rallies, but there have been few Republicans in Congress who have followed him.
The closing of the commission was a blow for Kris Kobach, the secretary of state of Kansas and the panel’s vice chairman. Mr. Kobach was one of a few state officials to support Mr. Trump’s contention of widespread fraud.
“We will do this in support of state governments who are responsible for administering elections,” he added.
But states may well not cooperate with the department any more than they did with the panel.
As a first step, Mr. Kobach, who said he would remain as an informal adviser to homeland security, said the department would marshal its files on immigrants, legal and otherwise, so that they can be matched with lists of registered voters nationwide to detect foreign citizens who are illegally casting ballots in American elections. Both Mr. Trump and Mr. Kobach have insisted that voting by noncitizens is endemic — Mr. Trump falsely claimed that millions of illegal voters cost him a popular-vote victory in 2016 — but investigations, including ones by Mr. Kobach and the Justice Department under President George W. Bush, turned up scant evidence of fraud.
Many Democratic secretaries of state had said they believed the commission had a goal of laying the groundwork for restrictions that will mostly make it harder for traditional Democratic constituencies — minorities, young people and the poor — to cast ballots, which would benefit Republican candidates.
The commission had been seeking voluminous information on voters, including names, addresses, dates of birth, political affiliations and the last four digits of Social Security numbers, along with voting history. It also had requested records of felony convictions and whether voters are registered in other states.
But many states bar the release of even partial Social Security numbers or other personal information because that data can be used for identity theft.
The commission had faced a deadline days from now about how it would proceed. Vice President Mike Pence, who was tasked with running it, was never particularly excited about the idea, and several members of the commission had objected to working with Mr. Kobach, according to a White House official.
Another official said that the idea, which was supported by the president’s former chief strategist, Stephen K. Bannon, was destined to be shoved off on an agency. And on a day when Mr. Bannon was already under fire for disparaging comments he made in a new book about the presidency, aides put the blame for the existence of the commission on him and insisted he had supported it eagerly. As coverage of the book dominated headlines, the White House pushed out the news of the commission’s closing.
Groups that opposed the commission said its real mission was voter suppression, in ways that would help Republicans, and they were quick to declare victory.
“The commission’s entire purpose was to legitimize voter suppression,” said Vanita Gupta, the president of the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights and former head of the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division.
Richard L. Hasen, a law professor and election law scholar at the University of California, Irvine, was sharply critical of the commission in a blog post.
“The commission was poorly organized and conceived,” he wrote.
