This week, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who has spent the past year shape-shifting his way into the facsimile of a leftist mascot, came up against the contradictions of political marketing. Mr. Cuomo recently proposed a series of legislative changes to the judicial system that he called “the most progressive set of reforms in the nation.” Yet at the same time, his own Department of Corrections was moving ahead with an entirely off-brand initiative whose disturbing effect was to reduce inmate access to reading material.
The program, which was in a pilot phase in three prisons, confined what inmates could receive to the inventory of six vendors who specialize in prison care-packages and offer relatively few books that deviate from the categories of religious text or insipid fiction. The impetus for it had been concern over an increasing volume of heroin entering the prison system. During a single week in April 2015, more than 25 people were treated for overdoses across the state’s prisons. Last year, over Columbus Day weekend, eight people were treated in a single facility.
But among those who would no longer be able to supply books to prisoners was a volunteer organization called Books Through Bars that delivers thousands of books a year to prisoners around the country free, about cultural history, chess, origami, language-learning. Some of the books in highest demand deal with fighting addiction and depression. The organization was hardly a source of contraband.
The vendors with whom the state had contracted were chosen for their ability to deliver secure packaging but there are broad problems with the services they provide. The products sold are typically offered with little regard to the farmers’ market values we have imposed on every other corner of American life. Foodwise, “it’s all junk,” I was told by a woman named Kay White, who for several years had a close friend who was serving out a prison sentence, moving among several medium-security institutions in upstate New York, near the Canadian border.
When she visited, Ms. White, a media buyer living in Brooklyn, would bring him fresh fruit, hermetically sealed according to prison regulations, and shrimp that was fully cooked, prepackaged and tightly sealed, but not frozen. What she quickly observed is that inmates without friends and family on the outside taking caring of them — “doing a bid,” in the parlance of the system — were dependent on getting the extras that make prison life marginally less stultifying from companies that delivered T-shirts, sneakers, crackers, Funyuns, Doritos, Listerine and so on solely to convicts.
And their prices are high: The 10-ounce bag of miniature 3 Musketeers that costs $3.33 if they are bought online from Target costs just under $5 if you are sending them, for instance, from Walkenhorst’s, a 25-year-old supplier of prison care packages, to the Cape Vincent Correctional Facility in Jefferson County. At EFordcommissary, which bills itself as “New York State’s No. 1 Source for Inmate Commissary!” the category of “Healthy/Nutritious” snacks features three products, all of them Fiber One bars, in the flavors of Streusel, Chocolate, Cinnamon Coffee Cake and a few others, none of them embracing the ethos of the grain bowl. The fruit is all presliced in plastic cups.
“Can you imagine not having a peach for 20 years?” Ms. White asked.
What if, in fact, there were an Amazon for prisoners, even a low-tech version, an apparatus through which they could get food, books and other things — properly contained — delivered to them, which didn’t merely mimic the caricatures of ghetto life? It is a project Ms. White has been working on for a while, with support from the Dream Big Foundation, an incubator for entrepreneurs in underserved communities. Her vision involves distributing circulars to the family members of inmates, perhaps when they are in line for buses on their way to prison visits, and ultimately delivering what prisoners might actually want in meticulous wrapping. 