It would seem unlikely that a single state legislative seat in Westchester County could hold the key to Democrats scoring a government trifecta in Albany, an alignment in which one party controls the governorship, as well as both houses of the Legislature.
But some political experts say the 37th Senate District may be that pivotal.
In November, George Latimer, a Democratic state senator from the 37th District, ran for Westchester County executive and trounced the two-term Republican incumbent, Rob Astorino. Many saw that election as a suburban referendum on the record of President Trump in a county where Democrats outnumber Republicans two-to-one.
Now, Mr. Latimer’s former Senate seat is up for grabs, and the special election to replace him has once again assumed heightened implications.
While the Assembly has an overwhelming Democratic majority, the Senate is controlled by Republicans, thanks to a power-sharing arrangement between Republicans and several Democrats.
Democrats have a different view. “It’s a marvel of modern technology how gerrymandered you can make the New York Senate map,” said Evan Stavisky, a partner in the Parkside Group, a political consulting firm that represents the Senate Democratic Campaign Committee.
So far, three candidates have stepped forward to run for the Westchester Senate seat, which covers diverse cities like Yonkers to the south, affluent suburbs like Larchmont and more rural towns like Bedford.
Shelley B. Mayer, an assemblywoman from Yonkers, secured the Democratic nomination in mid-January. Ms. Mayer, a lawyer who has been in the Assembly since 2012, said she expected to benefit from the activism of Democratic women angered by President Trump. “The enthusiasm of women toward my candidacy — and toward women running in local elections — is extraordinary to watch,” she said.
The county’s Republican Party, meanwhile, has yet to name a candidate. Mr. Colety said that he hoped to nominate someone in early February. Neither of the two declared Republicans — Daniel Schorr and Sarmad Khojasteh — have held office, a fact that Ms. Mayer, 64, seized on. “I’ve been in the world of Albany, and I say it in a positive way because I know how to get things done,” she said.
Mr. Schorr was a prosecutor in Queens and Westchester Counties, where he specialized in sex crimes. (In 2009, he lost his bid for Westchester County district attorney) He also served as inspector general for Yonkers, conducting audits and investigations. Now he examines cases of sexual misconduct for Kroll, the private investigative agency.
Mr. Khojasteh, a 36-year-old lawyer of Bedford, has made upward mobility a centerpiece of his campaign. The son of Iranian immigrants — he came to the United States when he was 1 — Mr. Khojasteh grew up in Poughkeepsie and attended the University of Chicago Law School.
Were Ms. Mayer to prevail in a special election, there are a number of potential complications with the plan for Democratic reunification; there is a provision, for example, that allows each side to approve the other’s deputies.
And even if the two Democratic factions successfully merged, it would technically still leave the party shy of a 32-seat majority, because of Simcha Felder, a Brooklyn Democrat. He is not part of the Independent Democratic Conference, but has nonetheless caucused with Republicans since his election in 2012, saying it favors his constituents.
After the deal was announced last fall, Mr. Felder said he could be persuaded to join Democrats, or stay with Republicans, if either side embraces a plan to put armed guards at every New York City school.
Meanwhile, Republicans in the Senate seem unlikely to cede control without a struggle. Last fall they suggested that they could retain power through 2018, citing rules they say would prevent a change in leadership without a 38-seat majority.
