After President Trump vaguely denied using objectionable language to describe African and Caribbean nations, Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, relayed his account of the events.
As Senator Graham made his presentation, the president interrupted him several times with questions, and in the course of his comments, said things which were hate-filled, vile and racist. I cannot believe that in the history of the White House and that Oval Office, any president has ever spoken the words I personally heard our president speak yesterday. To no surprise, the president started tweeting this morning, denying that he used those words. It is not true. He said these hate-filled things, and he said them repeatedly.
WASHINGTON — It was just after President Trump had finished railing in the Oval Office against African immigrants he said came from “shithole countries” when a senior Republican senator, Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, who was there to negotiate a deal on immigration, spoke up.
Mr. Trump’s racially charged comments in front of more than half a dozen lawmakers, which also extended to immigrants from Haiti — followed by a day in which members of Congress denounced the president, defended him or stayed silent — now threaten what had been an emerging agreement to protect undocumented immigrants brought to the United States as children.
Several people with knowledge of the conversation said the president had also demanded to know whether Haitian immigrants could be left out of any deal. The White House has not disputed the account of the exchange.
The collapse of negotiations on an immigration deal would raise the risk of a government shutdown next week, given that many Democrats have said such an agreement must be included in any measure to continue funding the government past a Jan. 19 deadline.
“I cannot believe that, in the history of the White House in that Oval Office, any president has ever spoken the words that I personally heard our president speak yesterday,” Mr. Durbin said.
Senator Tim Scott, Republican of South Carolina, told The Post and Courier of Charleston that Mr. Graham had related Mr. Trump’s remarks to him after the meeting, and he called news reports about them “basically accurate” based on that account.
According to three people briefed about the meeting, it featured a dramatic moment between the president and Mr. Graham, who referred to Mr. Trump during the 2016 presidential campaign as a “race-baiting, xenophobic, religious bigot,” but who has recently grown close to the president and has advised him on immigration policy.
After Mr. Trump disparaged African nations in foul terms, they said, Mr. Graham answered with an impassioned defense of immigrants and immigration as essential to the American ideals of diversity and inclusion.
Mr. Graham has not responded to repeated requests for comment on the president’s remarks or his own. But on Friday, he released a statement that appeared to confirm the tenor of both.
In Twitter posts on Friday, Mr. Trump charged that Democrats had fabricated parts of the exchange even as he defended the sentiment that prompted them.
In a joint statement released on Friday, two Republican senators who also attended the session, Tom Cotton of Arkansas and David Perdue of Georgia, charged that Democrats were acting dishonorably, claiming that they could not remember whether Mr. Trump used the words attributed to him.
Also present at the meeting were the House majority leader, Representative Kevin McCarthy, Republican of California; Representative Robert W. Goodlatte, Republican of Virginia and the chairman of the Judiciary Committee; and Representative Mario Diaz-Balart, Republican of Florida.
Some Republicans condemned the president’s remarks, as Democrats announced plans to introduce a resolution next week to formally censure him for them.
At an event in Wisconsin on Friday, Speaker Paul D. Ryan described Mr. Trump’s comments as “very unfortunate” and “unhelpful.” Mr. Ryan went on to recall how his own relatives immigrated to the United States from Ireland.
Senator Roy Blunt, Republican of Missouri, suggested the president’s inability to refrain from incendiary statements was detracting from his agenda.
The bipartisan backlash to the president’s comments intensified on Friday as Mr. Trump signed a proclamation at the White House for Martin Luther King Jr. Day, ignoring a question from a reporter about whether he is a racist.
The current debate about Mr. Trump’s anti-immigrant talk unfolded one week before funding for the government is set to be exhausted without action from Congress, where Democrats have pressed to include an immigration plan to preserve protections for roughly 800,000 undocumented immigrants that Mr. Trump has moved to rescind. Under Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, a program created by President Barack Obama that is commonly known as DACA, they have obtained temporary, renewable work permits. Mr. Trump announced in September he was ending the program, setting a six-month clock before the first permits would begin expiring and calling on Congress to enact legislation to create a permanent solution in the meantime.
A federal judge in San Francisco this week issued a nationwide injunction, putting that action on hold and ordering the Trump administration to continue the program pending a legal challenge.
While lawmakers had been closing in on a bipartisan deal on the matter and Mr. Durbin and Mr. Graham had been hopeful that Mr. Trump was on the brink of endorsing it, the furor surrounding his remarks appeared to deepen the divisions surrounding any such plan, prompting the president to discount the chances of an agreement.
The president’s comments on Thursday came during a session in which senators were describing a plan to end the diversity visa lottery and allocate some of the visas instead to vulnerable populations from places including El Salvador, Honduras and Haiti that have had Temporary Protected Status in the United States. The measure under discussion would also provide legal status for DACA recipients and work permits for their parents, bar the children from sponsoring their parents for citizenship, and include $2.5 billion in border security funding.
Mr. Trump had responded approvingly to the proposal after hearing Mr. Graham and Mr. Durbin describe it over the phone on Thursday morning, according to people familiar with the conversations, but the pair arrived at the White House to brief the president about it not long after to find several Republicans they were not expecting sitting in on the session. Attendees were startled by the tone Mr. Trump took during the meeting, and by Friday morning, Mr. Trump was listing his objections to the measure on Twitter and working preemptively to shift blame if the dispute led to a government shutdown.
