Business|Humira’s Best-Selling Drug Formula: Start at a High Price. Go Higher.
But they probably wouldn’t all look so relieved if they saw the bill. The price of Humira, an anti-inflammatory drug dispensed in an injectable pen, has risen from about $19,000 a year in 2012, to more than $38,000 today, per patient, after rebates, according to SSR Health, a research firm. That’s an increase of 100 percent.
Pharma bosses probably miss Martin Shkreli, the reigning villain of the industry. If you’ll recall, Mr. Shkreli, as chief executive of Turing Pharmaceuticals, acquired Daraprim, a drug used to fight infections in AIDS patients, and then raised the price overnight to $750 a pill from $13.50. He also trolled critics and spent $2 million on a one-of-a-kind Wu Tang Clan album, before his conviction on three securities fraud charges last year.
For a time, Mr. Shkreli’s antics, along with the soaring price of EpiPens, sold by Mylan, deflected attention from the rest of the industry. A more typical play for drug companies — the Humira play — is to start at a high price and keep raising it ever higher, but incrementally.
Anne Marie Garza, 51, an administrative assistant in Houston who suffers from colitis and Crohn’s disease, said she had held off buying her latest dose because her insurer had changed. She was trying to see if she could avoid an out-of-pocket payment of more than $1,200, one of two she would have to make this year, on top of her rising expenses for vitamins and supplements to manage the disease. She has relatively good insurance, but the payments will strain her budget.
Competitive pressures have been muted. Copies of biologic drugs, known as biosimilars, are not as easy to produce as normal generic drugs, and AbbVie’s aggressive patent strategy has allowed it to further push off rivals. While there are name brand competitors to Humira, they are not exactly alike, complicating efforts by doctors or insurers to switch a patient from one drug to another.
But it is typical. Other countries have single-payer systems, like Britain’s National Health Service, that negotiate with drug companies or governments that exert price controls.
AbbVie has put some of its earnings to work lobbying against efforts at price controls in the United States, recently in California. The industry also successfully lobbied in 2006 to bar Medicare from negotiating over drug prices. While President Trump once talked about taking action on drug prices, his administration did not follow through in the health care debate last year.
“I do think we need something like that in the United States, not the N.H.S. broadly, but some means of dealing with the extreme pricing instances,” said Richard Evans, founder of SSR Health.
An analysis by the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review found that Humira’s list price would need to be discounted by at least 55 percent to be cost effective for rheumatoid arthritis, its originally approved use.
Dr. Steven D. Pearson, the founder of the institute, which provides cost benefit data to health plans, said competing drugs were overpriced as well.
AbbVie joined a few of its rivals in saying it would limit price increases to single digits this year, and so only raised Humira by another 9.7 percent this month, roughly four and a half times the inflation rate. For the drug industry, that counts as generosity.