RISHIKESH, India — In 1968, the Beatles and a crew of hangers-on traded hip London threads for kurtas and wreaths of marigold, trudging through dense forest to an ashram in Rishikesh, India, where they spent weeks writing songs.
There was George Harrison, a devoted follower of Transcendental Meditation; John Lennon and Paul McCartney, who had started to feud over the band’s direction; and Ringo Starr, the band’s drummer, who was so perturbed by India’s famously spicy food that he packed a reserve of beans for his stay at the ashram. He lasted 10 days.
“Scan all the photographs of Ringo in Rishikesh, and you’ll find few in which he’s smiling,” said Raju Gusain, a local journalist who has become something of an expert on the band’s trip to India.
These days, the forest has swallowed up the ashram’s crumbling buildings, obscuring traces of celebrity from their halls. But the complex is set for a revival, with renovations planned for many of the structures, long unused and only recently reopened to the public.
A new museum on the grounds will showcase the legacy of the Beatles and Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, the guru whom band members abruptly fell out with toward the end of their stay in Rishikesh. Across the world in Liverpool, England, The Beatles Story, a museum dedicated to the band, is opening an exhibit next month to mark 50 years since their trip to India.
Over the years, as more spiritual seekers from the West traveled to India looking for enlightenment, Rishikesh ballooned in size. But when the Beatles arrived, the place was a sleepy town straddling the banks of the Ganges.
Bob Spitz, a biographer, characterized the trip as a spectacularly creative time for the band and as an escape from the “rat’s nest of fame” that consumed their lives in London.
With noise from the big city far behind them, Mr. Lennon and Mr. McCartney wrote many of the songs that would later appear on the album “The Beatles” (the White Album), including “Back in the U.S.S.R.” and “Dear Prudence.” Of note, Mr. Spitz said, was a brief thaw in the deteriorating relationship between the men.
A few months before the trip, George Harrison, who had discovered the sitar and Hinduism, brokered a meeting in England between the band and Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, the progenitor of Transcendental Meditation, which involves sitting and repeating a mantra silently.
Though most days at the ashram were spent engaged in simple pursuits like meditating and writing, the grounds were not exactly spartan. The Maharishi’s cliffside bungalow, where the band would gather for lectures (and the occasional argument), had a nearby helicopter pad, and living quarters were equipped with electric fireplaces.
In the evenings, the group would sometimes break the ashram’s no-alcohol rule with “a glass of hooch” smuggled in from a nearby town, Cynthia Lennon, Mr. Lennon’s wife at the time, wrote in her memoir. “Giggling like naughty schoolchildren, we’d pass the bottle around, each taking a swig, then contorting as it scorched its way down our throats,” she said.
Today, many of the original buildings have been demolished, but a few unmarked structures from 1968 still stand, said Anand Srivastava, the Maharishi’s nephew, who had helped manage the ashram for many years.
These buildings include the post office where Mr. Lennon waited for letters from Yoko Ono and the Maharishi’s cryptlike sleeping quarters, now inhabited by bats. A set of 84 blackened meditation caves also survived.
For the Beatles, the connection to Rishikesh puttered out. By April 1968, only two band members, George Harrison and John Lennon, were still at the ashram.
A few weeks before they were set to depart, Magic Alex, one of the band’s business associates, spread rumors that the Maharishi had made sexual advances toward a female student, warning them of “black magic” if they stayed at the ashram. The band members abruptly packed their bags and left the “madman’s camp,” Mr. Lennon said.
In an interview, Mr. Srivastava, the Maharishi’s nephew, denied that his uncle had made any sexual passes, describing him as warm, humble and fiercely committed to his work.
“I hated leaving on a note of discord and mistrust, when we had enjoyed so much kindness and good will from the Maharishi and his followers,” she wrote in her memoir.
But Mr. Lennon was less convinced at the time, writing his last song in India, “Sexy Sadie,” originally titled “Maharishi,” as a thorny tribute to the guru and the chapter of his life he was leaving behind.
