DAVOS, Switzerland — President Trump sought to repair one diplomatic rift while widening another on Thursday as he smoothed over months of friction with Britain but threatened to cut financial aid to the Palestinians after they withdrew from peace discussions.
Separate meetings with the prime ministers of Britain and Israel showcased the wide disparity in Mr. Trump’s ties with key counterparts. His session with Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain was tense as they tried to put the relationship back on track, while his sit-down with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel was warm as the two agreed on what they cast as Palestinian intransigence.
“We’re on the same wavelength, I think, in every respect,” Mr. Trump said. “And the prime minister and myself have had a really great relationship, although some people don’t necessarily believe that, but I can tell you it’s true.” He expressed respect for Mrs. May, and said he thought “the feeling is mutual from the standpoint of liking each other a lot,” adding that the two were “very much joined at the hip” on military matters.
The meeting with Mr. Netanyahu showcased one of Mr. Trump’s strongest international relationships. Mr. Trump recently discarded decades of American policy to formally recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and has threatened to pull out of a nuclear deal with Iran that the Israeli leader despises. During a visit to Israel this week, Vice President Mike Pence announced that the United States Embassy would move to Jerusalem in 2019.
The Trump administration this month already withheld $65 million from the United Nations agency that aids Palestinian refugees. The United States also provides aid through its own government agency that could be cut. But Israelis have expressed concern about such moves because they could further destabilize the West Bank and Gaza and fuel security threats.
Mr. Netanyahu thanked Mr. Trump profusely for the Jerusalem recognition. “This is a historic decision that will be forever etched in the hearts of our people for generations to come,” he said. “People say that this puts peace backward. I say it puts peace forward because it recognizes history, it recognizes the present reality, and peace can only be built on the basis of truth.
At the United Nations, Mr. Trump’s ambassador, Nikki R. Haley, delivered a rebuke aimed at the Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas, who has rejected any American role in peace talks because of the Jerusalem decision.
Palestinian leaders stood their ground and denounced threats to cut financial aid.
