Two journalists, inspired by engrossing yet little-known cases of derring-do, evoke the magic of early 20th-century New York in two new nonfiction books.
“The Man With the Sawed-Off Leg And Other Tales of a New York City Block” (Arcade Publishing) is an urban anthropological biography of seven Upper West Side buildings.
They’re on Riverside Drive, around the corner from where the author, Daniel J. Wakin, a New York Times reporter and editor who has covered religion, classical music and everything in between, grew up and now lives again.
“The Stowaway: A Young Man’s Extraordinary Adventure to Antarctica” (Simon & Schuster) by Laurie Gwen Shapiro, who is also a documentary filmmaker, explores a 17-year-old’s improbable escape from a future involving his Polish immigrant father’s upholstery business.
Each book provides an inviting window on New York’s variety and vibrancy.
Mr. Wakin’s book began as an article in The Times about the elegant Beaux-Arts townhouses built at the turn of the 20th century, between West 105th and 106th Streets (and declared part of a historic district by the city’s Landmarks Preservation Commission in 1973).
The block’s evolution unfolds through its diverse residents, who included the Fabers (owners of a factory in Brooklyn that made No. 2 pencils); the Davises (whose red-and-yellow baking powder cans remain a kitchen staple and who were scandalized when a widowed heiress married her chauffeur); relatives of the Goodyear Tire family; Marion Davies, the film actress and paramour of William Randolph Hearst; Duke Ellington; and Saul Bellow.
Among the unsavory characters who found refuge in 1934 at 334 Riverside, which by then had been renovated into a rooming house, was the book’s title character — Bernard (Bennie the Bum) McMahon.
His leg was, indeed, sawed off (both, actually – one amputated, the other severed so his body could be stuffed into a steamer trunk) after he suffered a self-inflicted shotgun wound after what was then the largest armored car heist in American history. The robbery at the Rubel Ice Company warehouse in Bath Beach, Brooklyn, totaled $427,950 (about $8 million in today’s dollars).
Billy was born in 1910 in a Lower East Side tenement and raised as a teenager in Bayside, Queens, in what seemed like an age of infinite fortuity.
He had already achieved fame, of sorts. When he was 14, his stray mutt won first place in a dog show sponsored by the New York Women’s League for Animals and he was featured in The Daily News.
He was enthralled when his favorite librarian at a local branch provided him with a copy of “Dick Byrd: Air Explorer,” a biography of the pioneering polar pathfinder, but was bitterly disappointed when, because his father insisted that studying for finals at Textile High School in Manhattan took precedence, he was not allowed to attend the June 1926 parade for Admiral Byrd, who had just returned from his airborne North Pole flight.
Less than two years later, though, Billy swam across the Hudson from Manhattan to Hoboken and stowed away on Byrd’s ship for the first American expedition to Antarctica (the author drew many details from Russell Owen’s coverage in The Times). He was discovered, but was eventually enlisted as a mess boy.
His mother begged Byrd not to take her son on subsequent expeditions. As a result, Billy never returned to Antarctica. But the teenager had experienced the adventure of a lifetime.
