For Marcela Alcaide Eligio, A.P. Biology class would have to wait. First, she had some paperwork to do.
On the first day young immigrants were able to renew the permits giving them temporary protection from deportation — as ordered by a California district court last week and authorized by the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services over the holiday weekend — Ms. Alcaide, 17, had booked the first appointment of the day at the Legal Aid Society of New York.
Hours later, his sense of urgency seemed prescient. The Department of Justice filed a notice of appeal on Tuesday afternoon in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, saying it intended to ask the Supreme Court later in the week to review the Federal District Court’s ruling, which had enjoined the federal government from ending the DACA program, as it had planned. .
In Phoenix, a community organizing and advocacy group, Puente Arizona, had already helped prepare six applications on Monday, even though it was a federal holiday. On Tuesday the applicants only needed to put them in the mail — with a tracking number to avoid any problems with the United States Postal Service that plagued the renewal program in the fall, when more than 1,900 applicants were rejected for being late because of mail delays.
In some cities, though, the DACA push in response to immigration authorities reopening renewal applications was slower than others. Geoffrey Hoffman, the director of the immigration clinic at the University of Houston Law Center, said on Tuesday that the clinic had received only a handful of inquiries from DACA recipients.
“It’s been very sparse,” Mr. Hoffman said on Tuesday. “I would say there’s still a fair amount of uncertainty with regard to whether these applications will be accepted,” he added.
On Sept. 5, when the Trump administration announced that it was phasing out the DACA program, which grants the deportation protection and work permits to young people who were brought to the United States illegally by their parents as children, it allowed only those recipients whose benefits expired between Sept. 5, 2017 and March 5, 2018 to renew for a final two years.
According to the immigration agency, 132,000 out of the 154,000 people eligible to renew applied in the fall. But this time, anyone whose permit had expired since Sept. 5, 2016 or was canceled at any time could apply.
The Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights, known as Chirla, said it would cover the cost, to Mr. Cruz’s gratitude. “It’s done, sealed in an envelope and about to be express-mailed,” he said.
The lawyer for Ms. Alcaide in New York, Hasan Shafiqullah, the director of the immigration unit at the Legal Aid Society, said he sent an email to 950 former DACA clients on Monday, explaining the renewal process. He got only 10 responses.
Mr. Shafiqullah said that perhaps some of the unit’s clients did not need legal assistance with their applications because they have renewed twice already and were familiar with the process. For Ms. Alcaide, who came from Mexico when she was 2 years old, it was her first renewal. Her mother gave her the application fee from her savings from cleaning houses.
“It’s really exciting because I don’t have to fear anything else for two more years,” Ms. Alcaide said.
But Mr. Shafiqullah had to caution her, as he has been doing for his other clients. The afternoon decision from the Department of Justice underscored why.
