289 pp. Riverhead Books. $27.
Doctors today often complain of working in an occupational black hole in which patient encounters are compressed into smaller and smaller space and time. You can do a passable job in a 10-minute visit, they say, but it is impossible to appreciate the subtleties of patient care when you are rushing.
At the beginning of her book, she relates how her 93-year-old father was mistreated after being hospitalized for a seizure. He is put in 4-point restraints and sedated. Bloody urine drains from his bladder because it has been injured by a catheter insertion. Worse, his rushed doctors don’t know that this isn’t his first seizure but rather the latest in a long line that can be managed at home.
The steamroller of inpatient care takes over. Every day Sweet’s father sees a different doctor. He isn’t allowed to eat or get out of bed because he is on tranquilizers. He becomes septic. His symptoms are misdiagnosed as a stroke. Doctors eventually prepare to insert a feeding tube into his stomach because he cannot swallow. Sweet and her sisters get him out of the hospital just in time. When he gets home, he has a steak and a beer.
Sweet’s book pivots from this point into a memoir of her education as a doctor. In often lyrical stories, she recognizes ailments that elude her colleagues. After poring through charts to diagnose a patient with multiple myeloma, a blood cancer masquerading as schizophrenia, she writes that it is proof that being rushed in medicine is not only wasteful but dangerous.
Sweet maintains a healthy respect for modern medicine, however. Dialysis, antibiotics and intensive care units save lives. She knows their power but their limitations, too, and this girds her subtle and insightful commentary.
One of the most compelling stories in the book is about Joey, a 3-year-old who is diagnosed with terminal lung disease after a near-drowning but against the odds makes it off the ventilator and out of the hospital. Sweet interprets Joey’s recovery in part as a victory for prayer. “Prayer worked,” she writes, “at least that once and maybe sometimes and maybe always.” I would see it differently: Joey was saved because a lung specialist slowly decreased airway pressure and tidal volume over several weeks in a patient with acute respiratory distress syndrome. And, as Sweet points out, it was slow medicine that allowed that doctor to make the proper adjustments.
