LOS ANGELES — The Los Angeles County Museum of Art is planning to expand beyond its mid-Wilshire campus to create a satellite campus, or possibly two, in South Los Angeles — the area once known as South Central but rebranded 15 years ago because of its association with riots and crime.
The City Council has scheduled a vote for Friday on one site, owned by the city, and Michael Govan, the director of Lacma, said he is in “very serious discussions” with county leaders about the other. The goal, he noted, is for the museum, which receives about 25 percent of its financing from the county, to reach what he called “underserved” populations in Los Angeles with exhibitions, after-school programming and other events.
The latest census data shows South Los Angeles, a cluster of over two dozen neighborhoods south of the 10 Freeway, to be about 67 percent Hispanic and about 31 percent African-American.
The City Council vote on Friday would give Lacma a 35-year lease for an 80,000 square-foot building in a recreation area known as South Los Angeles Wetlands Park. The lease will be first discussed on Wednesday during the council’s “arts, recreation and river committee” meeting, which is open to the public.
Boarded up for decades, the Wetlands building once served as a garage for metropolitan trains and buses. It was originally constructed in 1911 without electric lighting but with large windows instead.
“After you’ve seen dozens and dozens of industrial buildings, it takes about two seconds to appreciate the potential of a building like this, even if it’s disused,” Mr. Govan said on a visit to the site, about an hour’s drive from Lacma. He recalled spotting a former Nabisco box factory on the Hudson when he was head of Dia Art Foundation in New York that he ultimately transformed into Dia: Beacon.
If approved by the City Council on Friday, Lacma’s new site will serve, for starters, about 9,500 students who don’t live near its mid-Wilshire campus. Mr. Govan described an ongoing museum program at the Charles White Elementary School near MacArthur Park that brings students together with contemporary artists and gives them access to museum pieces as sharing similar aims.
Lacma has already spent several years raising money for the transformation of its main Wilshire campus, which involves razing three existing buildings to replace them with a single dramatic structure by the architect Peter Zumthor. With David Geffen’s gift of $150 million, the museum has raised about $450 million but is still $200 million short of its stated budget for construction and related costs.
“By going right into the community, this turns the traditional, elitist museum model on its head,” Mr. Walker noted. “The place of the museum is not only Fifth Avenue or Wilshire Boulevard but also Crenshaw Boulevard. It’s about democratizing our idea of a museum’s mission.” He was especially excited, he said, by the museum’s plans to develop programs and exhibitions in consultation with community members instead of simply importing existing shows.
The Wetlands Park is not the only locale in play. County officials have recently proposed a site about six miles further south: the former location of the Ujima Village housing project, which was torn down after the land was found to be contaminated with crude oil and gas. Part of the 104-acre Earvin “Magic” Johnson Park not far from Watts Towers, this site would require a new building, from the ground up, which could allow for a larger building and more dedicated art storage.
Mark Ridley-Thomas, the Los Angeles county supervisor who represents the area, is spearheading a decade-long renovation of the park, with $50 million in improvements in the first phase, scheduled over the next two years, to include a large event center, better trails and a water park.
