I applaud Tom Brokaw for calling attention to the great diversity of national origins in the United States health care delivery system. My husband had myeloma, like Mr. Brokaw, and frequently interacted with doctors, nurses and certified nursing assistants in hospitals and doctors’ offices as well as chemotherapy and radiation centers. He and I appreciated the intelligence and tenacity of the people delivering health care, who often had inspirational stories of their own or their parents’ migration to the United States and of overcoming great obstacles.
I would also like to call attention to another segment of the work force where there is a preponderance of immigrants: in assisted-living facilities and nursing homes. During her journey with dementia, my mother was treated with great kindness by people (mostly women) who often had low-paying jobs. As the United States population ages, we will not be well served by our increasingly restrictive immigration policies.
ANNETTE EVANS, BOCA RATON, FLA.
Immigrants not only staff our hospitals but also are a vital component of the labor force for delivering in-home health care and elder care. Working one-on-one with seriously ill and/or cognitively impaired patients many hours each day over extended periods makes significant emotional demands on caregivers. The lived experience of immigrants and refugees who have dealt with major obstacles and risks equips them with the empathy, patience and sensitivity needed for quality in-home care.
In terms of formal education and professional training, many of today’s home caregivers would not be admitted to the United States under the Raise Act proposed by Senators Tom Cotton and David Purdue and touted by President Trump as the solution to many of our imagined immigration ills. The legislation would sharply reduce our intake of low-skilled labor. But home caregivers are essential workers. It would be extremely difficult to replace them with American-born workers, who shun the long hours, dirty tasks, emotional demands and low pay of in-home care.
Home health aide is one of the fastest-growing occupations in the United States and other highly developed countries. When Congress gets around to reforming our legal immigration system, adequate provision should be made for these and other ostensibly “low skilled” foreign workers. They should be welcomed, not excluded by politically motivated immigration restrictions.
The writer is professor emeritus of global public health at the University of California-San Diego.
Tom Brokaw is right to point out the significant contribution that immigrants from all over the world make to Americans’ health care. We should also note that many immigrants involved in caring for others lack health care for themselves and their families. This is especially true of those who work in private homes as nannies and elder-care providers.
SONYA MICHEL, SILVER SPRING, MD.
The writer, professor emerita of history and women’s studies at the University of Maryland, College Park, contributed to the W.H.O. report.