Want the latest climate news in your inbox? You can sign up here to receive Climate Fwd:, our new email newsletter.
The broadcast of one of Mr. Trump’s top lieutenants came to light as Mr. Pruitt testified Tuesday morning before the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee. As part of the committee’s questioning, Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, Democrat of Rhode Island, played the interview excerpt in which Mr. Pruitt said Mr. Trump would be “more abusive” to the Constitution than Mr. Obama.
It was not yet apparent how Mr. Trump, who prizes loyalty in his inner circle, reacted to the airing of the broadcast. The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
In his leadership tenure at the E.P.A., Mr. Pruitt has often won praise from Mr. Trump as a key executor of the president’s aggressive efforts to roll back regulations on business and industry. Mr. Pruitt was among the most influential voices urging Mr. Trump to withdraw the country from the landmark Paris climate change agreement, making the United States only nation in the world not party to the accord.
In a sign of the high regard in which the president holds his E.P.A. chief, Mr. Trump has assigned Mr. Pruitt, rather than his secretary of state, Rex W. Tillerson, to craft the legal tactics to implement that withdrawal.
Mr. Pruitt’s 2016 remarks appear sharply at odds with his tenure at the Environmental Protection Agency. Last year, Mr. Trump issued multiple executive orders aimed at undoing environmental regulations on air, water and planet-warming pollution. Mr. Pruitt responded swiftly, drafting a list of legal proposals to undo those rules.
Climate Change Is Complex. We’ve Got Answers to Your Questions.
We know. Global warming is daunting. So here’s a place to start: 17 often-asked questions with some straightforward answers.
Mr. Pruitt has come under criticism for the swiftness with which he has sought to undo those existing regulations, a multistep legal process that usually takes years, as well as for doing so in secrecy.
Throughout the rest of Mr. Pruitt’s Senate testimony, Republicans heaped praise on him while Democrats hammered him for his push to strip away regulations.
