Each new revelation about the degradation of New York’s subways seems more shocking than the last. But it all comes down to one thing: New York’s leaders have failed the millions of people who use the transit system every day.
The latest dismaying detail comes from a report by Brian Rosenthal in The Times, which concludes that the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the state agency that runs the subway system, spends far more to build tunnels and extend train lines than agencies doing comparable projects elsewhere. Its construction projects have more workers than those in other cities, and workers are kept on hand even when there is no need for them. Contractors add a premium to their bids, claiming it compensates them for dealing with the M.T.A.’s bureaucracy. And some unions and contractors negotiate wages and work rules without any say from the authority.
Billions of dollars that could have gone to maintaining and improving the subways, which use a signaling system that dates to the 1930s, have been wasted on exorbitant costs. Projects have also been delayed by mismanagement.
Blame for these costs belongs to politically powerful construction companies and labor unions that drive up costs under the lax oversight of public officials who have no incentive to rouse sleeping legislative watchdogs.
Consider the following: The first phase of the Second Avenue subway, completed at the end of 2016, cost $2.5 billion per mile; and the extension of the No. 7 line to Hudson Yards, finished the year before, cost $1.5 billion per mile. By contrast, Paris, a dense and historic city with strong labor unions, is building a line extension similar to the Second Avenue project for just $450 million a mile, which is roughly comparable to the average cost for subway projects around the world. Several transit experts have pointed out these cost discrepancies in recent years.
The M.T.A. chairman, Joe Lhota, acknowledged to The Times that excessive costs have “been a problem,” but he says New York has unique challenges, like aging utilities and high density, that contribute to high costs. That is not credible, since Paris and London are older than New York and have done a much better job improving and expanding their transit systems in recent years.
Still, Mr. Lhota, whom Gov. Andrew Cuomo appointed last year, says the M.T.A. is working to bring down costs. To be successful, he will need help from Mr. Cuomo, who has been friendly with the labor unions whose members operate cranes and dig tunnels, and with the contractors doing the work. The unions and the construction companies are big campaign contributors and have a strong financial incentive to preserve the status quo.
Mr. Cuomo, in turn, will have to stir the Legislature, which has, regrettably, taken little interest in overseeing and improving the M.T.A. Besides annual hearings about the M.T.A.’s budget, the State Assembly and the Senate conducted just two oversight hearings on the M.T.A. between 2015 and last year, according to Reinvent Albany, a public interest group. Last year, as the subways were plagued by delays and derailments, the Assembly held just one oversight hearing, about the impact of the track work Amtrak was doing at Penn Station. The Senate did not bother with even that. By contrast, the New York City Council, which has little sway over the M.T.A., has held nine oversight hearings in the past three years.
It’s not as if the Legislature has no power. It held important hearings in 2016 about water contamination in Hoosick Falls and elsewhere. Those hearings helped shine a light on how a toxic chemical got into groundwater, and state officials were pressed to explain why they did not respond more quickly.
The state comptroller, Thomas DiNapoli, audits the M.T.A. and other state agencies. His office has examined construction costs for projects like East Side Access, which will bring the Long Island Rail Road to Grand Central Terminal, but it has not compared M.T.A. spending with the spending of agencies in other big cities. The comptroller could do more to expose waste.
New Yorkers like to think their city is the best. But there is one superlative — most expensive subway line on Earth — no taxpayer or commuter would care to be associated with. The state’s leaders ought to feel the same way.