Her name is Jada Yuan, and you’ll have all of 2018 to get to know her.
Each year, we put together a list of 52 places to inspire travelers for the coming year. This year, we’re actually sending a traveler to each and every place. You have seen some of our favorite submissions (we got 13,000 of them) and perhaps perused this year’s list — now meet the traveler: Jada Yuan.
Jada has spent the last decade at New York magazine, covering celebrities, film festivals and presidential conventions. She grew up in northern New Mexico, has a degree in history from Yale University and currently lives in Brooklyn. Not for long, though — her first stop on her journey will be our No. 1 destination, New Orleans. Follow her on Instagram, Twitter and Facebook as she begins her travels. She will be looking for your advice as she makes her way around the world.
Here is a little more from Jada’s submission video on why she thought she would be a great fit for the job. Obviously, we agreed.
Out of 13,000 applicants, Jada Yuan stood out. Here, she tells us a little about herself.
Hi, I’m Jada Yuan. I live in Brooklyn, but right now I’m in Los Angeles for work. I came out here to interview Natalie Portman as part of my job writing about celebrities and movies for New York magazine. But this is not the world I grew up in. I grew up in rural New Mexico. I was a Chinese-American kid in a mostly Hispanic neighborhood. We didn’t have paved roads when I was growing up and, um, yeah — I hung out with the donkey who lived down the street. And, yeah, I have this great job, but I also feel like there’s a part of my soul that isn’t being filled up except when I travel. I’m also turning 40 this year, which is confusing, but I think a really great entry point for writing something serialized about going around the world with The New York Times. The most interesting part of travel for me are the bumps that you hit on the road like — emotionally and logistically and especially as a woman traveling by yourself. And I just want to write about that. I don’t want to write about women.