Diane Lloyde Roth met, and married, her Prince Charming.
He turned into a frog.
Prince Charming No. 2: Frog.
After Ms. Roth’s third divorce, she sold a Harry Winston band that Frog No. 3 had bought her and purchased three thumb-size gold and diamond frog pins. She wears them crawling up her blouse in a column toward her neck.
The story of postmarital jewelry has many strands. There are the emotional tales of rebirth and repurposing, such as Ms. Roth’s frogs. There are the stories of the strictly financial, like when a piece that was once a symbol of everlasting love morphs into a strictly salable commodity that helps to pay the mortgage, a child’s college tuition or a charitable donation.
And then there are the tales of bitter court disputes, once the battle of the assets commences. Disputed jewelry is sometimes lied about, hidden, stolen and, in rare instances, brazenly worn in public.
Divorce filings typically surge at the turn of the new year.
Limor Shaya-Rosenberg of Roslyn N.Y., would tell Ms. Chemtob right up front that she lied about the jewelry (yes she did) after her 18-year marriage snapped like a pearl necklace.
“He said he bought the Rolex for himself, so it became a battle at the beginning,” Ms. Shaya-Rosenberg added. She said initially she held out hope that their problems might work themselves out, then realized that selling the jewelry meant the marriage was, at least for her, finally over.
A need for money prompted Ms. Shaya-Rosenberg to sell a Tiffany charm bracelet, diamond earrings, a diamond horseshoe pendant and more.
“There’s a guy here in Roslyn, at Gold Coast Jewelers, who became my new best friend,” she said. She even sold her diamond engagement ring to send her three boys to camp.
She has entered the realm of ex-spouses who seek to make a profit off their spurned jewelry, in an embarrassment-of-riches sort of way. Now that she has a son in college, she’s looking to sell a diamond Cartier watch.
Ms. Chemtob can attest to that urge. Clients who can’t cough up the cash for a retainer for her services have offered her an Hermès Birkin bag — one sold in May at auction for $380,000 — a diamond ring, a pricey watch.
But she doesn’t take those items.
“We don’t do any of that,” she said. “I’m always sending people to 47th Street.” There, in the city’s diamond district, clients can sell their jewels for cash, then come back to pay her. Keeping in mind that the cost for particularly nasty, and moneyed, divorces can climb into the millions.
Laws vary from state to state regarding marital jewelry. Semantics plays a part. In one case Ms. Chemtob handled, a mother-in-law gave a daughter-in-law a ring that was a family heirloom. During the court proceedings, the mother-in-law requested the return of the ring. The daughter-in-law insisted it was a gift. Recognizing that she might be compelled to return it, she turned the ring into a pendant.
The engagement ring, after the wedding, is the only piece of jewelry that is separate from marital assets. The bride gets to keep it, no matter where the marriage ends up.
Diane Lloyde Roth, who owns L’Armoire, a New Canaan, Conn., clothing, home and jewelry boutique, has created something of a side business out of designing new pieces from divorce remnants. She wears frog pins, purchased from the sale of a bracelet from her third spouse.
But in the case of all other jinxed jewels, there are plenty of jewelers ready and waiting to repurpose them. Ms. Roth, who owns L’Armoire, a clothing, home and jewelry boutique in New Canaan, Conn., has created something of a side business out of designing new lives for divorce remnants.
She took apart a client’s sapphire engagement ring and diamond wedding band and transformed them into a Maltese cross-style cuff. Another client owned a large ring — “Garish, she thought it was hideous, but it was a gift,” Ms. Roth said — that she turned into a platinum and diamond ankle bracelet. She has taken diamonds from wedding bands and placed them in lizard pins, in necklaces. She has taken pink and blue sapphires and the cacophony of colors in tourmaline and turned them into bracelets.
Mystified, Mr. Fine agreed.
She returned with a glimmering engagement ring, kept from a previous commitment. She told Mr. Fine she hoped to put its value toward a bigger bauble. The caveat: Mr. Fine couldn’t tell Mr. Right she had been engaged before.
Ms. Roth has taken diamonds from wedding bands and placed them in lizard pins for her customers.
“She obviously kept the ring from No. 1 and was using it to prop up No. 2,” Mr. Fine said. Final value: $35,000.
Mr. Fine is circumspect; he doesn’t name names. Jewelers, like psychologists and hairdressers, inevitably know the story beneath the story, like the tale of a man who was a client of Tiny Jewel Box in Washington, where Mr. Fine does business in pink diamonds.
The man bought a pink diamond for a woman the owner assumed was his fiancée. A year later, the man brought the ring back and asked the owner to have it resized for a second hoped-for fiancée. Soon after, he returned with a third woman and asked the owner to take the stone out of the mounting. Together, the man and woman designed a new ring.
The store hasn’t seen him since, so the thinking is that that one stuck.
“He bought the ring, then went shopping for the woman,” Mr. Fine said.
Leslie Korngold, a semiretired lawyer and journalist from Stamford, Conn., created a choker from her engagement ring, after the psychologist she and her spouse were seeing suggested they should get a divorce. She remarried years ago, but continued to wear the strand.
Thinking about keeping your engagement ring after a breakup? You might not be able to.