Betty Woodman, a sculptor who took an audacious turn when she began to transform traditional pottery, her usual medium, into innovative multimedia art, moving her work from kitchen cupboard shelves to museum walls, died on Tuesday in Manhattan. She was 87.
Her son, Charles, said the cause was pneumonia.
Ms. Woodman’s evolution from artisan to fine artist culminated in a retrospective in 2006 at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, its first for a living female artist.
One of the 70 works in the show, “The Ming Sisters,” is a nearly three-foot-high triptych of cylindrical vases arranged side by side — each with irregular, winged cutouts — that depict Asian women in gowns on one side and brightly colored paintings of vases on the other.
Another work in the retrospective was “Aeolian Pyramid,” which reflects Ms. Woodman’s late-in-life shift to very large installations of ceramics, some of them fused with paintings. “Aeolian,” which comprises 44 pedestal-mounted vase shapes, gradually tiers upward in a dramatic, pyramidal design.
Ms. Woodman’s “Aeolian Pyramid,” which Peter Schjeldahl called “a visual ‘Hallelujah Chorus’” in his review in The New Yorker.
Using clay as her primary medium, Ms. Woodman’s vividly colored ceramics drew on innumerable influences, including Greek and Etruscan sculpture, Italian Baroque architecture, Tang dynasty glaze techniques, Egyptian art and Islamic tiles.
Ms. Woodman — usually attired in a kerchief, a boldly striped dress and wildly patterned stockings — worked at her potter’s wheels and kilns at her studios in Boulder, Colo., the Chelsea section of Manhattan, and Antella, Italy.
Her husband, George, a painter and photographer, died last March; her son is an electronic artist, and her daughter, Francesca, was a photographer whose erotic and melancholy pictures won her acclaim before she committed suicide in 1981, when she was 22.
In the months after her daughter’s death, Ms. Woodman said, she began to shift from making functional pottery to creating the idiosyncratic vessels — like pillow-shaped pitchers — that altered her career.
She was born Elizabeth Abrahams on May 14, 1930, in Norwalk, Conn., and moved frequently with her family around New England. Her father, Henry, was a supermarket worker and woodworker who built bookcases and cabinets; her mother, the former Minnie Koffman, was a secretary.
In seventh grade, fed up with the sewing and cooking classes that girls were relegated to, Betty successfully petitioned her junior high school principal to let her take wood shop, where she learned to turn wooden bowls on a lathe.
While still in school, during World War II, she also made model airplanes, including a Messerschmitt, for air-raid wardens to use to identify German aircraft, she told the Archives of American Art in an interview in 2003.
As a high school student in Newton, Mass., she was seduced by clay, fascinated by its versatility. A pitcher was her first creation.
After graduating from the School for American Craftsmen at Alfred University, then located in southwestern New York State (it later moved to the Rochester Institute of Technology), she began her pottery career in earnest, making things for people to use.
But making pottery that landed in cupboards and not museums was not enough for her.
“I was always interested in my work being seen in a broader context,” Ms. Woodman told The Guardian in 2016, when an exhibition of her work, “Theater of the Domestic,” opened at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London.
That show focused on what she had done since the Met retrospective. One piece, “The Summer House,” a four-panel, 28-foot-long still life, demonstrated how far she had come from making functional pottery. In pink, green, gray, blue and yellow hues, Ms. Woodman depicted a cheerful room with ceramics, or shards of them, and a wooden shelf attached to the canvas. Three small vases sit on the shelf, and a diptych of vases rests on the floor in front of the painting.
Besides her son, she is survived by a grandson.
