How the internet, the self-help industry and the changing nature of celebrity gave rise to the era of “Me, Inc.” in the 1990s.
The headline: “Hold Me! Squeeze Me! Buy a 6-Pack!,” published here in November 1997.
The story: It was the ’90s, and celebrities were no longer content to be famous. They had to be “brands.” Leading the way were Martha Stewart, whose popular magazines and television show led to a home goods line at Kmart, and Michael Jordan, whose name suddenly adorned shower curtains, pot holders and walkie-talkies in addition to sneakers and basketball jerseys.
No wonder regular people began to reimagine themselves as walking conglomerates in their own right, poring over self-help books and even hiring consultants to help them polish their “brand image” in order to clamber up the corporate ladder and fine-tune their romantic lives.
Case studies: In an effort to hone his brand message for the dating world, one Manhattan author hired a market research consultant who assembled a focus group of single women, all of whom had shot him down on previous dates, to offer tweaks to his wardrobe and manner while the client looked on behind a one-way mirror.
A 17-year-old in Oregon named Jesse Daggett adopted the self-branding mind-set in order to vault past older, more experienced colleagues at work. “I like to think of the brand Jesse this way,” he said. “Hard worker. Putting yourself in charge. If something needs to be done, Jesse can do it and get it done and be the leader of the team.” His job? Dairy Queen clerk.
Why the ’90s? Self-branders found a receptive audience among Generation X members who had come of age in the early-’90s recession, and were thus motivated by fear to set themselves apart from the pack. Later, those Gen X-ers found themselves buoyed by the dot-com boom, when for a brief, heady moment, it seemed like any individual with a catchy URL really could become a business empire unto themselves.
The caveats: The concept was not entirely new to the ’90s. As far back as the Great Depression, Dale Carnegie “applied the techniques of the then-nascent advertising industry to personal relations” with his motivational book, “How to Win Friends and Influence People.” Calvin Klein made himself a household name in the 1970s when he stitched his name onto the collective rear end of America.
How well did this situation age?: The anecdotes, while prescient, seem almost quaint nowadays, given that the average teenager in 2018 is more likely to fantasize about becoming Jay-Z the empire builder than Jay-Z the chart topper, and the White House has opened its doors to the George Washington of self-branding. The article was published in the early internet years, before blogging and social media took off. The next decade would see platforms like Friendster, MySpace and Facebook usher in a new age of mass narcissism, which gave way to Twitter, YouTube and Instagram, giving everyone a worldwide stage to market themselves as products.
And how well did this situation age for Jesse from Dairy Queen? Mr. Daggett is now a 37-year-old national account executive at a uniform rental company who lives near San Antonio. He said in a recent interview that his efforts as a teenager to challenge the accepted ways of doing business gave his Dairy Queen manager “heartburn.” “This was the first time I remember hearing the phrase ‘stay in your lane,’ which I’ve heard countless times since,” he said.
