Aharon Appelfeld, the acclaimed Israeli novelist who wrote disturbing, obliquely told stories of self-deluded Jews slowly awakening to the reality of the Holocaust, died on Thursday in Petah Tikva, near Tel Aviv. He was 85.
His death was confirmed by Beilinson Hospital, where he died.
As someone whose mother was killed at the beginning of World War II, and who escaped a labor camp to hide among hostile peasants, Mr. Appelfeld made the Holocaust his great subject. Yet he told his stories from a seemingly naïve eye, a baffled child’s eye, working by indirection and intimation. The horrors, as critics pointed out, happened offstage; his novels rarely identified the threat explicitly as storm troopers with whips or concentration camps with poison-gas showers.
Rather, people wrestled with the banalities of daily life as ominous events were apprehended like distant thunder, lending his narrative the absurdist quality of a Beckett play or the chill of a Kafka story.
In “Badenheim 1939,” perhaps his most famous novel, which the critic Irving Howe called “a small masterpiece,” cultivated, petit bourgeois Jews blithely sunbathe, flirt and nosh on strudel and ice cream at a resort outside Vienna, deluding themselves about ominous developments like the shadowy Sanitation Committee’s requiring all Jews to register. Soon they are figuring out how to help the committee relocate them to Poland, where the implication is that they will soon end up in concentration camps.
In “The Age of Wonders,” a return train trip by a vacationing mother and son is disrupted by the registration of Jewish passengers and foreshadows a journey on a cattle car, just as the appearance of a creaking locomotive does after an eastward journey by a mother and son in “To the Land of the Cattails” (1986).
To his hapless characters, many of them westernized Jews who try to dissociate themselves from what they see as a Jewish rabble responsible for their demonization by anti-Semites, the menace is mysterious, the outcome unknown. They are also hobbled by the human need to deny approaching reality, to keep deluding oneself, while the murderers and persecutors, as Mr. Appelfeld said, know precisely what they intend to do.
The reader knows the menace from the beginning, and is bitterly aware that the Holocaust will swallow the assimilated as well as the outwardly religious. That historical knowledge lends the convulsive events their haunting quality.
Mr. Appelfeld’s indirection allowed for an intellectual engagement that won him a strong following that awaited his every novel — and he did not disappoint. He delivered books in Hebrew almost every couple of years, and at least 16 novels were translated into English from 1981 to 2011.
Mr. Appelfeld, an elfin, round-face man with what Mr. Roth described as “the playfully thoughtful air of a benign wizard,” was born Feb. 16, 1932, in a town near Czernowitz, in what is now Ukraine but what was then Romania. The family was proudly middle class, speaking the treasured German of the area’s better-off inhabitants and forbidding the earthier Yiddish. They spent summers in spa towns like Badenheim.
After months in a refugee camp in Italy, he made his way in 1946 to what was then the British mandate of Palestine, worked on a kibbutz, studied Hebrew at night and fought in the 1948 Arab-Israeli war.
Mr. Appelfeld portrayed Holocaust survivors in “The Immortal Bartfuss” (1988) as more than slightly lost as they mutely wander the Israeli landscape. “No one knew what to do with the lives that had been saved,” he wrote.
Moreover, like Theo, the protagonist of “For Every Sin” (1989), he sometimes found himself repelled by fellow survivors, believing that his engagement with them would produce only more misery.
In the 1950s, he learned that his father was alive — in Israel. Israeli newspapers reported that the reunion, after almost 20 years, was so emotional that Mr. Appelfeld was never able to write about it.
He completed his studies at Hebrew University in Jerusalem, and despite a national don’t-look-back ethic, he began writing short stories rooted in his war experience, choosing Hebrew rather than his native German. His first novel, “The Skin and the Gown,” was published in 1971.
He also supported himself by teaching — eventually becoming a professor of literature at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, in Beersheba.
Mr. Appelfeld won the prestigious Israel Prize for literature in 1983, and many other prizes followed. Yet when his books started making an impression in Israel, it was not among the Holocaust survivors, who he said “were afraid to be confronted with their past,” but among their children.
