In its fantastic second season, NBC’s “The Good Place” found empathy within the devil.
Michael (Ted Danson), an immortal bureaucrat charged with torturing four souls in The Bad Place — a version of hell where his prisoners are meant to inflict their neuroses on one another — develops a conscience and helps them escape.
But the most refreshing thing about “The Good Place,” in an era of artistic bleakness, is its optimism about human nature. It’s made humane and sidesplittingly entertaining television out of the notion that people — and even the occasional immortal demon — are redeemable.
For a generation now, the moral journeys of TV’s best shows have mostly run in the other direction. Tony Soprano spent six seasons in therapy yet learned nothing except how to be a better criminal. The corrupt police officer Vic Mackey, in “The Shield,” rationalized his brutality as what it took to bust gang members.
The exceptions — ambitious series about people seeking grace and improvement like HBO’s “Enlightened” and Sundance’s “Rectify” — tended to be overshadowed. Sunnier sitcoms like “Parks and Recreation,” from “The Good Place” creator Mike Schur, dealt with characters who were already decent, not striving to become that way.
None of this is to say that antihero stories are necessarily amoral. Some, like “Breaking Bad,” assumed moral universes of retribution and consequences. But they were a kind of rebellion against the pat moral lessons of earlier TV, in which you could count on the good guys to win simply because they were good.
“The Good Place,” on the other hand, avoided falling into easy moralizing by committing to the idea that becoming good is hard work.
This was built into the structure of “The Good Place.” For most of the first season, Eleanor Shellstrop (Kristen Bell), a selfish ne’er-do-well, believes — as part of Michael’s ruse — that she’s in heaven and was placed there by mistake. So she gets her assigned “soul mate,” the moral-philosophy professor Chidi Anagonye (William Jackson Harper), to teach her to be a better person.
In a Season 2 episode, for instance, Chidi brings up the “trolley problem,” a thought experiment devised by Philippa Foot: You’re driving a trolley and must either continue on the track and kill five people or switch tracks and kill one. Is it better to kill five innocents through inaction or one by choice?
To give the conundrum some oomph, Michael conjures up an actual trolley, forcing Chidi to live out his dilemma over and over, complete with copious blood spatter. The scene is slapstick, gross-out brilliance — and a clever illustration of how applying hypotheticals to real life (or a convincing illusion) becomes, er, messy.
This may seem unfair — is anyone good enough for The Good Place? — but it serves a purpose. It’s easy to feel distance from a true monster like Tony Soprano. The characters on “The Good Place,” on the other hand, have everyday failings. They have work to do — just like we do.
In “The Good Place,” morality is not something you have; it’s something you do. It’s a muscle that requires exercise. The show shares with dramas like “Breaking Bad” the belief that being good is hard. But it doesn’t believe that being good is futile.
The series feels like part of a wider reaction against the dark TV view of human imperfection, something that was once groundbreaking but has become a commodity.
CBS All Access’ “The Good Fight, ” like its predecessor “The Good Wife,” is about the conflict between principle and the cynical practice of law. ABC’s “The Good Doctor” (anyone notice a pattern in the titles?) is a sort of syrupy reverse “House” in which the diagnoses come not from a misanthrope but a well-meaning autistic savant.
