COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. — Jim Johannson, a longtime USA Hockey executive and U.S. Olympic men’s hockey general manager, died unexpectedly Sunday at age 53, shocking the sport less than three weeks before the start of the Pyeongchang Games.
Johannson died away in his sleep at his home in Colorado Springs, according to USA Hockey. His death came in the midst of the most high-profile role in his career: putting together the American Olympic men’s hockey team without N.H.L. players going to South Korea, a position he relished after doing so at several world junior and world championships.
With the N.H.L. out of the Olympics for the first time since 1994, Johannson was excited about putting together a 25-man roster that would include “25 great stories.” He picked Tony Granato as coach and on Jan. 1 unveiled a diverse roster made up of players from European professional leagues, the American Hockey League and the N.C.A.A.
It’s unclear who would be in charge of choosing any potential injury replacements if needed. The United States opens the Olympics Feb. 14 against Slovenia.
The United States. won 64 medals, including 34 gold, in major international competition during Johannson’s tenure. The Americans in particular became a perennial threat to win the world junior championship, showing the program’s improvement at the youth levels.
Johannson, who played for the U.S. at the 1988 and 1992 Olympics, began working for USA Hockey in 2000 after spending five years as the general manager of the Twin Cities Vulcans in the United States Hockey League. He was promoted to assistant executive director of hockey operations in 2007, overseeing the organization’s efforts in fielding teams for international competition.
He played college hockey at Wisconsin and helped the Badgers win the N.C.A.A. championship as a freshman. He was selected by the Hartford Whalers in the seventh round of the 1982 draft, and although he never played in the N.H.L., he was respected and well-liked by those all over hockey.
