Hugh Wilson, who created the CBS comedy “WKRP in Cincinnati” and directed the raucous hit film “Police Academy” in 1984, died on Sunday at his home in Charlottesville, Va. He was 74.
The death was announced by Hill & Wood Funeral Services of Charlottesville. No cause was given.
Mr. Wilson worked his way into comedy writing after starting out in advertising, and in 1978 he graduated from writer to creator when “WKRP” made its debut.
The series, about a radio station full of misfits, ran for four seasons and had a cast that included Gary Sandy as the station’s levelheaded program director, Loni Anderson as the sexy receptionist and Howard Hesseman and Tim Reid as disc jockeys.
Mr. Wilson introduced a different brand of misfits in “Police Academy,” his first feature-film directing assignment, for which he was also one of the screenwriters. The movie, whose cast included Steve Guttenberg, Kim Cattrall and Bubba Smith, was about what happens when the mayor of a fictional city eliminates the admission requirements for the local police training program, attracting all manner of dubious recruits as a result.
The movie was a box-office hit and spawned numerous sequels, though Mr. Wilson was not involved in those.
Hugh Hamilton Wilson Jr. was born on Aug 21, 1943, in Miami. His father was a surveyor, and his mother, the former Frances Nugent, was a housewife.
His family got its first television set when he was in second grade. He was especially intrigued by the commercials of the day.
After graduating from the University of Florida in 1965 with a journalism degree, he went to New York to try to crack Madison Avenue, but had no luck and took a job in the advertising department of the Armstrong Company, a maker of flooring and related products in Lancaster, Pa.
Every year Armstrong would bring its sales representatives to Lancaster from around the country, and Mr. Wilson’s department would put on a show for them introducing new products, hiring actors from New York to perform the skits and songs.
That is how he met Tom Patchett and Jay Tarses, struggling performers who would soon form a comedy team, with Mr. Wilson serving as their road manager. After Mr. Wilson split off from them for a job at an advertising agency in Atlanta, Mr. Patchett and Mr. Tarses ended up in Los Angeles as comedy writers.
When Mr. Wilson visited them on a West Coast trip and expressed a desire to switch to comedy writing himself, they arranged an interview with Grant Tinker, Mary Tyler Moore’s husband and co-founder of her production company, MTM Enterprises. Though 30 years old, he took a job as a gofer.
One day Mr. Tinker came through the Randall show’s set asking if anyone had any ideas for new pilots. Mr. Wilson responded with the pitch for “WKRP,” honing it by spending a week at WQXI, a radio station in Atlanta where he knew a lot of the staff from his advertising days.
He said his favorite episode — it is many fans’ as well — was “Turkeys Away,” from Season 1. The episode, inspired by a real story one of his Atlanta friends had told about an ill-conceived Thanksgiving promotion, involved throwing live turkeys out of a helicopter.
In an era dominated by comedies like “M*A*S*H,” “Three’s Company” and “Happy Days,” “WKRP” was never a huge ratings success — partly, Mr. Wilson said, because its time slot was changed several times during its run. But it captured new fans later when it ran in syndication.
“We were kind of an after-the-fact hit,” he said.
In 1991 a sequel, “The New WKRP in Cincinnati,” made its debut. Though it had Mr. Wilson’s name on it as creator, he was not involved with the new show. It ran in first-run syndication for 46 episodes.
In addition to “Police Academy,” Mr. Wilson’s films as a director included “Guarding Tess” (1994), starring Shirley MacLaine and Nicolas Cage, and “The First Wives Club” (1996), with Goldie Hawn, Diane Keaton and Bette Midler.
Mr. Wilson is survived by his wife of almost 40 years, the former Charters Smith; his children, Cannon Wilson Sayers, Price Wilson White, Margaret Wilson Thomas, Caroline Charters Wilson and Hugh Patrick Wilson; and four grandchildren.
After moving to Virginia from Los Angeles in 1992, Mr. Wilson sometimes taught screenwriting at the University of Virginia. A few years ago, he said, he tried to get back into television, floating a show idea in Hollywood, but got nowhere. He said he fully understood why no one was interested in an aging TV writer, even one with his résumé.
