His own search for love was an endurance test: He estimated that in the 1980s and early ’90s, before internet dating sites even existed, he went on 110 dates, most of them blind and so uninteresting, he thought about science experiments during them.
When he met Cara London in 1991 at a crowded singles event aboard the Intrepid, the aircraft carrier docked in the Hudson River, he didn’t recognize himself in her at all. Mr. Sirota is meticulous, mathematical and alphabetizes everything; she was a “flighty artist,” she said, who was mystified by physics and had never alphabetized anything in her life. At the time, she lived in an Upper East Side apartment with a Westie named Rocky. He disliked dogs, and cats too. They had almost nothing in common but liked each other immediately.
Their wedding, which took place less than a year after they met, was highlighted in a Vows column on July 12, 1992. Now, more than 25 years later, they have not grown more alike, only more tolerant. “I don’t think there’s a day that goes by when we don’t view the world differently,” Ms. London, 56, said.
They live in Flemington, N.J., in a house overflowing with her oil paintings and pastel drawings; Mr. Sirota has numbered and cataloged each piece.
When their two children — Julia Sirota, 22, and Craig Sirota, 20 — were growing up, Ms. London would sometimes turn the kitchen into an art studio and forget about making dinner. Mr. Sirota, who has been a research scientist at Exxon Research and Engineering (now ExxonMobil) in Annandale, N.J., for more than 30 years, would just order takeout for everyone. He is also the one who makes sure the fire extinguishers in the house are working.
The Sirotas are empty nesters now (“We can eat anything, anytime!” Ms. London said), and “Frankenstein” has found a larger audience. After a short break for the holidays, performances of “Frankenstein” resume Jan. 15 at St. Luke’s Theater on West 46th Street in New York and continue every Monday night.
In 2011, Ms. London’s father died of brain cancer and last March, Mr. Sirota’s father died of Alzheimer’s disease. Toward the end of his life, he could not remember the names of his children but he could perfectly recall the lyrics to his favorite songs. Whenever Mr. Sirota and Ms. London visited him, they would all sing together. “With gusto,” Mr. Sirota said.
After Mr. Sirota’s mother died in 2015, he found a stash of letters she had secretly written to him when he was a teenager. In one, she outlined — more like conjured, it turns out — the type of woman she hoped he would marry.
