For four years, Nettie Carrier had a couch in her apartment that she never sat on.
Her husband had bought it from a neighbor who was moving. Ms. Carrier had asked him not to buy the sofa until she had a chance to see it, but he did it anyway.
After the couch was placed in her living room, she saw it as an interloper, a part of her home she had never chosen.
For Ms. Carrier, 64, creating a home of her own is especially important. Throughout her life, she has thrived on helping others and uses her home to care for relatives and friends.
She still welcomes strangers to her apartment in Brooklyn.
Ms. Carrier, who has lupus, said her caregiving inclinations were deeply intertwined with her lifelong struggles with illness, mental and physical, as well as the deaths of many relatives to whom she tended.
After she gave birth to her only child at age 17, painful memories from Ms. Carrier’s childhood surfaced. She realized that she had suppressed traumatic events and sought counseling.
“I had my daughter, so I needed to put my life in a better place,” said Ms. Carrier, who remains close with her daughter and granddaughter.
In the following years, Ms. Carrier balanced motherhood and caring for ailing relatives with a career in advertising and work as an insurance coding supervisor until she was crippled by the loss of her brother. Just 22, he was hit by a drunken driver in 1977 and died from a heart attack shortly after. When she tried to return to work, she found it difficult to concentrate.
In 1983, she began working as a ticket collector for Conrail, now Metro-North. Ms. Carrier rose through the ranks to become one of the first black female conductors. A few years later, she was ready to move on. And in 1988, she founded a soup kitchen in the Bronx with a friend and that friend’s mother, funded entirely by the three of them. In cooperation with a Union American Methodist Episcopal church in the Bronx, they fed 200 or more people every day. Ms. Carrier also worked on and off as a home attendant from 1984 to 2007, stopping because of her knee replacement and growing complications from lupus.
In the decades since her brother’s death, Ms. Carrier has served as the primary caregiver for members of her immediate family in their final years. Her mother succumbed to leukemia in 1983. Her sister died of liver cancer in 2010. Five years later, her husband, whom she had lived with for over 20 years, died at age 64.
Over the last three years, Ms. Carrier has sought mental health help from the Service Program for Older People, a mental health treatment program that is a partner of FPWA, one of the eight organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. The service program has helped her cope with her many losses and address her traumatic memories.
Her health makes it difficult for her to leave Brooklyn, but once a week, Ms. Carrier, who each month receives $357 in Supplemental Security Income and $192 in Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program benefits, makes her way to the agency’s Upper West Side office for a therapy session.
In late September, Ms. Carrier received a $1,000 grant from FPWA to furnish her living room with two end tables, a pair of lamps and a love seat to replace the couch her husband had brought home.
Ms. Carrier chose her new furniture from a catalog at a store, where a manager looked on as she turned page after page.
“The man laughed at me. He said I sat there for 3½ hours picking out furniture,” Ms. Carrier said, but she would not be rushed. Choosing it herself was what made this furniture, and by extension the apartment around it, hers.