Rising sea levels are forcing the nation of Kiribati to make difficult choices.
This is coming, and it is going to destroy our lives. So we cannot afford to stand on the sideline. And we will do everything, everything we can, to ensure that there is the land and the nation of Kiribati that will remain. For a long time I said there is nothing we can do. I was very angry. I was — there was a deep sense of futility, that no matter what I said, nobody’s listening. Nobody’s going to do anything about it. But I had to overcome that. And to overcome that, you’ve got to really throw away everything. Don’t think in straight, linear terms. Take it all apart and think about doing something crazy, like building an island. [speaking Japanese] These floating islands, I know when I first thought about it, it was unrealistic. I know it’s — in terms of the scale of thinking that we normally do in Kiribati. We don’t think in those terms. With the machines and the technology that we have at our disposal, we keep thinking that we can continue to destroy this planet because we believe we can fix it with our technology. And our arrogance to believe that we have control of everything. The one thing, of course, that’s been very difficult for our people in contemplating the possibility of moving and leaving their homeland is the deep link and connection with the spiritual world. Once we begin to build artificial structures, you will find that people who have left their indigenous homes and gone somewhere else seem to have lost that spiritual connection because they no longer regard themselves as being indigenous. [singing and music] If we leave Kiribati, then our ability to retain our culture as being distinct will no longer be very easy.
Five years ago, I could not locate the Republic of Kiribati on a map. Yet last month, I spent Christmas with its former president, Anote Tong, and his family in their beautiful ancestral homeland. In just a few years, the citizens of this low-lying Pacific atoll nation have profoundly affected my outlook on our planet and its prospects. The latest climate estimates project that sea levels could rise as much as six feet within this century, threatening to put Kiribati under water.
Over the past few years, I have followed Anote Tong as he has traveled the world to ring the alarm about climate change’s dire consequences. Kiribati is a heartbreaking case study for those interested in taking stock of our rapidly accelerating climate woes. The country’s carbon footprint is the smallest in the world, and yet it finds itself most gravely affected by a phenomenon it had nothing to do with. Its citizens’ fate will eventually be ours, too.
This century will see unprecedented climate-induced migration, and the Kiribati case is merely the beginning. By conservative estimates, some 200 million citizens will be forced to flee their homelands by 2050. Where will we relocate all these climate refugees? For this unfathomable problem, we are now seeing equally unfathomable solutions. One example comes from the Japanese engineering firm Shimizu, which has pitched a futuristic floating-island concept, relying on technology that has yet to be invented, at prices barely any nation could afford (some estimates put an island at $450 billion). As long as we keep recklessly pillaging our planet, we may need to start taking projects like this more seriously.
That’s all the more problematic for the people of Kiribati, who cherish their strong connection with their land and the spirits they believe are tied to it. If the island of Kiribati disappears and the people abandon their ancestral homeland, where do the spirits go? Most ethnologists would agree that the land and our immediate environment are intimately connected with language, social organization and culture. A people losing its land in a sense loses itself. Taking that further, Mr. Tong argues that when land disappears, the connection between the physical and spiritual worlds also forever vanishes.
So where to go from here? It’s obvious that technological solutions can’t and won’t save the Kiribati nation (or the rest of us, for that matter). Without major changes, conservation efforts will be in vain. Now the fate of humankind may also soon be beyond repair. Let’s not delude ourselves into thinking billion-dollar artificial islands are the solution.
But we have a bigger problem. Our planet needs leaders that can plan 100 years ahead instead of for the next election. But in 2016 Kiribati got a new government whose views on climate change are radically different from its predecessors’.
The current president, Taneti Maamau, said in a video presented at the U.N. Climate Change Conference, COP23, in November: “We don’t believe that Kiribati will sink like the Titanic ship. Our country, our beautiful lands, are created by the hands of God.” The current administration also believes floating islands are a waste of money and is not pursuing them as an option, preferring that climate change funds be used for the economic development for the current islands. Rather than preparing an exit strategy, the new government is focusing on development for the island over the next 20 years, including building the tuna fishing industry, luxury resorts and eco-tourism of previously uninhabited islands and courting investment from multinational corporations. Its vision is to make Kiribati the next Dubai or Singapore.
It makes me wonder whether our political institutions could be more dangerous to our planet’s future than climate change itself.