Clockwise from top left: Scenes from “Get Out,” “Loving Vincent” and “Dunkirk.”Credit...Universal Pictures; Good Deed Entertainment; Warner Bros.
Watching is The New York Times’s TV and film recommendation website. Sign up for our thrice-weekly newsletter here.
The stigma against horror films during awards season is so strong that “Get Out” was reclassified as a comedy for Golden Globes contention. But make no mistake: Jordan Peele’s debut feature may satirize the racial posturing of suburban liberals, but the film’s driving force is still the terror of white supremacy. Daniel Kaluuya stars as a young African-American photographer whose white girlfriend (Allison Williams) takes him home to meet her parents. He soon discovers that the welcoming party has some sinister motives.
A scene from “Dunkirk.”Credit...Melinda Sue Gordon/Warner Bros.
Christopher Nolan’s treatment of the evacuation of more than 300,000 allied troops from the beaches of Dunkirk, France, in 1940 eschews political context — and a lot of chatter — in order to draw viewers into a meticulous re-creation of the scene. Presenting the action on three different fronts, each on separate but elegantly dovetailing timelines, Nolan follows the soldiers pinned to the beach by German forces, the British civilian vessels commandeered for the rescue effort and the Royal Air Force pilots working to clear the airspace.
In a savvy fusion of real-life crisis and rom-com convention, writers Kumail Nanjiani and Emily V. Gordon turned the dramatic story of their courtship into the biggest hit to come out of the 2017 Sundance Film Festival. Nanjiani stars as a version of himself, a Pakistani-born stand-up comedian who’s on the verge of breaking up with his girlfriend (Zoe Kazan) when she falls mysteriously ill and he ends up keeping watch with her parents (Holly Hunter and Ray Romano) in the hospital waiting room.
Director Dee Rees (“Pariah”) dissects the subtle and unsubtle effects of a racist culture in this adaptation of the Hillary Jordan novel about two rural families — one white, one black — whose lives become enmeshed in post-World War II Mississippi. Both families have young men returning from war, but the strong bond between those two veterans (Jason Mitchell and Garrett Hedlund) doesn’t transcend the entrenched barriers of Jim Crow or prevent the injustices that ensue. Rees, who also helped write the script, has with her cast produced a beautiful, grand-scale epic for a modest cost.
Dan Gilroy’s follow-up to “Nightcrawler” offers another obsessive loner on the fringes of society, this time a lumpen relic of criminal defense and activism who is deposited at a large firm after his longtime partner dies. Denzel Washington’s lead performance earned “Roman J. Israel, Esq.” its sole Oscar nomination after an aborted theatrical run, but the film carries the same ragged nobility as its hero, lurching toward some difficult truths about how ideals square with real-world compromise. It deserves a second look — or at least the first it was denied.
In the Magic Castle, a purple budget motel in the shadow of Disney World, a mischievous little girl (Brooklynn Prince) lives a childhood on the precipice as her mother (Bria Vinaite) hustles and scams to make the rent. By turns hilarious and heartbreaking, “The Florida Project” recalls everything from “The Little Rascals” to François Truffaut’s “Small Change,” evoking the wild innocence of kids who grow up without boundaries or safeguards. Willem Dafoe does particularly strong work as the Magic Castle’s put-upon manager, whose compassion is stretched to the limit.
Ana de Armas, left, and Ryan Gosling in “Blade Runner 2049.”Credit...Warner Bros.
Reviving “Blade Runner” for modern audiences seemed like a dodgy idea, running up against the impossible standards of a cult favorite — and the fact that mainstream audiences didn’t swarm theaters for the 1982 original in the first place. Director Denis Villeneuve couldn’t solve the second problem, but “Blade Runner 2049” does extend and enrich the mythology of this noir-soaked future dystopia, where androids known as replicants are rebelling against their human masters. The ace cinematographer Roger Deakins brings the rainy Los Angeles of the original back to life while also adding brilliant new bursts of color, particularly when the action shifts to Las Vegas.
With seven nominations and one win, Judi Dench has became a perennial Oscar favorite, and the bona fides deepen for this royal drama from director Stephen Frears, who steered Helen Mirren to an Oscar for “The Queen” in 2007. “Victoria & Abdul” didn’t make Dench a nominee this time around (the film received two nominations in techical categories), but Dench’s performance is still a pleasure: She’s given plenty of latitude here as Queen Victoria, a dyspeptic ruler who takes a surprising interest in Abdul Karim, an Indian Muslim who challenges her assumptions and earns an important role in her court.
The glossy, PG-13 homogeneity of superhero movies has needed some pushback for a while now, and James Mangold’s violent, hard-R twist on the X-Men mythology is a welcome shift of expectations, an existential Western that feels more like “Unforgiven” than an effects-heavy mutant team-up. In his final turn as Wolverine, Hugh Jackman plays the washed-up hero of a mutant race on the verge of extinction, logging enough hours as a limo driver to care for the ailing Charles Xavier in exile, but otherwise doing little to aid humanity. That changes when he agrees to drive an 11-year-old with extraordinary powers to a safe haven far to the north, but the journey comes at a steep cost.
Several major directors have ruminated over the life of Vincent Van Gogh, including Vincente Minnelli (“Lust For Life”), Robert Altman (“Vincent & Theo”) and Akira Kurosawa (“Dreams”), but none with the unique texture of “Loving Vincent,” which bills itself as “the world’s first fully painted feature film.” The unmistakable colors and swirls of Van Gogh’s work have been used here to illustrate the mysterious circumstances that led to his death. All told, the animators constructed their film out of about 65,000 hand-painted frames.
The nation’s children were most likely not crying out for an animated feature full of references to “Glengarry Glen Ross,” but someone at 20th Century Fox must have had the premium leads, because “The Boss Baby” brought in a half-billion at the box office. Popular success accounts for its nomination more than critical approval, but Alec Baldwin does persuasive voice work as the executive tot, and the plot — about a pint-size secret agent who goes undercover to thwart a dastardly scheme by the head of Puppy Co. — has a high adorability factor.
None of the major lenders responsible for the subprime mortgage crisis faced any significant consequences for their role in triggering the 2008 recession. But populist sentiment against the banking industry led the City of New York to bring charges against Abacus Federal Savings Bank, a family-run business that primarily serves Manhattan’s Chinatown. The veteran director Steve James (“Hoop Dreams,” “Stevie”) explores the facts of the case from the inside, suggesting that a Chinese-American family became an easy scapegoat for a tougher political dilemma.
Activist documentaries may raise awareness, but there’s a much shorter history of documentaries that directly affect social or political change. “Icarus” is one of them, stumbling accidentally into a doping scandal that led to Russia’s expulsion from the 2018 Winter Olympics. Setting out to make a kind of “Super Size Me” for cycling, the amateur cyclist Bryan Fogel wanted to see how he might react to performance-enhancing drugs. To that end, he found Dr. Grigory Rodchenkov, who turned out to be the architect behind a massive state-run Russian doping program. The doctor was willing to share some astonishing secrets.
Coming on the heels of Orlando von Einsiedel’s Oscar-winning 2015 short, “The White Helmets,” this fly-on-the-wall feature documentary from Feras Fayyad follows a search-and-rescue team as it picks through the rubble of the war-ravaged Syrian city of Aleppo, in search of survivors. Although the courage and dedication of its subjects are an inspiration, “Last Men in Aleppo” doesn’t gloss over the horrors they discover or offer false hope about the ruined lives of the survivors. It also doesn’t underplay the risks involved in joining the White Helmets and possibly coming under fire because of it.
Twenty years after his brother’s shooting death at the hands of a white mechanic, the director Yance Ford revisits the case — the shooting was determined to be an act of self-defense — and the ways it tore his middle class African-American family apart. Beyond this personal story about racial injustice and the gradual shift in Ford’s gender and sexual identity, “Strong Island” is a fascinating look at black families on Long Island who got a taste of the middle-class dream, but lived in de facto segregation.
After 18 years away from feature filmmaking, the Hungarian director Ildiko Enyedi (“My Twentieth Century”) returns with this strange and beguiling metaphysical love story about two workers at a Budapest abattoir who meet each other in their dreams. Enyedi contrasts their quiet, delicate courtship as deer in a snowbound dreamscape with their far more awkward chemistry in the real world, where the man has a disabled hand, the woman is on the autism spectrum, and cattle are being led to the slaughter.
This Palme d’Or-winning satire from Ruben Ostlund about the pretentious follies of a modern art museum may be akin to shooting fish in a barrel, but the fish had it coming. With the controlled, exquisitely brittle style he brought to his previous film, “Force Majeure,” Ostlund follows a put-upon curator (Claes Bang) as he unveils a controversial exhibit that asks visitors to participate in a social experiment on altruism and trust. Needless to say, society falls short of the challenge.
