BEIJING — Wang Qishan, the formidable Chinese politician who oversaw President Xi Jinping’s withering campaign against corruption, has been appointed to the national legislature, official news outlets said on Monday. The announcement added to signs that Mr. Wang, who retired from top Communist Party posts last year, could return to public office as a powerful ally of Mr. Xi.
Mr. Wang, 69, previously ran the Communist Party’s anticorruption agency, the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, turning it into a fearsome enforcer of loyalty to Mr. Xi. But he stepped down from that and other leadership positions at a party congress in October, following an unspoken retirement rule for high-ranking Chinese politicians.
But there has been speculation ever since then that Mr. Xi could see to it that Mr. Wang remained a powerful player in China’s political leadership. The reports on Monday of Mr. Wang’s appointment to the party-controlled legislature, the National People’s Congress, are the clearest sign yet that he will remain in public life.
Official news outlets reported that Mr. Wang had been chosen as a deputy to the congress for Hunan, a province in southern China. But the official reports gave no other clues about his future.
The National People’s Congress usually meets in full session only once a year, and Mr. Wang’s appointment as one of 3,000 or so deputies does not necessarily mean he will return to high office. It is very unusual, though, for a leader who steps down from the top ranks to join the legislature.
Before the announcement, four people, citing conversations with senior Chinese officials and speaking on the condition of anonymity, told The New York Times that Mr. Wang had a strong chance of being appointed vice president when the National People’s Congress meets for its annual session, probably in March. At that time, it is all but certain to give Mr. Xi a second, five-year term as president and to appoint a new government leadership lineup to support him.
The four people were a Chinese government official, a Chinese-American business executive who often meets senior politicians in Beijing, a foreign executive who has met Mr. Wang, and a former United States government official who has met him several times, including last year. They all requested anonymity to avoid damaging ties with Chinese leaders.
The South China Morning Post, an English-language newspaper in Hong Kong, reported in December that Mr. Wang could be appointed vice president.
In China, the vice presidency is a relatively weak position, and the current holder of the job, Li Yuanchao, has left barely any imprint. But in previous decades, the job was held by powerful politicians who influenced policy and supported the top leader: Yang Shangkun, for instance, a People’s Liberation Army general who was close to Deng Xiaoping. Some analysts said Mr. Wang could use the job to serve as an adviser and enforcer for Mr. Xi.
“What seems to be assured — or as close to it as it gets in China — is that he still is very well respected,” and that one way or another he would retain influence on key issues, said Randal Phillips, a former United States intelligence officer who now works for the Mintz Group, a company that assesses business risks.
According to party insiders, Mr. Xi had floated the idea of keeping Mr. Wang in the party leadership by changing an informal rule that says leaders must retire if they are 68 or older when a party congress convenes. In the end, though, Mr. Wang stepped down and he has stayed out of the public eye since then.
Mr. Wang’s extended political life may magnify speculation that Mr. Xi is looking to stay in power after his dual second terms as Communist Party chief and president end in 2022 and 2023. When Mr. Xi won his second term as party leader last year, he broke with recent precedent by not promoting a likely successor into the party’s topmost body, the Politburo Standing Committee. But most analysts believe it is too early to tell what will happen five years from now.
Mr. Xi and Mr. Wang first met five decades ago, during Mao Zedong’s Cultural Revolution, when they were sent from Beijing to labor in the same impoverished, hilly region of northwestern China. Mr. Wang worked on a rural commune about 50 miles from Mr. Xi, who has recalled visiting Mr. Wang for a night and lending him a book on economics.
Before taking up his job as anticorruption chief in 2012, Mr. Wang forged a career as an economic administrator and troubleshooter. He served as vice premier, helping steer China’s response to the global financial crisis in 2008, and he often met Western business leaders and politicians. In his new political life, Mr. Wang could reprise that role.
“It looks more likely now that he has a strong chance of becoming vice president,” said Deng Yuwen, a current affairs commentator in Beijing who previously worked as an editor for a Communist Party newspaper.
