 James Merrill used to mock the egotistic memoirs of the day by calling them “ME-moirs.” Ernaux’s is a “WE-moir,” the group memory of her generation (she was born in 1940). As someone also born in 1940, but in the United States, not France, I found her memories both familiar and distancing.
Throughout “The Years,” Ernaux traces the collapse of Catholic prudishness as it’s attacked by secularism, the pill, the legalization of abortion and the women’s movement. While as a teenager she was terrified of losing her virginity before marriage, in late adolescence her unmarried sons begin to sleep with their girlfriends at their mother’s apartment.
Ernaux attributes the “I remember” concept that summons up an endless list of events and products, no matter how trivial, to the French writer Georges Perec, but it actually started with the American artist and poet Joe Brainard. Unlike their random lists, Ernaux’s are arranged chronologically, and so she becomes something more than a list-maker: a Greek chorus commenting on politics and lifestyle changes. And yet her recollections are evanescent, unstable, because the media have taken charge of memory and forgetting. And the media have divided people into generations: “We belonged to all and none. Our years were nowhere among them.” The media have become the gatekeepers of the imagination.
Feelings themselves seem to go in and out of fashion. People now find the words “honor” and “patriotism” absurd. Other, newer emotions are unnamable: “There was no specific word for the feeling one had of simultaneous stagnation and mutation.” Life, caught up in meaningless rituals, feels as if it’s slipping by, but at the same time “progress” has landed us in a place we no longer recognize.
Ernaux comes to despise Christmas, “the most grueling period of desire and hatred of things, the peak of the consumer year.” Because “she feels no particular age,” she feels no older in her 70s than women in their 50s, but she knows that younger women have no doubt about the age difference.
Perhaps, as Ernaux’s book suggests, changes in attitude occur more rapidly in France. I remember when I lived in Paris in the ’80s and ’90s how shocked I was that feminism and gay liberation were considered old hat, fads that had prevailed only in the ’70s. “Feminism,” Ernaux observes, “was a vengeful, humorless old ideology that young women no longer needed, and viewed with condescension. They did not doubt their own strength or their equality. … The struggle of women sank into oblivion. It was the only struggle that had not been officially revived in collective memory.” The opinions Ernaux summarizes aren’t hers; they’re the common wisdom of the society around her. Everything in France is treated as a fad or fashion, which has the virtue of giving every idea its moment in the sun. In America, ideas fade less quickly, protected by the university tenure system.
“The Years” is an earnest, fearless book, a “Remembrance of Things Past” for our age of media domination and consumerism, for our period of absolute commodity fetishism.