I am a recently separated university English professor, and an avid reader of poetry, short fiction and novels. I am a sucker for forbidden or unusual romances with strong female characters and equally strong prose. Colleen McCullough’s “The Thorn Birds,” Reynolds Price’s “Blue Calhoun” and Eimear McBride’s “The Lesser Bohemians” are right up my alley, as are Samantha Harvey’s “Dear Thief,” Rachel Cusk’s “Outline,” “Mariette in Ecstasy,” by Ron Hansen, and “The English Patient,” by Michael Ondaatje. I thought the love scene in the seaside cabin in Jennifer Egan’s “Manhattan Beach” was a tour de force in restrained eroticism. Neither Domenico Starnone’s “Ties” nor Ali Smith’s “Autumn” gripped me as much as I’d anticipated, and I’ve never been able to get into Gabriel García Márquez’s “Love in the Time of Cholera,” although perhaps I was too young or too naïve when I tried. Can you recommend some good love stories for a woman recently on her own after 20 years of marriage?
As an English professor, you surely know the thrills of classic romance narratives — triangles, stolen moments and ill-advised liaisons, among other sublime pleasures — in books like “Women in Love,” by D.H. Lawrence, “Their Eyes Were Watching God,” by Zora Neale Hurston, and “Summer,” by Edith Wharton. These are always ripe for rediscovery and rereading.
And then there is the underappreciated art of seduction in short stories. The form’s constraint provides the perfect come-on. Its limits, made for both innuendo and artful elision, align with passionate longing: You fall in love with what isn’t there.
Unsettled passions stir beneath much of the work of the Nobel laureate Alice Munro. In “Carried Away” (from her story collection “Open Secrets”), a librarian with an affinity for order has her romantic life thrown into disarray by a series of peculiar, haunting encounters. The reverberations of an affair between a young actress and her director in Munro’s “The Children Stay” (from “The Love of a Good Woman”) haunt her more than 30 years later.
Conversely, the May-December entanglement at the heart of Jhumpa Lahiri’s “Sexy” (found in her Pulitzer Prize-winning collection, “Interpreter of Maladies”), a study in the allure of surfaces that begins over a cosmetics counter, burns up fast.
In David Schickler’s uneasy romance “The Smoker,” from his provocative collection “Kissing in Manhattan,” a high school teacher falls for his beguiling student — and for her urbane parents, too. Also pick up Schickler’s bighearted memoir, “The Dark Path,” about his ecstatic search for salvation through God and women.
Struggles with faith similarly suffuse Brit Bennett’s bittersweet, sexy, morally fraught novel, “The Mothers.” Bennett’s debut follows Luke, a pastor’s son, and Nadia, a grieving daughter, who are drawn back to each other years after their painful, youthful affair ruptures.
Three novels about women transfigured by love and sex while far from home will give your reading list some geographic sweep. The fleeting yet slow-to-ignite fling between Sophie, an Englishwoman visiting her aunt in Italy, and Tancredi, an architect she meets there, is exquisitely distilled in Shirley Hazzard’s slim 1960s masterpiece “The Evening of the Holiday.” The initial connection made between two anthropologists in New Guinea in “Euphoria,” Lily King’s novel inspired by the life of Margaret Mead, is more promising: “Lovely lips in a devastatingly tired face,” Andrew Bankson observes when he first meets Nell Stone. The romantic attachments in Gina Frangello’s fierce, uncompromising novel “A Life in Men” are more geometrically complicated. Mary Grace, an adolescent girl with cystic fibrosis, assumes the identity of her dead friend Nix and embarks on a series of intimate encounters with men in far-flung places as a way of holding on to her lost friend and finding herself.
Given your penchant for love stories that flirt with high style, I suggest two piercing accounts of adulterous love. Renata Adler’s wry, thrillingly associative novel “Pitch Dark” ranges over political events, romantic hurts and literary allusions, each of her scenes — with animals, among friends, between lovers — holding a measure of heartbreak. The stakes for loss are even higher in “Written on the Body,” Jeanette Winterson’s fervent novel that follows — with exquisite syntax and breathless drama — an affair derailed by illness. The deeply imaginative story wrestles with philosophical questions and carnal desires, playing with the split between head and heart.
