Governments and citizens across the world recoiled on Friday with disgust, outrage and sadness at reports that President Trump had described Haiti and unspecified African nations as “shithole countries” during a meeting with members of Congress on Thursday about immigration, asking why the American government would want to admit their citizens as immigrants.
In Haiti, particularly, the words were greeted with pain, as the country marked the eighth anniversary of the deadly 2010 earthquake — known as the worst natural disaster of modern history, killing between 230,000 and 316,000 people and leaving 1.5 million homeless.
President Jovenel Moïse attended a solemn ceremony at Titanyen, the monument to the country’s earthquake victims, where thousands were buried anonymously in giant pits.
“The Haitian government condemns in the strongest terms these abhorrent and obnoxious remarks which, if proven, reflect a totally erroneous and racist view of the Haitian community and its contribution to the United States,” the government said, while summoning the top American diplomat in the country for clarification, and possible an apology.
The fury was not limited to those countries directly mentioned, however.
El Salvador’s government sent a formal letter of protest. Earlier in the week, the United States announced it was rescinding Temporary Protected Status for about 200,000 Salvadorans living in the United States.
Unsurprisingly, some of the strongest reactions were in Africa.
After President Trump used vulgar language about immigrants, TV news grappled with a question: Were his comments racist?
Mr. Trump has a growing history of disparaging and ill-informed remarks about both Africa and Haiti. In June, he was reported to have said that Nigerians in the United States would never “go back to their huts” in Africa.
Mr. Trump said in a tweet on Friday that he had a “wonderful relationship with Haitians,” but last June, The New York Times reported, he grumbled in another immigration meeting that Haitians “all have AIDS.” The White House denied that report.
The celebrated Haitian-American writer Edwidge Danticat said that Mr. Trump’s comments gave her chilling memories of arriving to the United States in 1981, the year before federal authorities included being Haitian as one of the four increased risk factors for contracting the new, and at the time fatal, disease, H.I.V. and AIDS.
“Unfortunately, we fear, once again Haiti finds itself in the midst of a very negative narrative in the U.S., and we are hoping this conversation will be an opportunity to address the Haiti conversation in the U.S. once and for all,” he said.
Across social media on Thursday night and Friday, Africans and Haitians shared pictures of beautiful beaches, tree-lined streets and glamorous tourist resorts captioned with the insult.
Online and offline, in cafes and shops across Africa, some wondered why the United States had spent millions of dollars to build massive embassies in countries which Mr. Trump held in such low esteem. Others speculated that if Mr. Trump visited their countries, he might revise his assumptions. Still others said that Mr. Trump may have had a point, citing the endemic corruption, public health challenges and poverty in many African nations.
“That’s why we’re being termed a shithole,” Andrew Mataso, 55, a business executive, said on a busy street in Nairobi, Kenya.
Vincent Omondi, who lives in the sprawling working-class neighborhood of Kibera, in Nairobi, pointed out that the United States had a long relationship with people from the countries Mr. Trump criticized.
“The USA,” he wrote in a Facebook message, “was partly built by slaves from the ‘shithole’ countries.” But Mr. Omondi said poverty and economic dysfunction across Africa lent support to Mr. Trump’s point.
Oyenka Nwenze, 26, a broadcaster, was stocking up on cooking ingredients for the weekend at a supermarket in the Silverbird shopping mall in Abuja, Nigeria.
Under rainy skies in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, many people were reflecting on the earthquake, remembering loved ones who died.
The State Department appeared to have gone into damage-repair mode.
Without directly referring to the president’s contentious statement, the State Department’s main Africa account said on Twitter that “the United States will continue to robustly, enthusiastically and forcefully engage in Africa, promoting this vital relationship, and to listen and build on the trust and views we share with our African partners.” The tweet was framed as a comment on a meeting of African ministers that the department hosted in November.
Not everyone accepted that gesture, and some people were fearful of speaking in opposition to what they perceived as American policy. In Dakar, Senegal, diners at a beachside restaurant that serves Moscow mules and mojitos declined to express their views about Mr. Trump, fearing they might be denied visas to visit the United States.
Babacar Faye, a tailor in Dakar, tuned his radio to another station Friday morning when discussion of Mr. Trump’s comments was broadcast. His remarks were not surprising, Mr. Faye said.
Phoebe Mutetsi in Kigali, Rwanda, said she was not falling for it.
