In the movie, “I, Tonya,” the disgraced figure skater looks back on the 1994 Nancy Kerrigan scandal and her struggles to tell her side of the story.
“I’m going, damn, he’s got beautiful eyes,” she said. “I mean the eyes are the center to your soul, O.K.? You might have a nice butt, but I want to see the eyes.” Within weeks she proposed to him. Within those same weeks she was carrying their baby. She had never met anyone so gentle or kind; she had never known a man to just love her, not for her skating abilities or for what she might potentially become, but for her. They married, and she changed her last name, like lots of people do. O.K., I told her. Tonya Price it is.
You can’t run from being Tonya Harding, is the point. Even if you wanted to, even if you tried, and yes, she’s tried. “I moved from Oregon to Washington because Oregon was buttheads,” she said. Then, with mock apology, “I disappointed them. It’s like, how can I disappoint a whole state? Wait a second, how can I disappoint a whole country?” Oregon had been so proud when their own Tonya Harding was the first American female figure skater to land a triple axel jump in competition. Then what happened happened, and people turned on her. So she confronts it head on, the way she always has. As if she ever had a choice. She knew from the moment it all went down in 1994 that the Nancy Kerrigan attack wasn’t going to fade into the annals of history. “I knew that this would be with me for the rest of my life.” Absent anonymity — her face has softened over the years, but she is still clearly Tonya Harding — she is left to explain herself endlessly and hope that someone is listening.
Then, in 2014, the screenwriter Steven Rogers watched the ESPN documentary “The Price of Gold,” and decided to reach out. ESPN had given a rounder, more nuanced look at Ms. Harding and where she came from. It laid out the facts: How on Jan. 6, 1994, six weeks before the Lillehammer Olympics (and two nights before the conclusion of the United States Figure Skating Championships), Ms. Kerrigan was clubbed on the knee by a man with a collapsible baton. An F.B.I. investigation found that the man had been hired by Shawn Eckardt, a friend of Jeff Gillooly’s, who was Ms. Harding’s ex-husband. In the end, Ms. Harding pleaded guilty to hindering the prosecution — meaning that she knew who had done the attack, but only afterward, and that she didn’t report it immediately.
The prosecution believed that she was much more involved than what the plea bargain encompassed, but they accepted the plea since it included a felony charge. She was sentenced to three years of supervised probation, 500 hours of community service, a $100,000 state fine, and was tasked with setting up a $50,000 fund to benefit the Special Olympics, reimbursing the Multnomah County prosecutor’s office $10,000 in costs, undergoing a psychiatric examination and participating in any court-ordered treatment. And then there was this: She was forced to surrender her membership to the United States Figure Skating Association. Eventually, the association barred her for life.
Mr. Rogers, who wrote the 2015 movie “Love the Coopers,” asked her agent for the option to her story — her whole story — for $1,500, with more if the film actually got made and recouped its costs. The initial money wasn’t much, just enough for a month’s rent really, and she didn’t know if it was worth the hassle. But her agent said, “What’s the worst that could happen?” The worst had already happened.
All these years later, she’s still punished for what she did, but also for what she didn’t do. People still think she herself held a baton over Ms. Kerrigan’s leg that day. People still think she was married to Mr. Gillooly (who has since changed his last name to Stone), who planned the attack and was sentenced to two years in prison for racketeering, but they were divorced by then.
At the very least, people still think she herself hired the guy who attacked Ms. Kerrigan, Shane Stant, and they have never forgiven her for it. “I’ve had rats thrown into my mailboxes, [expletive] left on my door, left in my mailbox, all over my trucks. You name it, it’s been done to me.” Sometimes she pulls up to a traffic light and a man in the next car will make oral sex gestures at her.
FOR AS MANY people who are mean or crude when they realize who she is, there are just as many who love her. We had met earlier in the day at an ice rink in Vancouver that shares a building with a megachurch. When she entered, the 10 or so teenage wonders who had been jumping and spinning during serious-skater-only hours rushed off the ice to envelop her with hugs. “She’s such a good influence on the girls,” one of their mothers told me.
Ms. Harding swiped on her lipstick perfectly without a mirror: one coat of Wet n Wild 523B (Light Berry Frost) covered by a layer of Wet n Wild 530D (Dark Pink Frost). She laced up her tiny Harlick skate boots that she had painted pantyhose beige, which were attached to gold-plated MK Vantage blades, and put stirrups over her leggings and beneath the blades so that her lines would look longer and she would look taller. (She’s barely 5-foot-1.) She took a puff from her asthma inhaler, straightened her ponytail in its pink scrunchie, aligned her bangs, and stood up. The song “Low” came on and she said, “I love this song!” and hopped out onto the ice while Ms. Manary shimmied her shoulders to the music from behind the plexiglass.
When Ms. Harding got out there with her first jump, the girls who had been practicing all morning now looked like total amateurs by comparison. At 47, she still holds so much power in those thighs and so much grace in her hands and posture. People said that her sin — before her other sins — was not being the Disney princess Barbie doll that the Figure Skating Association demanded of its skaters. “I hated the word ‘feminine,’” she said. “It reminded me of a tampon or a panty liner.” Has anyone ever interrogated the notion of why the highest achievement in the female-centered sport of figure skating is exertion without expression of exertion? Has anyone ever said screw it all and flipped on the Tone Lōc and just gone for it like she did? Has anyone ever made skating look so fun?
Ms. Harding skates sometimes, but not as much as she used to. What would be the point? Her ban by the U.S.F.S.A. as a skater and a coach should leave her open to professional skating — say like in an exhibition or the Ice Capades — but “because everything is owned by the association,” she said, there are very few corners of it in which she can still meaningfully participate. Say she taught young skaters for $50 an hour at the rink, she wouldn’t be allowed to bring them to competition, so, again, what’s the point?
When she got the call from Mr. Rogers, she’d been doing fine. She could take care of herself. She had other skills. She’d worked as a welder, a painter at a metal fabrication company, a hardware sales clerk at Sears, where every day some guy would ask if there was a man who could help him, and every day she’d school that guy on how much more she knows about tools than just about anyone. She faced Paula Jones in a celebrity boxing bout in 2002, and started an unremarkable boxing career in earnest in 2003. But she wasn’t a great fighter, and she didn’t like it very much, either. She never bought the idea that hitting something could help you work out aggression. They told her, “Pretend it’s someone else’s face.” But it wasn’t, so what’s the point?
She married and had her boy, who changed her life by refocusing her attention on someone who wasn’t her. She and her husband would spend hours hunting together, just as she used to do with her beloved father — Mr. Price with a muzzleloader and Ms. Harding with a bow and arrow because she wanted “to give the animal a 50-50 chance to make it interesting and fair” (and also because felons aren’t technically supposed to possess guns in Washington State). Do you know how good of an archer she is? She says she has successfully done no fewer than eight Robin Hoods — shooting an arrow that splits another arrow, which itself was already in a bull’s-eye, 30 yards away — and that’s nothing compared to her fishing skills. (But she doesn’t want to elaborate. “Some people,” she said.  Also, she can build anything. She can fix anything.  It was going fine. She had made some kind of peace with the idea that she’d never really be understood.
The director Craig Gillespie narrates a sequence from his film featuring Margot Robbie as Tonya Harding.
Hi. I’m Craig Gillespie and I’m the director of “I, Tonya.” So this is the first skating sequence in the movie that we get to see Tonya Harding skate. And it’s young in her career. And she’s more aggressive and a little unruly and unpredictable. So there’s four major skating sequences in the film and they each have different styles. This one we wanted the camera to be more aggressive and reflect where her energy was at the time. So we actually have a steadicam operator, Dana Morris, who turned out to be, fortunate for us, a very amazing skater. So he’s skating here on skates handheld. And he’s backwards sometimes, sometimes he’s forward. He comes in here, wraps around her. Margot had trained for this sequence for five months and then we had two professional skaters training as well. And each one of these moments is broken down to who could do what. Obviously, Margot can’t do a lot of these big skating moves. Amazingly, she was able to do the dance moves, you know, which is the opening of this with all the spinning and the kicks. And then it becomes a very complicated situation of head replacement. But all of these shots are handheld. And he would skate along. And it’s shot on film, compounding it. Because on film, you know, the focus is by eye. So we have our focus puller having to judge these distances as we go in and out close to our skaters throughout this sequence. And it certainly was stressful in that way. A lot of these pieces we had to do actually with no time. We had — I think it was 2/3 of our day was allocated to doing the sequence. And this was all part of routines that Tonya Harding had done during that period of ‘86 through ‘88. And she had actually skated ZZ Top. But once we got into each move which had been rehearsed and prepped for five months, we were a little more spontaneous. Because Dana was on skates and we could look at the move and he could be like alright, so I’ll come around. I’ll keep coming in the opposite direction here. And let’s try and meet her right as she finishes it. And you know, each time it would be slightly different, but we’d have all the pieces that we could put together.
The story is told in the tone in which Ms. Harding speaks, and there are scenes in it you’ve seen a hundred times before in Lifetime movies: a young girl being hit by her mother, a young wife being hit by her husband — that aren’t portrayed as tragic as much as a particular kind of wide-eyed Oregon gothic. The film has been generally well-received and on Sunday Allison Janney won a Golden Globe for her portrayal of Ms. Harding’s mother. But there have also been reviews (including in this paper) that wonder if the protagonist is a punching bag for cheap laughs and classism.
For the record, Ms. Harding loved the movie. “Magnificent,” was her word, especially after she’d seen it a few times. You have to remember, that was her life. That those beatings were very specifically hers, not composite beatings. And that they weren’t even shown in full: “People don’t understand that what you guys see in the movie is nothing,” she said. “That was the smallest little bits and pieces.  My face was put through a mirror, not just broken onto it. Through it. I was shot. That was true.” Mr. Gillooly, er, Stone shot at the ground, she said, and it ricocheted onto her face. (He has denied this and other abuse.) She said her mother threw a knife at her. (Her mother has also denied allegations made by Ms. Harding.) But “that’s all true,” she said. The people charged with taking care of her didn’t.
The reason she loves the movie is because it conveys something she doesn’t feel was ever conveyed before. There were mitigating circumstances. Her life was terrible. She was beaten. She was threatened. You don’t get this way unless you were counted out completely. Her own mother didn’t seem to love her. The only time in her life she ever got anywhere was when she circumvented the rules and took for herself what appeared to be given to the Nancy Kerrigans of the world. Ms. Kerrigan was from a working-class family too, but she was loved. Her parents drove her to practices and cheered for her and cried with joy. She had Vera Wang skating outfits! Tonya had nothing. She had costumes that her mother made with sequins everywhere so that her thighs got cut up; then she had to make them herself, earning point deductions for the quality. She danced to ZZ Top while the others were dancing to Mozart. They had trainers and dietitians and Tonya was eating broccoli and cheese from the Spud City where she worked at the mall. She had asthma. She had muscles.
WE ADJOURNED to the South Pacific Cafe, the restaurant next door, which is Polynesian-themed and owned by the same people as 38 Below. It had been a long day. Ms. Harding ordered a steak appetizer she loves and a drink the owner created just for her. It has vodka, Bacardi 151, watermelon liqueur, orange juice and pineapple juice. It is called the Triple Axel, because no one would understand if you called it the Tonya Price.
She thinks that if she could have done a clean program at the Olympics, if her lace hadn’t broken, if she hadn’t been so frazzled and beaten down by the news media, we would be having very different discussions about her. We would be marveling at all she overcame. Her movie arc would have a heartfelt and triumphant trajectory like “Rocky” or “Rudy.” The international judges loved her, after all, she’s pretty sure. She just had to get past the American ones who found her existence and her dominance so disgraceful — the ones who set such an impossible gauntlet for her. But instead, by the time she got to Lillehammer, the Olympic committee seemed set on punishing the United States for its sideshow. Ms. Kerrigan, who skated a stellar program, even after all that had happened, should (arguably) have won the gold and got silver instead. There was a sense that the judges were sending a message, that the Olympics were no place for American scandal.
