When Ohene Opong-Owusu accepted a job with Mastercard in Purchase, N.Y., he decided to live in New York City and commute, after graduating from business school at the University of Virginia last spring.
His two-hour round-trip commute would include a Metro-North train to and from White Plains, where Mastercard is one of several corporations that run shuttles to and from the station. Not surprisingly, finding a home within walking distance of Grand Central Terminal — “in the heart of everything,” he said — was a priority.
He was willing to spend up to $3,100 a month to rent a studio or a one-bedroom, and he started checking availability online in the spring, months before his August start date — far too early.
He saw plenty of places that seemed perfectly nice but weren’t available at the right time. He had his eye on the Centra on East 44th Street, and checked online listings there daily. But when a unit became available, it was gone in short order.
So during the summer, he visited the city with a list of more than a dozen places to check out.
His first stop was a building he had seen online, Murray Hill Marquis, a hotel-to-rental conversion on East 34th Street, where he saw a studio on a high floor that was well renovated and relatively spacious, with more than 500 square feet, for a little over $3,000 a month. He liked everything about it, including the central location, the modern feel and something he hadn’t considered: the view.
He wanted to see a few comparable places, so he went across the street to Warren House, a white-brick postwar condominium building. A one-bedroom was available there for $2,600, but Mr. Opong-Owusu couldn’t get past the dated parquet flooring.
“That type of checkerboard floor — it looked old and was a turnoff,” he said.
For $2,900, there was a nicely renovated one-bedroom in a prewar building on East 46th Street, just steps from Grand Central. But the apartment was on a low floor and was dark and gloomy.
He considered other buildings, including Stonehenge 57, but at 57th Street and First Avenue, it was too far from Grand Central.
The studios he saw for roughly the same price were generally nicer than the one-bedrooms, which tended to be smaller and more run-down. A one-bedroom, he knew, would be helpful when he had overnight guests from out of town, but it would also mean a downgrade. And he didn’t have all that many guests.
“For my day to day, a studio is not bad,” he said.
So he returned to the Murray Hill Marquis, now satisfied that he was making the right choice. He moved into the studio apartment in August, paying $3,005 a month, with one month free.
The building was formerly the Affinia Dumont, “a boutique hotel with unusually large hotel rooms for New York,” said Richard Wernick, managing director of residential leasing for the LeFrak Organization, which bought the property last spring and began the conversion to rentals.
Mr. Opong-Owusu, who played football as an undergraduate at the University of Michigan, is also glad to have a gym in the building, which makes his early morning workouts more convenient.
