Ryan Murphy explores the life and death of Gianni Versace. And a new workplace comedy comes to FX.
THE ASSASSINATION OF GIANNI VERSACE: AMERICAN CRIME STORY 10 p.m. on FX. Gianni Versace’s family isn’t exactly thrilled with this depiction of his lavish lifestyle and eventual murder on the steps of his Miami Beach mansion: “distorted and bogus,” they said in a statement. The series’ creator, Ryan Murphy, hopes it dominates the cultural consciousness the way the first installment, “The People v. O. J. Simpson,” did two years ago. Darren Criss, a Murphy veteran from “Glee,” plays against type as Versace’s killer, Andrew Cunanan. “The story doesn’t horrify me as much as it breaks my heart,” Mr. Criss said in an interview with The New York Times.
RIVERDALE 8 p.m. on the CW. This teenage drama returns after a monthlong break. A shutdown of Southside High forces Jughead to transfer to Riverdale High, where old rivalries flair up. Archie investigates the dealings of his girlfriend’s powerful father, while Betty tries to find her long-lost brother.
NATURE: ARCTIC WOLF PACK 8 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). Don’t let the bushy coats fool you: The stars of this documentary, arctic wolves, are shrewd and dangerous hunters who prey on musk oxen, animals much bigger than them. This documentary films a pack on the edge of North America, as females care for their pups and venture off to find prey in temperatures that hit 40 below.
CORPORATE 10 p.m. on Comedy Central. The American version of “The Office” imbued the mundanity of the workplace with whimsical high jinks and tender romances. But while “Corporate” tackles the same subject, it portrays desk jobs with a bitter nihilism. The series was created by and stars Jake Weisman and Matt Ingebretson as put-upon junior executives-in-training. In one scene, Mr. Ingebretson’s character describes himself as “a cog in a soulless corporate machine” while his bosses scroll on their phones. Lance Reddick (“The Wire,” “Lost”) plays their company’s hot-tempered chief executive.
THE PATH on Hulu. You might have recently recognized Aaron Paul’s gravelly, assertive voice in episodes of “BoJack Horseman” and “Black Mirror.” He returns in the flesh, with all of his anguished facial creases, in the third season of “The Path,” where he stars as Eddie, a member of a fictional cult called Meyerism, a former outcast who suddenly finds himself a leader. This constantly mutating show dips into magical realism, marital drama and gritty power struggles. Freida Pinto joins a cast that includes Michelle Monaghan and Hugh Dancy.
LIVING SINGLE on Hulu. Long before Queen Latifah was part of a group of four raucous women in 2017’s “Girls Trip,” she was part of another lovable quartet on “Living Single,” a ’90s comedy on Fox. The show explored romantic and platonic life in and out of a Brooklyn brownstone, setting a template for “Friends” and many other ensuing sitcoms. And Queen Latifah has hinted at a reboot.