Their Status Is Temporary. But to Salvadorans, the U.S. Is Home.
By definition, T.P.S. is temporary, meant to be temporary. It’s not meant to be forever. We are fighting all together for these T.P.S. to be approved again so we can stay in this country. [music] Good morning. We have a full-time staff of about 12 people. And over 50 percent would be T.P.S. We’re just together more than we are with our families at home. And we spend a lot of time together. We work hard together.  And so we’re all really close. I don’t really have trust in the government anymore. I really wonder who they’re really looking after and the long-term effect. Without T.P.S., quite frankly, I really don’t know how I would run my business. Hey, Jose. Everything O.K.? I don’t remember where they are going. So I’m going to have to look at the email. O.K., bye. Thanks. Jose and I started to work together about 21, 22 years ago. And we’ve been working together since. There are times when businesses can be difficult and you worry about the next day. But I’m not worried about being kicked out of my country, or where I live, and where I’ve lived for 25 years, or even longer. I just can’t even possibly — I can’t imagine. I just can’t. Hey. Hi. How are you? Good. How are you? You’ve been here a while? Thank you. Yeah. You see this one tree here? We’re going to take that out. What, this one? Yeah. And one of those are going to go in there. My name is Morel Salinas. Or in Spanish — [speaking Spanish] My family, they came to the United States because El Salvador is like really dangerous right now. There’s a lot of bad people. And they came here because they wanted to live a better life. And they wanted to have a wonderful life with their children. It’s really beautiful here. I feel very safe. I am afraid because my family might not stick together. My biggest present for Christmas is to keep my family together. We don’t know what’s going to happen. We’re hoping for the best, because our kids are going to be — I don’t know how can we explain it to them. Because ending that program, they’re probably going to be looking to deport us back to our country. If that ever happens, we’re going to be probably trying to hide from immigration and stay here. We are celebrating Christmas like we always do. It’s been 23 years already. Oh my God, Mommy, Barbie. Oh my God, a clock. I always wanted a clock. I got Barbies. Look at this. I love this. Oh, wow, there’s bad guys. There’s so much. Yes. I’m going to open the one that’s going to be for all of us. Huh, oh my gosh. Thank you, Mommy.
