Book Review|To Respect the Earth’s Limits — or Push Them?
To Respect the Earth’s Limits — or Push Them?
640 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $28.95.
In “The Wizard and the Prophet” Charles C. Mann tries something tricky: to illuminate contemporary debates about the environment by examining the lives and philosophies of two men, long dead and mostly forgotten thinkers who had competing visions for the Earth’s future. It’s an ambitious sort of book, one that, to be completely successful, requires two things. One is a command of sprawling detail, with the ability to see parallels among events across time and distance and to explain the complex with ease. The second is an analytical device that takes all those parts and molds them into something novel and useful.
On the first count, Mann succeeds magnificently. William Vogt and (particularly) Norman Borlaug are brought to splendid, quirky life. Vogt, mostly unread these days, is a writer whose 1948 book, “Road to Survival,” Mann credits with helping birth modern environmentalism with its sense that humans should respect natural limits — he is the title’s “Prophet.” Borlaug is the Nobel-winning Midwest agronomist whose patiently bred strains of wheat kicked off the Green Revolution, and is here Mann’s “Wizard,” imbued with a technological worldview that seeks always to overcome Earth’s limits. One can argue with the choices — the “limits” argument might have been better served if personified by the more profound Aldo Leopold or Rachel Carson — but not with the results of his historical research, which provides one charming (and telling) anecdote after another.
This notion of balance, of limits that should not be pushed, would undergird the increasingly shrill alarms Vogt issued in his books and articles, and from various insecure perches in the global conservation hierarchy, where his disdain for economic growth cost him one post after another. He committed suicide in 1968, thinking his cause lost, just as Paul Ehrlich published “The Population Bomb,” Earth Day drew millions into the streets in 1970 and a groundbreaking 1972 report, “The Limits to Growth,” firmly established the argument he’d helped pioneer.
Borlaug’s story is more epic, even in its condensed form. A classic product of the Midwest land-grant colleges that are one of America’s greatest successes, he found his way to a dusty plant-breeding station in a desolate part of Mexico, where he figured out how to breed wheat that combined high yields with resistance to the ancient plague of stem rust. The new varieties made full use of fertilizers and other inputs — harvests soared first in South America and then, crucially, in India. (The story of getting the seed to the subcontinent, amid wars between India, China and Pakistan, is a fine Cold War saga.) What followed were honors, and also questions — the Green Revolution did raise yields, at least for a while, but it also wrecked much of peasant agriculture, driving poor people to the big cities and polluting farmlands with pesticides.
As he showed in his earlier books “1491” and “1493” Mann’s storytelling skills are unmatched — the sprightly tempo with which this book unfolds, each question answered as it comes to mind, makes for pure pleasure reading. But you may find yourself troubled a little along the way by the analytical framework he’s imposed on the material, the division between the technologically minded Wizards and the limits-embracing Prophets. His distinction works pretty well when he applies it to food (GMOs vs. organics) and water (dams and desalination vs. drip irrigation) but it starts to break down when we reach climate and energy, perhaps the planet’s central problems.
Fair enough, but in straightforward terms a solar panel seems pretty wizardly. I mean, you point a sheet of glass with some inlaid silicon at the sun, and out the back flows cold, light and communications. That’s pure Hogwarts. What’s more, it can be deployed (as Mann notes) in giant centralized arrays as well as house by house — so much sunlight falls on the Earth that in theory an area smaller than Texas would suffice to power the whole planet. Mann’s analysis of solar power also shows the inevitable danger of writing a book that takes several years when the subject is changing so quickly: He refers to renewable energy as “surprisingly expensive” and finds only one installation, in Nevada, that provides reliable round-the-clock power. But the price of panels and batteries has continued to plummet. In the past few months, bids for new solar farms in Mexico and Saudi Arabia have produced the cheapest electrons ever generated on the planet, and Elon Musk (who seems an unbreakable alloy of Borlaugish wizardliness and Vogtian alarmism) has built (in less than 100 days) the world’s largest battery, turning South Australia’s abundant sun into a 24/7 source of power.
This analytical muddle doesn’t matter greatly because Mann refuses to say which set of solutions he thinks holds most promise for the future. “In our internet era, there are entirely too many pundits shouting out advice,” he writes, which seems inarguable. “I believe I stand on firmer ground when I try to describe what I see around me than when I try to tell people what to do.” Safer ground, anyway.
The great virtue of Mann’s book — and much of his journalism over many years — is that it raises very large questions like these that are usually either ignored or answered in slogans. He provides detail enough, and simplicity enough, that anyone who is struggling with these puzzles will be enlightened and informed. And entertained, which, given the subject matter, is no small feat.