To submit news of your wedding to The New York Times, please follow these instructions closely, especially about the photo requirements (keep eyes level in portraits). Click here for the form to submit your announcement.
When should I submit my announcement?
Please send requests at least six weeks before the legal marriage event. We give preference to requests received before that deadline.
When will my wedding announcement be published?
Marriages are reported in the Weddings pages in the Sunday Styles section and online at nytimes.com/weddings. The timing of publication is governed by the date of the legal ceremony (when the civil marriage certificate is officially solemnized). We report on those legal ceremonies taking place during the previous six days. Events on a Sunday are published the day of the ceremony.
The Times does not charge for publishing these reports, but space is limited and we cannot guarantee publication. If it is published, the report will become a permanent part of the Times archives, on and off the Web.
What information do I need to complete my submission?
You must include your full names, the date of your event and the approximate time of day. We need your address, postsecondary education and occupations. Also please mention any noteworthy awards you received, as well as charitable activities and special achievements. And tell us how you met.
We also require information on the residences and occupations of the couple’s parents. Please include this even if the parents are deceased.
Submissions are rewritten, fact-checked and edited to Times standards.
We must have the name, title and religious and/or legal affiliation of the person who will legally sign the official certificate. For an interfaith event, include the names and affiliations of any other celebrant who will participate with the officiant, though please limit to only one other celebrant. Also state the exact location of the event.
All announcements must include daytime, evening and cellphone numbers for the couple and their parents. We also need the office phone numbers for those performing the ceremony. Submissions without telephone numbers cannot be considered.
What photo requirements are there?
The Weddings pages typically publish formal portraits of couples and individual brides. Couples posing for pictures should arrange themselves with their eyebrows on the same level and with their heads fairly close together with plenty of space at the top and sides of the couple’s heads. Pictures should be in color and in a horizontal format. Include the photographer’s name if professional credit is required. Examples of formal portraits can be found here, here and here.
We will sometimes include informal photographs of individuals or couples at home, outdoors or in other attractive settings. Those posing for pictures should be neatly dressed, and the images should be of professional quality. Examples of informal portraits can be found here, here and here.
What are the technical photo guidelines?
It must be a high-resolution JPEG file attachment (not embedded in the body of the email).
Note: Photographs altered digitally or in any other fashion are not accepted.
Image requirements: JPEG file format, Width and height of at least 3000 pixels. Maximum file size of 12MB. Minimum file size of 3MB.
If you are chosen to be in the Wedding pages, and are unsuccessful in delivering your image file to the Web, you may email your photo to the reporter who will contact you.
To have us consider your event for the Sunday Vows column, please tell us how the couple met, how their relationship progressed and how they arrived at the decision to formalize their union.
Enter that information into the space marked “sample announcement” on the Times Web form or, if necessary, prepare a duplicate submission, with a covering letter giving details about the planned ceremony and reception, and direct that request by email to the Vows column at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| If your announcement is selected, you will be called a few weeks before the event.
If questions remain, you may call the Society News desk at |||PHONE_NUMBER|||  or send an email to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Because of the volume of requests, we may not be able to reply immediately.