That was just one of the many statements issued by lawmakers after President Trump’s vulgar comments during an immigration meeting. It came from Senator Ron Johnson, Republican of Wisconsin. There was outrage from leaders around the globe, though others quietly agreed.
The president, above on his way to Mar-a-Lago for the weekend, had met with members of Congress to discuss the fate of the Dreamers, young undocumented immigrants brought to the U.S. illegally as children. An immigration deal remains up in the air. Here’s what Dreamers have to say about it.
Did you keep up with the headlines this week? Test your knowledge with our news quiz.
2. The Hawaii Emergency Management Agency sent an alert to cellphones on Saturday urging people to take shelter because a ballistic missile was headed toward the state. But it was a false alarm.
Not surprisingly, the alert caused widespread panic, coming at a time of heightened tensions with North Korea. Security experts called it a frightening warning of how a technical error could trigger an unintended conflict with North Korea.
3. Mudslides in Montecito, Calif., wiped out entire blocks, killing at least 18 people with a brute force that shocked residents in areas that were hit hard by last month’s wildfires.
The fires left the earth scorched, bare and vulnerable to sudden mudslides. Some faulted the authorities for not ordering a mandatory evacuation.
“It’s apocalyptic,” one resident said. This video shows the devastation.
4. Emilie König, 33, spent the past five years living in Syria, where she became a prominent propagandist and recruiter for the Islamic State.
Now she wants to return home — to France. The quandary her case poses is an increasingly common one for European countries: What should they do when citizens, who are also militants, want to come back?
5. At 54, Jeff Bezos of Amazon is the world’s richest person, with a net worth of more than $100 billion.
He had stayed out of the limelight for years, but he’s building a public persona now. He bought The Washington Post in October 2013, and this past week, he and his wife announced a $33 million donation for scholarships to Dreamers.
“He’s getting thanked at the Golden Globes and targeted by presidential tweet tantrums — not even Steve Jobs had that kind of pop-culture currency,” one observer noted.
6. Facebook announced changes to its News Feed around the world. The company said it was trying to increase “meaningful interaction” by drawing attention to content from family and friends while de-emphasizing feeds from brands and publishers.
But that could actually intensify the spread of fake news. We looked at a pilot program that Facebook ran last year in Slovakia, Sri Lanka, Cambodia, Bolivia, Guatemala and Serbia. It doesn’t bode well. Above, Mark Zuckerberg.
7. Male models and assistants are accusing the fashion photographers Bruce Weber and Mario Testino of sexual misconduct.
Above from left, Ryan Locke, Robyn Sinclair and Terron Wood. Each said he had experienced sexual harassment during his time modeling.
Representatives for both photographers said they were dismayed and surprised by the allegations. Condé Nast said it would stop working with the two men, at least for now.
8. Uber once paid a hacker a $100,000 bounty over a security breach that exposed the data of 57 million riders and drivers. Now the episode, which was not disclosed for a year, is turning into a serious black eye for the company.
It’s the subject of four lawsuits, with attorneys general opening inquiries into whether the company broke the law. And Uber’s response is fueling a wider debate about whether companies can scrupulously work with hackers at all.
9. As the Pittsburgh Steelers begin their march to a potential seventh Super Bowl championship on Sunday afternoon, we caught up with the family of Mike Webster, the stalwart center of the team’s 1970s dynasty.
Webster, who died in 2002, was the first N.F.L. player to receive a diagnosis of chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or C.T.E., the degenerative brain disease linked to repeated head hits. His case led to hundreds of others filed by retired N.F.L. players.
But Webster’s family was excluded from a settlement because he died too early to be eligible. They’re fighting the decision in court. Above, his son Garrett and ex-wife Pam.
10. “Saturday Night Live” welcomed back two alumni as guest stars in a sketch parodying the news show “Morning Joe.” Bill Murray appeared as the former Trump adviser Stephen Bannon, while Fred Armisen played Michael Wolff, the author of a new White House tell-all.
11. Finally, a long weekend is a great time to daydream about a getaway.
To aid in that effort, here’s our annual list of 52 places to inspire travelers.
It includes popular spots like New Orleans and lesser-known gems like Gansu, in China, and São Tomé and Príncípe, on Africa’s West Coast. Above, Lake Chaiquenes in Chile.
This year, for the first time, we are sending one writer to visit each and every place. We got 13,000 applications for the job. And now, please meet the lucky traveler: Jada Yuan.
Want to look back? You can browse past Morning and Evening Briefings.
