The Learning Network|How Do You Cope With Grief?
Have you ever experienced loss in your life — of a loved one, pet, job, home or something else special or valuable to you — or known someone who has? What was that experience like? How did you deal with your emotions?
Although many of us are able to speak frankly about death, we still have a lot to learn about dealing wisely with its aftermath: grief, the natural reaction to loss of a loved one.
Relatively few of us know what to say or do that can be truly helpful to a relative, friend or acquaintance who is grieving. In fact, relatively few who have suffered a painful loss know how to be most helpful to themselves.
Two new books by psychotherapists who have worked extensively in the field of loss and grief are replete with stories and guidance that can help both those in mourning and the people they encounter avoid many of the common pitfalls and misunderstandings associated with grief. Both books attempt to correct false assumptions about how and how long grief might be experienced.
One book, “It’s OK That You’re Not OK,” by Megan Devine of Portland, Ore., has the telling subtitle “Meeting Grief and Loss in a Culture That Doesn’t Understand.” It grew out of the tragic loss of her beloved partner, who drowned at age 39 while the couple was on vacation. The other book, especially illuminating in its coverage of how people cope with different kinds of losses, is “Grief Works: Stories of Life, Death and Surviving,” by Julia Samuel, who works with bereaved families both in private practice and at England’s National Health Service, at St. Mary’s hospital, Paddington.
— How do you cope with grief? What strategies from the article can you apply to your own life about healthy ways to express and relieve suffering when facing tragedy?
— What was the best way someone supported you when you were grieving? What was the worst? Why?
— What do you usually say to someone who is in mourning? What do you usually do? What advice can you take from the article about how to support those who are dealing with loss?
— What misconceptions or assumptions about grief did you have before reading the article? What is something new that you learned?
Students 13 and older are invited to comment. All comments are moderated by the Learning Network staff, but please keep in mind that once your comment is accepted, it will be made public.