MONDAY PUZZLE — I love Lynn Lempel’s puzzles, and this one was no exception, but it gave me a case of emotional whiplash.
On the one hand, it’s a smooth puzzle, typical of what we would expect from the Queen of Mondays. On the other hand, the theme covers a fairly serious subject. I’ve been DOWNSIZEd quite a few times over the course of my career, and it’s never fun. So, on balance, I enjoyed the wordplay, but I cringed a bit when I realized where Ms. Lempel was going with her theme.
Still, Ms. Lempel’s reinterpretation of the word DOWNSIZE to mean measurement sizes in phrases that have been placed in the Down entries is clever. The clues are starred to help solvers locate them, because the majority of early week puzzles will have the theme in the long Across entries.
All four of Ms. Lempel’s theme entries are lively phrases. We have SMALL WORLD at 3D, PRINT MEDIUM at 6D, AT-LARGE RACE at 27D and MUMBO JUMBO at 31D.
49A: At first, I thought that the clue “Asian yogurt drink” referred to those little bottles of Yakult, a probiotic drink that you get at the end of a meal in a Korean restaurant. It turns out that the answer is LASSI, an Indian yogurt drink. I like mango LASSI the best.
58A: Everyone knows what PRNDL is, yes? The onomatopoeia is “prindle,” and it is the name bestowed upon the transmission gear selector by automotive engineers. The letters stand for park, reverse, neutral, drive and low.
This was an idea that came together fairly quickly once it occurred to me. But it did undergo one major transformation. The obvious first thought was to have small, medium and large in phrases going down, with the downsizing revealer as the final, fourth entry. But then MUMBO JUMBO came to mind and was too perfect to disregard. That left the revealer for the spot where you find it now.
The grid constraint was that I wanted the size words to go sequentially down the grid as well as just being down entries. Which meant finding answers and placing them such that each key word was lower than the previous one. My preview copy of the puzzle (courtesy of XWordInfo.com) had the words shaded, which would be Will’s addition.
The turnaround on this puzzle was astoundingly fast. I sent it in at the tail end of October and got an acceptance email on January 10. And here it is still January. Maybe a record.
In looking this over, I can see I made some compromises. LASSI, ESSES, and ET ALII , as well as good old IDI, would not be my pick of fill. But that was the best I could do without changing the basic grid design.
Will did make one teeny grid change. At 7-Across, I had BMI rather than TGI. Most clues were unchanged. As I looked them over, I did pause at the one he substituted for PARK, thinking, “What the heck is PRNDL?” I had to laugh at that one.