Yet the note and Uber’s eventual $100,000 payment to the hacker, which was initially celebrated internally as a rare win in corporate security, have since turned into a public relations debacle for the company. In November, when Uber disclosed the 2016 incident and how the information of 57 million driver and rider accounts had been at risk, the company’s chief executive since August, Dara Khosrowshahi, called it a “failure” that it had not notified people earlier. Mr. Sullivan and a security lawyer, Craig Clark, were fired.
The hacking is now the subject of at least four lawsuits, with attorneys general in five states investigating whether Uber broke laws on data-breach notifications. In addition, the United States attorney for Northern California has begun a criminal investigation into the matter.
The situation is complicated by Uber’s track record for pushing boundaries, which put it under scrutiny last year and helped spur the resignation of Travis Kalanick, its longtime chief executive, in June. Mr. Khosrowshahi has since vowed to change the way the company conducts itself.
In a statement, Mr. Sullivan disputed the notion that the 2016 episode was a breach and said Uber had treated it as an authorized vulnerability disclosure.
Through a spokesman, Mr. Kalanick declined to comment.
By the time Mr. Sullivan got John Doughs email, Uber had paid rewards to hundreds of hackers. Mr. Sullivan forwarded the John Doughs note to his team for vetting and, if all checked out, patching and payment.
Uber’s security team used nicknames for hackers, particularly the colorful, anonymous ones who engaged with the company. John Doughs was called “Preacher” for his admonitions that Uber should be better at security.
Other emails obtained by The Times show Mr. Fletcher treated the incident as a bounty and encouraged Preacher to provide proof of the vulnerability, including sending a few lines of data from the database he had breached.
According to the emails obtained by The Times, Uber soon discovered that some of its employees had left certain computer code known as keys on a programming site called Github. Those keys had allowed Preacher to gain access to Uber’s Amazon web servers, where it stored source code as well as 57 million customer and driver accounts, including driver’s license numbers for some 600,000 Uber drivers. It was a major oversight. To fix it, Uber had to inform everyone at the company that it was temporarily shutting down access to Github.
Mr. Fletcher said he would need to seek authorization for a $100,000 payment, and would need Preacher’s reassurances that he would delete the data he had downloaded. Mr. Fletcher also pushed the hacker to take payment through HackerOne, which requires bounty recipients to disclose their real identities for tax requirements.
Mr. Fletcher drew further details about the hacker out through emails, including tidbits about his identity, his internet hosting provider, the location of his computer and proof that he deleted his copy of Uber’s downloaded data by looking at a virtual copy of his system provided by his host.
By then, Uber’s executives had decided what to do. Mr. Kalanick signed off on the $100,000 payment, so long as the hacker signed an agreement to destroy any data exposed in his discovery, according to the emails.
Preacher’s trail of digital bread crumbs eventually led to a 20-year-old whose first name was Brandon and who was living in a Florida trailer park with his family, according to the emails. In one email, Uber offered to send someone to meet Brandon at a local coffee shop. Brandon declined to leave his home and suggested that the employee meet him there. It was there that Brandon signed agreements assuring Uber that he had deleted the data he had downloaded.
Uber’s security team was soon celebrating its response to what could have been a major security breach. Mr. Sullivan and his colleagues were praised in year-end performance reviews, including by Mr. Kalanick, according to current and former employees.
Last fall, when two outside law firms for Uber learned about the payment to the hacker, they advised the company that the incident should have been disclosed, according to an Uber employee familiar with the matter. Mr. Sullivan and Mr. Clark, the lawyer who directly oversaw the bounty payment, were fired for not seeking outside counsel on the issue of whether to disclose, this person said.
That prompted a call to Mr. Sullivan while he was preparing Thanksgiving dinner, according to two people familiar with the matter. He was fired, effective immediately.