Mr. Bezos is the world’s richest person and can afford virtually any luxury. But obscurity is no longer among them.
On Friday, Mr. Bezos and his wife, MacKenzie, made public their $33 million donation to a nonprofit that provides college scholarships to so-called Dreamers, young immigrants brought to the United States illegally as children. In October, he received an award for a donation to a marriage equality campaign.
The appearances and actions are a new look for Mr. Bezos.
As he was shaping Amazon into one of the world’s most valuable companies, Mr. Bezos developed a reputation as a brilliant but mysterious and coldblooded corporate titan. He preferred to hunker down in Amazon’s hometown, Seattle, at least partly because he thought it was better for Amazon’s growing business, largely avoiding public causes and the black-tie circuit.
But while Mr. Bezos — who at 54 is the world’s richest person, with a net worth of more than $100 billion — can afford virtually any luxury, obscurity is no longer among them.
Amazon, now a behemoth valued at more than $600 billion, has become one of the faces of “big tech,” along with Apple, Alphabet’s Google and Facebook. These companies are facing a backlash. Amazon is under the microscope for what critics say is its corrosive effect on jobs and competition, and Mr. Bezos has become a bête noire for President Trump, who repeatedly singles out him and Amazon for scorn on Twitter.
Mr. Bezos’ portfolio of other ventures has thrust him farther into the spotlight. In October 2013, he bought The Washington Post for $250 million, jump-starting a renaissance of the paper. In 2016, Mr. Bezos bought a $23 million home in Washington, one of the city’s most expensive, which is undergoing extensive renovations to make it a suitable party spot for the city’s political class. Nearby neighbors include former President Barack Obama and his family, and Mr. Trump’s daughter Ivanka Trump and her husband, Jared Kushner.
Mr. Bezos’ space start-up, Blue Origin, is also making its efforts more public, giving him another stage. The company is trying to rescue Earth by helping to move pollution-belching heavy industries off the planet.
“He’s getting thanked at the Golden Globes and targeted by presidential tweet tantrums — not even Steve Jobs had that kind of pop-culture currency,” said Margaret O’Mara, a professor of history at the University of Washington, who curated a museum exhibit in Seattle endowed by Mr. Bezos.
But interviews with more than 30 people who know Mr. Bezos, most of whom declined to be identified to protect their relationships with him, revealed his awareness of the growing opposition to Amazon and his growing comfort with being in the public eye.
Mr. Bezos, they said, accepts the probability of greater government scrutiny of Amazon. The chief executive has advised Amazon executives to conduct themselves so that they can pass any legal or regulatory test.
The investor Warren E. Buffett, who has known Mr. Bezos since the 1990s, said the cautionary tale of Microsoft, which faced a landmark antitrust case by the government that decade, must loom in Mr. Bezos’ mind. Microsoft, by far the most dominant technology company at the time, lost its footing after the case, opening an unexpected opportunity for competitors.
“You’re going to get a lot of scrutiny if you’re disrupting other people’s livelihoods,” Mr. Buffett said.
Some of the people who know Mr. Bezos said his new public face was for business expediency. Others believe it is a result of personal growth.
But they all said it was clear that Mr. Bezos and Amazon were trying to go beyond his tech persona to show the world his other sides.
Mr. Bezos has always been happy to play the role of Amazon’s chief pitchman, especially when he perceives some benefit to Amazon customers from doing so, people who have worked with him said. He submits to interviews and speaks at events when, for instance, a new company product like the Kindle electronic reader or Echo speaker needs to be explained to the world.
A hedge fund executive in New York who caught the internet bug early, Mr. Bezos piled into a vehicle with his wife in 1994 with the intention of finding a place to start a business selling books on the internet. He founded Amazon later that year in Seattle, in part because of the growing pool of technical talent Microsoft had brought to the area.
But putting his start-up in Washington also meant Amazon would not have to collect sales tax in the country’s most populous states, like California, Texas and New York. Retailers typically have an obligation to collect sales tax in states where they have a physical presence.
Those efforts would, in turn, give his fledgling company a further price advantage against established physical retailers like Barnes & Noble.
It also meant that, despite its growing legions of customers, Amazon remained almost invisible in politics.
By the end of 2012, the company had swelled to more than 88,000 employees and over $61 billion in annual sales, creating huge businesses like its Prime membership service and Amazon Web Services along the way. Yet that year the company was criticized by leaders in Seattle and the news media for being disengaged from civic life compared with stalwarts like Boeing and Starbucks.
With investors, Mr. Bezos gave just enough of a peek at Amazon’s business to win their confidence while saying as little as possible to keep competitors guessing. To this day, Amazon will not disclose exactly how many Kindles, Echoes and other devices it has sold, and for years it refused to reveal financial details about Amazon Web Services, its highly profitable cloud computing business.
A turning point came for Mr. Bezos around 2011 when Amazon faced a public showdown with state governments.
At the time, legislators began hounding internet retailers like Amazon to collect sales tax. In California, Amazon initially campaigned to overturn a new law imposing an internet sales tax. But Mr. Bezos backed off after it became clear that Amazon’s image could be tarnished, a former employee involved in the matter said.
As part of those state deals, Amazon began building warehouses across the country, which allowed Amazon to deliver orders more quickly and let local politicians trumpet the arrival of thousands of jobs.
Suddenly, a company that once refused to confirm how many employees it had at its Seattle headquarters could not stop talking about how many jobs it was creating. It now has 542,000 employees.
As Mr. Bezos and the company talked about creating jobs, though, he and Amazon faced a counternarrative from critics that the company was really a job-killing bully.
Waves of store closings by bricks-and-mortar retailers like Barnes & Noble and Macy’s increased the volume. ”Amazon Must Be Stopped,” read a 2014 New Republic article about the company’s growing market power.
After the matter was resolved, Mr. Bezos told an interviewer that Amazon was simply negotiating hard on behalf of its customers.
“It’s very difficult for incumbents who have a sweet thing to accept change,” he said, referring to book publishers.
Another blow to the company’s public standing landed in 2015 when The New York Times published a lengthy examination of Amazon’s corporate work culture, which was depicted as an unforgiving environment. “The article doesn’t describe the Amazon I know or the caring Amazonians I work with every day,” Mr. Bezos said in an email to the company’s employees after the article came out.
According to two people who work closely with Mr. Bezos, the chief executive became more focused on corporate reputation issues after The Times article and the Hachette uproar.
By late 2015, a few months after Mr. Trump announced his campaign for president, he started his Twitter broadsides against Mr. Bezos, which often coincided with critical coverage of the candidate in The Washington Post.
Mr. Bezos responded by offering to launch the future president of the United States into space on a Blue Origin rocket.
People who have known Mr. Bezos for a long time say they see a concerted effort by him and Amazon to show more of his personality.
If there’s an image that captures Mr. Bezos at the moment, it’s a picture of him with his biceps bulging out of a polo shirt at a business conference in Idaho from July. “Swole Jeff Bezos” instantly became an internet meme, with one tweet juxtaposing shots of a doughy Mr. Bezos from the late 1990s (caption: “I sell books”) and the brawny 2017 version (“I sell whatever I want”).
The details people are willing to talk about include scraps about his daily routine. On most days, he leaves his lakefront estate in the affluent town of Medina, Wash., for a sparkling new 37-story office tower in Seattle, where he runs Amazon.
Mr. Bezos’ more public-facing work was abetted by a management change nearly two years ago at Amazon, when he put Jeff Wilke in charge of its consumer business and Andy Jassy in charge of cloud computing. That freed him up to devote more time to The Post and Blue Origin, though he remains deeply engaged at Amazon, dedicating most of his time to initiatives that are two to four years away from hitting the market.
Mr. Bezos has also pushed using publicity to the company’s advantage. In September, he masterminded the company’s splashy search for a place to locate a second headquarters. In the hoopla, Amazon highlighted the jobs it planned to create with the move — up to 50,000 total — and spurred a horde of towns, from Dallas to Boston, to apply.
In the future, that means Mr. Bezos will most likely be a more familiar presence in Washington. Mr. Bezos now visits Washington about 10 times a year, dropping in at The Post for forums, discussions with engineers and meals with journalists. In the capital’s stately Kalorama neighborhood, just off Massachusetts Avenue’s row of embassies, renovations are proceeding on his home — two combined properties that used to be the city’s Textile Museum.
Mr. Bezos plans to host salon-style dinners at the house, drawing inspiration from the celebrated dinner parties thrown by Katharine Graham, the former publisher of The Post, for the city’s movers and shakers from both parties. Mr. Bezos is known for asking his dinner guests to stick to a single conversation topic at a time to keep people from splintering off into private side discussions.
Sally Quinn, a longtime Post writer and an arbiter of the city’s social mores, said she had no firsthand knowledge of Mr. Bezos’ plans for his home. But she praised the idea of attempting to bring together guests from across the political spectrum.
