The border wall was one of President Trump's favorite topics on the campaign trail.
First of all, I want to build a wall. I will build a great, great wall. On day one, we will begin working on an impenetrable, physical, tall, powerful, beautiful, southern border wall. And it’s a real wall. This is a wall that’s a heck of a lot higher than the ceiling. And we’re going to have that big, beautiful door in the wall. They built the Great Wall of China. That’s 13,000 miles. Here we actually need 1,000 because we have natural barriers. Wall is probably $8 billion dollars. Maybe $10 or $12 billion dollars. The wall is peanuts. Remember this: the wall will be paid for by Mexico. Mexico is going to pay for the wall 100 percent. And I would build a wall like nobody can build a wall. I built great buildings all over the world. What’s more complicated is building a building that’s 95 stories tall.
WASHINGTON — In an early-morning Twitter post, President Trump insisted on Thursday that he has been unwavering in his stance for building a border wall between Mexico and the United States to thwart illegal immigration.
He was responding to — and directly contradicting — private statements by John F. Kelly, his chief of staff, who told the Congressional Hispanic Caucus on Wednesday that Mr. Trump had not been “fully informed” when he first promised the wall, and that the president’s position on building it had “evolved” over time.
“The Wall is the Wall, it has never changed or evolved from the first day I conceived of it,” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter at 6:15 a.m. Thursday.
But a review of Mr. Trump’s public statements on Twitter, in campaign speeches and during interviews shows that the president’s views on the border wall have shifted repeatedly since he raised the idea nearly four years ago, on Aug. 5, 2014.
The planned wall of 1,000 miles began with a single — and vague — statement.
Mr. Trump’s early statements about the length of the wall were ambiguous. More recent descriptions about the distance it would cover, however, have been fairly consistent.
Reporter: How are you going to build a 1,900-mile wall?
Trump: Very easy. I’m a builder. That’s easy. I build buildings that are — can I tell you what’s more complicated? What’s more complicated is building a building that’s 95 stories tall. O.K.?
“In our case, we need really 1,000 miles. It’s 2,000 miles, but some is natural borders, natural barriers which are pretty good, not as good as the wall but pretty good; you know what, let’s use it.” — Campaign rally in Manassas, Va.
“It’s 2,000 miles, but we need 1,000; you have natural barriers. We need 1,000 miles.” — Campaign rally in Ashburn, Va.
Mr. Trump: So the wall. The wall’s never meant to be 2,100 miles long. We have mountains that are far better than a wall. We have violent rivers that nobody goes near. ...
You don’t need a wall where you have a natural barrier that’s far greater than any wall you could build, O.K.?
Mr. Trump’s price tag for the wall has grown from $4 billion to $20 billion.
The president’s estimates for the cost of the wall have varied widely.
“If the wall costs $6 billion to build, and you know we’re talking about 1,000 miles, it’s 2,000, but you need it on 1,000. The Great Wall of China, think of it, is 13,000 miles.” — Speech in Richmond, Va.
President Trump talks about the cost of a border wall during a town hall in Charleston, S.C.
We’re going to have a trade deficit this year. $58 billion, O.K.? The wall is going to cost a fraction of that. Maybe 10 or 12 billion dollars.
The height of the proposed wall has roughly doubled and could grow even higher.
“China built a wall that’s 13,000 miles long 2,000 years ago. My ambition is for ours to be much higher.” — Speech in Myrtle Beach, S.C. The height of the Great Wall of China averages 20 to 23 feet. Its tallest point is 46 feet.
“The wall just got 10 feet higher.” — Speech in Tampa, Fla., after the former Mexican president said Mexico would not pay for it.
President Trump delivers a speech in Abingdon, Va.
And every time they fight me it gets 10 feet taller, right? Every single time, gets 10 feet taller. It goes up. It goes up, up, up. Taller it gets the safer it gets.
President Trump delivers a speech in Abingdon, Va.CreditCredit...Eric Thayer/Reuters..
Mr. Trump: I think a good 35 feet. It’s getting higher all the time.
Mr. Trump wants Mexico to foot the bill — but it’s not clear how.
Mr. Trump has been consistent in insisting that Mexico would pay to build the wall. But his position on how he would compel the country to fund it has varied.
President Trump addresses a crowd in Portland, Me.
Mexico’s going to pay for the wall. And that’s an easy one. And you know why they’re going to pay? Because Mexico is making a fortune. The trade deficit.
The area where Mr. Trump’s thoughts on the border wall have evolved the most has been in his description of what it will look like. His suggestions have ranged from a barrier with a “big, very beautiful door” to a solar wall that would pay for itself.
“We’re going to build a wall, and it’s going to be impenetrable, it will be a real wall.” — Campaign rally in Franklin, Tenn.
“People will come through the openings in that wall — we’ll have a few of them — and they’ll come in and they’re going to come in legally.” — Rally in Beaumont, Tex.
President Trump delivers a speech in Phoenix.
On Day 1, we will begin working on an impenetrable, physical, tall, powerful, beautiful southern border wall. We will use the best technology, including above- and below-ground sensors — that’s the tunnels, remember that. Above and below. Above- and below-ground sensors. Towers, aerial surveillance and manpower to supplement the wall, find and dislocate tunnels and keep out criminal cartels. And Mexico, you know that, will work with us. I really believe it.
“We’re going to build a wall. It’s going to be a great wall. And it’s going to have big beautiful doors in it because we’re going to have people coming into our country, but they’re going to come into our country legally.” — Campaign rally in Orlando, Fla.
Will it be a wall? Or a fence? Or a wall?
Mr. Trump has repeatedly shot down suggestions that the border wall would actually be a fence. But he has repeatedly in used the term “fence” in interviews and public statements.
Mikayla Bouchard, Barbara Marcolini, Tanner Curtis and Sameen Amin produced this article. Jeremy Bowers contributed reporting. Kitty Bennett contributed research.