297 pp. William Morrow/HarperCollins Publishers. $28.99.
One wonders what Damore would make of Joanne Lipman’s new book, “That’s What She Said: What Men Need to Know (and Women Need to Tell Them) About Working Together.” That’s a lot of title, but one that seems eerily prescient in light of our continuing national conversation about sexual politics in the workplace. Lipman was until recently the editor in chief of USA Today and chief content officer of its parent company, Gannett, and as she documents in her book, even before the exposure this fall of the movie mogul Harvey Weinstein’s decades of sexual predation (and the swift deposition of powerful men in entertainment, technology, politics, news, art and finance brought down by similar charges), men were already pretty freaked out about what they should and shouldn’t say to their female colleagues. It’s a situation that one could argue has gotten only more complicated since Lipman began writing this investigation into why the gender gap and its offspring — the wage gap, the achievement gap, the confidence gap, the respect gap, etc. — persist, despite decades of near parity in the numbers of men and women who work.
It’s an unfortunate opening salvo, as one could surmise that Lipman’s compassion for white men burdened by the demands of “outsiders” is the organizing principle for what’s to come. It’s not. Instead, she offers a persuasive examination of the innumerable institutionalized prejudices, roadblocks and often unconscious undermining that women face in nearly every aspect of public and private life. Some of her facts will be familiar to H.R. directors, women’s studies scholars and reporters who cover gender equality. They will likely be revelatory to nearly everyone else. Lipman’s not wrong that those with power are loath to give it up: One study by Catalyst, an organization devoted to working women, found that 74 percent of men surveyed on what undermines their support for gender equality said fear — of loss of status, of other men’s disapproval and of making a mistake — all of which, Lipman writes, has men “walking around on eggshells.” But she also believes that most men, certainly those in the upper echelons of management, “don’t need beating up with a two-by-four. They’d like to see an equitable workplace, they just can’t figure out what they’re supposed to do about it.” She’s here to tell them; here’s hoping they’re paying attention.
Lipman, a former journalist for The Wall Street Journal and the founding editor of the short-lived Condé Nast business magazine Portfolio, is a skilled assembler of data and a graceful storyteller. She starts with a sketch of just how male by default the universe is, from the standard office temperature (set to accommodate the higher metabolic rate of 40-year-old, 154-pound, suit-wearing men) and male-centric design at Apple (the iPhone 6 Plus was too big for many women’s hands and pockets) to the potentially dangerous side effects for women of the original prescribed doses of Ambien, a drug that was tested only on men, a still-common practice. All due, in part, to the lack of women in decision-making roles across industries and sectors, which, the data clearly show, is a financial mistake.
A lot of assertions in the book begin with “studies have shown”— a suspicious tactic. (Was the study that found a new potion “eliminated every wrinkle in a week” conducted with the 12 people who work at that beauty start-up? Or was it a double-blind, controlled trial by a credible research team?) Yet each fact here is carefully accounted for on the nearly 50 pages of notes at the end of the book. It’s not necessarily persuasive to read that “multiple studies have found that adding women to all-male teams leads to greater financial success,” but this claim is bolstered by data from several sources, including The Journal of Financial Economics (“Female executives make more profitable acquisitions and take on less debt than male executives”), Catalyst (“Firms with the most female board members outperform those with the least by almost every financial measure”) and the Credit Suisse Research Institute (“Companies whose top management is at least half female post returns on equity that are 19 percent higher than average”).
In a chapter titled “We’re All a Little Bit Sexist,” Lipman walks us through the thicket of research on cultural biases against women, which start almost from birth: Mothers overestimate the crawling ability of sons and underestimate that of daughters. Parents are 2.5 times more likely to query Google about whether their 2-year-old is a genius if that 2-year-old is a boy. In one study, girls outscored boys on math tests when there were no names on the papers given to teachers to grade; on the same tests with names attached, the boys outscored the girls. Women are 33 percent more likely to earn a college degree than men, even though professors are more likely to call on the men. Women are also more likely to be interrupted, despite speaking less than their male classmates.
In the working world, well, it gets worse: A Carnegie Mellon University study found that when an equal number of job-seeking men and women visited 100 recruitment sites, men were shown the ad for the highest-paying job six times more often than women were. Lipman dismantles the so-called “pipeline theory,” which posits that when women enter the work force at the same rate as men, they will reach management positions in equal numbers. In the early 1990s, more than half of law-school students were women, so, according to the pipeline theory, by now 50 percent of partners at law firms should be women as well. But by 2013, women held just 17 percent of those jobs, a pattern that Lipman says holds steady across “any” industry.
The Google case study is among several Lipman uses to propel a narrative about the uncertain status of women in the workplace. She recounts how jealousy of the woman who built the Tupperware company into a household name in the 1950s drove its founder to fire her and write her out of the company’s history, and she explains why Iceland is the only country in the world where men and women share power in almost equal numbers: After the global financial crisis of 2008, Icelanders embraced the idea that the bank failures were, as the female director of the country’s Chamber of Commerce put it, the result of a “penis competition” among bankers. Not only did Icelanders jail unscrupulous bankers but they also elected more women to government posts, including that of prime minister, and mandated that women make up 40 percent of corporate boards.
Lipman needs these stories to help give dimension to her statistics — though many women may find the statistics comforting all on their own, if only because they document an unease that many feel but can’t name. For instance: Women are 15 percent less likely to get promoted than men, in part because men get promoted for “potential,” while women get promoted for performance. And both men and women would rather work for a male boss — they’d even take a lower salary to ensure it. The self-annihilating absurdity of this last fact underlies some of the more important insights in “That’s What She Said,” which have to do with the unconscious bias women seem to have against themselves. Women in academia spend more time than men revising papers, in part because they’re reluctant to burden anyone with what they feel is subpar work but also because they’re so much more sensitive to criticism and hope to eliminate the possibility of any. Women underestimate their abilities at the same rate that men overestimate theirs, and a woman’s self-esteem is more closely tied to compliments and criticism from her boss, with praise being more meaningful to women than even a raise or a promotion.
But men have sensitivities too, and the shame of holding a lower-status job than a woman, particularly if that woman is a romantic partner, apparently runs deep. Lipman quotes two studies that hint at what men don’t often admit, much less even know. One is a study of heterosexual, college-age couples, in which both parties were asked to take a test. When the women were told that their boyfriends had scored higher on the test than they had, the women were unfazed. When the men were told that their girlfriends had done better, their self-esteem plummeted. Yet it rose when they were told that their girlfriends had done poorly. The other study found that men who earned less money than their wives were more likely to cheat. And when Lipman quizzed male executives on what it was about working with women that flummoxed them most, the resounding consensus was a crying woman. When women cry, a man’s testosterone drops, which makes him depressed. If he only knew that women typically don’t cry at work because they’re sad. According to the research Lipman cites, women cry in the office because they’re angry.
There is much to recommend this book, especially now, when record numbers of women are organizing, preparing to run for office and demanding change. So it’s a bit disheartening to get to the end with only a handful of paragraphs on sexual harassment. Lipman managed to fold in a reference to Harvey Weinstein, but if there’s one thing missing, it’s a consideration of how sexual harassment, and the perhaps less quantifiable issue of why men fear ascendant women, lead to the disparities that she documents so persuasively. She is optimistic that men are capable of acting not only out of self-interest — though it’s true, more female colleagues will make them richer — but out of the same moral imperative that once led privileged white men to abolish slavery and to “give” women the right to vote. Lipman offers 12 “tips and takeaways” for moving forward, one of which inspired her title. To address what we might call the “acknowledgment gap,” she exhorts those paying attention in a meeting to repeat a statement that a woman has already made, to ensure she’s recognized for it. Like her other suggestions, it’s a nice idea, one that’s been circulating among working women for a while. It reinforces her conviction that we must be vigilant in matters large and small if we want to shift the culture. Here’s Tip 13: Legislate equal pay.