In seventh-grade English class we were required to keep lists of the books we read for pleasure, with brief reviews — an adjective or two — then post them on a wall by the door. I was a bookworm, and eager to please. I quickly notched “Gone With the Wind” (“great”), “Jane Eyre” (“so good”), and “Wild December,” a fictionalized account of the Brontës (“really interesting”).
Then I paused. I was about to add my favorite of the bunch: “A Date for Diane,” by Betty Cavanna. Could I admit publicly that I adored it? I could not. “Dumb!” I wrote. My first literary lie.
The authors had their specialties. Cavanna tended to write about not-quite-pretty girls with artistic ambitions or interests like aviation or competitive skiing. Anne Emery sometimes worked that same earnest side of the street, notably in her four-novel account of Dinny Gordon, a budding classicist. Lenora Mattingly Weber was known for a 14-book cycle about a close-knit Irish Catholic family, the Malones, with a focus on its youngest member, Beany.
Occasionally, the books tackled substantive matters: economic inequality, alcoholism, racism and anti-Semitism. More often — and here I’m thinking of Rosamund du Jardin — the protagonists had to cope only with what they viewed as an unreasonable number of freckles and an unreasonable curfew.
Siblings may have hogged the bathroom or the telephone, parents may have refused to negotiate when it came to allowances, dates on school nights and a new dress for the prom, but families in these books were enviably high-functioning.
I became an 11-year-old whiz on the topic of chiffon scarves, peplums, pancake makeup and the dating rituals of bobby-sox wearers (granted, a strange preoccupation in the late 1960s). They went to double features and sock hops, then climbed into somebody’s jalopy to meet the gang for a milk shake at Joe’s Grill or McKnight’s Drugstore. I was transfixed and I was insatiable. While my mother toured J. L. Hudson, a Detroit department store, I skittered over to a rack of paperbacks, most with a pastel image of a girl in a skirt on the cover and a square of plaid on the spine.
It’s true that the titles ran together. There was “Fifteen,” by the inimitable Beverly Cleary; “Going on Sixteen,” by Cavanna; “Sweet Sixteen,” by Emery; and “Practically Seventeen,” by Rosamond du Jardin.
It is also true that the plots were formulaic, and that the authors, while concerned with their characters’ moral development, weren’t much for psychological complexity.
But as a bespectacled preadolescent with early onset acne, I found these books an endless source of reassurance and hope. You could be plain and scholarly, like Dinny Gordon, and still have boys eager to go out with you. You could be self-doubting like Jane Purdy, the protagonist of “Fifteen,” and, nevertheless, end up wearing the ID bracelet of cute green-eyed Stan.
My recall of plot details (Stan worked for a dog food delivery service; on an early date with Jane they went to a Chinese restaurant in San Francisco) is encyclopedic. My recall of character names (Beany Malone’s siblings were Johnny, Mary Fred and Elizabeth) is embarrassing. I wish I could remember “Middlemarch” with similar clarity.
I was 21 when my parents sold the family house, and I tossed Beany and Dinny, Tobey and Midge. Years later, feeling slightly wistful, I began to regret my decision. But the books, long out of print, were going for $100 or more.
I recently found a kindred spirit in Joy Canfield, a psychologist and academic publisher. In the late 1990s, she began searching for the Beany Malone series, and was poleaxed by the high prices. It occurred to her that perhaps she wasn’t the only one who wanted to revisit the Ragged Robin drive-in.
Playing on that hunch, Canfield began contacting the authors’ families and executors for permission to re-issue the novels with the original cover art.
She founded Image Cascade in 1999, republishing 14 paperback titles that first year. By 2009 there were 160. With sales of several thousand copies a year, Canfield, 56, hopes to continue expanding the roster. “I love these books, I absolutely love them,” she said.
They include Jennifer Travis, who read “Fifteen” and “Sister of the Bride” as a teenager. A few years ago, after a hunt in a used-book store yielded a copy of “Senior Year,” one of five novels about the sisters Jean and Sally Burnaby by Emery, she ordered the rest of the series from Image Cascade.
Rosemary Parker, 66, discovered malt shop novels in the fifth grade. Cavanna, du Jardin, Emery — she read them all, but she had a particular affinity for the Beany Malone books. The local library had three; she checked them out over and over.
“Beany was part of a big bustling family and every book had a problem to be addressed,” said Parker, a retired newspaper reporter who lives in Otsego, Mich. “There were anxieties about dating and how to treat friends and tucking in a shirt so a stain didn’t show.
A glass-fronted bookcase at the top of Parker’s stairway holds a complete set of Beany Malone books in hardcover, the fruits of a long search. Some were library discards, some were found on the internet.
