Music|These Gallery Walls Are Empty. Here, You Listen to the Art.
These Gallery Walls Are Empty. Here, You Listen to the Art.
She returned to her seat and the musicians all sat in silence for a moment, heads bent. An electric guitarist began to strike the strings of his instrument, slowly, methodically. A percussionist started to hum. Then a saxophonist howled a long, sharp single note with a kind of wild urgency. The other musicians, now all in a kind of musical trance, joined in, creating a crescendo of jumbled, inchoate sounds.
The walls of the museum have been stripped of art, and the only visual part of the exhibition is the musical instruments — a piano here, a drum set there.
Depending on when they arrive, visitors might encounter the ensemble performing the musical séance by Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster, or playing a 1965 Yoko Ono composition, “Sky Piece to Jesus Christ.” Or they might stumble into a rehearsal for a newly commissioned experimental musical work by the American composer Jonathan Bepler.
This “takeover” of an art space by an ensemble of musicians is an experiment to explore how contemporary classical music can be experienced as a form of contemporary art. Mr. Meyers and Ms. Chong Cuy hope that when experimental music is freed from its traditional settings and brought into the “white cube” of a gallery, both the musicians and the audience will experience it in a completely new way.
“If you think about the concert house, the opera house, the theater or even the club, these are spaces that have very specific rules that begin before you even enter the space,” said Mr. Meyers, during a break between rehearsals. Although these types of performance venues have been the norm for hundreds of years, he said, they may not always be the optimal setting for contemporary classical music.
“For the composer, these rules dominate the situation even before you step into the space, and sometimes even before you sit down to compose a piece.” About a decade ago, Mr. Meyers started to compose work for museum and gallery settings — large open spaces, usually with white walls and bare concrete floors, without fixed audience seating or even set performance times.
Mr. Meyers drew a distinction between music and sound art, which is often created specifically for art spaces. “I don’t consider myself to be a sound artist, I’m a composer,” he said. But the list of 38 musical compositions that he has put together for the exhibition contains both experimental pieces in the classical music tradition, and other works which have more to do with contemporary art.
The range of music on display begins with excerpts from Erik Satie’s “Vexations” (a single page of musical notation meant to be played 840 times) from around 1893, through Steve Reich “Clapping Music for Two Performers” from 1972, up to Mr. Meyers’s own “Elevator Music,” a 2016 piece that will be performed live in the Witte de With elevator by a cellist.
Halfway through “Séance,” the music had escalated into a pounding, rhythmic maelstrom of sound, with strains of blues and the saxophone wailing. The music swelled and dipped, swelled again and then waned, until the instruments stopped and only a few voices were left singing unintelligible words, breathy and prayerful. Then silence, while the musicians sat again with heads bent. Then they stood quietly and walked one by one out of the room.