The windows at Teuscher Chocolatier are a colorful, caloric confection that changes to herald each holiday. This time of year, they’re decorated with lipstick-red heart-shaped Valentine’s Day boxes.
Lynne-Marie Friedrichs, a vacationer from San Diego, couldn’t resist their charms. She bought herself a milk chocolate lactose-free bar and then returned the next day with her aunt, uncle and daughter in tow.
Ilana Hyman, a visual perceptual therapist who lives on the Upper West Side, stopped by, as she does every day on her way to the gym, to get a couple of Teuscher’s signature Champagne truffles. She discovered Teuscher in 1980, a year after it opened.
Ms. Hyman, somewhat unadventurously, chose the dark chocolate version of her usual milk chocolate Champagne truffle. She pronounced it perfect.
A complimentary truffle is nothing to sniff at. The chocolates at Teuscher, which arrive every Monday from Zurich, Switzerland, are not cheap: they sell for $112 per pound or around $3.36 per piece. Fancy fantasy boxes, which include 3D elephants blowing flowers out of their trunks and wide-winged ladybugs, are extra.
The Champagne truffles, which are sold singly or set, like precious gems, in lime green boxes tied with gold ribbon, were introduced in 1947. They were the creation of Dolf Teuscher, the founder.
Mr. Teuscher recently added rose and lavender truffles to the collection that includes salted caramel, pistachio, orange and Grand Marnier flavors.
Sara Yoffe, a nurse at NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, had tasted Teuscher chocolates only a couple of times. She stopped in to buy a 16-piece box of Champagne truffles for her grandmother’s 85th birthday.
Valentine’s Day, not surprisingly, is Teuscher’s biggest sales day of the year, and even the phone lines are busy. Tanya Aliyeva, an executive assistant for an executive coaching company, called in early to place her order.
For most of the rest of the year, Ms. Aliyeva, who lives in Brighton Beach, Brooklyn, takes care of her own chocolate cravings, although she said it takes tremendous willpower to place an order only every other month.
Ms. Hyman, however, prefers instant gratification.
This time, they were gone before she was out the door.