A look at major events in the complicated history of Mr. Allen and the Farrow family.
On Sept. 16, New York magazine published a lengthy interview with Soon-Yi Previn. The article represents the first extended remarks she has given on her relationship with the director Woody Allen, who began to date her mother Mia Farrow when Ms. Previn was a young girl. The pair began a romantic relationship when Ms. Previn was 21.
Earlier this year, Mr. Allen encountered fresh criticism — including from some actors in his films — over allegations by his adopted daughter Dylan Farrow that he molested her in 1992 when she was a child. (Dylan tweeted a response to the New York magazine story.) The Allen-Farrow story has its roots in the 1970s and encompasses several major events in the lives of Mr. Allen; his former partner Ms. Farrow; and their daughter Dylan.
This timeline is based on New York Times articles and other news reports, which are included. It is a guide, not a comprehensive accounting, and will be updated periodically.

Ms. Farrow adopts a baby girl, Dylan Farrow, who was born in Texas.
Ms. Farrow and Mr. Allen have a son, Ronan Farrow. Ms. Farrow suggests in a 2013 Vanity Fair interview that Frank Sinatra may have been his father.
Mr. Allen adopts Dylan Farrow and Moses Farrow, one of Ms. Farrow’s sons, who she adopted in 1980. Mr. Allen, who is 56, begins an affair with Ms. Farrow’s 21-year-old daughter, Soon-Yi Previn around this time.
Ms. Farrow discovers nude photographs of Soon-Yi Previn in Mr. Allen’s apartment. He later testifies in court that he thought the affair would remain secret.
GAYLE KING: Mmhmm. O.K.
Casey Pascal, a friend of Ms. Farrow’s, tells her that Dylan Farrow’s babysitter described observing Mr. Allen in a position with Dylan that seemed inappropriate. According to Vanity Fair, Ms. Farrow immediately asked Dylan about it, and she gave her account to her mother.
Mr. Allen sues Ms. Farrow in New York State court for the custody of Ronan, Dylan and Moses Farrow.
Mr. Allen releases a statement confirming his relationship with Soon-Yi Previn, saying it is “real and happily all true.” The same day, the Connecticut State Police announce they are investigating Mr. Allen. The focus: the allegations that he molested Dylan Farrow.
After a seven-month inquiry by a team of child abuse investigators at Yale-New Haven hospital, Mr. Allen’s lawyers say he has been cleared of molesting Dylan Farrow. Ms. Farrow’s legal team calls the confidential report “incomplete and inaccurate.” The report, which was commissioned by Connecticut law enforcement, was never officially released, but media outlets reported some of its contents.
Ms. Farrow takes the stand. She goes into detail about what Dylan Farrow told her the previous summer. She says she worried that Mr. Allen had a sexual attraction to Dylan from when she was 2 years old.
Dr. Coates testifies that she told Mr. Allen she feared for his safety because of threats made by Ms. Farrow. She says that she considered Mr. Allen’s relationship with Dylan Farrow to be “inappropriately intense,” but not sexual. The next day, Ms. Farrow’s lawyer portrayed Dr. Coates as “mesmerized” by Mr. Allen.
A sworn statement from Dr. John M. Leventhal, the doctor who headed the Yale-New Haven team, is released to the public theorizing that Dylan Farrow was emotionally unstable and coached by Ms. Farrow to accuse Mr. Allen. The Yale-New Haven team interviewed Dylan nine times and said she changed details throughout the interviews; Dr. Leventhal said in his statement that he had interviewed her, but Vanity Fair reported years later that he did not.
Mr. Allen loses the custody battle. Acting Justice Elliott Wilk of the State Supreme Court says Mr. Allen is “self-absorbed, untrustworthy and insensitive.” He denies Mr. Allen visitation rights with Dylan Farrow.
Frank Maco, a state’s attorney in Connecticut, announces that while he has “probable cause” to prosecute Mr. Allen, he would decline to press charges to spare Dylan Farrow the trauma of a trial. Mr. Maco says he believed that Dylan had been molested.
Mr. Allen files an appeal to the custody case.
The New York State appeals court denies Allen’s appeal.
Mr. Allen marries Soon-Yi Previn.
Dylan Farrow pens an open letter recounting her story in detail, posted through the Times columnist Nicholas Kristof.
In response to Dylan Farrow’s open letter, Moses Farrow defends Mr. Allen in an interview with People Magazine, saying Ms. Farrow coached the children to hate Mr. Allen. He says that Dylan was never molested and that Ms. Farrow was a bully.
In a guest column for The Hollywood Reporter, Ronan Farrow writes about the struggles that Dylan Farrow faced in getting her story out and says he believes Dylan’s story.
A book about Mr. Allen’s film career features an interview with Moses, who goes into more detail about his allegations that Ms. Farrow coached Dylan Farrow to accuse Mr. Allen of abuse and also accuses Ms. Farrow of being abusive. The author of the book is a friend of Allen’s, Eric Lax.
The New York Times, and then Ronan Farrow in The New Yorker, publish stories about sexual harassment, abuse and rape allegations against Harvey Weinstein.
Kate Winslet, the star of Mr. Allen’s latest film “Wonder Wheel,” demurs when asked about the accusations against Mr. Allen: “It’s just a difficult discussion. I’d rather respectfully not enter it today.” Griffin Newman, an actor in Mr. Allen’s next film, “A Rainy Day in New York,” expresses regret for working with him and pledges to donate his salary to an organization that fights sexual violence.
The actress Ellen Page says that working with Mr. Allen on the film “To Rome With Love” was “the biggest regret of my career” and expresses sympathy for women and minors who have suffered sexual abuse.
CBS This Morning airs the first-ever television interview with Dylan Farrow, where she recounts the allegations. Mr. Allen again denies them.
Mr. Allen sues Amazon for canceling a $68 million movie deal. (Amazon had backed out amid renewed focus on Dylan Farrow’s allegations.) Weeks later, The Times reports that Mr. Allen is shooting a new movie in Spain, backed by the Barcelona-based conglomerate Mediapro.
