Carl Higbie, who resigned on Thursday from the federal agency that funds AmeriCorps and SeniorCorps, said on Saturday that he regretted making disparaging remarks in the past about black people, Muslims, gays and lesbians.
Mr. Higbie, who also apologized on Twitter on Friday, was appointed by President Trump in August as chief of external affairs for the Corporation for National and Community Service, which encourages Americans to support their communities through volunteer service.
Mr. Higbie was quick to resign, he said on Twitter, “so as not to distract” from Mr. Trump’s successes.
Most of Mr. Higbie’s offensive comments, which were unearthed by CNN, were made in 2013 and 2014.
While hosting an internet radio broadcast, “Sound of Freedom,” in 2013, Mr. Higbie spoke of the “high percentage of people on welfare in the black race,” blaming “a lax of morality.” He added that taxpayers “are tired of supporting government checks going to these people who think that breeding is a form of employment,” CNN reported.
In one “Sound of Freedom” broadcast, Mr. Higbie said he opposed homosexuality in part because he was “molested by a gay guy” when he was a child, CNN reported.
Mr. Higbie also expressed disdain for Muslims several times.
In 2013, Mr. Higbie was fresh out of the Navy, and transitioning back to civilian life, he said on Saturday.
Mr. Higbie also drew criticism in 2016, while serving as a spokesman for the pro-Trump group Great America PAC, when he said during an interview with Megyn Kelly on Fox News that there was “precedent” for creating a registry for immigrants from Muslim countries, a proposal met with strong opposition by civil rights activists.
Mr. Higbie is one of many White House officials who have resigned or were fired, dismissed or reassigned over the past year, including Stephen K. Bannon, Mr. Trump’s chief strategist; Omarosa Manigault Newman, director of communications for the White House Office of Public Liaison; and Tom Price, the health and human services secretary.
The White House on Saturday confirmed that it had accepted Mr. Higbie’s resignation but offered no additional comment.