• Steve Wynn is accused by several former employees of sexual misconduct over the years.
• What he told C.E.O.s in Davos about Nafta and economic growth.
• What’s happening at Dell?
Want this in your own email inbox? Here’s the sign-up.
Shares of Wynn Resorts tumbled almost 9 percent in afternoon trading after a report of sexual misconduct by its founder and chief executive.
The WSJ just published a lengthy investigation into the casino mogul in which several former employees recounted incidents of sexual harassment and misconduct. Among the accusations were that Mr. Wynn pressured employees into sex.
Former employees said they sometimes entered fake appointments in the books to help other female workers get around a request for services in Mr. Wynn’s office or arranged for others to pose as assistants so they wouldn’t be alone with him. They told of female employees hiding in the bathroom or back rooms when they learned he was on the way to the salon.
Mr. Wynn told the WSJ, “The idea that I ever assaulted any woman is preposterous” and blamed his ex-wife, Elaine, of instigating the investigation. Ms. Wynn disputed that assertion.
In a surprise decision, the United States International Trade Commission struck down a Commerce Department recommendation to place steep duties on imported Canadian jets.
”The Commerce Department had decided that duties of nearly 300 percent should be placed on Bombardier’s new CSeries aircraft. But the trade commission, a quasi-judicial body of trade experts, disagreed.
As is its usual practice, the commission did not explain the factors behind its decision.
“For the U.S. International Trade Commission, an independent agency, to unanimously reject the arguments of America’s largest exporter and the Trump administration is a stunning rebuke. It suggests that President Donald Trump may find it as hard to back up some of his tough trade talk as trying to dismantle Obamacare and build a wall on the Mexican border.
President Trump used his speech to set out his economic record, while seeking to reconcile his “America first” protectionist stance with a call for free trade and foreign investment.
Mr. Trump took credit for the strong American economy, which he said had followed “years of stagnation.” He also pointed to rising stock prices, improving consumer and business confidence, and job growth. Growth in gross domestic product since he took office, however, is similar to that of 2014 and 2015.
Mr. Trump — never invited when he was a businessman — also delivered the message that the United States was open for business, appealing for international investment.
But he hit one of his favorite themes: that the global free trade regime has often treated the United States unjustly.
Mr. Trump specifically mentioned theft of intellectual property and central government direction of economies. In the past, he has linked those practices with China, but on Friday he did not do so.
What the cameras didn’t show: Many C.E.O.s actually weren’t present for Mr. Trump’s speech, because they had already left Davos.
That’s whether attendees like it or not. The president has already been making the rounds of the global elite at the World Economic Forum, including at meetings for business leaders last night.
He also spoke openly about the White House’s internal debate about Nafta, and whether he would need to rip it up and start over.
The message was that the U.S. is open for business and eager to welcome fresh investment. Attendees included the heads of Siemens, Adidas, HSBC and Volvo.
Many of the European corporate chieftains arrived at the dinner concerned about Mr. Trump’s provocative words about a possible trade war, his harsh treatment of immigrants, his skepticism about climate change, and his apparent disdain for international cooperation. But in the course of a conversation with the C.E.O.s, moderated by Gary Cohn, the dinner appears to have assuaged the worst concerns, leaving many convinced that Mr. Trump employs outrage as a negotiating tactic while pursuing pragmatic aims.
“There’s a very constructive mind-set in the Trump administration to find the best path forward,” one attendee, Vas Narasimhan, the C.E.O. of Novartis, said.
The president is addressing the forum this morning. The line for his speech was really long.
What will Dell do?
It was taken private by Michael Dell and Silver Lake in 2013 and closed its takeover of EMC, one of the biggest-ever tech deals, in 2016. Now it’s reviewing what it could do next.
The elephant in the room: Dell’s enormous debt load, currently about $51 billion and with annual interest payments of about $2 billion. The company and its backers have loudly complained about the recent tax overhaul, which limits corporations’ ability to deduct interest payments.
What can you do when your efforts are dwarfed by the funds pouring into developing countries through financial markets? For Jim Yong Kim, the president of the World Bank, the solution was to partner with investors.
In other World Bank News: Its chief economist, Paul Romer, resigned, weeks after apologizing to Chile for the way it was treated in a report on countries’ competitiveness.
Airbnb hiring Ken Chenault is another step toward an I.P.O.
Appointing Mr. Chenault, the outgoing American Express C.E.O. and a Wall Street grandee, as an outside director signals a strengthening of the home-rental company’s corporate governance. It’s another sign that the Silicon Valley darling — last valued at more than $30 billion — is preparing for a stock market debut.
Positive signs for Airbnb’s business: The company has been profitable (on a pro forma basis) and privately has told people that it has grown revenue by roughly 50 percent.
The big question: Can Airbnb sustain that growth by finding more homes to rent out? And can it do so without overspending on marketing?
• Walmart is getting into e-books, while Apple is revamping its iBooks market. And Google is getting into audiobooks.
Everyone wants in on Telegram’s I.C.O.
Including venture firms like Benchmark, according to Axios. V.C.s have been rushing to amend their fund documents to let them buy virtual currencies.
What’s less exciting: Ripple and its XRP token, since banks and their clients aren’t interested.
Should you buy Bitcoin with your credit card? Probably not, but providers like Capital One and Charles Schwab won’t let you anyway.
Naturally, WeWork will argue that it’s part of the solution.
We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.