ALBANY — With the nation in the midst of a profound national reckoning over sexual harassment in the workplace, the New York State Senate has revamped its decade-old policy on the topic — but some of the changes are not exactly what one might expect.
To be sure, the definition of harassment was expanded, more protected classes were included and disciplinary warnings were included if supervisors failed to report harassing behavior.
But the new four-page policy, distributed to members of the Senate and staff on Monday and obtained by The New York Times, also contains a new sentence stating that “reporting a false complaint is a serious act,” and then — as it did before — warned that such false accusations or false statements to investigators can result in disciplinary actions or firing.
The new policy also limits the amount of time that an employee — or someone who was accused — has to appeal to Senate lawyers to 15 days after any conclusion is drawn. “No appeal will be entertained after,” the policy reads.
Those particular changes struck Senator Andrea Stewart-Cousins, the leader of the Senate Democratic Conference, and the only female leader in either chamber of the Legislature, as tone-deaf amid the clamor of the #MeToo movement.
The new policy, last updated in 2007, comes weeks after a prominent member of the chamber, Senator Jeffrey Klein, who represents parts of the Bronx and Westchester County, was accused by a former aide of unwanted sexual advances.
Mr. Klein, who leads the eight-member Independent Democratic Conference, has denied the accusations.
The Republican leader of the chamber, John J. Flanagan of Long Island, has said that Mr. Klein will not be investigated by the Senate. Mr. Flanagan explained his decision by saying that Mr. Klein’s accuser, Erica Vladimer, who left Mr. Klein’s staff shortly after she accused the senator of forcibly kissing her outside an Albany bar in 2015, had not ever made a formal complaint.
Mr. Flanagan works with Mr. Klein’s Independent Democratic Conference and another Democratic senator, Simcha Felder of Brooklyn, to maintain control of the Senate, even though Democrats hold a slight numerical edge in the 63-seat chamber.
The new policy, sent by Francis W. Patience, the secretary of the Senate, also expanded the Senate harassment policy to include provisions to prevent discrimination, adding “creed,” “color,” “military status,” “familial status,” “predisposing genetic characteristics” and “domestic violence victim status” to categories of protected from bias by Senate employees.
“The claim that the alleged conduct ‘meant no harm’ or was ‘just a joke’ is not an excuse,” the policy reads.