A satellite image showing the aftermath of two avalanches in western Tibet in 2016, when two glaciers on the Aru range collapsed and spread across five miles. Researchers say this unusual event was due to climate change.Credit...Planet Labs Inc.
A deadly 2016 glacier collapse in Tibet surpassed scientists’ expectations — until it happened again. They worry it’s only the beginning.
When 247 million cubic feet of snow and ice collapsed off a glacier in the dry, mountainous region of western Tibet in 2016, the roiling mass took with it nine human lives and hundreds of animals, spreading more than five miles in three minutes at speeds of nearly 200 miles per hour. The event surprised scientists, who had seen a collapse that big and that fast only once before.
And then it happened again, three months later, on a neighboring glacier, though without fatalities. Glaciologists hadn’t quite believed that glaciers could behave this way, and suddenly they had witnessed two similar collapses in a year.
An analysis of the events, published this week in the journal Nature Geoscience, found that climate change was the culprit in both collapses. The study suggests that in addition to the known risks posed by a warming climate, such as sea level rise, we may also be in line for some cataclysmic surprises.
Researchers thought that collapse was linked to factors specific to the region — the glacial equivalent of a freak accident. Then came the first collapse in Tibet.
It’s not certain what caused the Caucasus collapse. But scientists say the driving factor in Tibet was climate change.
Normally, the cold air in the Tibetan plateau can’t hold much moisture. But warmer air caused by climate change — the region has warmed 0.4 degrees Celsius per decade since the 1960s — holds more moisture, leading to more winter snowfall. While many glaciers around the world are in retreat because warmer temperatures are melting them, the Tibetan glaciers that collapsed are among those that are growing because of more snow.
In the summer months, there has also been more rain. That water created crevices through the glacier and saturated the ground below, acting as a kind of lubricant. With more weight on top and less friction to hold the glacier in place on the bottom, it collapsed.
Lonnie G. Thompson, a professor of geological sciences at Ohio State University, said the underlying mountain range didn’t help, either. “The bedrock of this mountain range was laminated shales and sandstone, which are not extremely resistant to start with,” said Dr. Thompson, who was not a part of the study but by chance was in Tibet when the first glacier collapsed.
Dr. Kääb said he hoped that the study would be a wake-up call to people living near mountain glaciers that this kind of collapse, though rare, can happen. “The travel of the Tibetan avalanches was eight, nine kilometers. The one in the Caucasus traveled 18 kilometers. If you draw an 18-kilometer-diameter circle around glaciers of the world you see that even cities are within this reach,” he said.
