We are now approaching the 12th year of the national delusion that Justin Timberlake remains an essential pop star.
This is partly because subsequent editions have lacked his flair, his comfort with the combination of expressiveness and neediness that’s essential to sustained stardom. And also his talents: Peak Timberlake was lithe, lightly carnal, effortless. His first two solo albums, “Justified” and “FutureSex/LoveSounds,” were standard-bearers of how to grow boy-band unctuousness into grown-man smolder.
He was a rocket.
Since then, he’s returned to earth. Whether exploring funk or cheery soundtrack cheese, he’s been in a kind of slow retreat from the spotlight, while somehow remaining at its center. He remains one of pop’s leading figures — on Sunday, he will be the featured performer at the Super Bowl halftime show, 14 years after his participation in the wardrobe malfunction that derailed Janet Jackson’s career but left him largely unscathed.
Who is asking for this state of affairs to continue? Not Mr. Timberlake, who on his sometimes convincing, sometimes limp new album “Man of the Woods” — his first since the two volumes of “The 20/20 Experience” in 2013 — is at his most idiosyncratic, his most historically minded, and his most anonymous.
Mr. Timberlake, in his post ‘N Sync years, has had two real friends: Timbaland and the Neptunes. They made his first two albums beacons of forward-thinking soul, buffeting a still soft-at-the-edges Timberlake with a strong conceptual framework he could claim as his own.
But in the years since “FutureSex/LoveSounds” the last great Timberlake album, those producers have evolved from reliable, zeitgeist-shaping hitmakers to preservationists. For this phase of Mr. Timberlake’s career — he is 37 now, a sometime actor and Jimmy Fallon foil, and far from the warp-speed engines that change the sound of pop — that’s a perfect fit.
“Man of the Woods” posits Mr. Timberlake not as a sex-symbol soul supernova, but as an affable bro who enjoys the funk, soul and disco of the 1970s. The music here is tactile and warm: erotically lush disco on “Montana,” offhand Southern gospel on “Young Man,” casual country-funk on the title track.
Timbaland and the Neptunes handle the vast majority of the production, and most of it looks backward, not forward. The Neptunes, especially, thrive with this approach, especially on “Higher Higher,” a gleaming 1970s soundtrack homage. There are outliers — the throbbing pulse of “Filthy” has reverberations of acid house, and “Supplies” suggests someone has been listening to Migos — but for much of this album, Mr. Timberlake is content to live in the past.
What’s more, Mr. Timberlake has a third friend now: Chris Stapleton, stoic king of earthen country music, who appears here a few times as a songwriter, on guitar, and on “Say Something,” in duet. His writing, especially on “The Hard Stuff,” is evocative. (That song would sound better sung by Mr. Stapleton.) And on “Say Something,” he sings with grounded purpose.
Early whispers about this album, prompted in part by a video teaser in which Mr. Timberlake wore fringe and frolicked on a plain, suggested Mr. Timberlake was embracing American roots and country music. But while it turns out that visual marketing tactic wasn’t much more than that — in the eyes of some, it was meant to telegraph a return to whiteness for an artist who’s always openly flirted with black aesthetics — there was some truth embedded therein.
How Mr. Timberlake goes about it, though, is novel. Rather than bow explicitly to country music, he revisits its greasy overlaps with funk. The guitars on this album often bend, but the basslines are punchy too.
That musicology lesson is the loudest part of this album, certainly louder than Mr. Timberlake, whose reticence is a recurring feature here. His vocals often recede so far in the mix that their inherent sweetness gets lost.
And his words often fall short, serving as a better a rhythmic component than an emotional one. His lyrics are cheesy, or simply empty — that’s harmless when the production sparkles, but they glow with a radioactive tint when it’s not, like on the tacky “Wave” (“We’re getting better, aging like your favorite wine/I’ve got on rose-colored glasses, you’re batting your eyelashes”) or the inexplicable “Livin’ Off the Land,” which suggests a never-made 1970s hicksploitation film.
Mr. Timberlake is at his best on “Man of the Woods” when he sounds like he’s fronting a family band. (Sometimes, that’s literal, as both his wife and son have credited vocals on this album.) In an exceedingly un-pop-star way, the whole of these songs is far greater than his input. He never crowds the room.
It’s possible that Mr. Timberlake does not perceive himself — or wish to present himself — as the oxygen-hoovering superstar the celebrity ecosystem has long demanded of him. And maybe this album that barely flirts with the sounds of the day is, in actuality, the ultimate superstar indulgence — not too big to fail, but too big to care.