WASHINGTON — The president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., Richard Trumka, who flirted with an alliance with President Trump, delivered a searing critique on Tuesday of the president’s first year, saying that he had used the White House “to actively hurt working people” and favor corporate interests.
Mr. Trumka, who was criticized by some Democrats and union members for his early show of support for Mr. Trump’s presidency, also said internal union surveys showed that the president was losing favor among workers.
When Mr. Trump was inaugurated last January, an internal survey found that 45 percent of union members approved of him and 55 percent disapproved, according to Mike Podhorzer, the A.F.L.-C.I.O.’s political director. Now, he said, 37 percent of members approve of the president while 63 percent disapprove.
That finding mirrors a rise in support among union members for Democratic candidates, Mr. Podhorzer said, including in Rust Belt states.
“What we are seeing in these numbers is that most of the people who went to third parties are rejecting what the Republicans are doing nationally and coming back toward the Democrats,” he said.
Working-class support for Mr. Trump, a wealthy Manhattan real estate developer and reality television star, was among the more surprising twists in the 2016 campaign. An upswing in the support of white, working-class voters in Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin helped deliver Mr. Trump the White House, despite his popular vote loss.
Those voters will be critical both to Mr. Trump’s re-election campaign in 2020 and to Republican fortunes in the midterm elections in November. If, as Mr. Trumka suggested, support is eroding, then the president’s hold on the Rust Belt would be shaky.
Mr. Trumka said the president had been generous with access to the Oval Office and administration officials, and he described Mr. Trump as “charming person to person.” One meeting scheduled to last 30 minutes went on for nearly three hours, he said.
“He promised a trillion and we’ve seen nothing so far,” Mr. Trumka said of the president’s pledge to deliver an enormous program to rebuild the nation’s crumbling roads, bridges and other infrastructure.
“He tells whoppers all the time and denies the obvious truth,” Mr. Trumka said.
Mr. Trumka said his union would participate aggressively in the midterm elections, backing candidates who supported its agenda in what he labeled “Tier 1” states like Pennsylvania, Ohio and Michigan, and in Florida, Illinois, Missouri, New Mexico and Arizona. Labor unions will also target another dozen states.
Now, he said, workers are far less enthusiastic. The tax cut plan, Mr. Trumka said, favored companies over workers, adding that it “rewards outsourcing” of jobs.
“What he’s doing hasn’t matched up with what he’s said,” Mr. Trumka said.
In the last election, Mr. Trump outperformed Mitt Romney, the Republican nominee in 2012, by four percentage points among union members. But, Mr. Trumka noted, Hillary Clinton underperformed President Barack Obama by about 10 percentage points among union members.
Instead of delivering change, Mr. Trump is “doubling down on everything that got us to this point,” Mr. Trumka said, referring to the president’s tax and economic policies.
But Mr. Trumka also cautioned Democrats to outline an agenda that would appeal to union workers or risk losing their votes again in the midterm elections.
Mr. Trumka had initially joined the president’s business council, but resigned in August after the president’s seemingly ambivalent remarks about racists protesting in Charlottesville, Va.