One Howard Silk, a meek career bureaucrat who visits his comatose wife every night in the hospital, has “kind eyes,” according to a nurse.
The other Howard Silk, a sarcastic, deadly spy, does not.
And yet the two Howard Silks — genetically identical but temperamentally diverse characters in the alternate-dimensions thriller “Counterpart,” beginning Sunday on Starz — have the same eyes. They belong to the actor J.K. Simmons, whose double-barreled performance makes the show the most entertaining new series of the winter.
The existence of the parallel worlds, which have grown more and more different in the 30 years since the second world’s creation, is a closely (and implausibly) held secret. Privy to it are the senior members of the large, somewhat bumbling bidimensional bureaucracy that manages the portal, who are allowed to pass between worlds using visas measured in hours.
The two Howards are part of that apparatus, the meek Howard a paper-shuffler in the original world and the macho Howard a covert agent for the splinter world. They meet — an almost unheard-of occurrence — when the macho Howard follows a criminal who manages to cross between worlds and needs to pose as the meek Howard to catch her.
The story’s Cold War allusions and Berlin setting provide an apt — or maybe too cute — framework for a story of alternate worlds suddenly developing side by side. They also drive home Mr. Marks’s debt to John le Carré — “Counterpart” pays hommage to Mr. le Carré’s classic Cold War morality tale, “The Spy Who Came in From the Cold,” while pumping up the dystopian, Orwellian mood and visuals (and borrowing discreetly from the premise of the Fox sci-fi series “Fringe”).
More centrally, the show is an argument about nature versus nurture, in both geopolitical and personal terms. Will the two worlds, and the two Howards, in their separation, inevitably become nothing like each other? Or will their basic natures prove to be stronger?
Through six episodes, Mr. Marks doesn’t do anything especially interesting with that premise, but luckily for him and us, Mr. Simmons, an Oscar winner in 2015 for “Whiplash,” does. He plays with inflections, rhythms, expressions, postures and bearings to make his identical Howards utterly distinct, and at the same time he gives each one flashes of the other’s personality.
Other actors, notably Tatiana Maslany in “Orphan Black” and James Franco in “The Deuce,” have won praise for playing multiple characters. But their performances, skillful as they are, don’t completely escape self-consciousness. In “Counterpart,” Mr. Simmons works so subtly, and seemingly effortlessly, that you always know which Howard you’re watching, but you’re never aware of how you know.