In the days after the Grammy Awards, some griping about the winners can always be expected, with debates in recent years focusing on racial diversity and the institution’s relationship with hip-hop.
But following the 60th annual Grammys on Sunday, two words uttered backstage by Neil Portnow, the president of the Recording Academy, ignited a controversy that has drawn rebukes from some of the most powerful women in music at a particularly fraught time, amid the #MeToo and Time’s Up movements against harassment and professional inequality.
Asked about the gender representation among winners on the televised portion of the awards, during which just one woman was given a solo Grammy, Mr. Portnow told reporters that “women who have the creativity in their hearts and souls, who want to be musicians, who want to be engineers, producers, and want to be part of the industry on the executive level” need to “step up.” The comments, first reported by Variety, spread quickly online and gave a viral push to the budding hashtag #GrammysSoMale.
“Our industry must recognize that women who dream of careers in music face barriers that men have never faced,” he said. “We must actively work to eliminate these barriers and encourage women to live their dreams and express their passion and creativity through music. We must welcome, mentor and empower them. Our community will be richer for it.
Concerns over gender diversity in the industry were brought to the forefront just before the Grammys, with the release of a report by the Annenberg Inclusion Initiative at the University of Southern California. The report found that of the 899 people nominated in the last six Grammy Awards, just 9 percent were women. And in analyzing the top Billboard songs from 2012 to 2017, the group reported that women made up only 12 percent of songwriters and 2 percent of producers.
The diversity report’s stark statistics were borne out at Sunday’s ceremony, when Alessia Cara became the only woman to collect her own trophy on stage, for best new artist. (Rihanna won as a featured artist on the Kendrick Lamar song “Loyalty.”) Lorde, the only woman nominated for album of the year, which ultimately went to Bruno Mars, did not perform or appear onstage. And the televised category featuring the most female nominees, best pop solo performance, went to Ed Sheeran, who was not present, over Pink, Lady Gaga, Kesha and Kelly Clarkson.
George Howard, an associate professor of music business and management at the Berklee College of Music in Boston, said in an interview that the music industry could be seen as “a microcosm of our country”: “Any institution that is founded upon a firmament of endemic racism and misogyny ultimately crumbles,” he said.
