Welcome to the Smarter Living newsletter. The editor, Tim Herrera, emails readers with tips and advice for living a better, more fulfilling life. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.
I’ve never been great with deadlines.
It’s a flaw I’m keenly aware of, and one I actively try to counter. But despite my best efforts, it’s forever lingering in the background, an insatiable little gremlin that devours my productivity. It is definitely one of my things.
Yet of the countless articles, books and so-called lifehacks about productivity I’ve read (or written!), the only “trick” that has ever truly and consistently worked is both the simplest and the most difficult to master: just getting started.
Pardon the gimmicky phrase, but the idea goes like this: For any task you have to complete, break it down into the smallest possible units of progress and attack them one at a time.
Let’s say you’re an editor with a weekly newsletter to write. Rather than approach that task as “Write Monday’s newsletter,” break down the very first steps you have to take and keep slicing them up into tiny, easily achievable micro-goals, then celebrate each achievement. Step 1: Open a Google Doc. Step 2: Name that Google Doc. Step 3: Write a single sentence. And so on.
This is an idea that has been given many names — the 5-minute rule, the 2-minute rule and the 1-minute rule, to name a few — but these techniques only get you going on a task. My favorite expansion of this concept is in this post by James Clear.
And it’s not just gimmicky phrases and so-called lifehacking: Studies have shown that you can trick your brain into increasing dopamine levels by setting and achieving, you guessed it, micro-goals.
Going even further, success begets success. In a 2011 Harvard Business Review article, researchers reported finding that “ordinary, incremental progress can increase people’s engagement in the work and their happiness during the workday.” That means that once you start that PowerPoint you’re dreading, even if all you’ve done is give it a name, that micro-progress can continue to build on itself until you’ve finally finished that last slide.
But all of that success has to begin somewhere. So close this story right now and go get started.
What are your tips for riding a wave of productivity? Let me know at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| or tweet me @timherrera.
How to Maintain Friendships Keeping cherished friendships afloat doesn’t need to be a huge time commitment.
So You’ve Been Asked to Be a Bridesmaid. Now What? Being a bridesmaid is a role loaded with expectation and emotion, and it can be tricky to navigate. Here’s how to pull it off.
Is Your ID Approved for Travel? These Are the Latest Rules The Real ID Act requires that driver’s licenses meet standards set by the Department of Homeland Security by October 2020. Many states are already compliant and others have been given extensions.
Is There a Downside to Going Gluten-Free if You’re Healthy? A gluten-free or grain-free diet can pose risks for someone who is not highly sensitive to gluten. Such a diet is also unlikely to provide benefits.
Pay Down Those Credit Cards, Before Rates Rise Further With the holidays behind us, now is the moment to wipe out balances — before interest rates continue their climb.
How to Take Care of a Cast-Iron Pan Seasoning with oil gives the skillet a smooth, nonstick surface.
TK Is My New Philosophy: Turns out this journalism shorthand — which means additional details are still “to come” — can double as a lifestyle mantra and a cure for perfectionism.
You’re Most Likely to Do Something Extreme Right Before You Turn 30: When people reach the last year of a life decade, their behavior often changes and they might, say, attempt to run a marathon.
Advice on Living the Dream From Digital Nomads Who Make Over Six Figures: Good tidbits on going (very) remote.
Ladies Who Launch: Four Actresses Who Started Their Own Businesses: They’re getting creative with customized neon signs and hand-pounded jewelry.
Firsts: Women Who Are Changing the World: Inspiring stories about the first woman of color in space, the first black woman to run a Fortune 500 company and more faces you’ll recognize.