In “Vertigo” (1958), Alfred Hitchcock’s depiction of San Francisco is so specific that it’s possible, six decades later, for viewers who know the film to stand on street corners and guess with accuracy where he placed his camera — even in spots where the buildings no longer exist.
That precision is explored, celebrated and perhaps slightly trivialized in “The Green Fog,” a sort of fast-forward remake of “Vertigo” built from clips of movies and TV shows shot in the city.
Composed entirely of found footage, the assemblage is the work of the droll experimental director Guy Maddin (“The Forbidden Room”), who specializes in reviving outmoded cinematic techniques. Here, he works with his regular collaborators Evan Johnson and Galen Johnson. Commissioned by the San Francisco Film Society — now called SFFILM, which runs the city’s main film festival — and Stanford Live, the movie had its premiere in April with accompaniment by the Kronos Quartet, which later recorded the score.
Moviegoers even casually familiar with “Vertigo” should be able to follow the story, which is evoked with varying degrees of literalism and editing fluidity. To conjure a sense of Scottie (James Stewart) watching Madeleine (Kim Novak) at the Legion of Honor, the filmmakers cut to another clip shot at the museum. When “The Green Fog” reaches the moment that Scottie recognizes Madeleine’s necklace, the horror of that realization is captured in Donald Sutherland’s scream from the finale of “Invasion of the Body Snatchers” (1978).
As a chronicle of how San Francisco has changed over the years — and as a salute to the city’s role as a back lot for masters like Erich von Stroheim and Howard Hawks — “The Green Fog” is a wonder of excavation and urban history. What it says about Hitchcock is more ambiguous.
There is a slight arrogance in presuming that one of the greatest of films all time (“Vertigo” topped the 2012 Sight and Sound magazine poll) could be approximated, even a little, using clips from lesser directors. Then again, if trying to recreate a lost object of obsession from the materials at hand was Hitchcock’s subject, then he couldn’t ask for a more fitting tribute.