Wine comes in seemingly endless varieties, from a growing number of places and in countless styles. While the choices may sometimes seem overwhelming, they also present a wonderful opportunity for pleasure and experimentation.
On a recent expedition through a handful of Manhattan shops, I found these 20 excellent bottles, all under $20. They come from eight different countries, and even more regions. Most of these are red, in deference to the season, when most people gravitate toward heartier dishes. But in winter I still eat foods that call for white wines, and I always like sparkling wines, so both are represented as well.
The $20 price is crucial. Budget-minded shoppers may recoil, believing they can find plenty of bottles under $10. That’s true, and most of those wines will be technically sound. They will also be boring, the scourge of mass-market wines today.
By contrast, most of these are from small producers who work traditionally and sometimes iconoclastically. Wines like these cost a little more, from $15 to $25, but for that price, the level of interest and pleasure in the wines increases exponentially.
Among these selections are merlot and chardonnay, seemingly the most mundane of wines, but delicious when carefully and conscientiously produced. Alongside are rarities, made from grapes like vespolina, xinomavro, vernatsch and persan, which have long local histories but are largely unknown in the United States. Why not give them a try?
These 20 bottles were the top results from my own shopping. Invariably, different stores in other parts of the country will have entirely different inventories and selections. If you cannot find any of these bottles, ask a good local wine shop what their best values are for around $20, specifying any broad preferences you may have, like red or white.
It’s possible that some merchants will simply try to unload bottles they cannot otherwise sell. The best stores will not want to saddle you with rejects. They will honor your request and give you what they think is best for the price. That’s how you get customers to return.
Here are the 20 bottles, in no particular order.
In the old days, this might have been called a jug wine, in the best sense of the phrase. Indeed, the Tendu is sold in 1-liter bottles — there’s added value. It’s so delicious and low in alcohol (just 11.7 percent) that you’ll want to gulp it down. It’s an Italian-style blend of barbera, montepulciano and aglianico, plus some unidentified others. It’s made without sulfur dioxide, a common stabilizer, yet I’ve never seen a flawed bottle. Try it with burgers, pizza and even Cantonese food.
Foxglove is the value label from Varner, which makes excellent wines in the Santa Cruz Mountains. This is rich, ample California chardonnay, unadulterated by oak and made without the softening influence of malolactic fermentation, which turns firm malic acid into creamy lactic acid. The chardonnay is juicy, lively and full-bodied, not complex or subtle — just a big, clean wine that feels good.
A nonvintage red? Why not, especially in an inexpensive wine like this one, where the aim is deliciousness and drinkability. It’s spicy, brambly and precise, made mostly of merlot and cabernet franc, as well as trace amounts of cabernet sauvignon, petit verdot and malbec. From the terrific Shinn Estate, which changed ownership last summer. With luck, that will be the extent of the changes.
California merlot may never escape its besmirched reputation, courtesy of the 2004 movie “Sideways,” which memorably, and with good reason, dismissed it. While insipid or pretentious merlot abounds, this one, from the consistently good Broadside, is fresh and plummy, well balanced and lip-smacking, with a pleasant bitterness to invite the next sip.
