Across Syria, buildings lie in ruin. Millions have fled their homes. And historic sites have been shattered, either by military bombardment or at the hands of the Islamic State.
But Syrian authorities were hoping that foreign visitors would look past that devastation, as they promoted the country at an international tourism fair in Spain on Saturday.
While government officials say the country is experiencing a modicum of stability — the government has regained control of much of the territory lost in recent years to rebels — the push for tourism risks drawing criticism for ignoring the fallout of the yearslong war that has razed much of Syria.
Before the country’s conflict began in 2011, Syria was home to an array of tourist landmarks, from Aleppo’s citadel to the Roman-era ruins of Palmyra, and the travel sector was a major part of its economy. Many of those sites, however, have been badly damaged or destroyed entirely by the ongoing war. The widespread insecurity throughout the conflict has meant most governments advise their citizens against travel to Syria.
The country is hoping to change that. Officials from the tourism ministry attended the Fitur International Tourism Trade Fair in Madrid on Saturday in the hopes of attracting visitors back to the country.
“This year is the time to rebuild Syria and our economy,” Bassam Barsik, director of marketing at the Syrian Ministry of Tourism, told the Agence France-Presse news agency in Madrid.
Mr. Barsik said 1.3 million foreign visitors traveled to Syria last year, although that figure includes those who came from neighboring Lebanon for only one day. He said officials hoped to raise the number of visitors to two million in 2018.
Still, the push for tourists risks courting a backlash.
The Syrian government was widely criticized in 2016 when its official YouTube channel published a video with the tagline, “Syria Always Beautiful,” promoting tourism to the country. The footage showed sweeping views of the country’s coastline and swimmers splashing in the sea.
The video is one of dozens pushed by the authorities in a bid to attract tourists in recent years, but that video, published in the summer of 2016 — while the military was still battling to retake control of Aleppo — touched a particular nerve for its timing, and the appearance that it was ignoring the bloodshed still happening across the country.