Among the revelations that have rained down in the wake of Michael Wolff’s White House tell-all “Fire and Fury” — the claims and counterclaims, the excerpts and the tweets, the book’s vicious portrayal of a clueless, childlike president whose courtiers are forced to produce daily episodes of Short Attention Span Theater — surely the saddest is this: The president of the United States, leader of the free world and famously one of the few pet-less commanders in chief, does not understand how dogs work.
This is not the first time Mr. Trump has employed canine similes to describe an especially odious opponent, an enemy who has been not just vanquished but humiliated to the point that his very humanity is in doubt.
The president has used “dog” to describe the looks of a woman he does not like (Arianna Huffington is a “dog who wrongfully comments on me.”). An unfaithful woman cheats on her man “like a dog” (Kristen Stewart).  Dogs are failures, dogs are unattractive, dogs are unworthy of faith.
Which, as anyone who has spent five minutes in a dog’s company could tell you, is pretty much the opposite of how dogs are.
The author’s dog, Moochie.
When I was 23, my roommate and I saw an ad in the classified section of the newspaper where we worked: “one dog, small, spotted, free to good home.” We were charmed by his bouncy mien, his speckled coat and his needlelike teeth. We named him Wendell. When my roommate moved on, this 11-pound rat terrier became my guy, and I became, slowly but surely, his responsible adult.
Jobs changed, boyfriends came, boyfriends went. I moved from rural Pennsylvania to Lexington, Ky., then on to Philadelphia. Wendell was my constant. He was stylish: Every morning, when I got dressed for work, Wendell would lie on my bed, paws crossed, scrutinizing my stirrup pants and shoulder pads with a chilly disdain. He was loving: When I came home from work, he would act like I’d returned from a war, scampering in circles and leaping with joy as if to declare YOU’RE BACK! YOU’RE BACK! YOU’REBACKYOU’REBACKYOU’REBACK! He believed in me: Every night, when I’d work on my first novel, he would fall asleep at my feet, his somnolence suggesting that he was in this for the long haul and I should be, too.
I sold my book. Wendell feigned nonchalance, but I have to believe that he enjoyed the upgrade from generic to name-brand kibble. I got engaged. Wendell would start the day by chasing my fiancé down the hallway, back fur bristling, posture declaiming “and don’t come back.” By the end of his life Wendell had a cardiologist and was on a variety of medications, the pills carefully crushed and tucked into bits of paté. He needed a boost to get onto the bed. Still, every night, he would sleep on my pillow, furled like a halo above my head.
When Wendell died, it felt like the world had been knocked off its orbit. When it was, finally, time to get another dog, my daughters were adamant, rejecting puggles and poodles and bat-eared French bulldogs, insisting that we get another dog “just like Wendell.” In 2011, Ratterrierrescue.com brought us Moochie, who had been dumped, pregnant, at a kill shelter, where she’d languished as her pups went off to “forever homes.” Moochie spends most of her life within five feet of my person, heralding my movements by preceding me down the hall or up the stairs, curled up in a padded wicker basket while I work, or on my husband’s legs while he reads, a black-and-white spotted package of pure love.
It takes a lot to elicit sympathy for a man whose life goals seem to be deepening America’s divisions, lining his pockets and starting a third world war on Twitter, not necessarily in that order. But it’s hard not to be a little sad for anyone who won’t ever know the singular pleasure of a dog’s companionship.
For the price of a few face licks and leg humps, you’ve got the undying love and unwavering loyalty of a true companion.
And in an endlessly feuding, turmoil-ridden White House of warring factions, shifting alliances and endless leaks, all the president has is Stephen Miller.