For as long as I’ve been professionally acquainted with him, John Pierson has been an unusually energetic guy. In his early line of work, as a sales agent for independent movies, one had to be unusually energetic, with the travels, the marathon deal-negotiating sessions, and all the eccentric and sometimes volatile personalities at play. In the mid-90s he shifted from making deals to chronicling the deals he’d made and the people he’d met along the way.
His 1996 book, “Spike, Mike, Slackers & Dykes: A Guided Tour Across a Decade of American Independent Cinema.” (reissued in 2004 as “Spike, Mike Reloaded”) told of his adventures with Spike Lee, Kevin Smith, Jim Jarmusch, Rose Troche and other filmmakers whose careers Mr. Pierson assisted and kick-started. After it was published, Mr. Pierson began producing and hosting an unusual TV program “Split Screen,” which had its premiere on IFC in 1997. Over four years he made more than 60 half-hour episodes containing freewheeling informative interviews and video essays covering a wide range of topics in American indie film.
“Split Screen” served up many of what you might call the usual suspects — Mr. Smith, whose outrageous 1994 no-budget comedy “Clerks” remains an American indie landmark, showed up early and spoke freely and at length. But “Split Screen” approached familiar figures from unusual angles. An episode from 1999 features Christopher Walken and Julian Schnabel giving cooking tips and sharing a meal with John Ciarcia, known as Cha Cha or the Mayor of Little Italy. The show also made room for, say, a segment in which John Waters exchanged notes with the gore schlockmeister Herschell Gordon Lewis and an entire episode about animals in film.
Mr. Pierson’s passion for his brand of cinema is a palpable thread throughout. It’s infectious, and the segments produced by other film folk that Mr. Pierson picked up along the way testifies to that; their work has the same informed, fervent quality.
After years of pursuing the Criterion Collection about putting together a DVD or Blu-ray package of the show, Mr. Pierson eventually had to accept that TV content was, with one or two exceptions, not something that Criterion did. That changed when Criterion teamed up with Turner on the FilmStruck site. “The show fits really well with what the site does; it’s a very happy home for it,” he said.
Once the determination was made, Mr. Pierson was slightly surprised that the site insisted on putting up all 66 episodes over a period of time.
My own feeling is it’s too soon to tell, and that’s one thing I’ll be exploring in future columns.