I’m infatuated with a man I met in high school.  I’m sensitive and empathic. He’s cruel, aggressive, manipulative and status obsessed. And yet our love affair went on for years. I’ve cheated on multiple boyfriends with him.
 I seized an opportunity to move out of the country, far away from him. While abroad, I met the man who’s now my husband. Even after meeting him, I still met with my former flame or had secret phone conversations with him. When I did, all my desire would come flooding back, so I cut off contact. He recently got married, and I had my first child.
Still, he frequently haunts my dreams. These dreams can be so intense and sexual that I wake up and want to contact him.  I know this man doesn’t love me and perhaps never did. I know that what I have with my husband is wonderful.  If I found out that my husband had such feelings for someone else, I’d be devastated. But I cannot control these deep dark places of my psyche.
I recently got a job opportunity in the city where this ex lives, and I’m terrified about that geographic proximity. 
Steve Almond: First things first: Please stop punishing yourself. You don’t choose your dreams. They choose you. In other words, the torch you hold for this ex isn’t going to dim until you can shed more light on what it means.  Why have you given him so much control over your life? That’s the most striking aspect of your letter, frankly.
You don’t move overseas to pursue your own destiny but to get away from him. You sound ready to sacrifice a new job because it would bring you back into his orbit. So what’s it all about? Really answering these questions will require you to revisit experiences, and expose feelings, that are shameful and unhealthy. For this reason, my advice is to seek out the help of a skilled therapist, if you can manage it.
Cheryl Strayed: A good place to start changing your ex’s place in your psyche would be to reframe the story you’ve told yourself about his power. You’ve given an awful lot of it to him when in truth it resides within you. You describe your wish to be free of your ex as an exorcism, but I encourage you to think of it in another way: not an opportunity to rid yourself of a man you no longer love, but as an opportunity to know yourself and your desires more deeply. One act is an expulsion, the other is an expansion. One is about someone else, the other is about you.
I’m going to guess you’re haunted by your ex not because of who he is (in the end, a man you loathe), but because he represents something to or about you. Danger? Shame? Your own dark impulses, which have thus far expressed themselves only through your relationship with him? Only you can know. I suggest you do the internal work it takes to find out. A therapist can help you in this process, but if that’s not an option, you can also do this sort of emotional excavation on your own, through journaling, contemplation and perhaps conversations with a trusted friend.
SA: We’re often the most stubbornly attracted to those who represent forbidden, or unresolved, aspects of our personality. In this light, it’s worth considering that you’ve cheated on “multiple boyfriends” with this man.  After all, it’s not exactly “sensitive” or “empathic” to betray a series of lovers. I say this not to make you feel guilty but because the path to the truth so often runs through shame. Perhaps being with this man allows you to indulge certain darker aspects of his personality that dwell within you while also disavowing them.
CS: Bingo. This is precisely what I mean when I suggest you consider the narrative you’ve established about your ex, which is all about dichotomy.  These emerge when you speak to him or even think about him — and they thrill you. Pay attention to that.
 He has functioned in your life as someone who disrupts your romantic stability (even if he doesn’t destroy it). We generally see that as a negative, but very likely, in your deepest truth, you wanted or needed that disruption. Do you want or need it now? Your concern about living near your ex — a concern, I’ll note, you describe as terror — seems to me to be both a fear and a wish, and it takes you entirely out of the equation, as if his hold over you and your agency is inevitable. But it isn’t. You ask us for advice about how to free yourself of him, but it’s not him you need to be free of. It’s your own desire for the part of yourself he makes manifest.
SA: One other significant aspect of all this is the timing. You’ve settled into a stable marriage and just had your first child.  Nobody knows the precise ingredients of temptation. We can only attempt to know ourselves. That’s ultimately how we gain control of our lives. It’s not that we banish our desires. We simply learn to manage them, so that they no longer hold the power to destroy our happiness.