Here’s an interplanetary botany discovery that took college students and not NASA scientists to find: Hops — the flowers used to add a pleasant bitterness to beer — grow well in Martian soil.
“I don’t know if it’s a practical plant, but it’s doing fairly well,” said Edward F. Guinan, a professor of astronomy and astrophysics at Villanova University.
Last semester, 25 students took Dr. Guinan’s class on astrobiology, about the possibility of life elsewhere in the universe.
For the laboratory part of the course, the students became farmers, experimenting to see which crops might grow in Martian soil and feed future travelers there.
Dr. Guinan presented the findings on Friday at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Washington, D.C.
But let’s back up: soil from Mars?
Of course, no one has yet brought back anything from the red planet, but spacecraft like NASA’s Phoenix Mars lander have analyzed Martian soil in great detail. Based on those measurements, scientists have come up with a reasonably good reproduction on Earth — crushed basalt from an ancient volcano in the Mojave Desert. It’s available for purchase, and Dr. Guinan bought 100 pounds.
Martian soil is very dense and dries out quickly — perhaps better for making bricks than growing plants, which have trouble pushing their roots through. That includes potatoes, the savior food for the fictional Mark Watney in “The Martian,” the book by Andy Weir and later a movie starring Matt Damon about a NASA astronaut stranded on Mars.
For the most part, the students chose practical, nutritious plants like soy beans and kale in addition to potatoes. Some added herbs like basil and mint so that astronauts could enjoy more flavorful food on thesolar system’s fourth world.
What did "fabulous” in pure Martian soil was mesclun, a mix of small salad greens, even without fertilizer, Dr. Guinan said.
Future experiments might grow bamboo, which could also be useful on Mars. “Not because we want panda bears over there,” Dr. Wamelink said. The shoots are edible, and “It’s also a good building material,” he said.
It might be possible to rinse out the perchlorates, which are soluble in water. Bacteria that eat perchlorates might also be used to cleanse the soil.
This semester, two Villanova astronomy students will perform follow-up experiments. That includes attempting to grow barley, the other essential ingredient for future Martian beer.