RAMALLAH, West Bank — President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority said on Sunday that Israel had killed the Oslo Accords and angrily assailed the Trump administration over its handling of the conflict. He vowed to reject American leadership of any peace talks and urged Palestinians to reconsider their signed agreements with Israel.
“We will not accept for the U.S. to be a mediator, because after what they have done to us — a believer shall not be stung twice in the same place,” Mr. Abbas said.
Mr. Abbas, 82, stopped well short of embracing an alternative to a two-state solution, the project around which he has built his career. The number of Israelis and Palestinians who hold out hope that such a solution can be achieved is dwindling, but Mr. Abbas said nothing about abandoning it.
He also shied away from urging the kind of provocative acts, like ending the Palestinian Authority’s security cooperation with Israel or disbanding the authority itself, that could raise the costs of occupation for Israel and shake officials in Jerusalem and Washington.
Indeed, Mr. Abbas, who reaffirmed his commitment to nonviolence and stopping terrorism, seemed to hold out hope of a return to negotiations — but with someone other than the United States leading the way.
In a two-hour-plus speech opening a two-day gathering of the Palestine Liberation Organization’s Central Council, its second-highest-ranking body, Mr. Abbas delivered broadsides against Hamas, other Arab leaders and Britain. But he reserved his most scathing words for President Trump; the United States’ ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki R. Haley; and its ambassador to Israel, David M. Friedman.
He attacked Mr. Trump for recognizing Jerusalem as Israel’s capital, in defiance of international consensus and longstanding United States policy; for later declaring, in a Twitter post, that the city’s status was “off the table”; for threatening to close the P.L.O.’s mission in Washington; and for threatening to cut United States aid to the Palestinians.
Mr. Abbas also confirmed a recent New York Times report that the Palestinians had been told they would be offered the East Jerusalem neighborhood of Abu Dis, which they already control, as the capital of a future state.
Mr. Abbas said that Mr. Friedman, a staunch backer of Israeli settlements on the West Bank before becoming ambassador, had objected to the word occupation out of a conviction that Israel could not occupy its own land, and had asked the State Department to avoid using the word.
He also called it “shameful” of Ms. Haley to threaten countries that voted in the United Nations General Assembly last month to declare Mr. Trump’s recognition of Jerusalem as the Israeli capital “null and void.” The measure passed 128-9 with 35 countries abstaining.
“These two are a disgrace to any administration who respects itself, if it wanted to respect itself,” Mr. Abbas added.
The Palestinian Central Council is expected to make recommendations for a change in strategy, but those will be nonbinding. A similar meeting in 2015 resulted in a call to end security cooperation with Israel, but Mr. Abbas ignored it.
He advocated convening the Palestinian National Council, the P.L.O.’s legislative body, which elects the group’s Executive Committee and last met in 2009. “The P.L.O. has to be renovated, has to be refreshed,” he said.
Mr. Abbas spent considerable time early in his speech criticizing Hamas and Islamic Jihad for refusing to send representatives to the gathering in Ramallah. A Hamas spokesman said it should have been held in another country to ensure the participation of representatives from Hamas and other factions.
Neither Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu nor Trump administration officials offered any immediate response.
