LONDON — Fast Eddie Clarke, the quick-fingered hard-rock guitarist who was the last remaining member of the British band Motörhead’s best-known lineup, died on Wednesday night in a hospital here. He was 67.
Todd Singerman, the band’s manager, confirmed the death in a telephone interview. The band released a statement on its Facebook page saying that the hospital had been treating Mr. Clarke for pneumonia.
Mr. Clarke, who was born Edward Allan Clarke, joined the band as its guitarist in 1976, alongside the drummer Phil Taylor and the singer and bassist Ian Fraser Kilmister, known as Lemmy.
Motörhead, known for its punishing and distorted heaviness, volume and penchant for rhythmic speed, which would inspire genres like thrash and speed metal, released 22 studio albums and went through numerous lineup changes. But the one with Mr. Clarke on guitar was regarded as the classic one, leading to some of the band’s best-selling albums, including “Motörhead” (1977), “Overkill” and “Bomber” (both 1979), and “Ace of Spades” (1980).
Mr. Taylor, known among the Motörhead faithful as Philthy Animal, died in November 2015 at 61. Mr. Kilmister died a month later at 70.
Mr. Clarke occasionally contributed vocals to the group, in addition to his chunky chords and squealing licks and solos. On “Beer Drinkers and Hellraisers,” a ZZ Top cover from a 1980 Motörhead EP, Mr. Clarke traded lines and harmonized with Mr. Kilmister, a strategy they would also employ on the band’s version of “I’m Your Witchdoctor” (originally performed by John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers).
Mr. Clarke, who was born on Oct. 5, 1950, in Twickenham, a suburb of London, left the band while it was on tour in the United States after the release of “Iron Fist” in 1982. He went on to form the two-piece hard-rock group Fastway with the former U.F.O. bassist Pete Way in 1983.
Fastway released seven albums, including its 1983 debut, called simply “Fastway,” which Mr. Clarke called a personal favorite. “I loved it because it was all my pent-up stuff,” he said. The album “All Fired Up” was released the next year, and the band would go on to tour with AC/DC.
There was no immediate word on survivors.