It’s early morning, but Sal, Kris & Charlie’s Deli, a small shop in Astoria, Queens, which specializes in supersize sandwiches, is full of customers with lunch on their minds.
The deli, set between a laundry and a private house in the shadow of the Amtrak overpass near the Astoria- Ditmars Boulevard subway station, announces itself only with an awning the color of a bluebird’s wings.
It doesn’t need to advertise.
In 1987, Charlie Gordon became the shop’s third owner. He named the business after Sal (the legendary counterman who came with the shop), Kris (his wife) and himself. Around that time, customers called him “the Sandwich King of Astoria.” Mr. Gordon decided to use that as his slogan.
The 14-inch-long heroes, which mostly sell for $5.50 to $8 (onions, pickles and sweet peppers are each 50 cents extra), are jaw-dropping. They require some serious devotion in order to eat them in one sitting.
Efstratios Stavrianos, a LaGuardia Community College student who lives nearby, was ordering sandwiches for himself and his mother.
Sal, Kris & Charlie’s most popular sandwich is the Bomb, which is advertised on the board over the granite counter as “$9.50 fully loaded plus tax.” (Alka-Seltzer, which the shop also sells, is extra.) A mix of Italian and American cold cuts topped with American and Provolone cheese, lettuce, onions, tomatoes, hot peppers, sweet peppers and mayonnaise and vinegar, it happened accidentally.
Anthony Pisciotta, an employee of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority who lives in the Bronx, was hungry enough for the Bomb but didn’t order it.
“I’m trying to lose weight,” he said as he carried out a turkey on a club roll.
Mr. Santiago, who works at ConEd, has been coming to Sal, Kris & Charlie’s long enough to remember Sal, who worked there from age 8 until his death at 65.
Luis Baez, another longtime customer, recalls ordering when John Gordon was 12 and working the counter. That was, let’s see, 14 years ago.
Mr. Baez, whose son, daughter, uncle and wife are also regulars, said the staff members, who number five, are like family. “They make me laugh,” he said.
What’s he going to order today?
“Ham and mozzarella,” John Gordon said before Mr. Baez could answer.
They looked at each other and cracked up.