U.S.|The #MeToo Moment: I’m a Straight Man. Now What?
The #MeToo Moment: I’m a Straight Man. Now What?
As sexual misconduct continues to dominate the news, we’re providing updates and analysis in a weekly newsletter. Today, Daniel Victor, a reporter who covers breaking news and culture, writes on the conversations he’s heard recently among men. Tell us what you think at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| and sign up here to receive future installments of this newsletter.
Ten men, ranging in age from their 20s to 50s, arranged their chairs in a circle. The only woman in the group, a sex educator who had organized the gathering, promised not to speak.
The event — called “I’m a Straight Male. Now What?”— was branded as a place for men to “unpack aggression” and share “not-so-politically correct thoughts” in the midst of the cultural moment that has become highly politicized. The men who’d shown up — among them a marketer, a journalist, a podcaster and an organizer of sex-play events — were encouraged to say to each other what they were uncomfortable saying publicly about #MeToo. It took place in a small event studio in downtown Manhattan.
“There is a sense that women want us to be talking about it: ‘Guys, go figure it out,’” said Bryan Stacy, the co-founder of a sexual health app and one of the event’s hosts. He encouraged the participants to tap into their feelings as a way to release any simmering frustration, anger, fear or confusion.
The resulting discussion mirrored the private discussions that I’ve observed many men, including my friends, having over the past few months.
Second, the men wondered how they could participate without being viewed as disingenuous — or elbowing out female voices. They sensed they could do more to help, but didn’t know how.
Lastly, they wondered: How should they be assessing their own past behavior in this brave new world?
One man, a former human-resources director, said he was reported for harassment in the ‘90s — unfairly, he believed — when he told a female colleague that “You were in my dream last night.” He didn’t mean it sexually, he said.
Another said that while he logically knew that false accusations are rare, he couldn’t help but worry that it could happen to him.
Some men said they saw a lot of themselves in Aziz Ansari, the actor who recently was accused in an online article of ignoring the verbal and nonverbal cues of a former date.  They wondered if and how often they missed those cues themselves.
“We’re all kind of guilty to an extent,” one of the men said.
As the men unloaded, the event’s female organizer, who goes by a pseudonym, “Lola Jean,” sat silently as promised. She said that while she disagreed with some of what she heard, she felt it was important for men to air their apprehensions — with the goal of better understanding how to address them.
“Ultimately, I believe it’s going to be men helping men in order to be better humans, better allies and better advocates,” she said.
Men, to what extent are you struggling with the current cultural reckoning? Do you feel comfortable talking about your concerns — and if not, why? How should men be thinking about their role in perpetuating abuse — or working to end it? Email us on this or other thoughts at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Sign up here to receive future installments of the MeToo Moment. You can see past issueson the web or listen to us on WNYC’s The Takeaway. Share your feedback at nytgender@nytimes.com.