From 2008 to 2015, the proportion of emergency room and hospital encounters for suicide-related diagnoses almost tripled.
About five years ago, pediatricians at Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville found that more and more of their inpatient beds at the children’s hospital were occupied by children and adolescents with mental health issues, especially those who had come in because of suicide attempts, or suicidal thoughts. These patients were known as “boarders”: They were waiting for psychiatric placement because it wasn’t safe for them to go home.
The doctors wondered whether the problem was specific to their city, perhaps reflecting scarce local resources. But in a new study in the journal Pediatrics, they found that this same pattern held true around the country over the period from 2008 to 2015.
“What we find nationwide is that over the last decade, the numbers of kids being admitted or seeking help in the emergency department or hospital for suicidal ideation or attempts have dramatically increased,” said Dr. Gregory Plemmons, an associate professor of pediatrics at the Monroe Carell Jr. Children’s Hospital at Vanderbilt and the first author on the study. In fact, over the study period, the proportion of emergency room and hospital encounters for these suicide-related diagnoses almost tripled, from 0.66 percent in 2008 to 1.82 percent in 2015. And the rate of increase was highest among adolescent girls.
Seeking help for depression, or for suicidal thoughts, is actually a good thing, much better than not seeking help, but the increase is part of a disturbing trend of rising distress among adolescents. Suicide is the second leading cause of death in young people, after unintentional injury, starting with the 10 to 14 age group, continuing through 15- to 24-year-olds (and also the next group, ages 24 to 34). Suicide rates have been rising in the United States, with especially notable increases among young women; in 2016, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced that middle school students were as likely to die from suicide as from traffic accidents.
In the new study, the researchers noted a strong temporal relationship between the school year and the frequency of the encounters for suicidal thoughts or actions; the rate dropped sharply in the summer, which is notably different, Dr. Plemmons said, from the pattern in adults, where July and August are higher risk months. Performance anxiety or social pressures could be factors, Dr. Plemmons said, and schools can potentially play a role in identifying kids at risk, and in delivering treatment.
Even after suicide attempts, many adolescents who are seen in emergency departments do not get mental health evaluations, said Dr. Ruth S. Gerson, assistant professor of child and adolescent psychiatry at N.Y.U. Langone Health, and the co-editor of “Helping Kids in Crisis.” Instead, they are treated medically, and then released. Medical doctors often don’t have the support or the training, she said, to do the mental health assessment and stabilization. And when people don’t get that mental health assessment in the emergency room, they are at increased risk of making another suicide attempt.
Although suicide ranks just after trauma as a leading cause of death, there are many high-level pediatric trauma centers but very few dedicated pediatric psychiatry emergency rooms, Dr. Gerson said. She is the director of one such facility, the Bellevue Hospital Center Children’s Comprehensive Psychiatric Emergency Program, where some 2,400 children and adolescents are evaluated every year. Every child who comes in gets a complete mental health evaluation, which can include not only talking to the child and the parents, but also to the outside therapist, the pediatrician and the school.
It is also widely understood in the pediatrics community that there are not enough mental health workers available to our patients, not enough outpatient therapists and not enough inpatient beds. “We’re lobbying every day for more facilities, more beds, more mental health providers,” Dr. Plemmons said. Many adolescents with depression do not look for help, and many don’t have access to mental health specialists; the American Academy of Pediatrics published guidelines earlier this year for primary care pediatricians dealing with adolescent depression, and recommended screening all children 12 and up.
Some experts worry that the suicide theme in the Netflix series “13 Reasons Why,” which recently debuted a new season, may contribute to what is known as suicide contagion.
“If kids are saying, I’m thinking about suicide, or I wish I didn’t exist, or I wish I didn’t wake up — take that seriously,” Dr. Gerson said. Parents should try not to panic, she said, because if they get very emotional, their children may worry about hurting or disappointing them and stop talking.
“Stay calm. Ask, ‘Tell me more about what you’re thinking,’ show the kid you’re taking it seriously,” she said. “I see parents who in a very well-intentioned way will say things like, ‘Oh no, honey, everything’s fine, let’s think about the good things.’” And again, that may make a distressed child clam up.
“It’s pretty important if this is the first time you’re hearing about this from your child that a professional should evaluate them,” said Dr. Stephanie Kennebeck, an associate professor of clinical pediatrics at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital and the author of a recent review on suicidal behavior in children and adolescents.
After a full mental health assessment, Dr. Kennebeck said, deciding which children need to be hospitalized comes down to a question of safety. Can the child say, “I was feeling suicidal earlier but now I am feeling safe with you”? Does the parent feel able to control the environment and keep the child safe?
For help, call the National Suicide Prevention line, 1-800-273-8255.