It was about 4 a.m., Eastern, when a conference room full of sleepy New York Times editors and reporters converged to plan, write, edit and caffeinate. Elsewhere in the newsroom, about an hour later, a weekend editor arrived with a fascinator, a small, elaborate hat favored by royals, and a British breakfast in tow. The first rumblings of story planning began in an 87-member group chat for the day. Across the pond, reporters and editors were setting up camp around and near London, from Hyde Park to Windsor to Essex, ready to break down the madness for readers around the world.
It was royal wedding day at The Times.
The New York Times has covered several royal weddings in the last few decades — but this one, said Monica Drake, an assistant managing editor who oversaw the coverage, was different.
For many in the United States, it was the opportunity to see an American royal bride (and one who didn’t prompt a throne abdication) that made this a wedding to obsess over. For some, it was the love story, while for others, it was the new era for the monarchy and for Britain that the wedding represented.
Whatever their reasons, millions tuned in, and The Times was ready with a coordinated coverage plan that involved the Styles, International, video, photo and social desks, as well as the research and development team, which developed a new face-recognition software for the guests entering the party.
In London, the editor Jim Yardley coordinated on-the-ground reporters, like Ceylan Yeginsu, who stood with revelers at Hyde Park, in London, and Kimiko de Freytas-Tamura, who reported from Essex. Ellen Barry, who was stationed inside the royal press bubble at Windsor Castle, wrote articles including Sunday’s front page story about the monarchy’s new era. Sarah Lyall anchored the live briefing from the London newsroom, in between writing several other stories on her way to London and on a themed tour bus there. Editors elsewhere were ready to pull together copy quickly and package stories.
In New York, Choire Sicha, the Styles editor, began editing from home at 3 a.m. before joining the team in the newsroom. The reporting, he said, would try to explore big questions about race and the monarchy, as well as the royal family’s relationship to media. It would also focus on more immediate questions like, Who are the guests? What is the order of succession? Who is the bishop, and what does his speech mean?
There were also more fanciful stories to be written, about subjects like Meghan Markle’s sparkly tiara and whether any corgis would be in attendance. The whole crew, of course, had to be prepared to cover the wedding as a breaking-news event, with contingency plans in place.
And as with any royal spectacle or event with hundreds of celebrities in attendance, there would inevitably be some ridiculousness — like the Harry-and-Meghan condoms and dishrags that Ms. Lyall wrote about. It was perhaps part of the escapism.
