This week, even the climate team is getting in on the royal wedding coverage. Also, is the biggest hurdle for electric cars the car dealerships themselves? And, a NASA climate program is at the center of a budget battle.
1) Were they wearing seatbelts?
2) Does the duke, who was behind the wheel, have a driver’s license?
3) What was up with their ride?
We’re not sure about the first question (though video evidence suggests they did not buckle up) and it turns out that Harry passed his driving test as a teenager years ago (and on his first try).
As for the happy couple’s borrowed car, Climate Fwd: is pleased to report that it was a zero-emissions vehicle.
The car is a vintage silver-blue 1968 Jaguar E-Type Roadster with one crucial, and major, modification: Its famous six-cylinder gasoline-powered XK motor was replaced with an all-electric drivetrain.
Where the motor had been, Jaguar Land Rover technicians installed a lithium-ion battery pack capable of powering the car for about 170 miles on a charge (less than Tesla’s new Model 3 mass-market car, but perhaps the Jaguar has better braking). And in place of the gearbox, they installed a 220-kilowatt electric motor.
All of that was done without cutting or otherwise modifying the car’s frame, and the new drivetrain weighs about the same as the old one, so there was no need to change the suspension. Such “nondestructive modification” is important, said Nathan Hoyt, a spokesman for Jaguar Land Rover North America, because while owners of vintage Jaguars may wish to switch to an all-electric drive, they may want to reinstall the gasoline motor to sell the vehicle.
“It gives customers options without having to worry about doing permanent harm to the car,” Mr. Hoyt said.
A few other changes were made: the dashboard was swapped out with a new one with gauges to monitor electrical performance, the vintage incandescent headlights were replaced with more efficient LED bulbs, and the gas tank fill tube was removed in favor of an electrical coupling for charging the battery.
Many viewers noted that the steering wheel was on the left-hand side; Mr. Hoyt said this particular car, a one-off prototype that was first shown last fall, was originally exported to the American market after it was manufactured 50 years ago.
Jaguar Land Rover has been weighing reaction to it and may decide to go ahead with a program in which customers could order a new, all-electric E-Type or have their existing vintage car converted at the factory.
Either way, an electric Jaguar won’t come cheap. Mr. Hoyt said that a complete factory restoration of an E-Type that remains gasoline-powered typically costs about $390,000. An electric version would cost even more.
There’s a lot that needs to happen before electric vehicles take over the world. Battery costs need to fall, more charging stations need to get built and drivers need to get more comfortable with the technology.
But this week, three researchers in Europe found that there’s another potential hurdle for electric cars to clear: auto dealers.
In their study, published in Nature Energy, the members of the research team made 126 visits to 82 car dealerships in Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland and Iceland.
What they found was striking: In 77 percent of visits to dealerships that stocked electric cars, the sales staff didn’t even discuss the vehicles as an option. Many dealerships were “dismissive” of electric cars or provided incorrect information about the technology, instead steering customers toward conventional gasoline or diesel models.
There were some fairly benign explanations for this, the lead author, Gerardo Zarazua de Rubens of Aarhus University in Denmark, said.
After interviewing dealers and industry experts, he found that salespeople were often just responding to incentives. They work on commission and have to sell cars as quickly as possible. It can take up to four times as long to explain the ins and outs of electric cars to unfamiliar customers who might be anxious about things like range and battery life. So dealers often stick with what’s easiest.
Yet the authors of the Nature Energy paper found that dealer attitudes can sway people in some cases.
When sales staff were knowledgeable and enthusiastic about electric cars, some of the participants in the study reported feeling far more interested in them, and vice versa. This varied widely from city to city. In Göteborg, Sweden, 13 percent of participants came away saying they were “likely” or “very likely” to be interested in electric cars. In Malmö, Sweden, none of them did.
But Benjamin K. Sovacool of the University of Sussex, a co-author on the new paper, was less sanguine. If automakers and policymakers are serious about promoting electric cars as a tool for tackling climate change, he said, they may want to take a closer look at how these vehicles are actually sold. Training programs for sales staff or incentives for selling electric cars could do as much to encourage the technology as building new charging stations.
The Trump administration appears to be trying to kill off a program that you may have never heard of, in what critics say is a sign of the administration’s hostility toward climate science.
At $10 million per year, the Carbon Monitoring System is dwarfed by the multibillion-dollar NASA missions that launch satellites into space. It pays for research that gathers information from Earth-observing satellites and other tools to measure the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, oceans and forests around the world.
“If you wanted to mitigate climate change, and therefore wanted to manage carbon, you can’t do it unless you can measure it,” said George Hurtt, a researcher at the University of Maryland who was the science team leader for the program.
Philip B. Duffy, the president and executive director of the Woods Hole Research Center in Massachusetts, said canceling the program would be “a blow to climate science.” The 65 projects funded by the program have produced nearly 300 research papers since 2010, when Congress created it.
The move comes down to politics, said Eddie Bernice Johnson, Democrat of Texas, who serves as ranking member of the House science committee. “I think it’s obvious to anyone that has been paying attention that this program is being canceled because it tracks carbon pollution, and that information would be used in efforts to understand and respond to climate change,” she said.
The program’s uncertain future was first reported in the journal Science.
The Trump administration’s fiscal year 2018 budget called for the program’s end, but Congress provided adequate funding in its omnibus spending bill. That funding would usually mean that the program would continue, but NASA appears to have interpreted things differently.
Stephen E. Cole, an agency spokesman, said Congress needed to provide explicit language to keep the program in place. Mr. Cole added that the Carbon Monitoring System was only one small part of a well-funded array of earth science programs at the agency, including the twin Grace-FO satellites that the agency launched on Tuesday to monitor how water moves around the earth. “There is still a whole lot going on,” he said.
Last week the House Appropriations Committee passed an amendment that would restore funding to the program. If a similar measure passes the Senate, the Carbon Monitoring System could be saved.
