Seen any good books lately? With TV literary adaptations like “The Handmaid’s Tale,” “Outlander” and “Game of Thrones” doing so well, the industry seems determined to replace our summer reading list with binge watching. This month alone brings new series based on the novels of Louisa May Alcott, Ray Bradbury, Edward St. Aubyn, Stephanie Danler and Joan Lindsay.
Starts: May 4, on Netflix.
Justin Simien’s clever and cutting TV adaptation of his own indie movie “Dear White People” returns for a second season, promising more up-to-the-minute commentary about what life is like for a group of African-American students at a mostly white Ivy League university. The show’s first 10 episodes (aside from the finale) smartly balanced serialized and episodic storytelling, letting individual characters anchor each chapter, each offering distinct perspectives on the larger plot. Season 2 will pick up where last year left off, tracking the public pushback these kids receive after holding a series of tense protests over the institution’s systemic racial insensitivity.
Airs: May 5, on HBO.
Music fans can and should quibble indignantly about who gets in and who’s left out of the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame. But HBO’s annual telecast of the induction ceremony still routinely offers some of the best musical moments of the TV year, with reunited bands and their famous fans jamming through some of rock, pop and R&B’s greatest hits. This year we can look forward to performances by the Cars and the Moody Blues, as well as well as memorial tributes to Nina Simone and Sister Rosetta Tharpe, featuring Lauryn Hill, the Roots and Brittany Howard of Alabama Shakes.
Starts: May 6, on Starz.
Two years ago, the New York literary and culinary worlds were both abuzz over Stephanie Danler’s debut novel, “Sweetbitter,” based on her experiences working in an upscale Manhattan restaurant. In the TV version, the young British actress Ella Purnell plays the leading role of Tess, a Middle American naïf who arrives in the city unprepared for the pressures she’s about to face. While struggling to excel at a job many others would kill to have, Tess gets firsthand experience with the debauchery her co-workers enjoy after hours.
As a companion piece to “Sweetbitter,” Starz is also launching the new series “Vida,” based on a short story by Richard Villegas Jr. and starring Melissa Barrera and Mishel Prada as estranged sisters who reconnect when their mother’s death brings them back to their old East Los Angeles neighborhood. As they learn secrets about their family, the siblings also get to know each other and plug back into their Mexican-American roots. Like “Sweetbitter,” “Vida” is a half-hour drama, set in a major American city, with a focus of the lives of young women. It will be interesting to see how they complement and contrast with each other over the course of their six-episode first seasons.
Starts: May 12, on Showtime.
A passion-project for its star, Benedict Cumberbatch (who is also an executive producer), this five-part mini-series traces the life of the title character, from his childhood with an abusive alcoholic father through his own adult struggles with addiction and family life. At once harrowing and heartening, the show is adapted from a series of autobiographical novels by Edward St. Aubyn, combining dark comedy, personal anguish and some sly satire of the British upper classes.
Starts: May 13, on PBS.
“PBS Masterpiece” and Heidi Thomas, the creator of “Call the Midwife,” have assembled a top-shelf cast for their three-part adaptation of Louisa May Alcott’s American literary classic “Little Women.” Emily Watson plays the matriarch of the March family, taking care of her four teenage daughters while her pastor husband (played by Dylan Baker) is off at war. Angela Lansbury plays the persnickety aunt, while Michael Gambon plays a helpful neighbor. The mini-series drew ecstatic reviews and big ratings when it aired in Britain in December, and it ought to do well stateside, too, given that it’s the rare prestige drama that the whole family can watch.
Starts: May 19, on HBO.
The writer-director Ramin Bahrani updates Ray Bradbury’s 1953 dystopian novel “Fahrenheit 451,” setting it in a near future informed by our own modern world — where improved technologies and a fresh wave of populist political movements have made the original work’s preoccupation with book burning seem newly relevant. Michael B. Jordan stars as an anti-literature zealot who begins to question the foundations of his society, even as his superior officer (played by Michael Shannon) tries to keep him in line.
Starts: May 25, on Amazon.
Joan Lindsay’s 1967 novel “Picnic at Hanging Rock” tells the story of a fictional incident (framed as fact) in which a group of Australian boarding-school girls mysteriously disappear, disrupting an entire community. The book was adapted into an acclaimed 1975 feature film by Peter Weir, as well as multiple theatrical productions and a radio play. Now it comes to TV as a six-part mini-series, starring Natalie Dormer as the headmistress whose life is upended after her students go missing.
One of the most talked-about films at this year’s Sundance Film Festival, this autobiographical drama from Jennifer Fox stars Laura Dern as Fox: a filmmaker who has belatedly begun to reckon with the stretch of her teenage years when she was sexually exploited by her track coach. “The Tale” resonates with the current #MeToo and #TimesUp movements, though it is also an artful inquiry into the slipperiness of human memory, using smart editing and framing techniques to illustrate how the ways in which we tell our own stories often change over time.
Starts: May 30, on Netflix.
Given that the third season of this Emmy-nominated sitcom from Tina Fey and Robert Carlock tackled everything from contemporary college life to Beyoncé’s “Lemonade” — and did so with plenty of wit and heart — there’s no reason to expect that Season 4 will be any less unpredictable, or any less funny. As always, the producers aren’t revealing much about what’s to come, although Carlock did tell “The Hollywood Reporter” that the new season will be divided into two parts (with only the first six episodes arriving this month). Carlock also said that they’ll be following Ellie Kemper’s eternally optimistic Kimmy as she begins her first real adult job, working for a start-up.
Also of Interest: “Welcome to Sweetie Pie’s” (OWN, May 1), “Being Serena” (HBO, May 2), “Cobra Kai” (YouTube Red, May 2), “Colony” (USA, May 2), “The Jazz Ambassadors” (PBS, May 4), “A Little Help with Carol Burnett” (Netflix, May 4), “The Rain” (Netflix, May 4), “I’m Dying Up Here” (Showtime, May 6), “A Dangerous Son” (HBO, May 7), “X Company” (Ovation, May 7), “Motherland” (Sundance Now, May 10), “All Night” (Hulu, May 11), “Kevin Smith: Silent but Deadly” (Showtime, May 11), “Cargo” (Netflix, May 18), “Joe Pera Talks With You” (Adult Swim, May 20, Midnight), “Terrence Howard’s Fright Club” (Fox, May 24), “My Last Days” (the CW, May 25), “The Fourth Estate” (Showtime, May 27), “100 Code” (WGN, May 29), “Animal Kingdom” (TNT, May 29), “Queen Sugar” (OWN, May 29) and “Reverie” (NBC, May 30).
