ALBANY — Stalemate. Stymied. Stuck.
Any of the above describe the current state of play in the New York State Senate, where a raft of pending bills were set aside for a second straight day after it became evident that the ruling Republican majority could not muster the 32 votes to pass a bill — again because of the absence of a Navy-bound senator and the hairs-breadth division in chamber’s membership.
The Republicans only hold their majority in the 63-seat chamber because of the continuing defection of Simcha Felder, a Brooklyn Democrat who caucuses with Republicans. There are 31 other Democrats. But that slim advantage for the Republicans has been undercut in recent days by the decision of Senator Tom Croci, a Long Island Republican, to return to military service in the Navy, depriving his colleagues of the critical 32nd vote.
So it was that a day after they stopped a Democratic effort to vote on two bills concerning abortion rights on Wednesday, Republicans seemed to invite the same treatment — on a bill concerning concussion protocols for students.
The Republicans found themselves, with no support from the other side of the chamber, unable to get to 32 votes.
And then the speechifying began, often about the horror of politics, of all things, ruining any chance of lawmaking.
That obloquy led to a sharp response from Senator Michael N. Gianaris, a Queens Democrat, who said that the Republicans had not announced which bills might be brought up that day, and were simply posturing without power to pass anything.
“They don’t have the votes to pass a single thing in this chamber,” Mr. Gianaris said, his voice also rising. “And their answer to that is to jam us with things,” that the Democrats had no chance to read, review, or deliberate about.
That seemed unlikely anytime soon, of course, as Albany has another three weeks of legislative session before a six-month sojourn away from the Capitol. That period will also include the November elections, during which the Republicans may face strong political headwinds, including President Trump’s unpopularity in his home state.
Democrats, who reunified in April after a seven-year schism involving eight breakaway members, who formed the Independent Democratic Conference, are hoping to win outright control of the Senate.
While the Senate is generally more genteel than the larger, more verbose State Assembly, the scene on Thursday caused leaders of both conferences to take swipes at the other.
Mr. Flanagan’s Democratic counterpart, Senator Andrea Stewart-Cousins, called Republicans’ actions “unprecedented” and “an assault on our democracy,” and accused Mr. Flanagan and his conference of stalling all legislation rather than considering the abortion bills her colleagues proffered on Wednesday.
The showdown, and the slowdown, in the Senate even prompted the administration of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo to wade in on Thursday. Its messenger was Lt. Gov. Kathy Hochul, who serves as the official president of the Senate and who Democrats believe has a constitutional right to break any ties in the chamber.
The whereabouts of Senator Croci, meanwhile, remained a mystery. His office had previously said he was “in the States,” and on Thursday, they would offer no additional details, including whether he was on a boat, on shore, or anywhere near Albany.
And finally, there was Mr. Felder, the rogue Democrat, who could give his party the majority if he wanted to side with them. He conceded on Thursday that he was tempted to rejoin his fellow Democrats, but had given his word to the Republicans that he would stay.
As for what happened — or didn’t happen — on Thursday, Mr. Felder was succinct.
