Food|Why Work When You Can Procrastibake?
Why Work When You Can Procrastibake?
All procrastibakers do not bake alike.
Procrastibaking — the practice of baking something completely unnecessary, with the intention of avoiding “real” work — is a surprisingly common habit that has only recently acquired a name. Medical students, romance writers, freelance web designers: Almost anyone who works at home and has a cookie sheet in the cupboard can try it.
It’s clear that for many cooks, today’s telecommuting jobs, combined with the comforting rituals of the kitchen and the lure of Instagram “likes,” have made procrastibaking irresistible.
“I should admit that I find many ways to procrastinate, but most of them, like weeding out the sock drawer for singletons, are just not as Instagrammable,” said Allison Adato, an editor at People magazine.
“We make an emotional, irrational decision to do what feels good right now,” instead of doing what is necessary, he said. “Present self feels better, but future self gets jerked around.” Procrastibaking, he added, like procrasticleaning, is an unconsciously deployed strategy that makes us feel skilled, nurturing and virtuous in the present while distracting us from the future.
“The ‘fun’ component is essential to procrastibaking, so the content of your product should not be something that you need to make in order to meet your daily nutritional needs,” Amy Sentementes wrote in an email. Ms. Sentementes, a Ph.D. candidate at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, writes a blog about eating well as a graduate student. Baking sweet potatoes until they caramelize is a great project, she said, but it’s not procrastibaking.
Also, any recipe that requires leaving the house to buy ingredients is not in the spirit of procrastibaking. The procrastibaker must believe that it is possible to be simultaneously working on a document, buttering pans and separating eggs. A shopping trip to buy cocoa powder destroys the fantasy that the baking is not really an interruption of the work. That’s why recipes like “kitchen sink” cookies, which use whatever ingredients are on hand, are ideal.
Jonathan Martin, a medical student in London, says that the best recipes for effective procrastibaking are those with many steps, allowing the procrastibaker to get some work done in between and sustain an illusion of efficiency. “I make a few sourdough loaves, with the autolyzing, bulk proofing and then final rising steps all hours apart,” he said.
Another favorite is millionaire’s shortbread, which demands time for the layers — shortbread, then caramel, then chocolate — to chill between steps. “Looking forward to the next step allows me to enjoy and justify the time spent,” he said.
Many writers say that procrastibaking is actually part of their work, allowing them to enter a “flow state” that is conducive to creative thinking.
She said that procrastibaking is her way out of writer’s block — especially pie, because it is more stimulating to the senses than other recipes. “You can bake an entire cake without touching anything,” she said.  Baking helps her get out of the tangle of words in her head and into the physical world, she said, which helps with her particular line of work.
More surprisingly, there are many professional bakers who procrastibake.
“I used to beat myself up over it, but I don’t anymore,” said Erin Gardner, a cake decorator in New Hampshire. “I think it’s part of my creative process, and I just need to submit to it.” Inventing stunning new ways to shape chocolate flowers and stack cake layers is an imperative for Ms. Gardner, who contributes to The Cake Blog and to American Cake Decorating magazine, and who occasionally competes on the cutthroat cake-show circuit.
“Being in a field where I have to be creative on demand, I think my brain needs to ride on cruise control before getting down to business,” she said. So when she is procrastibaking, she sticks to the recipes she can make without thinking, like cookies, scones and brownies.
