In the spring of 1931, Zora Neale Hurston finished her first book, a 117-page manuscript titled “Barracoon.” It told the true story of Cudjo Lewis, an Alabama man who was believed to be the last living person captured in Africa and brought to America on a slave ship.
Publishers were unimpressed. One offered to buy it if she rewrote it “in language rather than dialect,” Hurston wrote in a letter to one of her benefactors. She refused, and “Barracoon” was never published.
Now, nearly a century after she wrote it, “Barracoon” will be made widely available to the public for the first time, in a new edition published by Amistad, a HarperCollins’s imprint. The book’s release could have a profound impact on Hurston’s literary legacy. Hurston, who died in 1960, is best known for her works of fiction, including “Their Eyes Were Watching God” and “Moses, Man of the Mountain.” But she was also a groundbreaking anthropologist and ethnographer, one of the first in her field to record and study African-American folklore, at a time when most scholars ignored black culture, or dismissed it as primitive.
Zora Neale Hurston’s handwritten preface to “Barracoon.”Credit...Copyright © 2018 by The Zora Neale Hurston Trust.
Hurston was first dispatched to Plateau, Ala., in 1927, at the behest of Franz Boas, her mentor and professor at Barnard. Boas, an influential anthropologist, urged her to interview Lewis for The Journal of Negro History. Doing field research in the segregated South was challenging for a single African-American woman, and Hurston, who was then in her mid-30s, occasionally slept in her car when she couldn’t find a hotel that would rent her a room, and traveled with a pistol for protection.
Hurston returned to Alabama to speak to Lewis again in 1931, and spent several months visiting him, gradually coaxing out his story.
He told Hurston about the roughly five years he spent enslaved, how he gained his freedom when Union soldiers appeared one day and told him he didn’t belong to anyone anymore, and how he joined together with a group of other former slaves and helped to establish Africatown, a community founded and run by Africans.
“Barracoon” unfolds largely as a monologue from Lewis, with an introduction and occasional interjections from Hurston. Some days, he didn’t feel like talking, so she helped him with chores. Other days, he grew exhausted by her questions and told her she wanted to know too much. At times, he was so overcome by painful memories that he couldn’t speak, like when he recalled the day his village was attacked by Dahomey warriors, who beheaded victims they deemed too weak to be sold, and smoked their victims’ heads to preserve them.
“His agony was so acute that he became inarticulate,” Hurston wrote.
She would bring him food, a basket of peaches or a Virginia ham, and tell him stories to break the ice. When Lewis was feeling chatty, he could go on for hours, and Hurston cedes the narrative to him for long, meandering stretches.
After she failed to publish “Barracoon,” Hurston threw herself into other projects. She wrote “Mules and Men,” a collection of African-American folklore. She traveled to Jamaica and Haiti to research voodoo, and wrote about the experience in “Tell My Horse.” In Haiti, she wrote her novel “Their Eyes Were Watching God” in a feverish seven weeks.
In her final decades, she slipped into obscurity. She worked as a substitute teacher and house cleaner in Florida to pay the bills. When she died at 69, she was buried in an unmarked grave.
“Barracoon” was never really lost. It was preserved in the archives at Howard University, in a collection of papers from one of Hurston’s professors and mentors, Alain Locke.
But it wasn’t until recently that the executors of Hurston’s trust began considering the commercial potential for “Barracoon,” and the cultural impact it could have. Lois Hurston Gaston, a grandniece of Hurston’s and one of the trustees, said that in August 2016, they began re-evaluating Hurston’s archives and looking for previously unpublished works, and Cudjo Lewis’s story jumped out.
