Season 1 of “Atlanta,” the unpredictable FX show created by Donald Glover, had a black Justin Bieber, an episode-long debate about transgender (and transracial) rights, an invisible car and, in spurts, a plot about an aspiring rapper and his rookie manager-slash-cousin.
Season 2, dubbed “Robbin’ Season,” which had its finale on Thursday night, upped the insanity: a homicidal Michael Jackson stand-in anchored one of two mini-horror movies; the real Michael Vick raced people for money; and a real alligator made a cameo, too.
One main ingredient both seasons had in common? The visual touch of Hiro Murai.
In addition to the finale — which saw Earn (Mr. Glover) finally turn cutthroat in the music business with the help of a golden handgun gifted to him in the season’s first episode — Mr. Murai was behind the camera for the latest Childish Gambino statement, “This Is America.” The music video premiered on Saturday night and has already been viewed more than 70 million times, inspiring nearly as many think-pieces with its whiplash depiction of black joy — verging, purposefully, on minstrelsy — and black death.
As a similarly tense and violent season of “Atlanta” wrapped up, Mr. Murai spoke by phone about how his visual palette has expanded with Mr. Glover’s vision and what the show and the music video have in common. Below are edited excepts from the conversation.
“Atlanta” is, in a lot of ways, a show about detours and loose ends, but the finale brought a lot of strands together. Did you feel the need to tie things up a bit?
Yeah, I think so. The gun payoff was something that was part of the conversation really early on. Even though we like meandering story and tangents, it really felt like we were aiming for cohesive through-line this season — in our own way. We still don’t prioritize plot very much, but we wanted to give you a sense of closure.
There were a lot of callbacks — the couch where the guys hang out, the airport credit card kiosk where Earn worked in the premiere, Darius’s Benny Hope T-shirt and the gun. Do you have fun scattering Easter eggs like that?
It’s never the main thing we prioritize, but whenever we can make it feel like the world exists even when you’re not watching it, we like to do that. I always say, especially with Darius’s Benny Hope shirt [a reference to the musician in the “Teddy Perkins” episode], I was saying how much I like the idea that none of the other characters knew what went on in that episode. Darius went through this very crazy experience and he’s just sort of keeping it to himself. 
This season had a lot of horror elements to it, moving even further away from straight-ahead comedy. Did you always know it would get darker as the story went on?
When we talked about the season breakdown, I could sense that things were going to get harsher. Even the funny episodes this season have a type of tension and anxiety in the air. That’s all part of the “Robbin’ Season” theme for us.
The first season, we shot all during the summer and spring season. So visually it was really lush and green and had a vibrant palette. Having seen Atlanta in the fall and winter seasons, I know that it’s a little gloomier and everything they were setting up for made sense to me. It felt like the right time to tell these stories and certainly there was tension in the air, socially and politically.
What are some of the visual tricks or shots that you use to convey that mood — the tension, surrealism and dream logic?
A big thing about the show is bouncing back and forth between the subjective reality of these characters and the objective. Our main tools are the close-ups and the camera being in the world with the characters, and then stepping way back and seeing how small they are in their environment, whether that be wide shots inside or top-down drone shots from above.
How do you decide who will direct which episodes, between you, Donald and in this season, Amy Seimetz?
This season, we knew that we wanted to give Van’s story lines to a female director. We treated that as its own arc, so therefore someone could come in and sculpt that any way they wanted. With Donald, obviously, it’s tricky because he’s in the show a lot. It’s very difficult to direct and act at the same time. Sometimes it’s a practical decision. The reason he did the “Barbershop” episode was because he wasn’t in it. But the “FUBU” episode, with the kids, that story is about him and his brother — it’s really a very personal story. So it just made sense for him to be the guy telling it.
It’s something that I’ve always been attracted to, that idea of letting everything happen in a single frame. I think the writing of the show is really similar, where none of it is very flowery. It’s very to the point and matter-of-fact. What I like about staging things in a single frame is that it has this same cadence visually.
Because you guys do tend to layer so much meaning, you get a lot of fans obsessing over identifying symbols and allusions. How much do you keep up with the internet chatter and Reddit sleuthing?
I’m a casual observer from a safe distance. I kind of love it, to be honest. Those fan theories are in line with what I like about the show. There’s more to this world than you’re seeing. So that gives me a lot of reassurance that that feeling is getting communicated.
You’ve said that what you do on the show is an extension of what you do in music videos. Do you seen a big overlap between “Atlanta” and “This Is America”?
I definitely think so. There’s sort of a world-weariness in both this season and the music video. They’re both reactions to what’s happening in the world.
When did the video fit in to the shooting schedule?
We probably shot [“This Is America”] a week-and-a-half or two weeks ago. It came together really fast, right on the heels of editing “Atlanta.” It certainly added to the chaos, but it was a fun kind of chaos.
Were you at all floored by the amount of feelings and interpretations that the video stirred up?
Yeah, you’d have to be pretty crazy to expect that kind of reaction. It certainly caught me off-guard and by surprise. But I can also see why it’s resonated with people. We’re just trying to be as honest as possible with our feelings through the work and hope that it connects with people.
There was a lot more violence in Season 2 of “Atlanta,” and that was a big theme in the music video, as well. How did you approach shooting more action?
I was fortunate to work on a few episodes of “Barry” right before we shot “Atlanta.” That was where I got my training wheels for action coverage. I kind of learned on the job. But directing action scenes is really just pure visual storytelling that just makes sense to me pretty intuitively.
Yeah, that video is a really crazy confluence of tone changes — that’s the premise of the whole video and the song, in a way. Even the violence, though it’s harrowing, there’s a part of it that also feels cartoony. There’s “Looney Tunes” logic in there somewhere. Obviously we’re dealing with very provocative images, so it’s a total tightrope walk.
Those screeching tone changes exist in “Atlanta,” too. What is it about Donald that he likes making those hard turns in his work?
Even from the start, our big mandate was just surprising people and trying to deliver something that people don’t know that they want to see. People are all so media savvy now that when you see a story, you pick up on the cadence really fast. You can tell where the story is going really easily if you’re at all media savvy. We really just wanted to see how far we could go into taking that apart and making you feel that anything could happen at any moment.