Cynthia Ozick reviews “Last Stories,” William Trevor’s final collection of stories, for this week’s cover. In 1964, J.D. Scott reviewed the Irish author’s debut novel, “The Old Boys,” for the Book Review. Below is an excerpt.
The phrase “Old Boys” has in England a special meaning: the old grads of a school. Originally the phrase was used only in those breeding grounds of empire, the public schools. Now it has been taken over by a good many of the schools that are part of the state system of education, but it is still very much an in-group phrase. It reflects the brooding preoccupation of middle-class and upper-class Englishmen with that period in their lives, between the ages of 13 and 18, that they spent in monastic seclusion with others of their kind, in a small, fiercely ingrown world, obsessed by games, tradition and emotional entanglements.
In modern England this preoccupation is lessening as the public schools have become less isolated, but the old boys in William Trevor’s novel are very old boys, indeed, and hardly belong to modern England. They are the committee of an alumni association, and it is a tradition of the association that members do not serve on the committee until they are very senior, and that all the committee during a two-year term of office should have been at the school at the same time. So we have a small group of men, Mr. Turtle, Mr. Nox, Mr. Swabey-Boyns, Mr. Jaraby, General Sanctuary, Sir George Ponders, Mr. Sole, and Mr. Cridley bound together by ancient memories, antique jealousies, anecdotes crumbling into dust — and unquenchable dislikes.
His publishers tell us that Mr. Trevor is young, and this makes it all the more remarkable that he should have taken this difficult material and made out of it a novel that is exceedingly readable, touchingly sad and dreadfully funny.
“The Old Boys” is largely written in dialogue, a stylized dialogue that owes something to Miss Compton-Burnett and that some readers may find artificial. Others may feel that Mr. Trevor has got his geriatrics a bit wrong, and that his characters are really octogenarians rather than septuagenarians. Yet this is an excellent novel, a memorable study of old age, and no less compassionate by being in part a comedy.