Illustrated. 331 pp. Henry Holt & Company. $30.
Oh to visit Paris in 1949 with Nelson Algren! In town on a trip to see his lover, Simone de Beauvoir, Algren attended dinners with Juliette Gréco and Miles Davis, spent nights drinking whiskey and grapefruit gin with Richard Wright at the Montana Bar, dropped in on cocktail parties at Gallimard and attended an evening cabaret performance by Yves Montand. But since we can’t “cue up the good old days on YouTube,” as the contemporary British writer Matthew de Abaitua has put it, we’ll have to turn to books like Agnès Poirier’s “Left Bank” to stoke our historical FOMO.
A journalist who was born in Paris and educated in London, Poirier knows that we expect many things when we consider the mythic figures who populated Paris in the 1940s. They appeared outsize in their own time too. The young of that era looked to Sartre, Beauvoir, Merleau-Ponty, Camus and their friends to change the world, but they inevitably disappointed. How could they not?
Carefully combing through an impressive amount of material, Poirier assembles the history of a decade in Paris as she tries to explain how these figures came to loom so large. And what a difference a decade makes — the period just before midcentury saw two republics and an occupation, the rise of communism and the beginning of both the Cold War and the war in Indochina. “Left Bank” moves scene to scene, cafe to cafe, tracing the affiliations and intrigues of a group of writers, philosophers, artists and curators whose lives were, as Poirier puts it, “shaped by the ordeals” of World War II and whose fates coincided in the service of art and revolution.
 In Poirier’s account, the city seems more like a small town where everyone knew everyone and together faced down the enemy, then took on the task of building a new world in the ashes of the old. This, of course, wasn’t the case, and Poirier’s sometimes narrow focus presents a rather elite version of the period. Consider, for example, the 1947 debut of Christian Dior’s New Look, using yards and yards of fabric to create full calf-length skirts — utterly shocking after the necessary parsimony of wartime. The British historian Andrew Hussey has described a Dior photo shoot in the working-class streets of Montmartre when the local women “flew at the models, ripping the clothes to shreds in anger and disgust.” In contrast, Poirier loftily extols the way Dior “reintroduced glamour and luxury,” the way he “invented a new sexy silhouette,” reminding us that Hollywood stars demanded to be dressed by him. This is typical of the way the breathless mythology of the era, to which none of us are immune, can obscure the way we see it. Poirier buys into the “glamour and luxury” at moments like these, but who can really blame her?
Poirier’s account of the decade explores a crucial moment at which prewar and postwar culture came together. She drops in on Marlon Brando watching Eartha Kitt sing at Cocteau’s old haunt, Le Boeuf sur le Toit (“Chéri, je vous aime beaucoup, je ne sais pas what to do”), and accompanies Beauvoir on a visit to an aging Alberto Giacometti, who, 20 years past his peak, is finally having a breakthrough. And she’s particularly attentive to Richard Wright’s association with Sartre and Beauvoir’s journal, Les Temps Modernes, emphasizing the meaningful contributions Wright made to French intellectual life. Far from romanticizing the American expat community, Poirier gives us some unflattering portraits of visiting writers. Arriving in 1948, James Baldwin, although welcomed by Wright, promptly tore him apart in his essay “Everybody’s Protest Novel.” Poirier suggests that Norman Mailer’s prickliness was learned from the French. And in her portrait Saul Bellow, forever dissatisfied, coming and going between his wife and family on the Right Bank and his writer’s studio and bachelor lifestyle on the Left, is just really annoying.
In the end, it’s Paris and the pursuit of freedom that unites the people in Poirier’s book. From their homes on the Right and Left Banks, they will have heard the bell that evening and felt the same rush of joy and hope. We experience it too, thanks to a detail like that. As Poirier hops across arrondissements, she manages to create the feeling we’re peeking into the windows of her subjects, looking at buildings that still stand, at inhabitants long gone.