For his last act, can the N.B.A. legend have a hand in fixing the Clippers once and for all?
LOS ANGELES — It wasn’t until the Los Angeles Clippers’ 74th game of the season, on one of their final home dates, that the excitable owner Steve Ballmer and Jerry West, his hypercritical special consultant, agreed to watch a game together in Ballmer’s baseline seats at Staples Center.
“He told me early on, ‘You don’t always want me sitting with you,’” Ballmer said.
West prefers to watch games alone, or as isolated as he can manage when he takes one in live. This allows him to fume at will, nitpick unreservedly and, most of all, curse freely.
Ballmer, though, didn’t offer a reported $4 million-to-$5 million per year and lure West away from the Golden State Warriors to then ask The Logo to muzzle himself. West is encouraged to be as outspoken as he wants with his new team, rants and all.
Near the end of his first full year as a consultant to Ballmer and Lawrence Frank, the Clippers’ president of basketball operations, West will have a seat on Tuesday night that’ll make it hard to miss where he works now. The Los Angeles Lakers legend has a chair reserved on the dais at the N.B.A.’s annual draft lottery Tuesday in Chicago — representing L.A.’s other team.
It’s largely a symbolic role, often assigned to franchise legends and occasionally even owners’ children. But for West — who both turns 80 and celebrates his 40th wedding anniversary on May 28 — the league’s made-for-TV production is the boldfaced occasion circled on his calendar this month.
“We have to do a great job this summer,” West said of the Clippers over lunch at the Bel-Air Country Club, where he has spent much of his time away from basketball since the 1970s, playing golf and gin.
He insists he doesn’t feel 80 — “Not at all,” West said — and carded a 78 followed by a 75 last month. Yet on this day, West was far more intent on discussing the two lottery picks the Clippers have in the N.B.A. draft this June.
Do the Clippers hold on to those picks and wait for July 2019 to make their next big free-agent push? Do they try to package one or both in a potential trade this off-season to pursue an established star like San Antonio’s Kawhi Leonard?
Frank and Ballmer will ultimately make those calls, but West expects to have significant say.
The Clippers never envisioned worrying about lottery proceedings so soon after they re-signed Blake Griffin to a five-year, $171 million contract last July. Days after West signed on in June, they agreed to trade Chris Paul, the stellar but frustrated All-Star guard, to Houston before Paul could bolt in free agency. But re-upping their star forward, to keep Griffin teamed with the All-N.B.A. center DeAndre Jordan, had the Clippers convinced they would remain a playoff team — even in the stacked Western Conference.
It wasn’t long, though, before buyer’s remorse set in. Already plagued by a lengthy injury history, Griffin sustained a sprained knee in November. He was the fourth of five projected starters to incur an early season injury, exacerbating a poor start which featured a nine-game losing streak even before Griffin got hurt.
Griffin wound up missing six weeks, but an unexpected opportunity to trade him to the star-starved Detroit Pistons materialized soon after Griffin’s late-December return.
Going through with the trade would essentially be admitting that re-signing Griffin was a mistake, an ill-conceived attempt to cling to relevance and respectability after losing Paul.
Do it anyway, West urged.
The Clippers had gone to great lengths just six months earlier to persuade Griffin to stay in free agency, staging a mock jersey retirement ceremony in which Griffin was proclaimed to be “a lifelong Clipper” as part of their recruiting pitch. Trading him so soon after that, for all the financial flexibility it could restore, would also paint the Clippers as heartless.
“Don’t be afraid to make that tough decision if you need to,” Ballmer recalled West telling him.
When it comes to making such calculations, West is the antithesis of the modern N.B.A. executive. He openly disdains how much teams rely on statistics in the N.B.A.’s analytics era.
Yet the Clippers will put up with that stubborn streak in exchange for the instant credibility they get from West’s presence. It also doesn’t hurt that the Clippers’ new front-office cabinet features Michael Winger, the highly rated salary-cap guru and strategist, as Frank’s top aide.
West does not respond to email or even have an email address, because “he doesn’t know how to use a computer,” Karen West, his wife, said. But the man whose silhouette and unmistakable left-handed dribble served as the inspiration for the N.B.A. logo has managed to gradually add texting to his repertoire.
“Lawrence and I text each other two or three times a day,” West said proudly, after a message from Frank caught his eye.
Before the Clippers called, West’s six seasons in a similar advisory role with the Warriors were undeniably fruitful, featuring two championships, a record 73-win season and the successful free-agent recruitment of Kevin Durant. But for all of his achievements and longevity, West still needs to feel needed, say those who know him best.
And he couldn’t help but wonder: Did the Warriors, whose then-new ownership group so badly needed the credibility boost West provided upon arrival in May 2011, still need him after the team’s president of basketball operations, Bob Myers, had become so adept in assembling a starry, and successful, roster?
For much of his Golden State stint, although it was never advertised, West was the highest-paid member of the basketball operations staff. But Myers, who joined the front office with West’s strong backing in April 2011, was promoted to general manager after a one-season apprenticeship and quickly established himself; he earned N.B.A. Executive of the Year honors twice (to match West’s career total) in a five-season span.
The longtime Sports Illustrated writer Jack McCallum reported in his 2017 book “Golden Days” that West, partly because of Myers’ rise in stature, was asked to take a reduction in compensation to stay.
But money was only one factor in West’s exit. No matter how hard Warriors officials tried to convince him, publicly and privately, that his input remained vital to their collaborative approach to decision-making, West felt his influence was fading.
“You have to be wanted,” West said.
Joining the Clippers, meanwhile, would represent a new challenge reminiscent of West’s unexpected move to the Memphis Grizzlies in April 2002, after he walked away from a 40-year association with the Lakers following Shaquille O’Neal and Kobe Bryant’s first championship in 2000.
The Lakers back then, like the Warriors now, were set up for success with or without West. Putting the Clippers on a championship course, by contrast, is seen as the ultimate challenge in L.A.
That’s not only because of the Lakers’ immense shadow but also the stain that lingers from Donald Sterling’s 33-year ownership, which for so long was synonymous with ineptitude and frugality to the point of cheapness that it made the Clippers a longstanding laughingstock. Sterling’s run finally ended in 2014, with his team competitive at last, when he was barred for life by N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver after Sterling was recorded making racist comments.
The Clippers strung together their six most successful seasons before West’s arrival, but they also failed to advance past the second round, even after hiring a championship-proven coach in Doc Rivers in June 2013. Mounting frustration prompted Ballmer to strip Rivers of his front-office power in August 2017 and promote Frank to head the department. Atlanta and Detroit likewise went away from that sort of leadership structure over the past 12 months.
San Antonio (Gregg Popovich) and Minnesota (Tom Thibodeau) are the only two teams left in the league that employ a coach who also holds final say over personnel matters. Teams are more apt now to try to replicate the Golden State model, which was built upon the belief that a diverse group of voices — if properly managed — can succeed through collaboration.
“In terms of how to set up a front office, how to think about problems, talent evaluation — Jerry is a superstar,” Ballmer said.
The idea to pursue West came from Ballmer’s former Harvard classmate-turned-Clippers minority shareholder Dennis Wong, who was once part of Golden State’s ownership group.
Neither can West.
“I’m not a person that does very well when I don’t have a reason to get up in the morning,” he said.
The Clippers finished 10th in the West this season, five games out of a playoff berth, but have high hopes after posting a 42-40 record in spite of their steady stream of injuries. They acquired the promising forward Tobias Harris and the defensive specialist Avery Bradley in the Griffin deal, along with Detroit’s first-round pick in June, and can start plotting for the future in earnest after Tuesday night’s lottery results.
West, for his part, is convinced that “the mountain is not that high for this team if we make the right moves” under Ballmer and Frank’s leadership.
Said West: “Leaving the Warriors was probably the most difficult thing for me in my whole life. I didn’t want to leave. You get to the point where maybe you don’t feel as valued, but it’s just something that happened. I hold no malice toward anyone over there.
