“If our leaders seek to conceal the truth, or we as people become accepting of alternative realities that are no longer grounded in facts, then we as American citizens are on a pathway to relinquishing our freedom,” he said in a commencement address at the Virginia Military Institute in Lexington, Va.
Even small falsehoods and exaggerations are problematic, Mr. Tillerson said. He did not mention Mr. Trump by name, although the president is prone to both.
“When we as people, a free people, go wobbly on the truth even on what may seem the most trivial matters, we go wobbly on America,” he said.
Mr. Tillerson arrived in Washington after running Exxon Mobil, one of the world’s largest corporations, backed by business leaders and some foreign policy experts as a man who could bring experience and ballast to an untested administration.
But as the nation’s top diplomat, he soon found himself at odds with the president over a variety of issues, including negotiating with North Korea and extending the Iran nuclear deal, and privately humiliated until he was fired by a tweet.
Since then, he has largely been in seclusion at his Texas ranch. He had agreed to deliver the V.M.I. commencement address before he was fired.
In his address, he cut to the heart of the most significant criticisms of the president, that Mr. Trump exaggerates and constructs his own truths and that he has undermined ethical standards in Washington.
“If we do not as Americans confront the crisis of ethics and integrity in our society and among our leaders in both the public and private sector — and regrettably at times even the nonprofit sector — then American democracy as we know it is entering its twilight years,” Mr. Tillerson warned.
He and Mr. Trump disagreed on an array of specific issues, from the Paris climate accord to free trade. He seemed to reference some of those disputes in his speech on Wednesday, reminding his audience that the United States gets much of its strength from a network of alliances.
Relations with Europe are at their lowest point in years, bedeviled by a series of disagreements with the Trump administration over the climate accord, the Iran deal and trade disputes. Mr. Tillerson suggested this was problematic.
He said that “every nation has a right to aspire to a better quality of life, and that free trade and economic growth are the means by which opportunity is created for all people.” It was a notable defense of free trade and developing nations from a veteran of an administration that has threatened to rip up the North American Free Trade Agreement and impose billions of dollars in tariffs on rivals and allies alike, and uses “America First” as its guiding principle.
In Washington, just moments before Mr. Tillerson began speaking, his successor, Mike Pompeo, was holding his first meeting with the entire staff of the State Department. In his own prepared remarks, Mr. Pompeo made clear that he intended to make a sharp break from Mr. Tillerson’s tenure.
It was a reference to Mr. Tillerson’s own first all-hands meeting at the department, which had amounted to a wide-ranging lecture on world affairs. Mr. Pompeo did not mention Mr. Tillerson by name but said he would not try to school a building full of professional diplomats.
“We should carry that diplomatic swagger to the ends of the Earth, humbly, nobly and with the skill and courage I know you all possess,” he said.
“Look for employers who set high standards for ethical conduct,” he said.