Ms. Bloom joins the ranks of unassuming and magnanimous millionaires next door, who have died with fortunes far larger than their lifestyles ever would have suggested. Like Ms. Bloom, Leonard Gigowski, a shopkeeper from New Berlin, Wis., who died in 2015, left his secret $13 million fortune to fund scholarships. Grace Groner, who lived in a one-bedroom home in Lake Forest, Ill., and directed that her $7 million estate go to her alma mater when she died in 2010 at 100, shopped at thrift stores and chose to walk, not drive.
Donald and Mildred Othmer, who settled in Brooklyn Heights, lived relatively simple lives; he was a professor at Polytechnic University in Brooklyn and she was a former teacher and buyer for her mother’s dress stores. They invested wisely in Berkshire Hathaway, run by a family friend from Omaha, Warren E. Buffett, and died in their 90s with three-quarters of a billion dollars, most of which they donated.
While her aunt’s wealth was a surprise, Ms. Bloom’s quiet plan to help students was not, Ms. Lockshin said.
Ms. Bloom, who never had children of her own, was born to eastern European immigrants and grew up in Brooklyn during the Great Depression. She attended public schools, including Hunter College, where she completed her degree at night while working days to make ends meet.
Ms. Bloom’s husband, Raymond Margolies, who died in 2002, was a city firefighter who retired and became a city schoolteacher with a pharmacist career on the side, relatives said. Even when she married, Ms. Bloom kept her name, which was indicative of her independent nature, said a cousin, Flora Mogul Bornstein, 72.
Nearly all the money was in Ms. Bloom’s name alone, Ms. Lockshin said, adding that it was “very possible” that even Mr. Margolies did not know the size of his wife’s fortune.
Ms. Bloom was known for always taking the subway to work, even on the morning of the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks on the World Trade Center, not far from the firm’s offices.
A lover of chocolate but not lavish gifts, she would only accept his gifts of special chocolate in small quantities.
Ms. Lockshin said an additional $2 million from Ms. Bloom’s bequest would be split between Hunter College and another scholarship fund to be announced.
Mr. Garza called the gift “the epitome of selflessness,” and a fitting gesture by a woman to the settlement, which was founded in 1893 by the public health pioneer Lillian Wald. The Henry Street Settlement now serves more than 60,000 people and provides an array of services in addition to its education support, including health care programs and transitional housing.
Ms. Bloom’s view of education was informed by her own public school experience and by working with successful lawyers from highly rated colleges and law schools, he said. Established in 1946, Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton has grown to become an international powerhouse and a go-to firm for nations that are having trouble paying their debts. The investment savvy Ms. Bloom gleaned from the firm’s founding lawyers must have been equally sound.
