The warning, made by the North’s disarmament negotiator, caught Trump administration officials off guard and set off an internal debate over whether Mr. Kim was merely posturing in advance of the meeting in Singapore next month or was erecting a serious new hurdle.
The abrupt change in tone began early Wednesday, when North Korea indefinitely postponed high-level talks with South Korea over the North’s sudden objection to joint military drills by the South and the United States that began last week. The North also raised the possibility of scrapping the meeting with Mr. Trump.
Then hours later, the North broadened the source of its anger and sharpened the threat to the summit with Mr. Trump.
John Bolton, the national security adviser, says the dismantling of Libya’s nuclear weapons program provides a playbook for North Korean denuclearization. The idea is provoking a lot of resistance and confusion.
Kim Kye-kwan, a vice foreign minister, rejected the administration’s demand that it quickly dismantle its nuclear program as Libya had done 15 years ago, singling out John R. Bolton, Mr. Trump’s new national security adviser, for condemnation.
“If the United States is trying to drive us into a corner to force our unilateral nuclear abandonment, we will no longer be interested in such dialogue and cannot but reconsider our proceeding to the D.P.R.K.-U.S. summit,” the statement said, using the abbreviation for the North’s formal name, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
North Korea had previously signaled flexibility about the military exercises, appearing to remove a perennial obstacle to talks between North and South Korea. But the North cited its objections to the joint American-South Korean air force drill in postponing a separate high-level meeting with South Korea that had been planned for Wednesday.
As the White House scrambled to assess the North Korean statements, the State Department said planning for the June 12 summit meeting remained on track, and pointed to Mr. Kim’s earlier acceptance of the exercises, which had been conveyed to the United States by South Korean officials.
The North Korean statements injected sudden tension and uncertainty into what had been months of warming relations on the Korean Peninsula, most notably the summit meeting between Mr. Kim and President Moon Jae-in of South Korea on April 27 and their declaration to pursue peace.
The confusion created by the statements also underscored the risks for Mr. Trump in meeting with the 34-year-old North Korean leader. And it served as a reminder that for all of Mr. Kim’s camera-ready smiles and diplomatic gestures of recent months, North Korea remains an opaque, unpredictable country.
“We will be closely watching the attitude of the United States and South Korean authorities,” the news agency added.
Senior officials from the two Koreas had been scheduled to meet in the “truce village” of Panmunjom on their border Wednesday to discuss putting in place an agreement to improve ties and ease military tensions, building on the declaration signed by their leaders on April 27.
The Pentagon said Max Thunder was an annual exercise to maintain military readiness to defend South Korea. “The defensive nature of these combined exercises has been clear for many decades and has not changed,” said a Defense Department spokesman, Col. Rob Manning.
She also said the United States had received no notification of a change in plans for the summit meeting. “We will continue to go ahead and plan the meeting between President Trump and Kim Jong-un,” she said.
There was some ambiguity about whether Mr. Kim had dropped his objection to all joint exercises, or merely the ones that were underway at the time that he opened a dialogue with Mr. Moon. When Mr. Kim met with South Korean envoys in March, he agreed to meet with Mr. Moon despite a round of joint military drills that were about to be conducted.
South Korean envoys quoted Mr. Kim as saying he understood that those exercises must continue. But those drills are over. The new round of annual United States-South Korean drills began last Friday.
In their March meeting, Mr. Kim told the South Korean emissaries that he hoped the United States and South Korea would “readjust” their annual military drills “when the situation stabilizes,” according to the envoys.
Joel S. Wit, a senior fellow at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies who negotiated with North Korea during the Clinton administration, said Mr. Kim was pulling a page from Mr. Trump’s playbook.
Christopher R. Hill, who negotiated with North Korea during the George W. Bush administration, said it was possible that the threat was serious. The North, he noted, has a history of insulting the South, and normally, the United States comes to the defense of its ally.
Mr. Trump did not immediately react to Mr. Kim’s warning, and the White House issued only a bland statement. “The United States will look at what North Korea has said independently, and continue to coordinate closely with our allies,” said Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary.
Tensions on the divided Korean Peninsula have eased considerably since Mr. Kim launched a fast-paced string of diplomatic overtures in recent months, starting with his decision to send North Korean athletes to the Winter Olympics held in the South in February.
Last month, North Korea announced an end to all nuclear and long-range missile tests. Last week, it freed three Americans held in North Korea, sending them home with Mr. Pompeo.
This week, the North invited international journalists to watch its engineers shut down its only-known nuclear test site later this month. The two Koreas have also started dismantling loudspeakers they have used to blare propaganda broadcasts across the border.
It is not unusual for North Korea to abruptly cancel and postpone meetings with its neighbors. The North’s decision to postpone the border talks was delivered only 15 hours after it proposed those talks on Tuesday and the South quickly accepted the offer.
In 2015, a North Korean band packed up and returned home only hours before it was scheduled to perform in Beijing in a gesture of friendship between the two countries’ Communist governments. In January, North Korea agreed to send an advance team of officials to the South to prepare for its participation in the Winter Olympics, but abruptly delayed their trip.
