ROME — Italy’s populists seethed and the European Union sighed with temporary relief on Sunday night after an anti-establishment alliance poised to govern the bloc’s fourth-largest economy imploded at the last minute amid concerns that it was planning to sneak out the back door of the eurozone.
Less than a week after Italy’s populist parties, the anti-establishment Five Star Movement and the anti-immigrant League, ironed out their policy differences and jubilantly received a mandate to form a government that they said would usher in a new era in Italian and European history, its designated prime minister announced on Sunday evening that he had failed to form a government.
“I assure you that I gave my maximum effort and attention to carry out this task,” said Giuseppe Conte, a previously little-known lawyer. His selection as prime minister-designate had raised concerns he would be a pawn of the populist forces that had settled on him as their compromise nominee.
The announcement, a result of an impasse over the future government’s economics minister, seemed likely to prompt the creation of a technical caretaker government on Monday morning. But it was unclear that such a government would have enough support to pass a confidence vote in Parliament, thus thrusting Italy back into political uncertainty.
Nearly three months after the majority of Italians voted for populist parties, the aggrieved forces demanded a return to the polls, with the League’s leader doubting Italy’s democracy and the Five Star leader raising the prospect of the impeachment of President Sergio Mattarella.
But Mr. Mattarella, a soft-spoken keeper of Italian institutions, explained in a civics lesson to Italians Sunday night that he was only carrying out his constitutional obligations to confirm a stable government that protected Italian interests.
In other words, if both parties had campaigned on leaving the eurozone, that would be one thing. But both had been vague on the subject, especially the Five Star Movement, which backed off talk of leaving the zone in the campaign. It was thus unacceptable, Mr. Mattarella argued, for the parties to install an economics minister hostile to the euro as a way out of the eurozone.
He said he could not allow stock market losses to torch the savings of Italian companies and families or make it harder for Italians to borrow money.
But Matteo Salvini, the leader of the League, argued exactly the opposite on Sunday night.
Saying he was as angry as “a beast,” he offered a preview of what is likely to be a long and vicious campaign attacking foreign interests, Italian institutions and Mr. Mattarella himself.
Mr. Salvini said that he had expected, as of Monday, to be Italy’s interior minister, responsible for security and migration, and had been thinking, “I can’t wait to send home a whole lot of illegals.” Instead, he said, the powers-that-be didn’t like his choice for economics minister so they pulled the plug.
But Mr. Salvini, a gifted politician, stands to gain the most from new elections. His support has increased throughout the long negotiating process. If Mr. Savona was a poison pill that Mr. Mattarella would never accept, his nomination essentially forced new elections that could send Mr. Salvini back to government as the prime minister of a broad center-right coalition with former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi.
That would leave the Five Star Movement out of the picture. On Sunday night, the party’s political leader, Luigi Di Maio, seemed genuinely apoplectic. After an emergency meeting with his party leaders, he called on Italian television for Mr. Mattarella’s impeachment for blocking the will of the people.
It is not clear if Five Star, an ideologically vague party that won more than 30 percent of the electorate, has alienated left-leaning voters upset about its alliance with the hard-right League.
What is clear is that the outrage machine of Five Star, a protest party born online, kicked into high gear Sunday. In response, government officials expressed solidarity for Mr. Mattarella.
On Monday, Mr. Mattarella is expected to meet at the Quirinal Palace with Carlo Cottarelli, a former director of the fiscal affairs department of the International Monetary Fund, to ask him to form a technical government.
Mr. Cottarelli, who has also worked for the Bank of Italy and for the country’s major energy company, ENI, is a preferred choice of Mr. Berlusconi.
There is now a good possibility. But in this unpredictable, dramatic and seemingly unending Italian electoral season, nothing is certain.
