A rapping Hamilton and a (quietly) rocking Boss propelled Broadway’s box office to new heights over the past year, as rising demand and even faster-rising ticket prices shattered industry records.
Over all, the 67 shows that ran over the last season brought in $1.7 billion from 13.8 million patrons, according to figures released Tuesday by the Broadway League.
“We’ve never had as many big hits,” said Charlotte St. Martin, the president of the League, which represents producers and presenters.
Broadway has been on an upswing for five years, powered by a surge in New York City tourism and a resurgence in enthusiasm for musical theater. Even so, the theater season that ended Sunday was remarkably lucrative, as producers have become more sophisticated — and more aggressive — about pricing.
At the same time, Bruce Springsteen, who can sell out arenas or stadiums, delivered a dramatic lesson on the economic value of scarcity, fetching a jaw-dropping $503 average ticket price for his “Springsteen on Broadway,” a blend of stripped-down songs and ruminative storytelling that he has been performing since October in the 948-seat Walter Kerr Theater.
By contrast the average Broadway ticket was $123, and even at “Hamilton” it was only $282.
Because of a quirk in the way the trade association tracks data, this past season consisted of 53 weeks, making season-to-season comparisons imperfect, but for the first 52 weeks grosses were up an eye-popping 14.4 percent. Attendance crept up a far more modest 1.6 percent.
Premium prices pay (for producers).
Dynamic pricing — the practice of varying prices to reflect consumer demand — is not new to Broadway. But this past season, producers became increasingly deft at it, and that’s why revenue is growing so much faster than attendance.
Theatergoers generally pay a premium for a seat in the center orchestra. It often costs less to see shows on a Tuesday night than on a Saturday, and more during the last week of December (Christmas!) than the first week of January (cold!).
The three shows with the highest average prices this past season — “Hamilton,” “Springsteen” and “Dear Evan Hansen” — are all in midsize theaters, meaning they had a limited supply of tickets despite enormous demand. And the premiums they charged had an added benefit for producers — helping reduce profiteering by resellers, and reclaiming money for investors and artists.
The most striking example this past season: The producers of “Hello, Dolly!,” recognizing the intense enthusiasm for Bette Midler’s performance in the lead role, charged $998 for front row seats late last year, counting on her biggest fans to pay for the pleasure of proximity.
Wealth is concentrated.
Just one of the 67 shows on Broadway last season — “Hamilton” — was responsible for nearly 10 percent of the grosses. And the top 10 shows gobbled up 52 percent of the overall take, leaving the other 57 shows to divvy up the rest.
Plays generally gross much less than musicals because they tend to have shorter runs. Just 11 percent of the season’s grosses went to plays; top-grossing among them was “The Play That Goes Wrong,” a British farce that was the only play to run all 53 weeks of the season, bringing in $19 million.
Promise for plays.
There has been much hand-wringing — with good reason — about the plight of plays on Broadway, where audiences tend to favor musicals.
But this past season saw some remarkable signs of financial strength for plays with familiar titles, big stars or strong buzz.
“Harry Potter and the Cursed Child,” a two-part drama that is a sequel to the enormously popular novels, is shaping up to be one of the top-grossing plays in Broadway history, bringing in $18 million in its first 10 weeks.
And four play revivals have recently been selling strongly — more strongly than many musicals: “The Iceman Cometh,” starring Denzel Washington; “The Boys in the Band,” starring Jim Parsons and Zachary Quinto; “Angels in America,” starring Andrew Garfield and Nathan Lane; and “Three Tall Women,” starring Glenda Jackson and Laurie Metcalf.
Less room for newcomers.
Broadway’s boom is having an unintended side effect: As productions run longer, there are fewer new shows because there is no place to put them.
