Graham Burton was my daughter’s classmate at Hamilton. His parents’ open letter to the Hamilton College community reports that faculty and administrators exchanged emails about Graham’s “complete crash and burn” shortly before his suicide.
I understand Hamilton’s obligations regarding student privacy. Maybe that’s why Graham’s parents weren’t alerted. But neither was the Hamilton Students of Concern team. Did any of the Hamilton adults ask Graham face to face if he was thinking of hurting himself, if he needed help?
Here’s what triggers communication to Hamilton parents: accumulating disciplinary points for policy infractions. Hamilton parents are notified if their child streaks, or makes excessive noise too often.
How about a student permissions policy allowing for notice to parents if and when mental health concerns arise? Some Hamilton students are suggesting this.
Maybe some parents are the problem, but statements of college administrators following Graham’s and other students’ deaths hardly assure that they’ve got this.
MEG MORAN, PORTSMOUTH, N.H.
I grieve deeply for Gina Burton, and I appreciate how betrayed she must feel by her son’s college, which had both legal and moral responsibilities to act, if not “in loco parentis,” then at least in the interests of her son’s physical safety and well-being.
A college’s obligations of care couldn’t be more clear, but, with the few exceptions noted in your article, they are owed to one recipient only: the student, not the parent. There are many excellent and obvious reasons for this, the most obvious being that the student, if at least 18, is a legal adult.
A college has no right to assume anything about a student’s relationship or history with her parents. There may be no relationship, or it may be one of abuse and control. The intervention of a toxic parent can have brutal, even fatal, consequences. It may vastly prolong illness.
If the college had respected its obligations to Graham Burton, an adult man, and acted more aggressively to get him appropriate care, he might still be alive.
Thank you so much for this article. My thoughts go out to the family.
When my daughter was a college freshman, she called me, in the dead of winter, from the dugout on the baseball field. She was severely despondent and alone. She felt hopeless. After I got off the phone with her, I called the college and tried to get someone to go to her, to offer support and counsel. The person I spoke to refused, stating that my daughter was over 18 and had to ask for the help herself. As anyone who has suffered from severe depression knows, it is often impossible to make that leap alone.
After contacting several college personnel in various departments, including the health center, I finally gave up and drove the 350 miles to her. Thank goodness all ended well. But I shudder to think what might have been.
The writer’s full name is being withheld to protect her daughter’s privacy.
The nightmarish stories of college students who commit suicide elicit basic questions about what steps colleges can take to avert such terrible outcomes. Federal laws like the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act need revision to make it easier for college advisers and faculty to contact families when students are failing and/or showing signs of distress.
Faculty, staff and students need to be educated about diseases like depression, bipolar disorder and substance use disorder, which are causally related to outcomes like death from suicide.
While schools cannot become mental health facilities, they need to have sufficient resources to intervene directly in crises like the ones depicted all too frequently in the media.
The good news is that for every story that ends in tragedy, there are thousands of others that result in recovery, thanks to the tireless work of engaged college personnel, peer support groups, mental health clinicians and families coming together on behalf of those stricken with mental health challenges.
This article made me reflect on my own college days five decades ago. No one I knew committed suicide, although there were days when we were very discouraged. When did suicide become “the second-leading cause of death, after accidents, for college-age adults in the United States”? What happened in our society to create such despair?
As a father and an educator, I grieve for Graham Burton. I also sympathize deeply with his parents, who believe that the college should have contacted them about his difficulties. But what about his friends? The college was bound by privacy rules and restrictions; his friends weren’t.
Shouldn’t we encourage our students to notify loved ones when they think a peer is in crisis? I’m not saying Graham Burton’s friends were responsible for his tragic death, any more than his college was. But at moments like this one, we seem to put all of the onus on institutions and none of it on the students.
The writer is a professor of education and history at the University of Pennsylvania.
Should colleges alert parents to mental health concerns? Some tragedies might be averted when caring parents are able to intervene, but college students are adults and have privacy rights. Moreover, some parents are abusive and will only increase the student’s risk of distress.
There is a solution in plain sight: Every term colleges should ask students to indicate who (if anyone) they want contacted in case of emergency. The questions should be precise about the type of emergency and the nature of the information provided. Consent should be requested on a regular basis. Colleges want students to learn about consent; the least they can do is model the behavior.
JENNIFER J. FREYD, EUGENE, ORE.
The writer is a professor of psychology at the University of Oregon.