I asked a senior German diplomat the other day what issues the United States and Germany are cooperating on. He looked blank. Not Iran, obviously. Not trade, evidently. Not climate change, blatantly. Not Russia, plainly. Not migration, pointedly. With alliances like these, who needs enemies?
Trump to Europe: Get lost. As the French president, Emmanuel Macron, observed of Trump last month, “He is very predictable.” Boringly so, I’d add. His contempt for the Atlantic Alliance was evident during the campaign; he follows through. That’s his form of “honesty” amid a torrent of lies. Tens of millions of Americans love him for it. They see him as the most “honest” president ever. Why? Because he tells it like it is.
Europe is beginning to digest the severity of the schism. Federica Mogherini, the European Union’s senior foreign policy official, heaped scorn on Trump recently, saying that “screaming, shouting, insulting and bullying, systematically destroying and dismantling everything that is already in place, is the mood of our times.” Without naming the president, she warned that “this impulse to destroy” leads nowhere good. Hers was a requiem for “respect” and “dialogue” — in effect the post-1945 order.
I’ve always been a passionate Atlanticist because I believe institutionalizing the European-American bond that grew out of World War II is what saved my generation from the wars my father and uncle were summoned from distant South Africa to join. But the problem today runs deeper than Trump’s contempt for any multilateral order. That can be fixed, in time.
What eats at America — and so its place in the world — is moral rot: unrelenting blight that emanates from on high. When it comes to rottenness, Denmark is passé. Try the White House.

 He emerged from captivity to become a stubborn advocate of American values as, overall, a force for good. His rejection of Gina Haspel, the new CIA director, because of “her refusal to acknowledge torture’s immorality” is what prompted Sadler’s dismissive foulness.
As for the president’s descent into the sewer where hatred and pogroms are fashioned, the United States is not a nation of animals. Immigrants, including Trump’s own German-born grandparents, made this nation distinct.
I’ve been reading “Our Towns” by James Fallows and Deborah Fallows, a tonic of a book about the can-do America unready to succumb to rot. In the many towns the couple visits, immigrants are working hard, enriching the social fabric, and creating wealth.
I’d suggest Trump read the book, but he doesn’t read. He traffics in slurs and untruths. The deepest form of rot is the erosion of the distinction between truth and falsehood. Totalitarianism was one big lie perpetrated on human beings reduced to the often hopeless quest for survival in a fog.
A universe where morality ceases is the one Trump is most comfortable in. “Mr. President, did you know about the $130,000 payment to Stormy Daniels?” Trump’s answer, on April 5: “No, no.” Except, as the president clarified in a recent financial disclosure, he did know.
There is only one core task before everyone in Trump’s America: Keeping the Republic, despite him.