Just two days after a school shooting in Santa Fe, Tex., left 10 dead, the incoming president of the National Rifle Association appeared on television on Sunday to blame mass shootings on a “culture of violence” and the drug Ritalin, adding that “taking away the rights of law-abiding citizens” would not stop the carnage.
The N.R.A., the country’s most vocal and active proponent of gun rights, has in the past kept a low profile in the wake of mass shootings. After the 2012 school shooting in Newtown, Conn., that left 20 children and six staff members dead, for instance, the organization shut down its Facebook page, stopped updating its Twitter feed and did not return calls from the news media.
But after the mass shooting in February at a high school in Parkland, Fla., the N.R.A. appeared to shift its strategy. Just over a week after that massacre, which killed 17 people, Wayne LaPierre, the N.R.A.’s chief executive, spoke publicly about the shooting and called for more armed guards in schools.
“The shameful politicization of tragedy — it’s a classic strategy, right out of the playbook of a poisonous movement,” he told the crowd at the annual Conservative Political Action Conference.
He said the N.R.A. is likely facing growing pressure from donors, politicians and gun manufacturers to respond more quickly.
But in the wake of the Parkland shooting, there has been a rise in high-profile student activists who have been able to influence the debate about guns, Mr. Kuczkowski said.
On Sunday, Mr. North said television and movies helped promote violence but also blamed medication.
“If you look at what has happened to the young people, many of these young boys have been on Ritalin since they were in kindergarten,” he said.
Ritalin and other stimulants used to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder are not known to produce violent behavior, experts said.
“The odds that a medication like this is going to be associated with an act that took weeks or months to prepare is slim to none,” said Dr. Steven P. Cuffe, chairman of the Department of Psychiatry at the University of Florida College of Medicine in Jacksonville.
A.D.H.D. medications like methylphenidate, which is the generic name of Ritalin, and amphetamine preparations, like Adderall, can produce anger or irritability in some patients. But when that happens, the drug is discontinued and the patient is prescribed a different medication, said Dr. Cuffe, who has studied A.D.H.D. for two decades.
Dr. R. Scott Benson, a child and adolescent psychiatrist in Pensacola, Fla., who has been practicing psychiatry for 40 years, said that about 5 to 7 percent of grade school children are estimated to have A.D.H.D., and hundreds of thousands of children are taking A.D.H.D. medications.
There is no statistical correlation between these drugs and mass violence, he added.
Shannon Watts, founder of the nonprofit Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America, a grass-roots movement born after the Newtown shooting, shared a similar sentiment.
David Hogg, a survivor of the Parkland shooting who has risen to prominence as an outspoken supporter of gun control, also criticized Mr. North on Twitter.
Mr. Hogg was referring to the Iran-contra affair, in which the Reagan administration used the proceeds from the secret sale of arms to Iran to aid rebel forces in Nicaragua.
Mr. North, a Marine, became a central figure in the affair, and was convicted of three criminal charges that were dropped in 1991 by a federal judge.
