WASHINGTON — Frustrated and impatient, fed up with waiting and eager to fight back, President Trump has embarked on what amounts to a two-prong strategy to contain the threat and undercut the credibility of the escalating investigations targeting him and his associates.
The blizzard of Twitter messages combined with a string of public statements by his lawyer, Rudolph W. Giuliani, in recent days seemed aimed at turning the focus away from the conduct of the president or his team to that of their pursuers while laying out a series of red lines to limit the reach and duration of the primary inquiry.
While he has assailed the investigations for a year, Mr. Trump’s latest assertion of bad faith by the Justice Department and the F.B.I. went beyond talk and resulted in an extraordinary meeting on Monday at the White House, where the president pressured intelligence and law enforcement officials to allow congressional Republicans to view highly classified information related to the Russia investigation that they had previously refused to divulge.
The president has seized on reports that the F.B.I. sent an informant to talk to three of his advisers during the 2016 presidential election and contended that that meant his campaign was infiltrated for political purposes. Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, who has resisted past pressure from Mr. Trump to open or close politically charged inquiries, agreed in this case to request that the Justice Department’s inspector general investigate the investigators.
Mr. Giuliani emphasized that the latest questions did not implicate Mr. Mueller since he was appointed last May, long after the original investigation was opened.
Still, Mr. Giuliani said the accumulation of questions that Republicans have raised about the origins of the investigation has bolstered his view that it should be shut down.
Mr. Giuliani’s deference to Mr. Mueller has not been shared by Mr. Trump, who again accused the special counsel of running an office filled with partisan Democrats with conflicts of interest. But both Mr. Trump and Mr. Giuliani share a favorite target in James B. Comey, the former F.B.I. director, who was fired by the president last year and is now one of his most outspoken critics as well as a potential witness against him.
James R. Clapper Jr., who was the director of national intelligence under President Barack Obama, said that Mr. Trump is trying to distort standard investigatory practices to insinuate wrongdoing.
Mr. Trump has maintained from the beginning that the investigation into Russia’s involvement in the 2016 election was a “witch hunt” inspired by Democrats who paid for research used to justify the inquiry.
But he has recently parted ways with lawyers who urged him not to attack Mr. Mueller and assured him that cooperation would ultimately exonerate him. In their place now is Mr. Giuliani and the guns-blazing approach that suits Mr. Trump more.
Robert F. Bauer, a former White House counsel under Mr. Obama who now teaches law at New York University, said part of the audience for Mr. Giuliani’s public blasts may be Mr. Trump, to assuage the president that someone is fighting for him. “The other audience for this of course is the political world that he needs to satisfy that he’s not in trouble, that he’s not going to be bullied,” Mr. Bauer said.
Mr. Dershowitz said that the president’s new White House special counsel, Emmet T. Flood, is “working the inside game” and gaming out the legal questions confronting Mr. Trump while Mr. Giuliani is laying the public ground for a confrontation if the inside game does not work.
