Technology|Scholars Have Data on Millions of Facebook Users. Who’s Guarding It?
“We’re concerned about how easy it was to collect this,” said Fredrik Erlandsson, one of the researchers and a lecturer at the Blekinge Institute of Technology in Sweden. Last December, he and his colleagues published a research paper in the journal Entropy detailing how their methods of trawling social media sites could be replicated.
For more than a decade, professors, doctoral candidates and researchers from academic institutions around the world have harvested information from Facebook using techniques similar to those of Dr. Erlandsson and his team. They have compiled hundreds of Facebook data sets that captured the behavior of a few thousand to hundreds of millions of individuals, according to interviews with more than a dozen scholars.
Their practices came to light in March when The New York Times and The Observer of London reported that Aleksandr Kogan, a University of Cambridge psychology professor, had obtained the data of up to 87 million Facebook users through a quiz app. Mr. Kogan sold the information to Cambridge Analytica, a political consulting firm with ties to the Trump campaign, so it could build psychographic profiles of American voters. Last week, Cambridge Analytica said it would cease operations after the uproar over its use of personal information.
But while what happened with Mr. Kogan’s Facebook data set is now known, the fate of other information hoards is murkier. In many cases, the data was used for research or scholarly articles. The information was then sometimes left unsecured and stored on open servers that offered access to anyone. Some academics said the data could have been easily copied and sold to marketers or political consulting firms.
Since Mr. Kogan’s actions were revealed, fueling an outcry over data privacy, Facebook has made further changes. The company has given people more control over their privacy settings. It has said it will audit all apps that collected large amounts of Facebook data, and it temporarily stopped allowing new apps to gather information from its members.
Last month, Facebook also narrowed the number of academics it would work with, saying it would collaborate with those who wanted to research the impact of social media on elections through an “independent election research commission.” Only scholars with election-related projects can apply.
Before social media existed, researchers hoping to study human behavior had to painstakingly seek out groups of people to examine. Social media has let them easily find masses of subjects — as well as information like their date of birth, gender and interests — and observe some of their online behavior in real time.
My Personality has now collected details on more than six million Facebook users, according to the academics who have gathered the data. Many researchers have since copied the quiz app method, including Mr. Kogan.
In interviews with The Times, Dr. Kosinski and Dr. Stillwell said they took great care to keep the data they procured anonymous. Dr. Stillwell added that the information had been widely shared with other researchers, but any academic who wished to use it was vetted.
Dr. Kosinski acknowledged that data is not a physical item that is easy to control. Once a data set is created, it can be copied and shared until its original source is unknown. He said collection of information from Facebook had become widespread over the years, not only by academics but also by developers, marketers, data analytics companies and others.
In 2014, after Facebook announced it would restrict third-party apps from gaining access to user data, the reach of quiz apps became limited. But scrapers continued to improve and more speedily compile information from the social network.
A group of German academics used a scraper to harvest the profiles of 60,000 Facebook users in the New Orleans area starting in late 2008. The researchers, whose goal was to study how people’s friendships change online over time, recorded over 800,000 interactions during a two-year period. They did not respond to a request for comment.
“Academics would argue that we need access to primary data,” said Dr. Nielsen of Oxford. He said the changes might lead to an asymmetry, with internal Facebook researchers accumulating mounds of data while outside academics would not.
“If that happens, only Facebook will really know very much about how Facebook actually operates and how people act on Facebook,” he said.
Dr. Erlandsson said the paper he and his colleagues published last December initially made little splash. But since the Cambridge Analytica revelations, he has seen renewed interest. He said he had been contacted by companies — he declined to name them — interested in buying the data on 368 million Facebook members.
