“I basically wound up combining an action figure with a favorite stuffed animal,” the maker of Wonder Crew dolls said.
But she realized that despite her efforts, her son was still being exposed to rigid ideas about gender.
“There was a wave of toys coming out around that time, toys that were encouraging girls to get involved with STEM, changing the way girls see themselves, and I thought to myself, ‘What about boys?’,” she said.
She began to do research. She spoke with more than 150 parents, educators and people in the toy industry to try to answer that question.
The 15-inch molded dolls, which come in a range of characters and skin tones, are packaged with dress-up gear so that the child and doll can take on the same pretend persona — playing as superheroes, firefighters, astronauts or other adventurous duos.
The “Superhero Will” Wonder Crew doll won Doll of the Year at the New York Toy Fair in February.
Parents seeking male dolls can choose from options like Playskool’s “Dressy Kids Boy” or offerings like “Groovy Boys” and “Dress Up Friends” dolls from the Manhattan Toy Company.
But Wonder Crew’s hook of matching accessories allows the child to enter into a special style of play with the doll.
“I basically wound up combining an action figure with a favorite stuffed animal,” Ms. Wider explained.
And child development experts say it’s important for a child to have a wide range of play experiences.
“Play is the context in which young children learn,” said Rebecca Parlakian, senior director of programs for the child development website Zero to Three.
Playing with dolls in particular, Ms. Parlakian said, can help boys develop social and emotional skills, and the “theory of mind” that enables a child to imagine how another person is feeling and thinking.
Giving young children access to dolls helps normalize those skills at a time when children are very sensitive to messages about gender, she added.
Lauren Spinner, a postdoctoral research associate in the School of Psychology at University of Kent in Britain, said children start to acquire knowledge and understanding of the categories of gender as young as age 1 or 2. By ages 4 to 6, children’s desire to sort things into categories can lead to a rigid view of gender. As they develop further, however, some flexibility returns, Ms. Spinner said.
Ms. Spinner, who has researched how images of play influence children’s perceptions and preferences around gender, sees Wonder Crew dolls as offering a vital alternative to stereotyped narratives.
Ms. Parlakian noted that children pick up on social cues about gender from a very young age, and that parents and caregivers can show children a nuanced and diverse view of gender roles, rather than a stereotyped one.
For Ms. Wider, the Wonder Crew dolls are a subtle way to tell that story without alienating children or their parents.
“We’re having to meet kids where they’re at, and provide expansive experiences from there,” Ms. Wider explained.
She compared Wonder Crew to other, traditionally feminine products that have been repackaged in more masculine guises — like diaper bags marketed to men.
But for Elizabeth Sweet, an assistant professor in sociology at San Jose State University who studies gender-based toy marketing, that experience of inclusion still has inherent limits.
That structure is something Ms. Wider agrees should be dismantled.
Ms. Wider said that boys don’t need to be taught how to be nurturing or empathetic, but can benefit from having permission to explore that side of themselves.
