A crowd filled with famous faces gathered on Saturday to witness a momentous union — and in other news, Prince Harry married Meghan Markle. For its 43rd season finale, “Saturday Night Live” brought together two powerful entertainers: Tina Fey, who hosted the episode, and the rapper Nicki Minaj, its musical guest. Among the stars who made cameos were Benedict Cumberbatch, Robert De Niro, Donald Glover, John Goodman, Anne Hathaway, Lin-Manuel Miranda and Jerry Seinfeld.
When “S.N.L.” alums return as hosts, they tend to reprise their most beloved characters from the show. For Fey, that character is unquestionably her rendition of the 2008 vice-presidential hopeful Sarah Palin. Palin didn’t show up until the final half-hour, in a sketch set in the Oval Office. It was the highlight of the evening.
Too Many Cameos?
Fey also fielded throwaway questions from Cumberbatch, Hathaway, De Niro, Armisen and Chris Rock. Glover, who hosted the show earlier this month and worked with Fey as a writer on “30 Rock,” asked whether Fey had seen a hat he had left backstage. “I have this system in place where I’ll be able to tell if you wore it or not,” he warned her.
The sweetest cameo of the night came at the end of the monologue, when Fey’s “30 Rock” co-star Tracy Morgan took the stage to wish her a happy birthday. (She joked that she was now 60 but had, in fact, just turned 48 on Friday.) “If your man isn’t making you feel special today, I will,” he offered.
It was probably inevitable that the episode would feature a sketch about the royal wedding, which took place earlier that morning. But what was really impressive was how quickly the “S.N.L.” costume department was able to throw together copies of clothing as distinctive as Queen Elizabeth’s chartreuse suit and Kate Middleton’s flowery white hat.
Prince Harry, played by Mikey Day, offered a guided tour of the posh reception. “The past six years I’ve been pregnant, so I’m goin’ hard tonight,” Strong, as Middleton, proclaimed. Playing a great-uncle of Markle’s, Kenan Thompson attempted to convince the queen to watch “The Crown.” Alex Moffat’s Prince William drank what he called a “virgin hot toddy” (otherwise known as tea) and cut loose on the dance floor with baby Prince Louis strapped to his chest.
But the party really got going when Harry ventured into the room reserved for the wedding’s less distinguished guests, such as one of Markle’s fellow “briefcase girls” from her stint on “Deal or No Deal” and the comedian Russell Brand (played by Pete Davidson). It was a bit surprising to see Princess Diana’s close friend Elton John (Aidy Bryant) relegated to the B-list, but at least he had Leslie Jones, who played herself, for company.
Mueller had slipped in, unnoticed by everyone but Trump, and was listening in from a nearby table. When he made for the bathroom, he signaled that he had his eyes on the president. But, just as on “The Sopranos,” viewers didn’t get to see what happened next.
