SYDNEY, Australia — The first group of athletes to disappear from the Gold Coast Commonwealth Games were weight lifters and boxers from Cameroon.
More athletes from more countries followed, and while much of Australia wondered what was going on, Lamin Tucker knew — because 12 years ago, he had been one of them. After finishing his last race in the Melbourne Commonwealth Games, he walked into the city’s streets with nothing but a phone in his pocket.
The number of athletes and officials from the recent games who stayed in Australia has now ballooned to roughly 250. For the most part the athletes have gone underground, keeping low profiles to evade attention from the authorities in Australia and their home countries.
A Home Affairs official told a Senate committee last week that the vast majority of the athletes have applied for asylum, and though they have remained silent, their presence has reignited debate about how and when Australia should welcome foreigners fleeing danger.
Here in a country that has been condemned by the United Nations for its offshore detention camps and refusal to accept arrivals by boat — even when escaping war zones — the athletes have become a cause célèbre. They are the ultimate competitors or cheats, depending on one’s perspective, who found a way into a place where the government prides itself on keeping people out.
But they are not the first athletes to use the cover of a sporting event to seek asylum.
Those who have followed a similar path say that international competitions have frequently been used as a means of escape from persecution.
Since at least the end of World War II, nearly every Olympic Games has included a rush of athletes seeking asylum in the host country.
Indeed, after the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, 82 athletes and officials sought asylum to remain in the United Kingdom. At least 200 Ghanaians who entered Brazil for the World Cup as tourists sought asylum in 2014.
And in this year’s Winter Olympics in South Korea, many wondered if North Korean athletes might be tempted to defect, though none have previously done so at an Olympic Games.
Even the lead-up to this year’s Commonwealth Games in Australia was not without incident: the Australia Border Force canceled the visas of several people who were posing as journalists and officials.
But Mr. Tucker, 35, did not come under such false pretenses. As the captain of the Sierra Leone team, he had come to compete.
Now he lives in a block of flats in Sydney, in an apartment scattered with coloring pencils and books for his four children. A scar from an acid burn on his arm is a permanent reminder of why he chose to leave during the Games. In Sierra Leone, after criticizing the government, he said he had been beaten up, thrown in jail and tortured.
But a frantic call from his wife as he prepared to compete, warning him their family was in danger and planning to flee to Guinea, made up his mind.
He added that he has spoken to a few of the missing athletes who feel the same way.
Legal experts have accused the government of inflaming what they describe as something people have done for decades — acting on their basic right to seek asylum.
The missing athletes are largely from Africa, including Cameroon, Uganda, Rwanda and Sierra Leone, according to news reports. About 50 are still here on expired visas. Mr. Dutton said last week that he had launched an operation to locate them all.
Ben Lumsdaine, a lawyer at Refugee Advice and Casework Service in Australia, which has been handling some of the cases, said the athletes generally reflect the reality of global need. “In some ways what’s going on is just what happens every day,” he said.
Like many who come on student or visitor visas, foreigners associated with the Games arrived in Australia legally but feared returning home and eventually applied for protection visas. Under international law, it is legal to seek asylum as long as you report yourself to the authorities.
“It’s a little bit strange that they’ve been singled out and so much attention has been directed toward them,” Mr. Lumsdaine said of the missing athletes and the furor that ensued.
Some of the athletes, like Mr. Tucker, faced extraordinary political pressure at home in countries where repressive governments demanded support in order to compete — one of many reasons not to return home.
Other missing athletes are believed to be seeking protection from religious persecution in their home countries, while still more claim their sexual orientation makes them a target of violence.
“People fleeing from persecution will use what means are available to them,” said Ms. Graydon, of the Asylum Seeker Resource Center, which is working with a group of people who arrived in Australia on visas associated with the Commonwealth Games.
A few athletes starting over in Australia have continued their careers, with a different loyalty. After successfully seeking asylum in 2006 like Mr. Tucker, Cameroon’s former weight lifters, Francois Etoundi and Simplice Ribouem, now wear Australia’s green and gold.
In this year’s Commonwealth Games, Mr. Etoundi won a bronze medal in weight lifting for Australia, tearing a biceps muscle in the process.
But for others, like Mr. Tucker, who began running at 16, staying in Australia has cost him his athletic career.
Now, he works part-time at a pub while studying computer science at a local technical college. He also coaches budding track athletes in Sydney, developing the next generation of runners.
At a park on a recent afternoon, his youngest child, Rachael Tucker, 3, seemed to show promise, her tiny red sneakers pounding the pavement.
“She’s going to be the runner,” he said.