U.S.|Their Ancestors Were on Opposite Sides of a Lynching. Now, They’re Friends.
For years, Karen Branan, a white woman from Georgia, kept at a safe distance the haunting words that her grandmother had spoken. Ms. Branan was an inquisitive journalist, but she refused to explore a hanging that her grandmother had said was one of her most unforgettable memories. She was afraid of what she might learn.
But in 1986, when she learned that she was going to have a racially mixed grandchild, Ms. Branan felt compelled to dig up the truth. She discovered that her relatives had been part of a mob that had lynched four black people — three men and a woman — in Hamilton, Ga., in 1912.
Ms. Branan turned what she learned into a book, “The Family Tree,” that was published two years ago.
The book eventually made its way into the hands of Jackie Jordan Irvine, an Alabama native and a professor emeritus of urban education at Emory University. Ms. Irvine, who is black, came across the name of her ancestor Milford Moore. He was related to John Moore, one of the lynching victims.
The connection caught her by surprise.
She had never heard of the lynching or that a relative had been a victim. So Ms. Irvine sent an email to Ms. Branan, and the two have struck up an unlikely friendship: a black woman whose ancestor was lynched, and a white woman whose ancestors did the killing.
The two grew up in neighboring cities — Ms. Irvine, 70, in Phenix City, Ala., and Ms. Branan, 76, in Columbus, Ga. With the racial divide, they lived worlds apart.
The two joined us on Facebook Live on Wednesday night for a discussion about history, their relationship and race in the South. Here are some excerpts from the conversation.
Karen Branan learned that several of her ancestors had been involved in a lynching. Then she got an email from a descendant of one of the victims and came face-to-face with her family’s bitter legacy. John Eligon and Rachel Swarns, NYT writers, were live in conversation with Ms. Branan and Jackie Jordan Irvine as the two women grapple with their shared, painful history.
“It was shocking. I didn’t know how to feel about it. But immediately, I thought about my grandmother, who we just loved dearly, what must have happened when she knew that this event had occurred in this county.
Ms. Branan explained that her distant cousin Norman Hadley, a nephew of the local sheriff, had been murdered. Mr. Hadley was known for chasing after young women, and he was in pursuit of a 14-year-old black girl. The three black men lynched were close to the girl — her preacher, the Rev. Burrell Hardaway; her father, Eugene Harrington; and her boyfriend, John Moore. They had been accused, without proof, of murdering Mr. Hadley.
“This was an era in which W.E.B. DuBois in The Crisis, the magazine that he edited, was calling for black men to protect black women, and to, quote, risk lynching if need be to do this. So Burrell Hardaway was preaching, calling out Norman Hadley by name.
Ms. Branan said that the woman who was lynched, Loduska Crutchfield, was believed to be the first female lynching victim in Georgia.
Ms. Branan also learned of a surprising racial back story. Mr. Moore, the youngest of the victims, was a distant cousin of hers because one of her white ancestors had children with a black woman. 
Ms. Irvine said she was eager to meet Ms. Branan. With the South’s widespread, insidious history of racial hatred, Ms. Irvine could not hold anything against Ms. Branan.
Together, the two women visited the National Memorial for Peace and Justice, a new memorial in Montgomery, Ala., honoring lynching victims.
Ms. Branan said that the story of the lynching her family was involved in, along with others, was not just a historical tale.
