Éric Rohmer’s small masterpiece ‘The Green Ray’ is a hymn to youth — and to the beach town’s indefinable allure.
It’s raining in Biarritz. The rain is a disappointment but also a relief. Yesterday was sunny, and the beaches were so jammed and hot that whenever you weren’t stepping on someone else’s towel your feet were being burned to a crisp. Today you can see the sand, vast stretches of it. It’s early, and the partyers are sleeping off their drinks. The dog walkers and the odd jogger have braved the drizzle. As have, of course, the surfers. They dot a stretch of wild beach called the Côte des Basques that can be accessed only by a maze of shrub-lined stairs. Arriving on the Côte des Basques, one has the feeling of scaling a castle wall, burrowing through a secret garden and stumbling upon a colony of handsome seal men engaged in ritual aquatic worship.
Biarritz is in the French Basque Country, on the Bay of Biscay less than an hour’s drive from the Spanish border. There are 25,000 year-round residents; in the summer that number swells, peaking in August in the low bajillions. Imagine Big Sur designed by Napoleon, and you have the general idea. Cliffs fall straight into the sea. Rough waves cascade over giant boulders. Sweaty promenaders march the grand walkways. Villa Eugénie was built in 1854; in 1883 it was renamed the Hôtel du Palais. The 1920s were a glamour decade for Biarritz. In August 1929, a beachfront casino opened in a dramatic and austere Art Deco building. A few months later, the stock market crashed.
In 1939 Biarritz was in consideration to be the site of a new film festival, but forces from Cannes lobbied and won the bid. Ten years later, the casino played host to the first and only edition of the Festival du Film Maudit (Festival of Damned Film), with a jury chaired by Jean Cocteau. In attendance were the young cinephiles who would go on to form the nucleus of the French New Wave: François Truffaut, Jean-Luc Godard, Jacques Rivette, Claude Chabrol and Éric Rohmer.
Rohmer eventually bought a house in Biarritz and vacationed there. (It had again become chic, in part because of surfing, which had arrived, thanks to screenwriter Peter Viertel and his friend Dick Zanuck, in 1957.) Biarritz was, and is, a popular destination, but due in part to its erratic weather, it has never acquired the cachet of the Côte d’Azur (where Rohmer set 1967’s “La Collectionneuse,” about a summer love triangle with a sultry teenager at its center). It’s a place where you are likely to meet another traveler, where something surprising might occur.
In 1985, Rohmer shot “Le Rayon Vert” (“The Green Ray”) in Biarritz. He had noticed young girls on the beach there, vacationing alone, and wondered about them. “The Green Ray” is the fifth in his six-part Comedies and Proverbs series. The “proverb” that opens the film is less a truth than a plaint: “Ah! Let the time come/When hearts fall in love!” Rohmer’s films are usually about love — if not being in love, then wanting to be in love, or the meaning of love. They tend to feature men and women having intense conversations, and little action. Of all the French New Wave directors, he seems to resonate most with young filmmakers and audiences. This is in part because of what the films are about, or not about — Rohmer’s lovelorn bourgeoisie do not engage in Godardian radical sloganeering. Rohmer filmed quotidian experiences such as going out for drinks and visiting family, all with naturalness and a gift for capturing the felt rhythm of life in a given place. His movies are economical (most are two hours or less) but open. Basically, he filmed people walking and talking.
His most famous works — from the early films he made between 1963 and 1972 known as the Six Moral Tales — hinge on a man’s choice to be faithful or be led astray, but they deal “less with what people do than with what is going on in their minds, while they are doing it,” as he explained. Women have more to do in the Comedies and Proverbs series, although “doing” in this context is often simply being at loose ends. “The Green Ray” opens when a lonely young Parisian named Delphine, played by Marie Rivière, is ditched by the friend with whom she planned to go to Greece. (Rivière is also credited with cowriting the film, which she almost entirely improvised.) Delphine then tags along with a friend to unfashionable Cherbourg, but feels left out and returns to Paris; she goes to the mountains, where her ex-fiancé has a place she can use, but she doesn’t even spend the night. At last she runs into an old acquaintance who spontaneously offers her the use of an apartment in Biarritz.
Biarritz is the perfect Rohmer location. It’s a walkable city filled with nooks, alcoves, hidden benches and sloping paths. In another Rohmer movie, the protagonists would meander around while having long philosophical chats. But for much of Delphine’s time in Biarritz, she is wandering alone, overhearing other people’s conversations. “The Green Ray” documents Biarritz’s mix of tourist kitsch, wealth and exuberant mating rituals, but it also captures the promise of the city: A meaningful encounter is always just around the corner, perpetually out of reach. In “The Green Ray,” Biarritz is at once totally present and a little withheld. Rohmer doesn’t film a lot of big establishing shots or give the viewer a tour of Biarritz in montage. He simply shows Delphine living her life. All of the beauty she encounters is in passing.
Before coming to Biarritz, I knew “The Green Ray” as a film that evoked a dilemma familiar to New Yorkers — the feeling of summertime abandonment, of wanting to get out of the city and having nowhere to go. But the film is also a loving, almost documentary portrait of the city. I do not feel, when I am at Rome’s Trevi Fountain, that I am in “La Dolce Vita.” But here I really do feel that at any moment the images of the film will come to life, and a coltish curly-haired beauty in a red slicker might dart past, or a jolly topless Swede may emerge from the water, towel herself off and suggest we go dancing later this evening.
It is possible to watch “The Green Ray” and think that Delphine ought to get over her loneliness and try to enjoy being single. She’s so young; she still has time. But then you go to Biarritz, and join the throng of tourists on the ancient esplanade, and dodge carousers playing drinking games that involve wearing floaties around their waists. Biarritz is beautiful, but the August crowd is miserable. The film shows the crowds — it was shot in late July and early August — but looking at a crowd is nothing like being in one. The waves on the beaches here are also strong, much stronger than they appear on film. I realize now that Delphine was a very adept swimmer.
“The Green Ray” refers to a meteorological phenomenon — the flash of light that emanates from the sunset on a very clear day. Delphine overhears a group of older tourists analyzing Jules Verne’s 1882 novel of the same name. (In that novel, a young girl becomes obsessed with glimpsing the green ray, which, she believes, will grant her the power to understand her own feelings and the feelings of those around her. In the end, the elusive ray appears on the horizon, but she and her lover are too busy looking at one another to notice.) Delphine, who is unable to enjoy the singles scene, at last packs up and heads for the train station. But at the station she meets an intriguing young man, a carpenter who is on the way to Saint-Jean-de-Luz, a fishing village just down the coast. She goes with him. They have a drink, and walk around, talking. They pass a beach shop called Rayon Vert. (That shop is still there, still called Rayon Vert, though the sign is new.) They watch the sunset, and in the final seconds of the film, the green flash appears. “It’s a gift to them,” Rivière has explained.
I have heard it said, rather cynically, that we can’t know for sure whether the green ray appears in “The Green Ray,” or whether it is only in Delphine’s mind. It’s true that it might have been tricky for the very first viewers of “The Green Ray” to discern what happens. The film was shown on a French cable channel prior to its wide release, and on a small screen, it might have been difficult to see. But I do not think there is really any doubt about what we see. Rohmer’s world is one of serendipity, fortuitous encounters, loves lost and miraculously found.
“My films are made using meteorology,” he said in a 1986 interview, the year “The Green Ray” was released. “If I didn’t check the weather forecast every day, I couldn’t make my films because they are filmed according to what the weather is doing.” In fact, Rohmer, who died in 2010, wasn’t able to capture the green ray in Biarritz. He asked a documentary crew in the Canary Islands to shoot it, but no one succeeded. The shot that closes the film was created in a laboratory. I spoke to Rivière, who is now 61 and still exceptionally charming, about making “The Green Ray.” She had never been to Biarritz before and has never been back since. She has also never seen the green ray. Once, 13 or 14 years ago, she was fussing with her camera on the beach in Contis, a little over 60 miles north of Biarritz, when everyone around her burst into applause. They had seen the flash. When she tried to play back the recording, though, her camera hadn’t captured it.
I watched the sunset last night, and it was stunning, but hazy. It is raining today, as I have said, so I will not see the green ray, either.