President Trump’s former lawyer Michael Cohen has been sentenced to prison for offenses, including paying women for their silence during the 2016 election. Here’s a look at how this could affect the president.
The story of President Trump’s involvement in hush payments to a porn star and a former Playboy model in 2016 is once again in the spotlight. Trump’s former lawyer Michael Cohen pleaded guilty to violating campaign finance law and prosecutors say Trump directed the illegal payments. What does this mean for Trump? No one knows yet. Here’s what we do know. Did Trump know about the payments to Stormy Daniels and Karen McDougal? Yes. Trump initially pleaded ignorance. Reporter: “Mr. President, did you know about the $130,000 payment to Stormy Daniels?” “No.” But prosecutors say the evidence shows that he was aware of both cases. Cohen’s lawyer released a secretly recorded conversation between Cohen and Trump that seemed to be about the McDougal payments. Trump: “Listen. What financing?” Cohen: “We’ll have to pay —” Trump: “Pay with cash —” Cohen: “No — no, no, no, no, no, no — I got — no, no, no.” What was the motivation for the payments? Prosecutors say, to hide a potential sex scandal. Both women were paid off in the final months of the 2016 presidential campaign. Trump claimed he made the payments for personal reasons, tweeting that it was a simple private transaction. But prosecutors say Cohen admitted that Trump directed him to make the payments to bury accusations Trump feared could jeopardize his candidacy. Why does the motivation matter? It will determine if it’s a campaign finance violation. Prosecutors say that by suppressing the stories, Cohen and Trump deceived voters and tainted the election process, which is breaking campaign finance law. So, what comes next? Unclear. On Dec. 12, Cohen was sentenced to three years in prison for multiple crimes. The Justice Department has decided it can’t prosecute a sitting president. But if Trump loses re-election, it’s possible prosecutors could try and charge him in 2021.
WASHINGTON — President Trump’s personal lawyer, Rudolph W. Giuliani, abruptly resigned from his law firm, which then promptly undercut his recent statements defending the president.
Mr. Giuliani had taken a leave of absence last month from the firm, Greenberg Traurig, to represent Mr. Trump. But the firm, one of the nation’s largest, said in a statement on Thursday that he no longer worked there.
Firm partners had chafed over Mr. Giuliani’s public comments about payments that another of Mr. Trump’s lawyers, Michael D. Cohen, made to secure the silence of a pornographic film actress who said she had an affair with Mr. Trump. The president has denied her allegations.
The New York Times asked Greenberg Traurig about those remarks early this week. Shortly after Mr. Giuliani’s resignation was announced, the firm responded.
Mr. Trump has publicly denied knowing about the payments as they were made. Mr. Giuliani said the president reimbursed Mr. Cohen for them, an arrangement he said was routine. Mr. Giuliani had to walk back many of his comments.
Later on Thursday, Mr. Giuliani said that officials at the firm had never raised concerns about his comments. “They never brought it up,” he said. “I have good feelings about them, but for me, this opens up being able to speak” freely without being concerned about how Greenberg Traurig would react.
The firm’s prominent lawyers are not unified against Mr. Giuliani — one of its best-known litigators, Marc L. Mukasey, is an ally of his.
In its statement, Greenberg Traurig said that Mr. Giuliani had resigned effective Wednesday. “After recognizing that this work is all consuming and is lasting longer than initially anticipated, Rudy has determined it is best for him to resign,” said the firm’s chairman, Richard A. Rosenbaum.
Lawyers at Greenberg Traurig are sensitive about their public image. In 2005, one of its lobbyists, Jack Abramoff, was implicated at the center of a wide-ranging corruption scandal that shook Washington.
Mr. Giuliani has enjoyed the public-relations work he has been doing for Mr. Trump, according to three people who have spoken with him. Much like his client, Mr. Giuliani, a former New York mayor, prefers being untethered, they said.
And despite Mr. Trump’s grousing about Mr. Giuliani’s gaffes, the president has also told people that Mr. Giuliani is putting out information that the president wants to be part of the public conversation, particularly about the special counsel inquiry.
What’s more, Mr. Trump’s team functions better as a collection of free agents as opposed to major names tied to a big firm, which imposes strong restrictions, according to one person familiar with the situation.
One person close to Mr. Giuliani said that his serving in the administration in some role eventually was a possibility and had been the subject of informal conversations he had with the president.
Many of the country’s top law firms have resisted the prospect of their lawyers representing the president. As Mr. Trump tried to rebuild his legal team this spring, firms told their top lawyers that if they wanted to represent the president, they would have to resign.
The firms were concerned about Mr. Trump’s longstanding history of ignoring his lawyers’ advice and apparent failure to pay his bills, and backlash from employees who did not want to work for a firm that was representing Mr. Trump.