By 6:30 a.m., Ms. Slaughter checked her email and schedule while fixing breakfast for her two older children, ages 3 and 5. Her commute started at 8, driving her Honda minivan from her home in Bethesda, Md., a Washington suburb, while hooked up to a hands-free electric breast pump.
For the next several weeks, until Pippa goes to day care as a slightly older baby, she will join Ms. Slaughter on the fifth floor, either in a gray bouncy seat behind a desk or nestled in a wrap attached to her mother’s chest. It was the imperfect but best solution for Ms. Slaughter, whose appointment in March to serve as an F.T.C. commissioner just happened to coincide with the birth of her third child.
Ms. Slaughter, a longtime legal adviser to Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the top Democrat in the Senate, didn’t think about turning down the job offer. She did have some doubts about how she could pull off the schedule of raising three children and taking a senior position in government, but the opportunity was too good to pass up.
Such considerations have held back female representation in every corner of government. Women comprise 20 percent of Congress. They hold a quarter of the cabinet posts in the Trump administration.
But recently, there have been signs of change. The federal government has slowly reconfigured buildings to accommodate new moms, with lactation rooms at most agencies and in Congress. In April, Senator Tammy Duckworth, a Democrat from Illinois, became the first member of the Senate to deliver a baby during her tenure. Shortly after, lawmakers changed the rules to allow children on the Senate floor.
Ms. Slaughter, 36, recognized that she was lucky to be in a position that allowed her to bring Pippa to work. She doesn’t have the same luxuries as Marissa Mayer, the former Yahoo chief executive who built a nursery in her office and hired a full-time nanny to look after her infant son a few years ago. Nor does she have the luxuries available to Ivanka Trump, who is now championing more favorable workplace policies for women. Ms. Trump flew to Miami for business eight days after giving birth to her daughter, Arabella, via the convenience of the family’s jet.
But Ms. Slaughter does have an office that allows her to nurse the baby and pump in private, and for Pippa to nap in quiet. She divides most household duties with her husband, Justin Slaughter, a political and business consultant.
“Bringing a baby to work is not the right choice for every mom or dad, nor do many have that option,” Ms. Slaughter said.
Three months ago, Ms. Slaughter, who goes by Becca, was working as the top lawyer for Mr. Schumer. After a decade working in his office, she was asked to consider filling an empty Democratic slot at the trade commission.
Pippa was born on April 2. Ideally, Ms. Slaughter would have had a longer maternity leave, like she did with her two older children when working for Mr. Schumer. Each day since her nomination in April has felt like a “confluence of high-intensity events” that she approaches day by day, she said.
Before her first day, she informed the four other F.T.C. commissioners about her plan to bring Pippa to the office and received their unanimous support. She organizes her days accordingly, only accepting meetings and speaking engagements where she can take the baby. Two weeks ago, she appeared onstage at a privacy conference hosted by the Future of Privacy Forum for a question-and-answer session. Pippa shared the stage, asleep in her carrier.
The work itself is right in her sweet spot. Ms. Slaughter spent much of her time in Mr. Schumer’s office working on consumer protection and antitrust issues, and is now on the F.T.C. amid an uproar of the practices of Silicon Valley giants. The agency is investigating Facebook’s privacy practices and Equifax’s massive data breach. Consumer groups and smaller tech rivals have called on the F.T.C. to break up Facebook, Google and Amazon amid growing antitrust concerns.
It is unclear whether Ms. Slaughter’s decision to bring Pippa to the F.T.C. will pave the way for other high-level government officials to combine work and motherhood. Some — but not all — agencies have day care on-site, and government employees aren’t guaranteed spots for their children.
But Ms. Slaughter’s male colleagues say her decision helps all working parents. Noah Phillips, a Republican commissioner and parent of young children, said it was important for the F.T.C. staff to know that Pippa would be a daily fixture.
Three weeks into the job at the F.T.C., some of the adrenaline has begun to wear off. Sleep deprivation was setting in.
Ms. Slaughter is trying to spend more time with her older children as they adjust to her job change and their new younger sibling. She’s determined to attend a baby and me yoga class at least once a week during the lunch hour. For now, she isn’t planning to attend out-of-town speeches and conferences or the dinners and cocktail parties that typically attract government officials.
On the recent Monday morning, Ms. Slaughter walked with Pippa in the carrier to a nearby restaurant for a business lunch. Then mother and baby were back in the office for several meetings and a block of time to go over papers on cases pending before the F.T.C. She kept her promise to leave the office by 5 p.m. to have dinner with family at home. But she was online again after the two older children were asleep around 8 p.m.
