How to navigate the inherent awkwardness of workplace friendships.
Work friendships are great.
This is an obvious statement, but it also happens to be a fairly popular subject of study among organizational psychologists. Consider, for example, a recently published meta-analysis in the Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin that analyzed 26 studies on work and friendship and concluded that teams made up of friends tended to perform better than teams made up of strangers.
Twenty-six studies to confirm the fact that, yes, work friendships are great.
Yet having and keeping friends at work can feel more complicated than these studies let on. Say you’re leading a big project, and your friend’s contribution to that project is a total mess. Or maybe your friend is lately not doing her share of the work, which means you are too often doing it for her. What are you supposed to say? What are you supposed to do? And how can you say or do that without damaging your friendship in the process?
And there’s the rub: “If we befriend someone at work, it’s likely that we also need to work with them,” said Jessica Methot, associate professor of human resource management at Rutgers University, who has studied the weirdness inherent in being friends with your co-workers.
In 2015, for instance, Dr. Methot and her colleagues published a study in Personnel Psychology on so-called multiplex relationships, a rather fussy term used in the psychological literature to describe people who are both genuine friends and direct co-workers. This is the person you work closely with every day — not just a pal in another department or a sometimes lunch companion.
Dr. Methot’s study confirmed, again, that these relationships can be valuable, as employees who reported more multiplex relationships also received better performance reviews from their supervisors.
But these same employees also tended to report more emotional exhaustion — one of the symptoms of burnout — than those who had fewer of these friendships, a finding that should ring true to anyone who’s had a good work friend. You’re playing two roles at once: friend and colleague. Friends unconditionally support each other, but colleagues can’t always do that, especially when their own reputation is at stake. It can be draining to have to decide which role to play, and when.
About eight years ago, Patricia Sias, a University of Arizona researcher who studies workplace relationships, interviewed two ex-best friends who worked together. Their friendship had ended, but they remained colleagues. Separately, they told Ms. Sias why.
“One of them had made a proposal in a meeting, and it got voted down, and their friend voted against it,” Ms. Sias said. The friend who made the proposal was hurt and later asked the other why he hadn’t supported him. After all, weren’t they supposed to be friends?
The second friend replied: “Friendship has nothing to do with it.” The first friend’s proposal simply wasn’t a good one. “The one employee felt betrayed by his friend,” Ms. Sias said. “The proposal was important to him, and he expected full support and was surprised and hurt when he didn’t get it from his friend. … He couldn’t separate personal and professional.” For these two, that was that; the friendship was never quite the same afterward.
In practice, that means being a little more guarded than you would be with your nonwork friends. At happy hour, for instance, maybe stop sharing the secrets that “we wouldn’t want our boss to find out,” Dr. Methot said.
That’s not to say workplace friendships are necessarily doomed. Honesty is important for any relationship, but having the courage to be straightforward with your work friends often gives you a better chance of keeping them, said the work advice columnist Alison Green, who has answered questions about all sorts of uncomfortable office issues on her site Ask a Manager for more than a decade.
Ms. Green said friendship is a perennially popular subject for her readers. What should you do, for instance, if your friend is terrible at her job and you keep having to cover for her? In this situation, and in countless more, Ms. Green has advised the same thing: You’re going to have to talk to them.
Dr. Methot, too, suggests that work friends often do not directly address problems they have with each other.
It’s just that talking about it can be so deeply uncomfortable. You don’t want to upset your friend, or maybe you don’t want to let on that your friend has upset you. But these conversations don’t have to feel excruciatingly awkward, if you know how to approach them the right way.
If, for example, you need to talk to your co-worker pal who isn’t pulling her weight, you don’t have to frame it as criticism.
See? Work friendships are great.
