Gaza is built on the exact same sand as Jaffa/Tel Aviv, where many Gazan families originally came from. Israel ended its occupation of Gaza in 2005. If Hamas had chosen to recognize Israel and build a Palestinian state in Gaza modeled on Singapore, the world would have showered it with aid and it would have served as a positive test case for the West Bank. Hamas chose otherwise.
I appreciate the Gazans’ sense of injustice. Why should they pay with their ancestral homes for Jewish refugees who lost theirs in Germany or Iraq? The only answer is that history is full of such injustices and of refugees who have reconciled with them and moved on — not passed on their refugee status to their kids and their kids’ kids. It’s why so few Arabs, so few Europeans, so few anybody, rose to Hamas’s defense. People are fed up with it.
There are now about 2.7 million Palestinians in the West Bank, 2 million in Gaza and 1.84 million Israeli Arabs, for a total of about 6.5 million. That is roughly the same as the number of Jews living between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean. If current birthrate trends continue, the Jews will likely become a minority, with all of the negative governing consequences that will entail.
And then there’s this: Repeated Hamas rocket attacks that led to an Israeli blockade of building supplies, electricity shortages due to intra-Palestinian feuding, and Hamas’s regular use of building materials to dig tunnels to penetrate Israel have led to a critical shortage of infrastructure in Gaza, particularly sewage treatment plants. So Gazans now dump about 100 million liters of raw sewage into the Mediterranean daily, explained Gidon Bromberg, the Israeli director of EcoPeace Middle East, which promotes peace through environmental collaboration.
Indeed, look at the neighborhood. The combination of prolonged drought, rising temperatures and population growth is threatening aquifers all over the Middle East. The World Meteorological Organization registered the highest temperature ever reliably recorded anywhere in the month of April: 122.4 degrees Fahrenheit in Nawabshah, a city of 1.1 million people in southern Pakistan.
