Christian Estevez, the son of Dominican immigrants, grew up in the 1970s in Plainfield, N.J., at a time of widespread white flight. Most of the children in his crowded elementary school classes were like him: poor, minority and struggling.
Then his single mother managed to rent an apartment in the neighboring town of Westfield, which was thriving and predominantly white. The situation in his new school was like “night and day,” and Mr. Estevez succeeded and went on to college.
Since his own childhood, the problem of school segregation in New Jersey has only gotten worse, despite efforts to make school funding across districts more equal. Today, New Jersey is the sixth most segregated state in the nation for black students, and seventh for Latino students, according to a U.C.L.A. study. This is despite the fact that it is among the only states whose constitution explicitly prohibits segregation in public schools.
Now Mr. Estevez, along with a coalition of community groups, parents and children, is seeking to change that.
On the 64th anniversary of the landmark Brown v. Board of Education Supreme Court decision, Mr. Estevez, as president of the Latino Action Network, together with about a dozen other plaintiffs, filed a lawsuit against the State of New Jersey on Thursday, calling on it to desegregate its schools statewide.
Not since 1964, when a federal lawsuit forced integration in Alabama, lawyers for the plaintiffs said, has a suit achieved statewide school desegregation.
The school segregation in New Jersey is de facto segregation, not explicit segregation by law, as was the case in the American South before the Brown decision. It stems from a complicated mixture of discriminatory zoning practices in suburbs, poverty and personal choice, the plaintiffs claim. But it is institutionalized by a state law in New Jersey that requires children to attend schools in the municipalities where they live, said Elise Boddie, a law professor at Rutgers University and a founding member of the New Jersey Coalition for Diverse and Inclusive Schools, a nonprofit that organized the lawsuit.
Because neighborhoods and towns in New Jersey are so segregated, that law results in segregated schools. So the suit asks the state to let children cross municipal lines to go to school. It also calls on the state education commissioner to develop a comprehensive, detailed plan suggesting ways to integrate schools.
New Jersey is rare among the states: Its courts have declared even de facto school segregation unconstitutional since the 1960s. Such segregation has persisted, and worsened, however, because “no one has done anything about it,” said Gary Stein, a former New Jersey Supreme Court justice on the court that ordered equal funding for the state's districts.
The lawsuit suggests several remedies, including the creation of magnet schools that draw from multiple towns and districts and tax incentives for municipalities to create more diverse schools. It points to an effort in Hartford, stemming from a 1996 desegregation lawsuit, that created clusters of magnet schools so attractive that suburban children are bused into inner-city Hartford to attend them.
Children who attend integrated schools do better than those who remain in segregated schools, research shows. And while the benefits of desegregation are most profound for black and Latino low-income students, diversity also helps white students by exposing them to children of different socioeconomic backgrounds and broadening their perspectives.
“We think that white children who attend segregated white schools are disadvantaged,” Mr. Stein said.
The lawsuit cites statistics to show that without legal action, segregation has only deepened. The number of New Jersey public school students who attend schools that are at least 99 percent nonwhite, for example, grew to 107,322 in the 2016-17 school year, from 93,614 in 2010-11.
New Jersey’s governor, Philip D. Murphy, declined to comment on the suit itself, but his press secretary, Dan Bryan, said that Mr. Murphy was “deeply committed” to desegregation.
“As the head of one of the most diverse states in the nation and on the anniversary of the landmark Brown v. Board of Education decision, Governor Murphy believes strongly that we must combat the deeply rooted problem of segregation,” Mr. Bryan said.
Statewide, 46 percent of the 585,000 black and Latino public school students attend schools that are more than 90 percent nonwhite. Of the 622,359 white students in New Jersey public schools, 43 percent attend schools that are at least 75 percent white.
Decades after Mr. Estevez graduated, for example, Westfield is 86 percent white, with 2 percent of families in poverty, while Plainfield is 82 percent black and Latino with 22 percent of families in poverty. The discrepancies are still reflected in local schools.
Mr. Estevez said he has tried several ways to help children like him who hadn’t been able to leave Plainfield, even moving back to the town at one point to join the local school board. But he found that the available solutions failed to address the deeper problem.
