Living In ... Closter, N.J.
For years, downtown Closter, N.J., was defined by the empty storefronts and potholed parking lot of Closter Plaza, a 1960s shopping center that had fallen on hard times.
“It was really a blight on the town,” said John C. Glidden Jr., the mayor.
But a few years ago, a new owner renovated the 16-acre property, attracting national retailers like Whole Foods, Target and HomeGoods. The transformation has increased shopping activity and injected new life into this affluent borough of 8,650 in northeastern Bergen County.
The answer, residents say, is plenty: leafy neighborhoods, highly regarded schools, a pedestrian-friendly downtown, a nature center and a history that stretches back to precolonial times.
Jera Randesi, 43, a lawyer, and her husband, Anthony Randesi, 47, who works in asbestos and mold remediation, moved to Closter from Weehawken, N.J., in October 2016, paying $785,000 for a four-bedroom stucco house. They were drawn by the “superb” public education for their son, who is now 7, along with the family-friendly vibe and the easy access to New York City, Ms. Randesi said.
Along with Closter Plaza, the borough has an older, small-town-style shopping district with a Korean barbecue restaurant and a Ward’s 5 & 10 store, as well as a number of small businesses, including a shoe repair shop, hair salons, bagel and pizza places and medical offices.
Angela DeDonato Ferullo, a co-president of the Closter Parent-Teacher Organization, has two daughters in the elementary school. She chose Closter in large part for its school system, she said, when she moved from Cliffside Park, N.J., paying $900,000 for a four-bedroom house in 2016.
Closter is less than two miles from the Palisades Interstate Parkway and less than five miles from the Rockland County, N.Y., border. It is bounded by Alpine to the east, the Oradell Reservoir to the west, Haworth and Demarest to the south and Norwood to the north.
Because of the borough’s long history, the housing stock is varied and includes a mix of 19th-century houses, midcentury split-levels and ranches, and larger luxury homes built in recent decades.
Closter also has a piece of midcentury architectural history, in the form of a Lustron house — a small prefabricated-steel home made by the Lustron Corporation after World War II, in response to a housing shortage. The Closter house, on Durie Avenue, is one of two remaining Lustron structures in Bergen County. It was threatened by development, but is now owned by the borough.
Other attractions include the Belskie Museum of Art and Science, a 3,000-square-foot gallery attached to the public library. The museum was built by the Lions Club in 1993 to house the work of Abram Belskie, a sculptor and medical illustrator who lived in Closter, but it exhibits other artists’ work as well.
Prices range from around $400,000 or so for smaller, older homes that are often in need of work, to upward of $2 million for newer luxury properties in the East Hill area, which slopes westward from the top of the Palisades.
According to the New Jersey Multiple Listing Service, in the 12 months ending May 15, 2018, 109 homes changed hands in Closter, for a median price of $665,000. The number of sales and the median price were little changed from the previous year, when 104 homes sold for a median price of $678,000.
On May 23, the multiple listing service showed 61 single-family properties for sale in Closter. They ranged from a three-bedroom 1939 Tudor listed for $399,000, to a six-bedroom stucco house, built in 2012, listed for $2.6 million.
For more bucolic pleasures, residents head to the Closter Nature Center. The borough’s leaders set aside land for the center in the early 1960s, during the postwar suburban building boom. Now the center offers 136 acres of trails, woods, streams and ponds near the heart of Closter.
Nature lovers can also walk the Cross-Closter Trail System, which connects a chain of parks and wooded areas along the Tenakill Brook, from the Demarest border in the south to the Norwood border in the north.
Closter has two schools: Hillside Elementary, with 675 students in prekindergarten to fourth grade, and Tenakill Middle School, with 508 students in grades five through eight.
Older students attend Northern Valley Regional High School in neighboring Demarest, part of a regional district that includes a high school in Old Tappan. Northern Valley Demarest has about 1,000 students. For 2016-2017, mean SAT scores in the Northern Valley district were 614 in reading and writing and 620 in math, compared with 551 and 552 statewide.
Of the class of 2017, 82 percent went on to college, compared with 71.1 percent statewide.
New Jersey Transit buses run along Schraalenburgh Road for the commute to the Port Authority Bus Terminal in Manhattan, a trip that takes 60 to 90 minutes. The fare is $7 one way and $199 monthly. Closter no longer has passenger rail service.
Because it is near the Palisades Interstate Parkway, Closter offers easy access to both the George Washington Bridge and the new Gov. Mario M. Cuomo Bridge (formerly the Tappan Zee), each about 10 miles away.
Closter was settled by the Lenni-Lenape, and then by European (mostly Dutch) farmers in the 1700s. The borough has a rich architectural heritage, with 10 buildings on the National Register of Historic Places. It also has Bergen County’s largest collection of traditional stone Jersey Dutch colonial homes, said Tim Adriance, the chairman of the Closter Historic Preservation Commission and a descendant of early Dutch settlers.
In 1779, during the Revolutionary War, British soldiers raided Closter, damaging homes and fatally bayoneting a 90-year-old resident, Douwe Harmanse Tallman.
A passenger rail line opened in 1859, and Closter’s downtown grew around the train station, making it a business hub for the surrounding area, a role the borough once again plays, with the renovation of Closter Plaza.