SAN FRANCISCO — More than a second before a self-driving car operated by Uber struck and killed a pedestrian in March, the vehicle’s computer system determined it needed to brake to avoid a crash. But a built-in emergency braking system had been disabled while the car was in autonomous mode to ensure a smoother ride, according to the preliminary report of federal regulators investigating the crash.
The initial findings, released on Thursday by the National Transportation Safety Board, confirmed early police reports about the episode, which was the first known pedestrian fatality involving an autonomous car.
The report also affirmed what many experts on self-driving cars said in the days after the crash: Uber’s cars are loaded with sensors and cameras that should have detected a pedestrian with plenty of time to stop. But this one failed through a combination of a computer system not responding properly to the pedestrian’s presence and a distracted safety driver.
The fatal crash has raised questions about the safety of testing self-driving cars on public roads and whether companies, in their rush to be among the first to deploy this breakthrough technology, are taking enough precautions to prevent harm to other drivers and pedestrians. It has also dampened some enthusiasm for self-driving cars as a technology that researchers believe could eventually save lives because robot drivers, unlike humans, don’t get distracted or tired and obey traffic rules.
The New York Times reported that Uber’s cars had been struggling to meet reliability standards in Arizona before the crash. Its cars required human drivers to intervene much more frequently than those of its competitors. Uber was also asking safety drivers to do more — driving solo instead of in pairs — even though the cars were still performing erratically.
The safety board said the Uber car’s computer system spotted 49-year-old Elaine Herzberg pushing a bicycle across a road at night in Tempe, Ariz., six seconds before impact. The system classified Ms. Herzberg, who was not in a crosswalk, first as an unrecognized object, then as another vehicle and finally as a bicycle. But it did not slow down before barreling into her at 39 miles per hour. The car’s software system is not designed to alert the driver of an object in the road.
The Uber car, a Volvo XC90 sport-utility vehicle equipped with Uber’s sensing technology, comes with an automatic emergency braking system from the manufacturer.
But Uber disabled that function as well as other safety features to “reduce the potential for erratic vehicle behavior,” according to the report. This put the onus on the safety driver to intervene to avoid a crash if necessary. The agency said Uber’s safety driver, who was not impaired, grabbed the steering wheel in an attempt to swerve at the last second but did not start braking until after impact.
The vehicle’s operator, who was seen on dashboard cameras looking down and away from the road before the crash, told investigators that she had been monitoring the self-driving car system in the center of the car’s dashboard. A toxicology report for the victim came back positive for methamphetamine and marijuana, investigators said, though they did not say drugs played a factor in the crash.
While the safety board’s preliminary report did not determine fault, it pointed to instances where Uber’s testing system failed to prevent the crash.
Mary Cummings, an engineering professor at Duke University who studies the interaction between humans and autonomous vehicles, said there was “a lack of maturity” in Uber’s testing program because it was asking the drivers to do too much. The company made it hard for them to focus on their primary task: ensuring safety.
Immediately after the crash, Uber suspended testing of its self-driving cars and has not yet returned to the road.
On Wednesday, the company said it was shutting down its testing operations in Arizona and laying off 300 employees, saying it wanted to move testing closer to its engineering hubs in Pittsburgh and San Francisco. Uber also said it hoped to return to the road in Pittsburgh by the summer. The company has not said when it hopes the autonomous cars will return to San Francisco.
But even politicians who once welcomed self-driving cars onto their roads are striking a more cautious tone. William Peduto, Pittsburgh’s mayor, said the city would require Uber’s cars stay under 25 miles per hour, regardless of the road’s speed limit.
Still, the crash hasn’t significantly altered the deployment or testing plans for Uber’s rivals.
Waymo, the self-driving car company spun out from Google, has been testing cars without a safety driver in Arizona, where it is also picking up passengers as part of a test deployment of an autonomous taxi service. Waymo said it expected to start accepting fares for its self-driving taxis this year. And Cruise, a self-driving car company owned by GM, has continued testing in California.