SHANGHAI — China announced Thursday evening that it would cut tariffs sharply on July 1 for an eclectic array of imported goods, the latest in a series of moves by Beijing to dismantle steep trade barriers at a time of rising frictions with the United States.
The tariff cuts came less than two days before Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross is due in Beijing for wide-ranging talks aimed at addressing American frustrations with China’s $375 billion bilateral trade surplus with the United States. But the categories the Chinese Finance Ministry selected for tariff cuts cover few American goods, and appeared to be targeted at China’s goal of developing sophisticated industries rather than low-value mass manufacturing.
The moves came as China and the United States, the world’s two biggest economies, continued their wide-ranging economic and diplomatic sparring. The countries have alternated between attacking each other over trade issues and working together on efforts to rid North Korea of its nuclear weapons. At times, President Trump has praised his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, at other times he has swiftly criticized Beijing for its trade practices, sometimes in quick succession.
In its latest action, China is making a modest peace offering, without really giving up much.
Chinese workers’ wages have soared over the past 15 years, and Beijing is engaged in a broad effort to steer the economy toward high-wage industries like semiconductors and away from factories making garments and handbags.
Christopher Rogers, a trade analyst at Panjiva, an international commerce data firm recently acquired by S.&P. Global Market Intelligence, estimated that the tariff cuts would cover about 1.1 percent of China’s $1.95 trillion in annual imports. “The cuts are more to do with keeping a lid on inflation and improving consumer spending power than to do with keeping President Trump happy,” he said.
China is energetically trying to rally other governments to its side in its showdown with the United States. Beijing’s latest move could assuage concerns from many European countries and developing nations about their own trade deficits with China as well as loss of manufacturing jobs. At the same time, trade ministers elsewhere have been deeply troubled by the Trump administration’s moves to impose tariffs on steel and aluminum imported from around the world.
The announcement came just before Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross announced in Washington that the United States would begin imposing tariffs on steel and aluminum from Canada, Mexico and the European Union at midnight on Thursday.
President Trump had issued a statement on Tuesday threatening further tariffs on Chinese goods and contending that China’s average tariff on imports was more than three times as high as that of in the United States, an assertion supported by World Trade Organization data. And China’s tariff average is nearly double that of the European Union.
The announcement in Beijing on Thursday followed a recent decision by China to cut its tariff on imported cars to 15 percent from 25 percent. President Trump also criticized the Chinese car tariff on Tuesday, noting that the American tariff on imported cars was just 2.5 percent.
Mr. Xi, China’s president, had called during a speech in April for cuts in Chinese tariffs on imported cars and some consumer goods, as part of Beijing’s long-term policy of gradually opening to international competition.