WASHINGTON — President Trump accused federal investigators on Wednesday of using a spy inside his campaign, repeating unconfirmed claims and saying it could be one of the “biggest political scandals in history,” as administration officials bowed to political pressure to change plans to share information about the informant with Congress.
In a series of Twitter posts early Wednesday about the continuing Russia investigation, Mr. Trump briefly departed from his previous language about the possibility that the government deployed a spy inside his presidential campaign. Instead, he stated it as fact.
But the president has decidedly joined his allies in Congress in an offensive against the Justice Department, calling for law enforcement officials to share documents related to an informant who approached several of his campaign advisers who had been in contact with suspected Russian agents. The use of the informant was to glean information about what the aides knew about the Russian efforts to hack into Democratic emails — not to spy on Mr. Trump’s campaign, according to people familiar with the matter.
Top intelligence and law enforcement officials had been scheduled to meet Thursday with only Republicans on the House Intelligence Committee, purportedly to share the highly classified information about the informant that the lawmakers have demanded.
But after senators from both parties, including the majority leader, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, worked behind the scenes, the administration scheduled a second meeting to share the delicate information with the so-called Gang of Eight party leadership on Thursday afternoon.
The group is made up of the Republican and Democratic leaders of both chambers and the top members of the intelligence committees, and is typically the venue through which the government’s most sensitive secrets are shared with Congress.
Participants in the meetings were expected to include Christopher A. Wray, the F.B.I. director; Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general; and Dan Coats, the director of national intelligence, along with other F.B.I. and Justice Department officials.
John F. Kelly, the White House chief of staff, was also scheduled to attend — a decision that was sure to rankle Democrats who have warned that it is inappropriate for a member of the White House staff to be present to learn about delicate investigative files related to an inquiry involving the president. The White House said on Tuesday that no White House staff members would attend.
Mr. Kelly had agreed to arrange the meeting amid the rancor between senior law enforcement officials and Republican congressmen loyal to the president, including Representative Devin Nunes of California, the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee.
Representative Trey Gowdy, Republican of South Carolina, was also invited to attend both meetings, even though he is not a member of the Gang of Eight. Mr. Gowdy, a former federal prosecutor, has been brought into several meetings between Mr. Nunes and the Justice Department to help lower tensions.
The arrangement was a victory for the senators and for Democrats, who publicly urged the Justice Department and the F.B.I. to reconsider holding the meeting with Mr. Nunes. Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, pressed Mr. McConnell throughout the day on Wednesday to demand access for the Gang of Eight.
The inclusion of the Gang of Eight could serve to blunt Mr. Nunes’s continued attacks on the Justice Department.
One of the advisers whom the informant spoke to, George Papadopoulos, has completed his cooperation in the investigation, the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, signaled on Wednesday. Mr. Papadopoulos pleaded guilty last year to lying to the F.B.I. and agreed to talk to Mr. Mueller about his role in what the bureau believes was a covert Russian influence operation. Mr. Mueller had asked that the sentencing of Mr. Papadopoulos, a key witness in the investigation, be delayed while he was cooperating. On Wednesday, prosecutors asked a federal judge to move forward with the sentencing.
Prosecutors normally do not sentence cooperators until after all their cooperation has been exhausted, meaning Mr. Mueller most likely does not expect Mr. Papadopoulos to testify against anybody who has not yet been charged.
The latest accusation is similar to Mr. Trump’s claims in the early days of his presidency that former President Barack Obama had Mr. Trump’s “wires tapped” in Trump Tower. His unsubstantiated claims were later proved to be false after a Justice Department review.
Until recently, Mr. Trump has couched the notion of an informant inside his campaign as a hypothetical. On Sunday, the president ordered an investigation into such claims, a move some say crossed a line intended to put constraints on executive power. The president and the White House do not make decisions about law enforcement investigations.
Later in the day, Mr. Trump said it was Mr. Comey who lied. And the president said his efforts to learn more about the informant were not undercutting anything.
He said he did the country a service when he fired Mr. Comey, as well.
“If you look at the lies, the tremendous lies, if you look at all that’s going on, I think James Comey’s got a lot of problems,” Mr. Trump said.
Since his earliest days in office, Mr. Trump has lashed out against the government’s investigation into whether members of his campaign worked with the Russians in their efforts to interfere in the election. Mr. Trump fired Mr. Comey, in part, the president has said, because he wanted to put an end to the inquiry. The firing was the first in a series of events that culminated in the appointment of a special counsel.
Mr. Trump regularly pushes back against the Russia investigation, calling it a witch hunt, a scam and phony.
He has also claimed the investigators are corrupt or incompetent. The president has berated his attorney general and the Justice Department for not conducting inquiries into his Democratic rival, Hillary Clinton, about her use of a private email server and her family’s foundation.