Welcome to the Smarter Living newsletter. Editor Tim Herrera emails readers with tips and advice for living a better, more fulfilling life. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.
Here’s a confession: For the last week or so I’ve felt a little drained.  It’s nothing serious, but one of those passing phases we’re all familiar with when things feel overwhelming.
As an old editor of mine used to put it: My mojo is a little off.
Sound familiar? If so, here a few ideas to help you dig out.
So just get started: Slice up whatever is on your to-do list into the tiniest components possible, then just knock out that first one. Then the second. Then the third. Progress begets progress.
Last Thursday I took a half-day for mental health: I got lunch at my favorite restaurant, went for ice cream, then spent the afternoon relaxing, and I was in bed early for a full night’s rest. I came back to work Friday relaxed and refreshed.
This seems obvious, but experts say that taking time for yourself and unplugging when you’re stressed can be a quick trick for relieving burnout, even if that just means a coffee break or a long lunch.
Christina Maslach, a pioneering researcher behind the study of burnout, told us that interacting with other people can be the strongest antidote to burnout.
In that spirit, talk to me about your burnout. Tweet me @timherrera or email me at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| and tell me what you do when you’re feeling overwhelmed at work, feeling emotionally drained or, like me, when your mojo just feels off.
Have a great (and hopefully stress-free) week!
Tidy Up Your Home In this special treat for subscribers, get a jump on your spring cleaning with a step-by-step guide to tidying up your home.
How to Recognize Burnout Before You’re Burned Out Being tired, ambivalent, stressed, cynical and overextended has become a normal part of a working professional life.
5 Ways to Make Spring Cleaning Easier Spring cleaning checklists can easily become overwhelming. Here are a few tips that take some of the hard labor out of the most onerous tasks.
Diving Into the Artichoke, That Delicious Mess It takes a lot of trimming to get to the heart of an artichoke, but don’t let that stop you.
How to Protect Yourself From Mosquitoes and Ticks There are several measures you can take, some of which provide two-for-one protection against the insects.
How to Have a Good Flight Flying can be stressful, but there are ways to make it a better experience for you and your family.
• Americans are obsessed with work. But what about rest?
• Want to try the Whole30 diet? Here’s what you can and cannot eat.
• Five habits to add a decade or more to your life.
• Success isn’t about free will. It’s about luck.