After 17 years with the same course layout, organizers of the New York City Triathlon felt they had arrived at a crossroads. Quite literally.
After swimming nearly a mile in the Hudson River and biking 25 miles along the West Side Highway and beyond, racers setting out on the final leg, a 10-kilometer run in Central Park, were long used to a course along the wooded hills that make up the northern section of the park. But this year, for the first time, those haunting inclines will be ignored.
Instead, runners will follow a more southerly, flatter route in the park, bringing them closer to Midtown Manhattan, closer to the skyscrapers and horse-drawn carriages, Columbus Circle and Carnegie Hall. The hope is that the more scenic route will draw more participants to the event, one of the largest triathlons in the country, and maybe help them forget that, not long earlier, they had been swimming in the Hudson River.
It is the first time since the race began in 2001 that the run course has been modified. But after a surge in interest almost a decade ago, participation has hit a wall in recent years, and Hutmacher said the organizers wondered if there was a growing sense of race fatigue.
In 2010, the event was booming enough to institute a lottery system for entrants, similar to the New York City Marathon. There were 3,856 entrants that year, its peak, but last year it declined to 3,158.
This year, the event removed the lottery but also expanded the available field to 5,000 from 4,000. Hutmacher said there are still spots available for the race, which takes place on July 1.
Avoiding the North Woods removes more than 100 feet of hills from the course, or 10 percent of the course’s overall incline. Hutmacher said this should make the event friendlier to first-time participants and spectators, who will now have easier access to viewing areas.
Cameron Dye, a 34-year-old professional triathlete who has won the male division of the race two years in a row, said running the hills could get a little lonely, with fewer fans who might stop and watch on their way to somewhere else.
But he also fretted that a flatter running course might eliminate part of what he sees as his competitive advantage by training in Boulder, Colo.
Hutmacher said Life Time changed the bike course for the Chicago Triathlon in 2014 to better incorporate the downtown sights and sounds of the city. Perhaps as a result, participation in that race went up 20 percent.
