U.S.|A Woman Said She Saw Burglars. They Were Just Black Airbnb Guests.
Within minutes, several police cars had arrived and the group was being questioned as a helicopter flew overhead. A neighbor who didn’t recognize them had reported a possible burglary, the police said.
Ms. Fyffe-Marshall said the officers came out of their cars, demanding the group put their hands in the air. At first, the renters “joked about the misunderstanding,” she said, but the situation escalated after 20 minutes when a sergeant arrived.
The sergeant didn’t know what Airbnb was, “insisted that we were lying about it and said we had to prove it,” Ms. Fyffe-Marshall said. She showed the officers their booking confirmations and called the landlord, and the group was detained for 45 minutes, she said.
The Rialto Police Department said in a statement that the group was questioned for 22 minutes and that officers had not used restraints on them. The officers learned they were Airbnb guests “through reasonable inquiry,” and they were “immediately released without incident,” the police said.
“The Rialto Police Department is confident officers treated the involved individuals with dignity, respect and professionalism,” the police said.
Many people of color have reported that the police have been called on them while going about their everyday business, a fact of life that has seen several prominent examples in recent weeks. National outrage followed the arrest of two black men in a Philadelphia Starbucks; a group of black women had the police called on them for golfing too slowly in York County, Pa.; and two Native American brothers had a college visit in Colorado cut short when a parent told a 911 dispatcher that their behavior and clothing were suspicious.
Airbnb said that what happened to the guests in Rialto was “unconscionable.” Laura W. Murphy, a senior adviser, and Janaye Ingram, the head of national partnerships, sent a letter to Rialto’s police chief and mayor on Monday to request a meeting.
