Good morning on this warm (and possibly stormy) Thursday.
Meet Audible, the New Yorker to watch in the Kentucky Derby.
Of the 20 thoroughbreds in the 144th running of the Derby on Saturday, Audible, bred by Oak Bluff Stables and born upstate at Berkshire Stud in Pine Plains, is the only starter from New York.
New York State is home to some 39,000 horses, and over the years we’ve had our fair share at the Derby starting gate. But the finish line is a different story: The only New York horse to win was Funny Cide, in 2003.
Audible may change that — with his 8-to-1 odds, only three horses in this year's field are given a better shot.
Audible was born in 2015 to Blue Devil Bel, a mare from New York, and Into Mischief, a stallion from Kentucky.
A newborn horse, referred to as a foal, is typically nursed by its mother during the first year. In January of the following year, it becomes a yearling, the most common time for breeders to sell their offspring, according to Mr. Leahy, who sold Audible as a yearling to the horseman J. J. Crupi for $175,000.
Mr. Crupi, a pinhooker — which involves “buying a yearling, training it aggressively and then selling it as a made horse,” Mr. Leahy explained — eventually sold the 2-year-old Audible for $500,000.
And finally, the January after that, when thoroughbreds are 3, they’re eligible to compete in the Triple Crown — the Kentucky Derby, the Preakness and the Belmont Stakes.
This afternoon we could see thunderstorms, and the rain could stick around until the weekend.
Our warm spell continues, with a high of 90 today and temperatures in the mid-80s on Friday.
The weekend forecast is giving us a reason to grin: Cloudy, with cooler temperatures.
• Mets host Braves, 1:10 p.m. (SNY). Yankees at Astros, 2:10 p.m. (YES).
Here in New York, we’re known for our tiny, expensive apartments, and for spending most of our time outside them.
Which means that when we step out the door, we need to be prepared.
Sunglasses. Reading material. Makeup. Lip balm.
New York Today wants to put together a New York City survival kit: a bag of those offbeat items that saved you in a pinch, or that you MacGyvered in a New York emergency.
And we’d like to know what’s in your bag.
Send us an email to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| and tell us about your never-leave-home-without-it item, and tell us (briefly) about that time that it came to the rescue. We’re looking for items under $25. Please include your name, age and where you live. We may use your response in a coming column.
