Stephen Curry was on his way to two more days of online debate about what was wrong with his game. Curry, the two-time winner of the N.B.A.’s Most Valuable Player Award, looked tentative and lost. His shots were not falling, he was being exposed badly on defense, and his team was winning in spite of him rather than because of him.
Then came a transcendent third quarter on Sunday in which Curry looked positively Steph Curry-like. He made all seven of his shots, including two long 3-pointers, and finished the quarter with a team-high 18 points, matching his highest point total in the first two games of the Western Conference finals in a single period.
The quarter, during which the Warriors’ lead over the Houston Rockets swelled from 11 to 21 points, was part of a 35-point effort by Curry in Golden State’s eventual 126-85 victory that made an emphatic statement on the heels of Golden State having lost badly in Game 2. Golden State, which effectively stole home court advantage in the series with a Game 1 win in Houston, now has a 2-1 lead in the series, with two of the next three games coming at home.
Curry, who before the game had called it funny how much people were doubting him after a few bad games, played down his performance during an on-court interview with TNT’s David Aldridge right after the buzzer.
“I was obviously happy to hit some shots tonight — eventually,” he said.
Curry’s big night, which he capped by hitting 11 of his last 13 shots, came alongside 25 points from Kevin Durant and a huge effort on both ends of the court by Draymond Green, who finished with 10 points, 17 rebounds and 6 assists. Even with a third consecutive quiet night from Klay Thompson, the Warriors, who turned the ball over just eight times, handed the Rockets the worst loss in the franchise’s playoff history.
It was also the largest win in Golden State’s playoff history, and was the team’s 16th consecutive playoff victory at home, which broke a record set by Michael Jordan’s Chicago Bulls in 1990 and 1991.
Houston was led on offense by James Harden, who had 20 points and nine assists, but he seemed frustrated with a lack of fouls called on Golden State’s defense. Houston’s offense, which had been so dynamic in Game 1, was almost empty behind Harden, with Chris Paul limited to 13 points and the Rockets getting far less from role players like Trevor Ariza, P.J. Tucker and Eric Gordon.
Curry, who missed more than a month with a sprained ligament in his left knee, came back in Game 2 of Golden State’s Western Conference semifinal series against New Orleans and performed well against the Pelicans. But in Games 1 and 2 he went a combined 2 for 13 from 3-point range (which extended to 3 for 20 if you include the first half of Game 3) and was unable to wield his usual influence and space out the floor for his teammates. On top of that, Houston clearly had developed an offensive game plan of attacking him as Golden State’s worst defender.
It was more of the same through the first half on Sunday, but early in the third quarter he got rolling with a few 2-pointers before he finally launched one of his signature 30-footers with 5 minutes 7 seconds left in the period. The crowd at Oracle Arena was whipped into a frenzy and Curry clearly played off it, approaching plays with far more tenacity than had been present at any point since his knee injury.
Curry’s playing off the crowd in Oakland is one of the reasons that the Warriors are often credited with having such an extreme home court advantage, but D’Antoni splashed some water on that thinking in his pregame news conference.
But even the pragmatic D’Antoni acknowledged that the Warriors seem adept at feeding off the energy of their crowd.
On Sunday night, Curry fed the crowd and the crowd fed him right back, moving the Warriors one step closer to a fourth consecutive appearance in the N.B.A. finals. But Thompson, who has doubled down on his defensive effort as he has struggled offensively, said Golden State had to avoid its well-documented problems with backsliding after a big win.
