As Letitia James, the New York City public advocate, considers a bid to replace the disgraced former attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, she faces an unexpected and thorny dilemma.
Ms. James, a Democrat, was a logical pick to secure the Working Families Party line ahead of the upcoming Democratic convention, since she won her very first race with that progressive party’s backing.
But logic and the cutthroat politics of New York do not always comport.
Ms. James has been telling allies and potential supporters that Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s operation is pushing her to reject the Working Families Party — or risk losing his support if she seeks the Democratic Party nomination, according to five people familiar with the matter, including three who spoke directly with Ms. James.
It is hardly a secret that Mr. Cuomo has been at war with the Working Families Party, which aims to pull Democrats to the left politically, ever since it endorsed Mr. Cuomo’s primary opponent, Cynthia Nixon, last month. His labor allies have already withdrawn support from the party.
The governor, however, flatly denied placing any pressure on Ms. James.
Mr. Cuomo’s team said Ms. James is projecting onto the governor the frustrations that some other Democrats, such as county leaders, have with the Working Families Party.
Mr. Jacobs said he did not speak with people in the governor’s orbit before giving that advice.
The jostling over the minor party’s ballot line is just one twist in the scramble for attorney general, following Mr. Schneiderman’s abrupt resignation last Monday after The New Yorker detailed four women’s accusations of being physically assaulted by him.
Two members of Congress, Kathleen Rice and Sean Patrick Maloney, are considering running, but face potential legal obstacles. State Senator Michael N. Gianaris is mulling a bid, and notably used Twitter on Monday to post a photo of himself with “my friend” Joseph Crowley, the highest-ranking New York House Democrat. Zephyr Teachout, a law professor who ran against Mr. Cuomo in 2014, announced an exploratory committee on Monday, and a campaign staff that includes a pollster, digital fund-raisers and ad makers.
“It’s no secret by now that I believe that primaries are healthy for the Democratic Party,” Ms. Teachout said in an email.
Looming in the background is Preet Bharara, the former United States attorney for the Southern District of New York whose tenure included multiple investigations of state officials for corruption, indicting a top aide to Mr. Cuomo and the top two legislative leaders in Albany.
The state Legislature is empowered to name a replacement to fill out the remainder of Mr. Schneiderman’s term, but a range of editorial pages called for lawmakers to hold off and keep the interim attorney general, Barbara Underwood, who had served for years as state solicitor general, in the job.
“It does have the look and feel of a back-room deal,” Mr. Bharara said on his podcast last week of the lawmaker-controlled process.
Before that outcry, Ms. James had emerged as a leading contender for the appointment. But on Friday, she withdrew from the appointment process — as did Ms. Rice, Ms. Teachout and Mr. Gianaris. Mr. Maloney initially applied but pulled out on Monday.
The Legislature is still moving forward with interviews, including with Ms. Underwood. The other more than a dozen applicants include Elizabeth Holtzman, who served in Congress in the 1970s, and later as district attorney of Brooklyn; and Leecia R. Eve, a former top aide to Mr. Cuomo and a candidate for lieutenant governor in 2006.
But, politically, the main focus has moved to the party conventions.
The Working Families convention is Saturday, only days before the crucial Democratic Party convention, where Mr. Cuomo holds great sway. He told The New York Times he would personally interview the attorney general candidates this week.
Working Families leaders have told Ms. James that if she declines their nomination — for which she is viewed as a front-runner — the party could endorse Ms. Teachout, who is serving as treasurer to Ms. Nixon. Ms. Nixon has not commented on the attorney general’s race.
As they consider campaigns, Mr. Maloney and Ms. Rice face the same complicated legal question: Can they simultaneously seek re-election, which they have already filed for, and the attorney general post? State law prohibits being on the same ballot twice but the state and federal primaries are held months apart.
“That’s the conundrum here,” said Thomas J. Garry, a New York elections lawyer, who said a current congressional candidate who wants to run for attorney general would likely need to file a lawsuit.
On a 1-10 scale of legal complexity, Mr. Garry declared, “It’s 8 to 10.” The risk, he said, is that a judge could throw that lawmaker off both ballots.
Jerry H. Goldfeder, another New York election lawyer, said, “I don’t think that would ever happen” but agreed the situation is legally complex. “There’s no definite result one way or the other,” he said.
People close to Ms. Rice said she remains concerned about those legal issues. Mr. Maloney, in contrast, believes he can run for both, according to people close to him, allowing him to decline his congressional nomination later in the year should he win the attorney general nomination. Mr. Maloney currently has nearly $3.2 million in his congressional committee and Ms. Rice has $1.6 million remaining in old state campaign funds. For his part, Mr. Gianaris, who said he would decide about running in the next weeks, has $2.5 million scattered across two state accounts.
The vacancy has scrambled the Republican field, too.
Numerous strategists and party officials are trying to woo John P. Cahill, who lost four years ago to Mr. Schneiderman, to run again.
Keith H. Wofford, a partner at the law firm Ropes & Gray, is also considering a run. He notably has represented Elliott Management, the firm of Paul E. Singer, one of the Republican Party’s most influential donors.
“I am currently in the process of exploring a candidacy for attorney general, reaching out to party leaders and stakeholders,” Mr. Wofford, a Republican, said in an email, saying he hoped to decide this week.