A former federal transportation secretary said on Thursday that he has “100 percent confidence” that the chaos that brought John F. Kennedy International Airport to a standstill during a January blizzard would not recur.
Ray LaHood, now an adviser to a Manhattan law firm, said he believed that the changes in how the airport’s managers prepare for winter storms would prevent a repeat of the debacle that left hundreds of passengers stranded on planes for hours and many of them separated from their luggage for days. The most important change, he said, would be the creation of a center for command and control of the airport during storms and other emergencies.
During a four-month review of what went wrong at the airport after a nor’easter swept up the East Coast on Jan. 4, Mr. LaHood said he and a team of investigators found there had been “deficiencies in communication” and “inadequate overarching leadership by J.F.K. management,” two issues that have been previously cited as contributing to the mess.
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey operates the airport, but has ceded control of each of its six terminals to an airline or other private operator. That unusual structure only made matters worse when the “wicked, wicked storm” that meteorologists called a “bomb cyclone” started dumping snow on Kennedy’s runways, Mr. LaHood said.
At the time, the airport did not have a modern system for coordinating responses from Port Authority officials, the terminal operators and airlines. Much of the communication involved one official trying to reach another by cellphone.
Mr. LaHood issued a report Thursday that detailed the breakdowns in the airport’s operations and laid out 50 recommendations for improvements. The Port Authority hired Mr. LaHood to conduct the review but he said the agency had given his team “unfettered access” to interview airport managers and employees, he said at a news conference at the airport.
The Port Authority has already begun making changes to address what Mr. LaHood said were the most critical failures: the overall lack of coordination and the poor handling of baggage by some airlines.
Since January, airport officials have been building an emergency operations center that will serve as a central point of contact for the airlines, terminal operators and various federal and local agencies — 26 entities in all — that play a role at Kennedy. Mr. LaHood recommended that they go further and maintain an operations center year-round, with airport managers providing regular briefings.
“A team needs to be built here, a team of people that know one another, that meet with one another, that talk to one another,” Mr. LaHood said, pointing out that many other airports, including Los Angeles International and Boston Logan, already have operations centers.
Los Angeles does not have to cope with snowstorms, he said, but its airport has had other troubles, including the fatal shooting of a Transportation Security Administration screener in 2013. “They’ve had some serious incidents and they’ve handled it very well,” Mr. LaHood said.
Rick Cotton, the executive director of the Port Authority, said his agency accepted the criticisms in the report and embraced its recommendations for change. He said the emergency operations center would evolve into a “24/7” operations center, though probably not with all 26 entities represented at all times.
The Port Authority has addressed another breakdown highlighted in the report by ordering more snow-removal equipment. The report detailed the trouble Kennedy’s crews had clearing snow from the airport’s runways after the Jan. 4 storm, which Mr. LaHood referred to as winter storm Grayson.
When the storm’s combination of snow and wind created “whiteout” conditions, airport officials closed Kennedy at about 11 a.m. and said it would reopen at 3 p.m. That reopening time was repeatedly pushed back, first to 6 p.m., then to 8 p.m. and eventually to 7 a.m. the next day.
Meanwhile, Kennedy’s airfield became “gridlocked” and “passengers were stuck on inactive planes for unacceptable periods of time,” the report said. Many planes that had taken off for Kennedy from overseas had to turn around or detour to other cities. A total of 8,400 passengers on 28 planes were diverted to O’Hare International Airport in Chicago, where some “were virtually abandoned” because their airlines did not have a presence there, it said.
Mr. Cotton has vowed that Kennedy will not get into another jam like that. To help ensure there is no recurrence, the Port Authority has adopted a practice of barring airlines from sending planes to Kennedy during a period when a winter storm is expected unless they have an assurance from a terminal operator that a gate will be available.
The report recommended that airport officials strengthen their new storm procedures by asking airlines and terminal operators to consider the good of the entire airport when making decisions. Mr. LaHood said he was encouraged by the airport staff’s stated desire to improve service for travelers.
