FIFA has closed a doping investigation into all of the Russian soccer players expected to compete in the World Cup next month after finding “insufficient evidence” of wrongdoing.
FIFA, world soccer’s governing body, had opened its investigation after the publication in December of an exhaustive report on doping in Russian sports. The report, the result of an investigation by the Canadian lawyer Richard McLaren and published by the World Anti-Doping Agency, laid out mountainous evidence that for years Russian officials orchestrated a doping program at the Olympics and other competitions that involved or benefited 1,000 athletes in 30 sports, including soccer.
McLaren’s report led to the suspensions of dozens of Russian athletes and to the formal banishment of the Russian team from the Pyeongchang Olympics in February.
FIFA said Tuesday that its investigation had prioritized “high-level players against whom a suspicion had been raised, in particular those who might participate in the 2018 FIFA World Cup in Russia.” Russia has announced a provisional roster of 28 players and seven reserves for the tournament, which begins June 14 in Moscow.
The doping investigation, FIFA said, included reaching out to McLaren for more information and guidance on how to proceed; the retesting of samples seized by WADA investigators; and the targeted testing of players expected to be part of Russia’s World Cup team, which FIFA labeled “one of the most tested teams” in the world.
Investigators also reached out to Grigor Rodchenkov, the whistle-blower who exposed Russia’s massive doping scheme, and who had said he had evidence that Russian soccer players were being protected by the state doping program.
FIFA has informed WADA of its conclusions, and it said the antidoping agency had agreed with the decision to close the cases.
FIFA’s president, Gianni Infantino, also appeared to close a second doping case on Tuesday when he declined to intervene in the case of Paolo Guerrero, the Peru striker who was suspended last year after testing positive for a cocaine metabolite.
Guerrero, 34, has mounted a last-minute campaign to overturn his suspension in time to compete for Peru at the World Cup. With the full-throated support of his fans and even Peru’s president, Guerrero flew to Zurich this week for a private meeting with Infantino to press his case.
On Tuesday, Infantino met with Guerrero and the president of Peru’s soccer federation, Edwin Oviedo, at FIFA’s headquarters, but in a statement released afterward, Infantino made it clear that neither he, nor FIFA, would act to lift the ban.
Guerrero’s lawyers can ask Switzerland’s supreme court to overturn the suspension, but the court could do that only if it finds that the legal process was abused.