Prosecutors in Connecticut have indicated plans to appeal a state court decision overturning the murder conviction of Michael C. Skakel to the United States Supreme Court, creating yet another wrinkle in the drawn-out legal battle over a case that has captured widespread attention for decades.
Early this month, in a surprise ruling, the Connecticut Supreme Court vacated Mr. Skakel’s conviction for the 1975 killing of Martha Moxley, his neighbor in Greenwich, when they were both 15. The decision came less than two years after the court reinstated Mr. Skakel’s conviction.
Mr. Skakel, a Kennedy nephew, was not arrested in Ms. Moxley’s killing until he was in his late 30s. He was found guilty by a jury in 2002 after a three-week trial that turned largely on circumstantial evidence. Investigators had recovered part of the golf club that was used to kill Ms. Moxley, a 6-iron from a set that had belonged to Mr. Skakel’s mother. But prosecutors had no direct physical evidence tying Mr. Skakel to the killing, and he claimed he was miles from the murder scene at a cousin’s house.
The case became a media sensation, captivating much of the nation with details of a grisly killing in a gated community in one of the country’s wealthiest suburbs, a connection to the Kennedy family and questions about the influence of wealth and privilege in the justice system.
After Mr. Skakel was sentenced to 20 years to life for the murder, his legal team waged an extensive, and expensive, appeal, asserting that he had repeatedly been failed by his trial lawyer. His appellate lawyers argued that his trial lawyer did not investigate a witness who, they argue, could have confirmed Mr. Skakel was nowhere close to the Moxley home at the time of the murder, and they have suggested that one of Mr. Skakel’s brothers could have been the culprit.
In the motion, prosecutors said they would ask the United States Supreme Court to review whether the Connecticut court had erred in finding Mr. Skakel’s defense inadequate.
Michael A. Fitzpatrick, a lawyer for Mr. Skakel, said he believed that the prosecutors’ appeal had a limited chance of success.
