Katie J. M. Baker’s article raises important questions, but I take one exception to her approach. She continues to ask what to do about these “bad men.” To call them bad men skews the conversation.
There are bad men, and there are men who do bad things. Bad men worry about their comeback TV show. Good men who do bad things worry about the impact they have on others. They partake in self-reflection and want to make repairs and amends to those they harmed. Maybe that distinction is a key to how we begin a new conversation about these men.
LAURIE KAHN, EVANSTON, ILL.
In response to “What Do We Do With These Men?,” sweeping these problems under the rug doesn’t work well. Just ask the Catholic Church, whose leadership created a secret system for passing along their tainted priests from one parish to another, until that blew up, tarnishing the church forever.
If men like Matt Lauer, Charlie Rose and Harvey Weinstein are capable of getting therapy and paying back to society for the harm they’ve done, I hope they do so. Frankly, I’m skeptical. I think they’re probably too set in their ways. Maybe I’m wrong, and they’ll prove it by donating millions of dollars to domestic violence shelters, pronto.
Sexual assault behavior has to be nipped at an early age. Let’s start raising our boys and girls to not accept this behavior.
MOIRA SAUCEDO, ALEXANDRIA, VA.
I am the college admissions consultant Katie J. M. Baker refers to who works with young men expelled from school. Before we decide what to do with the “bad men,” we need to determine which men are bad. Ms. Baker notes the spectrum of bad behavior from Bill Cosby to “handsy” salesmen, but we must also acknowledge the spectrum of certainty.
In some cases (like Harvey Weinstein), the evidence is so overwhelming that there can be no doubt about his badness. In contrast, most sexual misconduct cases against students provide little evidence, some of it ambiguous or contradictory.
Institutions must make findings based on half-remembered stories of partly consensual encounters, months or years after the fact. Surely many of the accused are guilty of wrongdoing, but which ones?
If we are labeling some people as “trash,” we ought to have a lot of confidence about who belongs in the bin. In many cases, we just don’t know.
As a mental health professional who has been treating sex offenders for almost two decades, I have developed a three-step process leading to a reintegration of offenders into the community.
This involves a) a convincing, thorough explanation of motivation; b) recognition and regret of the impact on victims; and c) a pledge that there will be no further incidents.
The most important step is the first, requiring confrontational probing to cut through failure to take responsibility and facile rationalizations. An honest explanation in a public forum (for well-known offenders) or to the relevant community is an essential step in achieving both individual behavioral change and a deeper understanding of this issue in the broader community.
Still, when dealing with human beings, there are no guarantees.
