ASHBOURNE, Ireland — Until recently, Aoife and Muiriosa O’Sullivan, 23-year-old twins from a religiously conservative family, led nearly identical lives: They wore identical clothes until they were in their early teens, studied the same subjects in college and both went into teaching.
Yet, aside from a quibble over the virtues of veganism, they parted ways for the first time over what could be a defining moment for them and their generation: a divisive referendum on legalizing abortion, set to take place on Friday.
Aoife (pronounced EE-fuh) plans to vote for the measure, saying that a woman has a right to choose what to do with her body. Muiriosa is against abortion under any circumstance, saying she is opposed on moral and religious grounds to the taking of a life.
The pair, who grew up in Waterford, on the southeastern coast of Ireland, are hardly alone in finding themselves on opposite ends of a bitter and seemingly irreconcilable row. The argument over the referendum has exposed wide divisions among Irish women and has emerged to some extent as a debate among women for women.
In contrast to the United States, where male politicians, donors and social commentators have often dominated the abortion issue, many men in this Irish vote are tending to hang back, seeing abortion as a woman’s matter. That is in large part a reaction to earlier generations, when women’s issues in Ireland were solely decided by men, including leaders of the Roman Catholic Church.
But far from marginalizing men, this trend has put them in the cross hairs of the opposing campaigns, which have sent droves of male workers into the streets and lined up support from male celebrities.
Polls published in early May showed that 47 percent of women in Ireland supported legalizing abortion while 35 percent opposed it, thought pollsters warn that the gap has narrowed substantially since then. Male respondents also favored legalization, though the margin was narrower — and it was unclear how many men would come out to vote.
This mix of beliefs and values underscores the soul-searching and hand-wringing playing out across the nation. Many women who support legalizing abortion say they are “pro-life” as individuals but feel that women should be given a choice. Many who oppose it cite values, identity and religion, arguing that abortion is murder and that banning it celebrates motherhood in a society that emphasizes careers and individual pursuits.
In advertisements and news conferences, each campaign has accused the other of exploiting personal tragedies suffered by women to bolster their cases.
The nuances and emotions surrounding abortion are so complex that opinion surveys published this month showed that nearly a fifth of all voters said they were undecided.
At stake is the Eighth Amendment of the Irish Constitution, which confers equal rights to the fetus and the mother. Currently, Irish law bans abortion even in cases of rape or incest, allowing it only if a mother’s life is at risk. If the referendum passes, the government has said it would introduce a measure allowing unrestricted terminations during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy.
In addition to the undecided vote, pollsters say, much of the outcome hinges on male turnout, which, unless recent campaigning has made any difference, is expected to be lower than among women.
Joe McGrath, a 62-year-old barber in Ashbourne, near Dublin, said he planned to vote for legalizing abortion, but only because his wife, six sisters and three sisters-in-law insisted. “It should’ve been an only-woman’s vote,” he said.
Many others seem to agree: A poll released this week showed that 10 percent of Irish people think men should not be allowed to vote in the referendum.
“It’s not a man’s issue. A man doesn’t know what it’s like to get pregnant,” Mr. McGrath said, even as he added that he knew at least 25 women who have had abortions, usually by traveling to England or Wales, where abortion is legal.
Michael Lawrence, 55, said he planned to stay home on polling day. “It’s so confusing, I wouldn’t know what the heck to vote for,” he said, adding that even his wife was unsure which side she was on. “If my wife is confused about a woman’s issue, I would know less about it,” he said, throwing up his hands.
By Saturday, when the official results are expected to have been tabulated, the campaigners will have a chance to reflect on their success or failure.
Leading up to that, in the last frantic days of the campaign, yes and no campaigners in Dublin — many of them young people — rubbed shoulders on crowded thoroughfares, handing out fliers and badges, acknowledging one another through gritted teeth. Occasionally, tempers flared, and activists on both sides described being heckled or having pints of Guinness thrown at them.
Aoife O’Sullivan, wearing a “Yes” badge in favor of repealing the amendment, stopped by an anti-abortion booth where rubber figurines showing the various stages of fetal development were on display. She quickly fell into a debate with an opponent over what kind of life a child of a rape victim would face.
“I agree,” said Leah Boyle, 22, a “No” campaigner. “We have no idea what its life will be like, but abortion offers no chances,” she said, before recounting that her uncle had been conceived in a sexual assault.
As the vote neared, some voters wavered, including Aoife O’Sullivan. She said that she was the only person in her immediate family to vote yes, and that her parents were upset by her decision.
Aoife, for her part, admitted to liking meat very much. Aside from teaching rowdy high school students, she is part of Ireland’s national weight lifting team and is expected to compete in Canada after Friday’s vote. “I feel empowered,” she said.
