The Harlem rapper talks about jewelry, his new partnership with Tiffany & Co. and his drive to one-up his father’s legacy.
When ASAP Ferg was still a teenager in Harlem, he started making crystal-studded pendants. He would sketch designs of characters like Bart Simpson and Mega Man, then hand the drawings over to Earl Harley (also known as “Harley, the buckle man”). Mr. Harley would create the bases for Ferg, who would then add Swarovski crystals and sell the pendants. They cost him about $200 to make; he sold them for about $700 a piece.
During a recent interview at The Blue Box Cafe at the Tiffany flagship store on Fifth Avenue, Ferg was frank about the mutual interest driving the partnership.
The conglomerate LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton recruited Jay-Z as a brand ambassador for its Hublot watches in 2011, and in the years since, it has been rewarded with hundreds of bars, from his songs and others’, testifying to the status of its brands. Virgil Abloh, Kanye West’s longtime creative director, was tapped in March as the artistic director of men’s wear at Louis Vuitton. And in January, Gucci opened a studio with the Harlem fashion legend Dapper Dan, who worked with Ferg’s father and is close enough with the rapper to refer to him as his nephew.
Before Mr. Ferguson Sr. died of kidney failure in 2005, days before Ferg’s 17th birthday, he designed T-shirts for stars like Teddy Riley and Heavy D and logos, like the one he created for Bad Boy Records. Also in 2005, Ferg started his own line, Devoni Clothing.
Eventually, Rocky, who had known Ferg for years, helped convince him to start making music in addition to designing clothing. A couple of studio albums and mixtapes into his career, Ferg now feels as if he’s beginning to reach a new level of fame.
These days, he cares less about flash. He said he believes in the artistic value of the jewelry he’s promoting — referring to himself as a “a walking MoMA installation” — but also understands what it could mean for young people to see him wearing gold from Tiffany & Co.
