550 pp. New York Review Books. Paper, $19.95.
In his lifetime, François-René de Chateaubriand won renown as a politician, diplomat, novelist and travel writer. Today he is best remembered for his “Memoirs From Beyond the Grave,” a gigantic 42-volume work intended for publication only 50 years after his death. In the end, though, obliged by poverty in old age “to pawn my tomb,” as he lamented, the memoirs appeared soon after he died in 1848, at the age of 79, in Paris.
This new edition, which comprises the first 12 books of the memoirs (considered by many critics to be the most interesting), covers Chateaubriand’s aristocratic upbringing in Brittany, the first two years of the French Revolution, a six-month trip to the United States, his combat alongside Royalists resisting the revolution, the loss of family and friends to the Terror and his eight-year exile in England, which ended in 1800.
What distinguishes this endeavor, however, is less its historical overview of the turbulence that preceded Napoleon’s rise to power than Chateaubriand’s examination of his own character and feelings amid multiple setbacks. Indeed, it is the lyricism and intimacy of his language, convincingly translated here by Alex Andriesse, that made Chateaubriand a precursor of French Romanticism.
Chateaubriand’s most unsparing writing comes during his time as a Royalist soldier, when he’s wounded, infected by smallpox and discharged to wander the French countryside. Finally, he finds a boat to the Channel Islands. “My constitutional vigor was finally exhausted. I was no longer able to speak, and the swell of the rough seas was nearly the end of me. I could hardly swallow a few drops of lemon water, and when bad weather forced us to put in to Guernsey harbor, it seemed certain that I would die.” Still not fully recovered, he reached London to join hordes of French exiles no less impoverished than himself. Struggling to survive, he asked himself: “What remained? A pen? But the pen was unknown and untried; I was ignorant of its power. Could my unborn taste for letters, the poems of my childhood, the rough sketches of my travels, command the attention of the public?” Filled with doubts, he nonetheless began writing.
Chateaubriand’s first book, “Essai Historique,” was, in his own words, “a compendium of my existence, as a poet, a moralist, a polemicist and a political thinker.” More than two decades later, as he was working on his memoirs, he no longer harbored doubts about his achievements. “In my person, with the so-called Romantic school,” he writes with rare immodesty, “there began a revolution in French literature.” This claim, at least, is not challenged today.