WASHINGTON — Mark J. Penn was one of the primary architects of President Bill Clinton’s re-election campaign in 1996 and served as chief strategist for Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign in 2008. Few people have done more to advance the Clinton cause in the last couple of decades.
Which makes it all the more striking that in his current campaign the longtime Democratic political consultant has essentially switched sides and accused associates of the Clintons of helping to orchestrate a politically driven, manufactured “deep state” investigation into President Trump that Mr. Penn says should be shut down.
Mr. Penn goes further, however, by associating his former clients with the sort of wrongdoing that Mr. Trump often alleges. Mr. Penn wrote that the F.B.I. and the Justice Department “broke their own rules” to end the investigation into Mrs. Clinton’s use of a private email server. He implied that Mr. Clinton’s encounter with Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch on a Phoenix airport tarmac in 2016 really was as suspicious as Republicans found it. And he suggested that “Clinton Foundation operatives” got the F.B.I. to investigate Mr. Trump.
Mr. Penn declined to comment on Monday, but his migration away from the Clinton camp has been a long time coming. More center-right than most advisers in the Clinton orbit, he long battled with more liberal aides and eventually stepped down from his post as chief strategist for Mrs. Clinton’s 2008 campaign amid bitter internal feuds driven by clashes over personality and strategy as well as ideology.
A New York native who was captivated by numbers since childhood and parlayed a Harvard education to become a top Democratic pollster, Mr. Penn, 64, was one of three strategists brought into the White House by Mr. Clinton after Republicans swept the 1994 midterm elections and took control of Congress.
The three helped Mr. Clinton pivot toward the political center to undercut the House speaker Newt Gingrich’s Republicans and regain popular support to win re-election two years later. Mr. Penn’s internal rivals grumbled that he cared more about statistics than people and pushed a bloodless form of politics that focused on trivial symbolism like school uniforms over meaningful policy.
Mr. Penn considered such criticism to be sour grapes by advisers who were held hostage by the left wing of the party, unable to see the popular middle and resentful of his ascendance. He boasted a record of helping elect two dozen heads of state around the world. He has also worked for corporate giants like Microsoft.
The other two members of that rescue team brought in after 1994, Dick Morris and Douglas E. Schoen, would also go on to become sharp critics of the Clintons and favorite guests on Fox News. But Mr. Penn lasted longer with the Clintons than any of them and had been most associated with their campaigns. He helped steer Mrs. Clinton to win a Senate seat from New York in 2000 and set the original course of her 2008 presidential bid against Barack Obama, including the famous ad asking voters who would they trust for a 3 a.m. crisis phone call.
Today, he is the president of the Stagwell Group, a digital investment firm that owns a series of public affairs agencies, including one that has worked for Republicans like Speaker Paul D. Ryan and Mitt Romney, the former presidential candidate.
He attributes his criticism of Mr. Mueller’s investigation to lingering disgust with the inquiry by the independent counsel Kenneth W. Starr that led to Mr. Clinton’s impeachment by the House in 1998 on charges of perjury and obstruction of justice in connection with the president’s efforts to cover up an affair with Monica Lewinsky. Mr. Clinton was subsequently acquitted in a Senate trial in 1999.
But his arguments have gone beyond denouncing Mr. Mueller or the investigation’s effect on the White House. He has come to see the Clinton team as unprincipled schemers, much as the Republicans he long opposed do.
In his column this week, he said the Australian diplomat who told the F.B.I. about an incriminating bar conversation with George Papadopoulos, a Trump campaign adviser, was responsible for a $25 million contribution to the Clinton family’s foundation.
He likewise dismissed Mr. Clinton’s explanation of a conversation he had with Ms. Lynch during the 2016 investigation into his wife’s email server. Ms. Lynch “definitely wasn’t playing mah-jongg in a secret ‘no aides allowed’ meeting with former President Clinton.” And he implied that the F.B.I. was wrong not to charge Mrs. Clinton in that case.
Spokesmen for Mr. Clinton and Mrs. Clinton did not respond to messages on Monday, but some former colleagues from his days advising Mrs. Clinton saw no moral conversion on the part of Mr. Penn. To them, Mr. Penn appeared intent on ingratiating himself with Mr. Trump for some unknown benefit.
In his writings and television appearances, Mr. Penn has said he was not motivated by party politics but by concern for the state of the country.
