Think back to a favorite summer and chances are it will include a billowy blockbuster or a marvelous musical, topped by youthful shenanigans. As the season gets underway — at the multiplex at least — we asked the stars of this summer’s crowd-pleasers to recall the movie dates — some with flames, others with friends and family — they remember to this day.
I grew up going to movies with my father, and we loved just whatever the super hyped-up, big-budget action epic of the time was. I remember being at “Jurassic Park” and us both falling on the floor, actually rolling around, with uncontrollable laughter. And then standing up and clapping after that scene in “Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon” when the two women are fighting on the rooftop, me and my father giving a standing ovation to that.
Henry Golding with Michelle Yeoh, left, and Constance Wu in the film.Credit...Sanja Bucko/Warner Bros.
When “Titanic” came out, that was really my first experience at the cinema and one of those moves that define my childhood. [“My Heart Will Go On”], by Celine Dion, was what I first made out to, so “Titanic” has a very warm place in my heart. I think I must have been about 15, and it was with my greatest high school crush and she had braces. That was a good summer. That was monumental for me.
I remember going to see Barbra Streisand in “Funny Girl.” I don’t remember very much about the date, but I was so knocked out by Barbra that I remember basically every single moment from the movie.
I don’t know that that’s how she would have had it. But I totally understood after that why there was an entire era of stuck in the car at a movie. It’s so perfect for chemistry. You have all this amazing privacy and you’re basically already lying down. I was like, “Oh man, this is Tinder for 30 years ago.” We made out later — not that night, but it eventually happened.
My family went to a drive-in once when I was very young. I don’t know what I expected — some sort of 1950s magic. It was so hot that we had to keep the windows down and the air-conditioning on, and we couldn’t hear the movie and not really see it either. And no one was making out with anyone because we were a family. So that was not as magical as I thought it might be. It’s actually kind of cramped, and you can’t really see the screen that well, especially if you’re sitting in the back seat. I haven’t been to a drive-in movie since.