Sometimes it seems as if we’re living under a constant barrage of heavy news. But it isn’t all bad out there. This feature is meant to send you into the weekend with a smile, or at least a lighter heart. Want to get The Week in Good News by email? Here’s the sign-up.
An Australian man with a “golden arm” saved millions of babies with his blood.
James Harrison, 81, is special — not only because he has given blood every few weeks for 60 years, but because his blood contains a rare antibody necessary for a pioneering medication. Officials say his blood has helped save more than two million babies from a potentially fatal disease.
Despite his distaste for needles, Mr. Harrison has donated in locations across Australia. Last Friday, he made his final donation in Sydney. Medical officials decided that it was time for Mr. Harrison to protect his own health.
Mr. Harrison’s selflessness has been widely praised. He has received the Medal of the Order of Australia for his longtime support of the Australian Red Cross Blood Service. Now, researchers are working on a “James in a Jar project,” with the goal of synthetically creating antibodies that match what Mr. Harrison produces naturally.
A remote Central African park is home to a stunning conservation success story.
Zakouma National Park in Chad has become a rare haven for Africa’s imperiled elephants. Its success is astounding, considering that the elephant population there had been in serious trouble from unchecked poaching.
Thanks to heightened security at the park and the increasing support of surrounding communities, Zakouma hasn’t suffered a confirmed poaching incident since January 2016.
The park’s herd has 500 elephants, one of the largest surviving in Central Africa. It’s also home to Kordofan giraffes, lions, cheetahs, leopards and honey badgers. Six black rhinoceroses were recently flown to Zakouma from South Africa, reuniting the threatened animal with a land it hadn’t roamed in nearly five decades.
An immigrant’s son won a prize for the best baguette in Paris.
Perhaps nothing says France more than a long, crusty stick of bread poking from a bicycle basket or paper shopping bag.
So the mastering of that symbol of Frenchness by Mahmoud M’seddi, 27, whose father is from Tunisia, is about more than great baking. At a moment when President Emmanuel Macron is taking a tougher line against immigration, Mr. S’seddi’s triumph challenges the very notion of what it means to be French.
A double amputee reached the summit of Mount Everest.
Xia Boyu, a Chinese mountain climber, has tried to scale the world’s highest mountain almost half a dozen times. He ran into avalanches, lost both his feet to frostbite while trying to reach the summit in 1975 and later lost his legs above the knee to lymphoma in 1996.
But Monday morning, he finally achieved his dream.
Trans fats should be eliminated worldwide by 2023, the World Health Organization says.
The W.H.O. announced a sweeping plan that seeks to eradicate the industrially produced edible oil from global food supplies, potentially saving some 10 million lives.
Popularized in the 1950s and once lionized as a healthy alternative to butter and lard, trans fats have been implicated in sudden heart attacks and strokes.
Georgia State is leading the U.S. in black graduates — and others want to replicate its success.
For decades, Georgia State was downtown Atlanta’s rather unremarkable commuter school. Now, using a raft of data-driven experimentation, Georgia State has been reimagined as one of the South’s more innovative engines of social mobility.
The school focuses on retaining low-income students, rather than just enrolling them. And for the last five years, it has awarded more bachelor’s degrees to African-Americans than any other U.S. nonprofit college or university.
Data analysis is used to predict potential academic problems, and the school encourages advisers to swoop into students’ lives at the first sign of trouble.
Athletes 50 years and older participated in the Senior Games in New York.
The games were organized by the Parks Department in Brooklyn and on Staten Island this month, and gave older athletes a chance to show off their skills and engage in some friendly (and sometimes rather heated) competition.
James Sloane, who played basketball in Brownsville, Brooklyn, for most of his 68 years, took part in a three-on-three game.
