TOKYO — Ever since President Trump pulled out of planned talks with Kim Jong-un, the leader of North Korea, officials from both countries have been scrambling to salvage the summit meeting and keep it on track for June 12 in Singapore.
A process that would normally take months is now being compressed into days, with meetings taking place between North Korean and American officials all over the world. Here is a rundown of who is meeting whom, and what they might be talking about.
Kim Yong-chol, one of Kim Jong-un’s most trusted aides, arrived in New York on Wednesday for talks with Mike Pompeo, the secretary of state. The two had dinner together on Wednesday night as they worked on strengthening their personal relationship, a senior State Department official said.
They face a monumental task: finding a path to denuclearization.
Analysts believe that Mr. Pompeo will seek to clarify the North’s position on its nuclear program, which may have gotten muddled during Mr. Pompeo’s two visits to Pyongyang to meet with Kim Jong-un. Kim Yong-chol was also at those meetings.
North Korea’s Diplomat and Spymaster: Who Is Kim Yong-chol?
Mr. Kim is a former intelligence chief and is North Korea’s top nuclear weapons negotiator. His visit to the United States signals that talks between the two countries are reaching a critical point.
You may have never heard of Kim Yong-chol. But you’ve probably seen him before. Here he is sitting next to Ivanka Trump at the Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang. Here, with the North Korean leader at the inter-Korean summit in April. Here, leading a delegation to South Korea during military talks in 2007. Here, with Kim Jong-il. And here, with Secretary of State Mike Pompeo in Pyongyang in May. The former head of North Korea’s spy agency is said to be one of Kim Jong-un’s closest aides. He worked for all three leaders of the Kim dynasty, and is one of its longest- serving senior officials. But he has a controversial past. He’s still on sanctions lists in South Korea and the United States. South Korea accuses Kim Yong-chol of being involved in several high-profile attacks. He was allegedly behind the sinking of a South Korean naval ship in 2010 that killed 46 sailors, and of masterminding an attack on a South Korean island the same year. Under his leadership, North Korea’s spy agency was suspected by the U.S. of launching a cyberattack against Sony Pictures in 2014. It apparently was in retaliation to the film “The Interview,” which mocked Kim Jong-un. “I don’t need my father.” Kim Yong-chol is also no stranger to nuclear diplomacy. He’s been involved in various rounds of negotiations to limit North Korea’s nuclear weapons. This week, he became the highest-ranking North Korean official to visit the United States since 2000.
Kim Yong-chol has emerged as a prominent figure in the flurry of diplomacy in recent months.
He led a delegation to the closing ceremony of the Pyeongchang Olympics in South Korea in February, a controversial move given that many South Koreans blame him for orchestrating a deadly attack in 2010.
And what was on the menu? “American beef,” he said.
Pulling off a summit meeting by June 12 will require a herculean focus on all kinds of details. Singapore would be the farthest that Kim Jong-un has traveled since coming to power in 2011, and for both Mr. Kim and Mr. Trump, there are daunting security concerns.
Both Kim Chang-son, the director of North Korea’s state affairs commission secretariat, and an American delegation led by Joe Hagin, a deputy White House chief of staff, arrived in Singapore on Monday to work out security measures, where and when various meetings would take place, which events would be open to the press and which officials would be in the negotiating rooms. Given both Mr. Trump’s and Mr. Kim’s fondness for photo ops, Mr. Kim and Mr. Hagin may start to scope out some visually striking spots.
Kim Chang-son is sometimes called the chief butler to the family of Kim Jong-un and has looked after the North Korean leader since he was a child. When Kim Yo-jong, Kim Jong-un’s sister, traveled to the Olympics in February, South Korean media spotted Kim Chang-son taking her coat.
When Mr. Trump sent his letter last week to Kim Jong-un canceling — or at least postponing — the summit meeting, one of the likely triggers was a statement from Choe Son Hui, a North Korean vice foreign minister, in which she criticized Vice President Mike Pence for “ignorant and stupid” remarks comparing North Korea and Libya.
But she has been representing the North in talks with an American delegation led by Sung Kim, a veteran diplomat and ambassador to the Philippines. The two sides met on Sunday in Panmunjom, a “truce village” in the Demilitarized Zone that separates the two Koreas.
The diplomats and technical experts are probably working out an agenda for the meeting, and the American side is looking to secure detailed commitments from Kim Jong-un that his regime is willing to abandon its nuclear weapons program.
Analysts said that Ms. Choe and Mr. Kim were likely to work on drafts of a potential declaration that could be issued at the summit meeting, with wording from North Korea about getting rid of its nuclear weapons and a guarantee from the United States that it would not interfere with the North’s regime or demand redress for human rights abuses.
Ms. Choe was an interpreter for the North Koreans during previous nuclear negotiations known as the six-party talks, which started in 2003 and eventually broke down in 2009. She is likely to have previously met Sung Kim at conferences in Europe as well.
Mitoji Yabunaka, a retired Japanese diplomat who represented Japan in the six-party talks, said that although Ms. Choe was officially an interpreter at the time, he sensed that she had more power and influence than that role might have indicated. She had an “impressive presence,” he said.
After the meetings in New York, the DMZ and Singapore, Mr. Pompeo will give Mr. Trump his recommendation about whether enough progress has been made to go forward with the summit meeting, the State Department official said.
“Great power conflict is back,” said Admiral Harris, who is retiring from the military and awaits Senate confirmation of his nomination for the diplomatic post in South Korea.