The singer and guitarist Lindsey Jordan has a high school diploma, an emotional intelligence well beyond her years and a chance to push herself out on a bigger stage.
BALTIMORE — Strolling through the National Aquarium last week, Lindsey Jordan, the singer and guitarist who records under the name Snail Mail, had some concerns about the animals’ emotional well-being.
“I wonder how they keep them all eating and not depressed,” she said, observing an exhibit devoted to an Australian river gorge, where long barramundi nosed one another and turtles drifted by. She paused to post some spindly jellyfish on her Instagram story because the background music was so comical (Steve Vai-like shredding), although she found them gross. The lone dolphin doing languid flips in a huge tank was a bummer too far, and she quickly moved along.
Her style of indie rock — poetically honest lyrics set to harmonically creative guitar parts — can recall Liz Phair, an idol she recently met, and Mary Timony, who used to give her lessons. But Ms. Jordan is not merely an inheritor; she is an innovator, creating fresh expectations for what a complex artistic statement from a young voice can sound like today.
She asked for a guitar when she was 5 and started classical training, forcing herself to practice two hours a day. “It’s an obsessive personality trait,” she said. “My parents were never like, ‘Go practice.’ I was just like, ‘I have to practice.’” She brought a similarly fervent work ethic to ice hockey, which she played through high school.
When Ms. Jordan started attending a rock ’n’ roll camp, her passion became a competition, dulling her interest. “I was like, oh, now I have to learn ‘Cliffs of Dover,’” she said, referring to the Eric Johnson noodle-a-thon often heard in the aisles of Guitar Center. At 9, she began playing at sports bars in her parents’ friends’ cover band, the Eight Balls. Around 11, her spark for the guitar returned in earnest, and she starting writing songs, emailing the owners of restaurants and coffee shops to book her own sets. Then she discovered the D.I.Y. punk scene and didn’t want to play coffee shops anymore.
Ms. Crutchfield remains struck by Ms. Jordan’s confidence and purity as an artist. “Superficial things to gain from being successful in music don’t interest her, which is cool,” she said. “She has a clear vision, and it’s inspiring.” But Ms. Jordan, who treated herself to a solo visit to the Wizarding World of Harry Potter during a recent stop in Florida and responded to the waitress’s offer of a soda refill with “That would be sick,” is also very much still a teen.

After our aquarium adventure, Ms. Jordan hunted for a lost parking garage voucher in her red Prius, which was littered with candy hearts, empty bottles and toiletries. She admitted to speaking in “meme language” and internet shorthand, subbing “v” for very.
After she signed to Matador, however, Ms. Jordan said she snapped into a fresh head space. “I was obsessed with being the life of the party,” she said. “I was so high energy, [an] extrovert. When I knew I had to start writing, I started to kind of lock myself in my room.” The process of meeting industry operators who didn’t necessarily have her best interests at heart was sobering, and she retreated into books and music for inspiration.
Ms. Jordan had a firm idea of what she wanted “Lush” to sound like, and her producer Jake Aron (who has worked with Solange and Grizzly Bear), said he was impressed by her poise. “The importance of what she’s saying is really central to what makes her music so special, so she really pushed me for clarity” in the production, he said. “It’s crazy she knows this much.” On one of the record’s standouts, “Heat Wave,” Ms. Jordan traces an infatuation that curls into disappointment as surprising bursts of guitar break the track’s calm.
Spending time in the studio appealed to Ms. Jordan’s perfectionist impulses (“There’s so much shaker on the record, it’s sick,” she boasted), and being a full-time artist has also allowed her to indulge her interest in fashion. A few days before our meeting, she attended a Gucci party in New York with two friends from home for support.
“I’m really glad I had them there, because we were the only people sitting because the shoes are a little hard to stand in,” Ms. Jordan said, confessing that she needed to visit the brand’s website to figure out how to affix the long leather strap on the pair she borrowed.
