Climate|Arctic Ice Is Getting ‘Younger.’ But That’s Not Healthier.
Arctic Ice Is Getting ‘Younger.’ But That’s Not Healthier.
This week: The Arctic is melting, and Scott Pruitt is under fire. Also, we answer your question about investing, not just divesting, to make a difference.
In the Arctic Ocean, some ice stays frozen year-round, lasting more than a decade before melting.
This multiyear ice is considered one way to determine the region’s climate health, because older ice tends to be thicker and more resistant to melting. But this winter, the region hit a record low for ice older than five years.
And as darker, heat-absorbing water replaces reflective ice, it hastens warming in the region.
These maps and our full story show how the old ice is disappearing in the Arctic.
Scott Pruitt, the Environmental Protection Agency administrator, has just wrapped up fielding questions from lawmakers about allegations of ethical abuses and excessive spending.
The hearing, before the Senate Appropriations subcommittee on the environment, was Mr. Pruitt’s third congressional appearance in a month. It was the first opportunity, though, for senators to ask Mr. Pruitt about his stewardship of the agency. His earlier appearances were in the House.
This week, a 12th investigation into Mr. Pruitt’s management practices was announced. This one is examining Mr. Pruitt’s use of E.P.A. email addresses that he did not disclose, lawmakers said on Tuesday.
Here are the highlights from Wednesday’s hearing.
Thanks for your question, Eleanor. Some of the earliest student-led campus divestment campaigns focused on getting universities to drop fossil fuel stocks from their portfolios. Proponents saw the act as an ethical statement about investments in technologies that contribute to climate change, and as part of an effort to paint the fossil fuel companies as pariahs. But much of today’s movement calls for both divestment and investment, as you can see in the name of the group DivestInvest.org.
“We felt the investment side of the equation had to be much more explicit,” said Ellen Dorsey, executive director of the Wallace Global Fund, the private philanthropy that helped found DivestInvest.
More than 850 organizations and nearly 60,000 individuals have aligned themselves with the movement’s goals, and 170 foundations have pledged to devote at least 5 percent of their portfolios to areas like renewable and clean technologies, energy efficiency and sustainable energy access for the developing world. Together, the organizations and individuals have assets under management totaling $6 trillion.
That doesn’t mean that it’s easy to do, said Mindy S. Lubber, chief executive of Ceres, a nonprofit that encourages companies to invest with environmental and equitability issues in mind. Institutions don’t have the freedom to tinker that individuals do: Pension funds and university endowments often invest in broad funds, so targeting individual stocks can be difficult, and the institutions also have legal obligations to maximize the financial return on their investments. “They don’t just categorically divest easily,” Ms. Lubber said.
Still, in many ways, the market is driving investors toward renewable sources of energy as fossil fuels like coal and tar sands decline in value. And companies are taking actions to support environmental goals that go beyond investing for profit, as Apple and other companies have done by committing to using only renewable sources of energy.
Thomas P. DiNapoli, the New York State comptroller, announced this year that the state pension fund was doubling the size of its low-emissions investments to $4 billion. “We’ve successfully shifted significant holdings to lower-carbon companies without losing value,” he said at the time.
Daisy Dunne of Carbon Brief wrote an insightful overview of various solar geoengineering ideas to cool the planet, as well as their potential downsides.
With sea levels rising and flooding homes, some policymakers have argued that “managed retreat” away from the coasts is our best option. Christopher Flavelle has a terrific piece in Bloomberg on why that has proved tricky in practice.
David Roberts of Vox looks at the pros and cons of California’s new rule to mandate rooftop solar panels on all new buildings.
Ten years ago, cellulosic biofuels were considered a promising low-carbon alternative to gasoline. Today, the technology is struggling — but here’s a good profile by James Temple of a scientist who hasn’t given up hope.
