Since its publication in 2015, “George” has garnered positive reviews from many news outlets, including The Times. It is published by Scholastic, a $1.6 billion company whose books are in thousands of classrooms across the country. The book has seen its share of controversy; indeed, it appeared on the American Library Association’s list of the 10 Most Challenged Books in 2016 and 2017.
A few parents, weighing in on the Oregon Battle of the Books Facebook group, objected to the book because it features a transgender child. More parents, however, singled out the older brother character, Scott, who, they say, behaves inappropriately in a book aimed at a younger audience. Scott appears on Page 6, banging on the door of a locked bathroom and demanding that George get out. Scott surmises that George is taking so long because she’s “looking at dirty magazines.” Later Scott is more explicit, talking about copies of Girls’ Life that George keeps hidden in a bag. “Dude, I thought you had porn or something in there,” he says.
Darin Drill, superintendent of the Cascade School District, which is south of Salem, said in a phone interview that he had decided to pull the three elementary schools in his district out of OBOB competition at the recommendation of administrators at each school.
A spokeswoman for the Hermiston School District in eastern Oregon cited similar reasons for that district’s decision to keep younger grades out of OBOB for next year.
The OBOB committee is standing by its decision to include “George” next year.
Responses, in support of the book and against it, have numbered in the hundreds. A pro-“George” petition currently has more than 1,500 signatures versus nearly 1,000 signatures on an anti-“George” petition.
Although other states offer Battle of the Books programs, Oregon’s is especially vibrant, and fast-growing. The elementary school division is the most popular. During the current academic year, 869 teams went to regional competitions, according to Ms. Fukasawa. Some elementary schools have as many as 150 students participating from a single school. Although she didn’t know the total number of students across the state in OBOB, a conservative guess would be more than 8,000, she wrote.
Students form teams of four or five and master the content in 16 books. They face off against one another in intra-school “battles,” similar to a quiz show, and then each school can send one team in each division to regional tournaments. Winners at regionals advance to the state finals. The program is voluntary, and no student is required to read every book. In fact, teams often divide the list to increase their odds of success.
Debbie Huffaker, a mother of five in Grants Pass, Ore., has been following the debate on the OBOB Facebook group. She thinks that “George” is not appropriate for the grade levels. Two of her children will be eligible for the elementary division of OBOB next year. She hasn’t decided yet how she will handle “George” with her kids.
