Eric T. Schneiderman, the New York attorney general who resigned this week after four women accused him of assault, was one of the most active state-level opponents of the Trump administration’s efforts to roll back environmental regulations. He was also the first attorney general to open an investigation into Exxon Mobil’s climate policies and statements.
Most of Mr. Schneiderman’s environmental initiatives will almost certainly continue without him, in New York and other states. But a prominent figure in the legal fight against climate change has left the arena, and his eventual replacement could set different priorities.
Beginning the day before President Trump took office — when Mr. Schneiderman filed a motion with five other state attorneys general to protect an Obama-era rule on air pollution that crosses state borders — the office of the New York attorney general has led or taken part in dozens of legal actions, including lawsuits, that opposed Washington’s deregulatory wave.
The State Energy and Environmental Impact Center of the New York University School of Law has counted 55 actions by New York during the Trump era, more than any other state but California, which also has 55.
The lawsuits and other legal filings, brought largely by attorneys general in blue states, follow a range of similar suits filed by conservative counterparts during the Obama administration. Scott Pruitt, now the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, achieved a level of prominence as Oklahoma’s attorney general by filing 14 lawsuits against the agency he now leads.
With 10 other states, New York sued the E.P.A. and Army Corps of Engineers in February over what the states called the Trump administration’s “unlawful delay” of the Obama-era Clean Water Rule.
Mr. Schneiderman filed comments along with 17 other attorneys general in April opposing the administration’s move toward replacing the Clean Power Plan, a signature climate regulation of the Obama administration.
With 14 other attorneys general, he sued the E.P.A. in April over “unreasonably delaying” an Obama-era rule that would curb methane leaks from existing oil and gas operations.
While none have worked their way through the entire judicial process, these legal sorties have scored a half-dozen early court victories, often based on claims that the Trump administration, with its rather chaotic approach to rule making, has committed violations under the Administrative Procedures Act.
In the wake of scandal, the shock to staff members is keenly felt, but “after a day, the assistant A. G.s will get back to work,” Mr. Tierney said. In fact, he said, cases might proceed more smoothly without Mr. Schneiderman, whose tendency to garner publicity for himself could be a distraction.
Other initiatives of Mr. Schneiderman’s office may come under greater scrutiny, Mr. Tierney suggested, in particular the investigation of Exxon Mobil that began in 2015. That inquiry is intended to determine whether the company misled its shareholders and the public in its statements about the effects of climate change on its business.
Exxon, which now acknowledges that climate change is occurring and supports the Paris Agreement and a carbon tax, has strenuously battled Mr. Schneiderman. The company sued in both state and federal court to block the investigation, though both of those lawsuits have been rejected by the courts. The company has announced it will appeal.
But Lee Wasserman, director of the Rockefeller Family Fund, which encouraged Mr. Schneiderman’s Exxon inquiry, said he doubted Mr. Schneiderman’s successor would change course.
An Exxon spokesman declined to comment on Mr. Schneiderman’s resignation or the fate of the investigation.
No matter what happens with Mr. Schneiderman’s office, however, other state attorneys general have already joined the Exxon fight, most notably Maura Healey of Massachusetts, who was included in the suits filed by Exxon.
