When Madeline Singas, then the acting Nassau County district attorney, was campaigning to keep the top job in 2015, her message to Long Island voters was clear: She was a career prosecutor, not a politician.
Now, Ms. Singas has been thrust onto the national stage as the prosecutor appointed to investigate Eric T. Schneiderman, the state’s former attorney general accused of physically assaulting four women with whom he was romantically involved.
The appointment may put Ms. Singas’s political skills to the test. The governor rarely chooses a special prosecutor to take on a case. And in this instance, Mr. Cuomo first took the investigation away from the high-profile Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus Vance Jr., citing what he called “at a minimum the appearance of a conflict of interest.” Mr. Schneiderman had been investigating Mr. Vance’s working relationship with the New York Police Department on sexual assault cases, including a 2015 investigation into Harvey Weinstein that did not result in charges being filed. The move infuriated Mr. Vance, setting off a political squabble that ended, at least publicly, on Thursday when he vowed to support Ms. Singas in her investigation.
At the height of the #MeToo movement, Ms. Singas may be on tricky ground. “She will obviously be under considerable pressure to prosecute, but if you don’t have decent evidence it’ll get thrown out,” said Daniel L. Feldman, a professor of public management at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice.
While Ms. Singas, 51, may not be well-known outside Nassau County, she is no stranger to prosecuting high-profile cases there.
She joined the Nassau County district attorney’s office in 2006 and headed its then-new special victims bureau. She was the lead prosecutor in the case of Ricardo Walters, a former New York City correction officer who was sentenced to 203 years in prison for robbing and raping several women, including one who was pregnant.
She began her career in the Queens district attorney’s office in 1991 where she helped create the domestic violence bureau and served as the deputy bureau chief. She has spent much of her nearly three-decades-long career prosecuting sex crimes, domestic violence, child abuse and public corruption.
Ms. Singas also served as the lead prosecutor on a panel created in 2010 by her predecessor, Kathleen Rice, who is now a congresswoman, to review the conviction of Jesse Friedman, who pleaded guilty in 1988 to charges he had sexually abused children along with his father, Arnold, who ran computer classes in the basement of their Great Neck, N.Y., home. After Mr. Friedman was freed on parole in 2001, he said he was innocent, and contested his conviction in the courts. The United States Court of Appeals ruled in 2010 that it could not overturn Mr. Friedman’s conviction because the appeal was too late, but that there was a “reasonable likelihood” that he was wrongfully convicted.
After a three-year review, the panel led by Ms. Singas stood by the conviction, though in 2013, one of the alleged victims wrote a letter to the Nassau County district attorney’s office recanting his statements. He said the Friedmans had never sexually assaulted him. He was reportedly one of several victims to change or dispute parts of accusations attributed to them in the case.
Mr. Friedman is fighting in court with the district attorney’s office for access to evidence in the case.
It is rare for a governor to appoint a special prosecutor, and it can drag a criminal case into the world of politics. In 1996, Gov. George E. Pataki removed Robert T. Johnson, then the Bronx district attorney, from a case involving a slain police officer because he believed Mr. Johnson would not seek the death penalty. Mr. Johnson objected to the decision, fought the matter in court and lost. In 1986, Gov. Mario Cuomo appointed a special prosecutor to investigate the racially charged attack of three black men in Howard Beach after lawyers for the men accused the Queens district attorney of covering up aspects of the assault.
Over the years she has petitioned state lawmakers to enact greater restrictions for registered sex offenders and called out schools for failing to follow a state law that requires education officials to report incidents of bullying, harassment and intimidation. She began a probe into the county’s contracting practices that found a host of deficiencies. She also challenged elected officials’ use of publicly funded mailings for promotional purposes.
