It has been one of the most pressing questions in the TV industry: Will the Fox TV chiefs Dana Walden and Gary Newman head to Disney, or will they strike out on their own when their contracts expire in a couple of months?
It may be a little longer before that question is ultimately answered.
Ms. Walden and Mr. Newman, the co-chief executives of the Fox television group, are in advanced talks to extend their contracts with 21st Century Fox for an extra year, according to three people briefed on the negotiations who spoke on condition of anonymity because the talks are ongoing.
The new deal would give Ms. Walden and Mr. Newman time to figure out whether they will stick with the Fox broadcast network, go to Disney with much of 21st Century Fox’s entertainment assets or look for other jobs. It would allow Ms. Walden and Mr. Newman to stay until a deal is closed, and would give them flexibility to leave sooner or stay later depending on when the sale is completed. Their current contracts with Fox are set to expire this summer.
The Walt Disney Company reached an agreement for most of 21st Century Fox’s entertainment properties in December. That deal is awaiting regulatory approval. Things could get complicated depending on the outcome of the Justice Department’s lawsuit to stop AT&T’s merger with Time Warner, or if Comcast, which made an offer for Fox before Disney did, goes ahead with a hostile bid.
However, barring those hiccups, the Disney deal could be completed within a year.
Ms. Walden, who is known to have a deft hand with talent and is the godmother of the star showrunner Ryan Murphy’s children, is one of the most powerful female executives in the television industry. She has run the broadcast network with Mr. Newman since 2014, and they have run Fox’s TV studio together for almost two decades.
But in the time since they’ve run the broadcast network, Fox has not been able to climb out of a years-long slump that started when ratings for “American Idol” began to crater. The studio’s biggest recent hit, “This Is Us,” airs on NBC.
Earlier this year, Ms. Walden briefly spoke to Amazon for its chief entertainment job before pulling out. The position ultimately went to Jennifer Salke, a former colleague of Ms. Walden’s.
On Monday, Ms. Walden and Mr. Newman presided over Fox’s annual upfront presentation for advertisers. The event was muted, by the usual glitz-and-glam standards of the upfronts, featuring lots of talk about future sports rights for Fox.
The fallout of the deal has already begun. Mr. Murphy, the executive producer behind “American Crime Story” and “Glee,” has already made a $300 million deal to go to Netflix. He showed up at Fox’s upfront presentation on Monday, but his new deal with the streaming service begins in six weeks.