On March 29 last year, Scott Pruitt, the administrator of the E.P.A., had vanished for several hours after reporting to his staff that he was feeling ill. Security was dispatched to the $50-a-night, lobbyist-owned Capitol Hill condo where he was living to see if he was O.K.
To gain entry, the agents had to knock down the front door to the building.
Mr. Pruitt was fine. But the episode grew into one of the early mysteries of his tenure: What happened that day? New documents obtained this week through a Freedom of Information request help to explain the sequence of events, and the monthslong effort to get the E.P.A. to pay for the door.
The emails detail what happened next. An agent “is on site and is breaching [name redacted] door to gain access,” said a 5:20 p.m. email sent to the E.P.A. inspector general’s office and to the head of the agency’s criminal investigations unit.
Mr. Pruitt, his staff said, had told his aides the day before that he was feeling groggy and had a bad headache. The episode took place at the condo Mr. Pruitt was renting, from the wife of a lobbyist, J. Steven Hart, whose firm had business pending with Mr. Pruitt and the E.P.A.
The rental of the condo is the subject of an investigation by the E.P.A.’s inspector general. Until last month Mr. Hart was the chairman of Williams & Jensen lobbying firm, whose E.P.A.-regulated clients included Oklahoma Gas & Electric; Smithfield Foods, the world’s largest pork processor; and Enbridge, a Canadian pipeline company.
Mr. Pruitt has defended the rental as within ethics guidelines, has said he was paying market rates and has said his living arrangements had no bearing on any policy decisions at E.P.A.
The emails include correspondence that took place after the security detail first went to the condo, at 233 C Street NE, a mile and a half from the E.P.A. headquarters, as well as a series of follow-ups as the building owners attempted to get the agency to reimburse it for the damage.
The total bill: $2,460.
According to a spokesman for the landlord, Vicki Hart, only one door was actually smashed. Apparently Mr. Pruitt was awakened when the front door to the building was broken open, meaning he was able to unlock a second door inside the unit before that was broken down, too, the spokesman said. Mr. Pruitt had been staying in a room on the third door of the Capitol Hill townhouse.
It was not until mid-September, at the earliest, that the agency moved to pay the bill. “Kindly confirm when we can expect to receive payment,” said one email from mid-August, following up on an invoice that had been sent in May detailing the cost of the damage.
A spokesman for Mr. Pruitt, Jahan Wilcox, declined to provide further details about the episode. The E.P.A. has acknowledged that it reimbursed the condo association $2,640 for the cost of the new door.
Mr. Pruitt has a 20-member security detail providing round-the-clock protection that has cost more than $3 million in salary, overtime and travel. Asked on Tuesday why the security detail did not have a key to open the door, an E.P.A. agent involved in the matter, John Mickle, said he had no comment.
In July 2017 Mr. Hart, the former lobbyist, met with Mr. Pruitt on behalf of a client of his firm, Smithfield Foods and its Smithfield Foundation, while Mr. Pruitt was living in the condo, to discuss funding for the cleanup of the Chesapeake Bay. He later sent an email to Mr. Pruitt’s chief of staff asking Mr. Pruitt to appoint people recommended by his client to the E.P.A.’s prestigious Science Advisory Board.
Representative Betty McCollum of Minnesota, the top Democrat on the House Appropriations Committee panel that oversees the E.P.A., has objected to the agency paying for the door. Ms. McCollum owns a condo adjacent to the building where Mr. Pruitt was living, and was present when security officers broke down the door.
“I know that Congress appropriates money for the E.P.A. to protect human health and the environment — not for repairs to the administrator’s residence,” she wrote in a letter last month to the agency.