Harveen K. Gill and Rajinder Singh Dhaliwal were married May 26 in Yuba City, Calif. Baltej S. Dhillon, a Sikh priest, performed the ceremony at Tierra Buena Sikh Temple.
The bride, 28, will take her husband’s name. She is a deputy city attorney, specializing in labor and employment cases, in Oakland, Calif. She graduated cum laude from Pepperdine, and received a law degree from the University of California, Davis.
She is a daughter of Neena Gill and Kash S. Gill of Yuba City. The bride’s father is a senior vice president and oversees agricultural lending in California for Banner Bank, a commercial bank with headquarters in Walla Walla, Wash.; his office is in Yuba City. He is also a former mayor of Yuba City. Her mother is an academic counselor at Yuba College, a community college in Marysville, Calif.
The groom, 34, is a manager for crediting and compensation at Salesforce, a San Francisco company that provides cloud-based business platforms. He graduated with first-class honors from Coventry University in England and received a master’s degree in international money and banking from Birmingham University in England.
He is a son of Gurbax K. Dhaliwal and Bant S. Dhaliwal of Rocklin, Calif. The groom’s father retired as the owner of several groceries and convenience stores in the Spar chain in England; his office was in Birmingham.
The couple met in 2016, after Ms. Gill’s mother asked her friends if any of them knew of an eligible bachelor she might set up with her daughter. One of them knew someone who knew Mr. Dharwali’s family, and soon Mr. Dharwali was asked to supply a résumé, a school transcript and a photograph. He obliged.
She told him she was busy but might be available the following week, while hoping that he would lose interest and forget about her. “I was just thinking I could brush him aside,” she said.
So though she put him off, precisely a week later, he texted her again. This time she relented.
Their first date, at a Sacramento restaurant, was for cocktails. But with the drinks was “great conversation,” Ms. Gill said. And so they had dinner, too. “And I hadn’t even heard his voice when we went on our first date!” the bride said.
The couple had two more dates within the week.
“He’s really nice, super fun, smart, educated, motivated and career oriented,” she said.
