The Learning Network|Should Colleges and Universities Contact the Families of Students Who are Struggling?
Should Colleges and Universities Contact the Families of Students Who are Struggling?
Going off to college and becoming independent from one’s family is generally seen as the first step in young adulthood.
But if students struggle—whether with grades, adjusting to college life, mental health or anything else—should their parents be alerted? Would such an act be a help or an invasion of privacy?
What if the student in question is in extreme distress?
Every year, parents send their children to college, trusting that they will be well, or that word will come if they are not. Ms. Burton had lived every parent’s nightmare: a child flunking out, sinking into despair, his parents the last to know. Her discovery set off a wave of pain and soul-searching but also a campaign to strip away some of the veils of confidentiality that colleges say protect the privacy and autonomy of students who are learning to be adults.
Suicide is the second-leading cause of death, after accidents, for college-age adults in the United States. The number of college students seeking treatment for anxiety and depression has risen sharply over the past few years, and schools have in turn stepped up their efforts in mental health research and intervention. Even so, families have continued to put pressure on them to take greater responsibility for students’ well-being.
In a case that was closely watched across the country, Massachusetts’s highest court ruled on Monday that M.I.T. could not be held responsible for the 2009 suicide of a graduate student. But the court ruled that a university might be liable under limited circumstances, such as when a student expressly tells college staff members of plans to commit suicide.
— Do you think Hamilton College should have contacted Ms. Burton regarding her son’s welfare?
— If so, at what point should she have been contacted? Why?
— If you are in favor of college and universities communicating with families when necessary, what circumstances merit such intervention? What circumstances do not? Explain your reasoning.
— What, if anything, do you think are colleges and universities’ responsibilities regarding the mental wellness of their students?
— What is your opinion of the recent ruling that states a university might be liable to intervene in cases such as a student telling a professor or other university employee of suicidal intentions?
