AMERICAN BALLET THEATER at the Metropolitan Opera (May 14-July 7). “Giselle” was a smash hit from the moment it had its premiere in Paris in 1841, and more than a century and a half later, it remains the quintessential Romantic ballet. Performances of “Giselle” (Monday through May 19) open American Ballet Theater’s spring season with seven of the company’s principal ballerinas trading off in the title role of the peasant girl who is deceived by a nobleman in disguise but nevertheless defends him against the wilis, those famously fierce, vengeful sirens.
MILKA DJORDJEVICH at the Chocolate Factory (May 16-19, 8 p.m., through May 26). In 1965, Yvonne Rainer introduced her “No Manifesto,” which argued against spectacle and style in performance and helped usher in the genre known as postmodern dance. In “Anthem,” Ms. Djordevich pushes back against those edicts by embracing “theatricality, virtuosity and sass” through a mix of various dance styles and repetitive movements that grow in complexity before dissolving in chaos. The goal is, in part, to reclaim female sexuality in dance, which the choreographer’s four dancers do while surrounded on all sides by the audience.
FLAMENCO VIVO CARLOTA SANTANA at BAM Fisher (May 15-18, 7:30 p.m., through May 20). To celebrate its 35th anniversary, this New York-based flamenco company is giving itself a gift: a new work by the great flamenco dancer and innovator Belén Maya. That work, for six dancers, is called “Mujeres Valientes” (“Brave Women”), and it honors the courage of Latin American women fighting injustice over the centuries, particularly the 17th-century poet and philosopher Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz and the 19th-century revolutionary Manuela Sáenz. In addition, Flamenco Vivo presents two rising choreographers from Spain, José Maldonado and Guadalupe Torres, who each perform a solo.
FULL CIRCLE SOULJAHS at Danspace Project (May 17-19, 8 p.m.). The hip-hop dance pioneers Gabriel “Kwikstep” Dionisio and Ana “Rokafella” Garcia founded Full Circle in 1992 in the Bronx to support and cultivate that dance style as it entered mainstream consciousness. A quarter-century later, they’re still championing it and expanding its reach. Their latest theatrical creation, “Boxed In,” follows a B-boy, a D.J., a pianist and two ballerinas as they navigate the limitations of their respective forms and attempt to push past them into new artistic territory. Hip-hop music is juxtaposed with Bach, while classical ballet and breaking share the stage.
LAMAMA MOVES! DANCE FESTIVAL at the Ellen Stewart Theater and the Downstairs Theater and Lounge (through June 3). The 13th season of this eclectic festival features a robust schedule, and this week brings “This Dancerie” (May 11-13), a performance and accompanying installation by Tony Whitfield that focuses on queer visibility and defiance in early 20th-century Paris; Adham Hafez’s “To Catch a Terrorist” (May 12-13), which considers bodies and borders; and “Shared Evening of Dance” (May 17-18) featuring works by Parijat Desai, Paz Tanjuaquio and Angie Pittman.
PARSONS DANCE at the Joyce Theater (May 15, 7 p.m., through May 27). David Parsons brings his brand of entertaining athleticism and a handful of new works to the Joyce for two weeks. For the gala performance on Tuesday, Mr. Parsons presents “Stranger to the Rain,” a tribute to the Broadway composer Stephen Schwartz of “Wicked” fame (who will accompany on piano), as well as the premieres of “Microburst,” a collaboration with the tabla player Avirodh Sharma, and “Reflections,” a solo for the retiring company dancer Abby Silva Gavezzoli. Also on tap are the company premiere of Trey McIntyre’s “Ma Maison” and the perennially popular dance “Caught,” a duet between a dancer and perfectly timed lighting cues.
ARIEL RIVKA DANCE, AMY MARSHALL DANCE COMPANY AND CHANEL DASILVA at New York Live Arts (May 17-18, 7:30 p.m., through May 19). Three choreographers come together to present seven works with a thematic focus on female empowerment. Ariel Grossman, the director of Ariel Rivka Dance, presents three works including “She,” a premiere that explores the challenges of motherhood. Chanel DaSilva sets a work called “Necessary Evil” on Ms. Grossman’s dancers, with music by Nina Simone, while Amy Marshall contributes three works to the program, including “Shakambhari,” inspired by the strength of a Hindu goddess.
