Hold on to your crown jewels, members of Parliament: Caitlyn Jenner will address the House of Commons on Wednesday.
The talk is part of a series of lectures on the importance of diversity; other speeches have come from the British actors Riz Ahmed and Idris Elba. Ms. Jenner, the former Olympic athlete and reality show star, will be speaking in Westminster about the issue of gender identity and the heavy burdens carried by trans people worldwide.
You could reasonably ask whether Caitlyn Jenner is the right person to address Parliament on this issue, and many advocates are doing just that; she was, after all, an early enthusiast of Donald Trump, the biggest disaster for trans people in decades. But that’s not what unsettled me when I first learned of her speech.
Strangely, during Tuesday’s “debate,” Ms. Greer denied having ever said anything critical about transgender women, ever, and seemed to express a newfound respect for non-binary identities. It wasn’t clear, at least to me, whether she was gaslighting her audience or whether her views had genuinely evolved. One of the panelists noted, “She doesn’t know what she thinks,” and it was hard to disagree.
I wasn’t surprised. This is what happens when we act as if the humanity of vulnerable, marginalized people is up for debate.
But transgender people don’t need any more think pieces about the legitimacy of our lives. What we need, and what we deserve, is justice, and compassion, and love. What we need is freedom from violence, and protection from homelessness, and the right not to lose our jobs, or our children, or our lives.
I don’t know whether I have ever spoken or written a word about my identity that has had half the effect of simply living my life publicly and without shame. At long last, I have landed on a new strategy for refuting the ideas of people who think I don’t exist.
I refute them by existing.
And yet somehow, in the wake of that, Ms. Jenner and the other transgender people on the panel failed to disappear. Instead, they continued to exist — with dignity and courage and love.