Don’t call it junk food.
It’s academic research, at least for a University of Winnipeg historian, Janis Thiessen. Or just call it a snack, based on the title of Professor Thiessen’s latest book. While traveling on assignment recently, I picked up a copy of “Snacks: A Canadian Food History,” which was published last year. I became intrigued and decided this newsletter deserved some snack time.
Canada once had a wide array of Canadian brands of potato chips, other salty snacks and candies. But as in most of the rest of the world, the number of nationally owned or nation-specific brands has dwindled.
Professor Thiessen’s book also punctured some accepted wisdom about just how Canadian some famous snacks really are.
Probably the most Canadian of non-candy snacks are Hawkins Cheezies, made by W.T. Hawkins and the pride of Belleville, Ontario. For the benefit of non-Canadians, Cheezies share the saltiness and nowhere-in-nature orange of Cheetos, the puffed-up offering of the multinational PepsiCo, but little else. Hawkins Cheezies are hard like a crunchy nut and come in an assortment of irregular shapes and sizes.
The Hawkins Cheezie came about when someone at the company saw a newly developed machine that extruded pellets of corn meal for feeding cattle.
W.T. Hawkins is now “a Canadian company,” as it says on its packages beneath a red maple leaf. But it was originally the Canadian subsidiary of a large snack maker based in Chicago that made a variety of treats. The company’s Canadianization, detailed in Professor Thiessen’s book, is a convoluted story involving a bitterly contested divorce, a bankruptcy and suggestions of Mafia influence through the Teamsters.
In Western Canada, Hawkins Cheezies are distributed by Old Dutch Foods, a Winnipeg-based company that defines potato chips in that part of the country. Many Canadians, even many Winnipegers, believe that Old Dutch is an all-Canadian company, Professor Thiessen said. But its nationality is more complex.
It is actually a subsidiary of an American company of the same name, which is headquartered in Roseville, Minn., where it makes chips for the United States market. But unusually for an American company, the Canadian operations dominate, providing about 70 percent of its business. Old Dutch Canada mainly uses Canadian potatoes that are fried in Canadian canola oil in Canadian plants.
Professor Thiessen said that Old Dutch’s Canadian and American arms diverge when it comes to chip flavors. Canadians prefer anything involving vinegar as well as less conventional seasonings like dill pickle (one of her favorites). Sour cream and onion is more of a hit in the United States. Theories abound to explain the taste differences and include the Canadian habit of squirting vinegar on French fries and the differences in ethic backgrounds between immigrants to Canada’s West (Eastern Europe) and Minnesota (Scandinavia).
The Cuban Lunch had nothing obviously Caribbean about it except, maybe, that it contained sugar. And there remains considerable debate about its recipe, including discussion on a Facebook group devoted to the revival of this chocolate and peanut delight.
“That’s one of the mysteries that remains unsolved,” said Professor Thiessen, who was unable to obtain the definitive recipe even from the last Paulins plant manager.
Can Canada Letter readers crack this case? Do you know the one and true Cuban Lunch recipe? Do you know how it got its name? Is there a Canadian snack food that’s disappeared but that you still pine for? And is there a uniquely Canadian, commercially made snack where you live that the rest of the country should know about? (Let’s exclude baked goods like the Joe Louis.) Please send your answers along to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Professor Thiessen’s book is highly informative, filled with nostalgia and amusement. But it’s an academic history, so you may find yourself skipping over some abstruse sections to get to the sweet and salty bits.
The distance between the arena in Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario and the hotel where Givani Smith of the Kitchener Rangers is easily walked. But racist threats meant that he had to travel in a police cruiser.
—Dan Bilefsky has traced how Alexandre Bissonnette went from being “a mousy and soft-spoken chess-obsessed student from a middle class family” to someone obsessed by “far-right, mass killers, Donald Trump and Muslims” who ultimately a killed six people in a Quebec City mosque last year.
—Team names and mascots based on stereotypes of Indigenous people have pretty much vanished in Canada. But the offensive practice thrives in Europe. In England, fans of the Exeter Chiefs, a rugby team, call themselves the Tribe in an online group, communicate on a message board called the Pow-Wow, drink in stadium bars called Wigwam, Cheyenne, Apache, Mohawk and Tomahawk and are led in “tomahawk chops” by a mascot named Big Chief.
—Ninalee Allen Craig, who was the subject of an iconic photo taken in Florence in 1951 by Ruth Orkin, died in Toronto, her longtime home, last week.
—Charlie Russell, a self-taught naturalist from Pincher Creek, Alberta, who studied grizzly bears by living with them, died in Calgary on Monday because of complications from surgery. Mr. Russell long urged people to seek coexistence with bears rather than dealing with them in fear.
