The highly regulated season for snagging paddlefish on the Yellowstone River, near the North Dakota border, opened on May 15, some 15 miles from this small town. Dozens of fishers, sitting in lawn chairs and standing in waders, crowded the tree-lined bank below Intake Diversion Dam, which provides water for irrigation.
Instead of flies, these fishers tie a large treble hook on the end of a heavy line on a large rod, the kind used for saltwater fishing. Below that they tie a quarter-pound of lead, or sometimes a sparkplug or piece of chain from a chain saw, to pull the hook down in the rapidly flowing water.
The river’s average flow for May 15 is 17,000 cubic feet per second. This year, the figure was 47,400 cubic feet per second, mainly because of a very snowy winter.
When a fish is hooked, a cry goes up: “Fish on!” People look to see who has a deeply bent rod. It can take five or ten minutes of intense, high-tension reeling to bring in the heavy fish. Once it slides onto the gravelly bank, the hooks are removed.
Paddlefish are one-of-a-kind, in the same family as sturgeon. They are silvery gray with tiny eyes, extremely large gills and a toothless mouth. They are filter feeders with large comb-like “gill-rakers” in their gaping mouths that filter zooplankton, their main food, from the water.
Their signature feature is the unusual flat paddle, or rostrum, that extends from the snout and can be half as long as the fish. It’s part of a unique, highly sensitive electro-sensing system that, in concert with tens of thousands of tiny sensors on its head, functions like sonar to detect zooplankton. Sharks and platypus have similar systems for locating food.
While a big trout in Montana might weigh four or five pounds, the record paddlefish caught in this state in 1973 weighed 142.5 pounds. The national record is 198 pounds. An old trout is one that is near 10 years old; paddlefish live to be 50 or 60 years old.
The paddlefish season runs here until June 30 but may end earlier if the 1,000-fish quota is reached. Last year, it was over in five days. An archery season opens in July: People hunt the fish with lights from boats at night.
Then he snips a piece of jawbone and counts the layers like tree rings to determine the age of the fish — something he has done with every paddlefish caught in the caviar programs in the three states. His collection of jawbones go back to 1990, an unusually rich trove of scientific data.
The giant fish are laid on a conveyor, still flopping, and ushered into a “cutting trailer” where they are quickly sliced into fillets. The roe, a dark gray egg mass, is scooped into bowls. A female can carry as much as 30 pounds of eggs. About two-thirds is the finished weight.
The eggs are screened and washed by workers in rubber aprons and gloves in a separate “egg trailer,” the eggshells and fat discarded. The fillets are bagged and given to the fishers along with a paddlefish recipe book.
After expenses, 30 percent of the proceeds goes to fund research and monitoring efforts by the Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks. The rest goes to the Caviar Grant Program, which donates to a variety of nonprofits in 15 rural counties for purposes ranging from playground construction to building preservation. The program has handed out almost $1 million since its inception in 1990.
Dr. Scarnecchia credits proceeds from the caviar programs for maintaining consistent monitoring of the species that has helped keep populations from falling further.
