Art & Design|The European Union Is Under Threat. Artists Say It’s Time to Rebrand.
The European Union Is Under Threat. Artists Say It’s Time to Rebrand.
AMSTERDAM — With populist politicians across the Continent attacking the European Union and negotiations underway for Britain to leave the bloc, the very idea of a unified Europe seems to be under threat. Some artists feel the union needs to rethink its public image and refine its communications strategy to combat these attacks. In other words: to rebrand Europe.
The German photographer Wolfgang Tillmans has teamed up with a friend, the Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas, to encourage artists and other creative people to brainstorm ways for Europe to better present itself to the public.
More than 400 proposals from 43 countries poured in. A German fashion designer had an idea for a unisex jacket that would serve as a ticket for public transportation in all 28 member states. A dance troupe with members from Albania, France and Italy proposed filming folk dances at European historical sites that could then be broadcast or viewed with virtual reality goggles. A musician from Hungary proposed a new anthem, and dozens of artists sent sketches for new European Union flags and designs for new euro bills and coins. Several proposals suggested the bloc needed to develop a new sense of humor.
Mr. Tillmans considers himself to be a product of a “Pan-European experience.” He grew up in West Germany, moved to England as an exchange student in the 1980s, and has spent much of his adult life between London and Berlin; his burgundy European Union passport gives him the right to live and work in any member country.
“I think that inevitably we also need to look at what’s causing this kind of persistent problem of the difficulty of communicating about Europe,” he added.
The European Union communication department is primarily tasked with informing member states and journalists about legislation and political initiatives. It has recently introduced a campaign called “E.U. and Me” to help younger Europeans learn how they benefit from the union. Carolien Peeters, a project adviser on that campaign, said that she and other officials planned to attend Eurolab, adding that she hoped to leave with new perspective and inspiration.
Mr. Albrecht said that he had organized the conference to give cultural leaders a voice.
