NASHVILLE — President Trump accused Democrats on Tuesday of siding with brutal immigrant gang members over American citizens and implored Republican voters to turn out in November’s midterm elections or risk the safety of their country.
During a raucous rally in Nashville, Mr. Trump invoked fears of crimes committed by illegal immigrants, particularly by the transnational gang MS-13, to argue for stricter border policies, including his long-promised wall, and charged that Democrats were standing in the way.
He worked an audience of about 5,500 people into a frenzy by recalling the term he used this month during a discussion of how difficult it was to target suspected undocumented immigrants, including criminal gang members, for deportation.
“What was the name?” Mr. Trump asked. “Animals!” his cheering supporters screamed back.
Mr. Trump was in Nashville to boost Representative Marsha Blackburn, a Republican, who is running to succeed Senator Bob Corker, who is retiring. He savaged Phil Bredesen, the state’s former Democratic governor whom Ms. Blackburn is expected to face in November, calling him “an absolute, total tool of Chuck Schumer,” the Senate Democratic leader, and “of course, the MS-13 lover Nancy Pelosi,” he said, referring to the House Democratic leader.
Mr. Trump’s appearance in Nashville was a new phase of heightened campaign activity for the president as he looks toward the midterm elections, keeping an early focus on the deeply conservative states he won handily in 2016 and steering clear of politically competitive areas where his presence could be riskier. Ms. Blackburn has tethered herself tightly to Mr. Trump in her bid, a vital race for Republicans working to hold off Democratic attempts to seize the majority.
During an hourlong performance before a huge American flag, Mr. Trump plainly relished his time in front of the cheering crowd, regaling them with stories of what he argued were unmatched successes as president, and drifting off script for brash asides.
The president made only glancing mention of the special counsel investigating Russia’s interference in the 2016 election, an inquiry that he had suggested in a Twitter post earlier in the day itself constituted “MEDDLING” in the midterm contests.
An F.B.I. informant did contact members of Mr. Trump’s campaign team after a counterintelligence investigation into possible efforts by Moscow to interfere in the election uncovered that the aides had been communicating with Russians.
And he took aim at Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, who has brain cancer, for voting against a Republican proposal last year to repeal the Affordable Care Act.
At one point, making the case that his policies had benefited black Americans, Mr. Trump claimed incorrectly that African-Americans had supported Democrats “for over 100 years.” It was not until the 1965 Voting Rights Act that the majority of African-Americans could vote, and those who could before then mostly supported Republicans until the 1930s.
And at another point, Mr. Trump hinted that he would force Mexico to pay for his border wall — which officials there have flatly refused to do — using the renegotiation of the North American Free Trade Agreement as leverage.
Still, Mr. Trump managed to stick to one element of his script that his aides and Republican strategists pray privately he will not forget to emphasize: a direct plea to core supporters to turn out and buck the well-established pattern whereby the president’s party loses seats in midterm contests.
