WASHINGTON — Prominent Democrats — stung by their eroding support from working-class voters but buoyed by the deficit-be-damned approach of ruling Republicans — are embracing a big idea from a bygone era: guaranteed employment.
How such guarantees would be paid for is still largely unresolved. And criticism of the idea has emerged not only from conservatives who detect a whiff of socialism but also from liberals who say guaranteed employment is the wrong way to attack the central issue facing workers in this low-unemployment economy: stagnant wages.
But Democratic leaders hope the push will help their party bridge the growing political divide between white and minority workers, and silence the naysayers who accuse the party of being devoid of new, big ideas.
The employment plans, along with single-payer “Medicare for all” health care, free college, legalized marijuana and ever less restrictive immigration rules, are parts of a broader trend toward a more liberal Democratic Party in the Trump era.
Federal job guarantees are a throwback idea. President Franklin D. Roosevelt essentially called for them in his “Second Bill of Rights” speech in 1944, which held that Americans had “the right to a useful and remunerative job” and “the right to earn enough to provide adequate food and clothing and recreation.” The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. endorsed the idea in the 1960s.
A handful of liberal researchers have revived and promoted such a plan in recent years, including Mark Paul, William A. Darity Jr. of Duke University and Darrick Hamilton of the New School. Last year, the Center for American Progress, a liberal think tank stacked with veterans of the Obama administration, released a job guarantee proposal that would employ an estimated 4.4 million Americans. Last Tuesday, the group released a follow-up plan that detailed how it would guarantee jobs to Americans who live in particularly distressed communities, urban and rural.
Mr. Booker’s plan would create pilot programs to provide jobs to Americans in as many as 15 areas where the unemployment rate remains dismal. Its co-sponsors include three Democratic senators also seen as possible presidential candidates: Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, Kamala Harris of California and Kirsten Gillibrand of New York.
Senator Chris Van Hollen of Maryland, the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee chairman, would fund “transitional” jobs lasting up to one year for workers who have been unemployed for six months or more. Representative Ro Khanna of California would provide federally subsidized employment, in the public or private sector, for anyone who wants to work, for a maximum period of two and a half years.
The most ambitious proposal, an outline from Senator Bernie Sanders, independent of Vermont and another possible White House hopeful, would promise a government job in areas such as construction, child care and park maintenance to anyone who wants one, paying a “living wage” and offering benefits on par with what current federal employees earn.
Given the current state of the job market, the operative word there is “good.” It has been a long time since jobs have been this easy to find in the United States. Unemployment fell to nearly a half-century low of 3.9 percent in April.
At the same time, wage growth has only sluggishly advanced. Real median household income is up only slightly from where it was in 2000. Critics from the left say a job guarantee will not adequately address that broad wage issue.
Advocates of the more targeted jobs plans say they are needed to help workers who are still stuck on the bad side of the improving national employment numbers.
Conservatives say the most sweeping job guarantee plans could ignite runaway inflation and impose a large degree of central planning on private industry. From the left, Ms. Kim said she worries the effort would create “a permanent class of underclass jobs” that some workers would not be able to move up from.
And then there is the cost. Mr. Sanders’s office said his plan is not yet complete and thus cannot be assessed, for costs or for the benefits it would bring to the economy. Others estimate their plans would cost hundreds of billions of dollars over a decade, but could be funded all or in part by rolling back some parts of the tax law that Mr. Trump signed in December, estimated to cost $1.5 trillion over 10 years.
Democrats’ casual attitude toward cost is in part a reaction to the Republican tax bill, which was passed without much concern for rising government red ink. It also reflects a growing belief among many liberals that a clear lesson from Mr. Trump’s victory is that Democrats need to go bold — and spend big.
