One evening, at the end of a 14-hour day that included posing and dance practices, the squad’s director told nine of the 36 cheerleaders that their work was not done. They had a special assignment for the night. Some of the male sponsors had picked them to be personal escorts at a nightclub.
The Redskins’ weeklong trip to Costa Rica in 2013 — for which the cheerleaders were paid nothing beyond transportation costs, meals and lodging, the team said — provides a vivid illustration of how N.F.L. teams have used cheerleaders for far more than sideline dancers during games. Their treatment has come under intense scrutiny in recent weeks since two former N.F.L. cheerleaders filed discrimination complaints and described a hostile work environment in which they were often dangled as sex objects for the titillation of male fans away from the games.
Interviews with dozens of current and former N.F.L. cheerleaders revealed a common perspective: They enjoyed performing at games, developing friendships with other cheerleaders and participating in charity work, which included visiting hospitals and going overseas to entertain military troops. But they were disturbed by some of the extracurricular requirements that put them in what they considered unsafe situations.
This account of the Redskins’ calendar shoot at the Occidental Grand Papagayo is based on interviews with five cheerleaders who were involved, and many details were corroborated with others who heard descriptions of the trip at the time. The cheerleaders spoke on condition of anonymity because they were required to sign confidentiality agreements when they joined the team.
Stephanie Jojokian, the longtime director and choreographer for the Redskins’ cheerleaders, disputed much of the women’s description of the Costa Rica trip. She vehemently denied that the night at the club was mandatory and said that the cheerleaders who went were not chosen by sponsors.
After Daniel Snyder bought the Redskins in 1999, the cheerleading program was given a makeover. He brought it in-house — it had operated independently — and its style became increasingly risqué.
In an interactive feature on the Redskins’ website, fans were able to play a version of the “hot or not” game, clicking on a flame to pick between images of two cheerleaders. In online video interviews in the past, the cheerleaders were asked, “Describe your perfect date” and “What’s the first thing you notice about a man?” (Since publication of this article, the “hot or not” interactive has been removed).
Many Redskins cheerleaders understand the team’s approach — sex sells — and remain enthusiastic supporters of the team. They said they were troubled, however, when their safety was not taken seriously. There is no leaguewide policy for security, or a union to protect them.
A half-dozen Redskins cheerleaders said Ms. Jojokian seemed especially focused on preserving relationships with businessmen who supported the team and her nonprofit dance company, Capitol Movement.
In an interview on Tuesday, Ms. Jojokian choked up when she considered that some cheerleaders felt she did not fully support them.
A recent contract for Redskins cheerleaders said off-the-field work would include “community and charitable events, youth camps, etc.” There was no mention of having to entertain men who financially support the team, and these appearances raised flags for some cheerleaders.
In 2012, Ms. Jojokian, a former squad director and choreographer for the N.B.A.’s Washington Wizards, announced a mandatory team-bonding boat trip. At a pier in Washington’s Georgetown neighborhood where the cheerleaders were to board, they discovered that it wasn’t the commercial party boat they had expected. It was a yacht with several men aboard — including a familiar face, William R. Teel Jr.
Mr. Teel, 52, was a longtime Redskins suite holder and a local businessman with close ties to the team. He lent cornerback Carlos Rogers $125,000 in 2009, and later sued Mr. Rogers to get the money back.
He also maintained a close relationship with the cheerleading program. For about a decade, one or both of Mr. Teel’s companies, Energy Enterprise Solutions and 1 Source Consulting, sponsored the cheerleading program and, for a few years, Capitol Movement, Ms. Jojokian’s dance company. As an Army veteran, he said he was drawn to sponsor the cheerleading team because of the many trips it took to entertain United States military troops overseas.
As a sponsor, he helped judge cheerleader tryouts and occasionally was invited to buy package deals to attend calendar shoots. Mr. Teel also paid for Redskins cheerleaders to go to Super Bowls.
Ms. Jojokian said that Mr. Teel always made deals with the cheerleaders “on his own” for those Super Bowl trips and that those trips were not sanctioned by the Redskins. Mr. Teel said, however, that he always worked through Ms. Jojokian to determine which cheerleaders would participate on his trips and that he always provided security.
Ms. Jojokian said that she, too, was not expecting to see strangers on Mr. Teel’s boat that day. “I didn’t necessarily feel that we were bonding in a way that was helpful for the whole season,” she said.
Mr. Teel, whose name is still painted on two prime parking spots at FedExField though he no longer owns a suite at the stadium, was adamant in saying that nothing inappropriate happened on his boat and that he always treated the cheerleaders with respect.
He added that the Redskins had asked him if they could use his yacht for the 2012 cheerleading team’s event.
For the Costa Rica trip, the cheerleaders had a dress code: white tops, khaki bottoms and heels. Straw hats were permitted, while flats were definitely not.
Their suitcases were packed with bathing suits, which they had to purchase for the photo shoots, and food. Disordered eating was common on the team, several of the cheerleaders said. Laxative abuse was prevalent. Many N.F.L. teams, if not all of them, have weight restrictions in cheerleaders’ contracts, forbidding them to gain more than a few pounds. The Occidental Grand Papagayo is an all-inclusive resort, but the women did not feel they could indulge in the buffets. Besides, they said, they often were too busy to eat proper meals.
They said their hotel rooms turned into markets, with stacks of fiber and protein bars, rice cakes, peanut butter and cans of tuna.
During the photo shoots, they were anxiously aware when the sponsors and other guests were watching.
The nine cheerleaders picked to escort the sponsors to a nightclub boarded a hotel van without any Redskins management. When they showed up at the club, it was dark and nearly empty, several of them said. But the men who had requested them were there.
The cheerleaders said they were further bothered by the fact that Redskins officials were there, too. Ms. Jojokian was not, but Lon Rosenberg, the senior vice president for operations, and Dennis Greene, the president for business operations, were. A former Redskins cheerleader who volunteered as a sideline assistant during games was encouraging the women to drink and flirt, the cheerleaders said.
“The issue was that management seemed to condone all of this,” one cheerleader who was there said.
“I guess they thought you were prostitutes,” a man affiliated with the cheerleading squad told them after they were allowed to leave.
They returned to the resort, but several women on the team decided not to return to the squad the next season. What happened in Costa Rica, they said, made them feel worthless and unprotected.
She added: “No sponsor is worth these children’s safety and well-being at all.
