Jim DeFelice’s “West Like Lightning,” a history of the Pony Express, begins with an anxious young rider waiting to take the news to California that Abraham Lincoln had been elected president. The delivery service lasted only about 18 months, but its revolutionary speed left an indelible mark on the country. Many, including Mark Twain, marveled at riders’ courage and the spectacle of their switching horses every 10 miles or so for a fresh burst of speed. The Express was just one concern of three business partners — William H. Russell, William B. Waddell and Alexander Majors — who owned much more besides. Below, Mr. DeFelice talks about the vision of those businessmen, the incredible true stories of their riders’ exploits and more.
Probably when I was 6 or 7 and started watching westerns on television and John Wayne movies. I was born in New York, but I thought the Old West was a really cool place. The actual genesis for the book, though, is that I have a project to do — a historical nonfiction narrative history of the United States, in different decades and around different turning points of history. I’m skipping around. One of the things in being a — hopefully — commercial writer is that you have to go where people are interested. And the Pony Express specifically covers the time right at the start of the Civil War. You can talk about a lot of different things in that period.
I also have to give a shout out to my editor at HarperCollins, Peter Hubbard. We were talking and he mentioned the Pony Express. The next thing I knew, I was digging into the history books and the archives.
I knew the Pony Express was fairly short-lived, but I didn’t realize it was only 18 months. That was very surprising. Another thing was the New York and Washington, D.C., angles. William H. Russell was very active on Wall Street and down in D.C. I didn’t understand the financial machinations that were going on behind the scenes.
Russell’s vision was not just to deliver mail but to have basically an empire; if you had anything that had to be transported — information, mail, heavy goods, packages, people, military supplies — he wanted his companies to deliver it, from the Missouri River all the way out to California and back. Besides the Pony Express, they had stagecoach companies, a bank, an insurance company, ox delivery companies — which would be the equivalent today of heavy-freight eighteen-wheelers; six or eight or 12 oxen with a big wagon, delivering really heavy stuff. That’s where they would have made most of their money.
Historians, God bless them, they do a lot of debunking of legends. They can sometimes come off as schoolmarms. The reality is, those legends are fun. They’re the exciting part. I separate fact and fiction, but I love those stories — and underneath them, there’s a much deeper truth. There’s a reason we value these 19- and 20-year-old kids pushing themselves against the elements.
I knew there would be some debunking involved. What I didn’t know was how true a lot of those stories turned out to be. If I were a Pony Express rider, I’d be bragging about how fast I made it. These guys didn’t brag about that — they bragged about how far they went. They were bragging about endurance and dealing with the elements. That impressed me, the resilience.
I also think sometimes we underestimate — and I’m guilty of this — just how entrepreneurial and into technology people were in the past. We think we’re cool because we can fly somewhere and be there tomorrow. But for these guys, 10 days was huge. If you gave them something in downtown New York, it would be in San Francisco two weeks later. At the time, that would be like going from dial-up to the fastest speeds we have today.
My 12th-grade English teacher, John Rehl, who made us read “Crime and Punishment,” and expected us not only to finish it but to intelligently discuss it. Looking back, he treated us like people who could think, and sometimes you don’t realize how important that is at the time. When I got the book, I probably thought, “Are you crazy?” But I love that book. I still remember reading it.
And I worked my way through college with a bunch of odd jobs, most importantly at a small newspaper. I started as the night guy, doing police reporting. My first editor there was a woman named Geri Herron, who had been, of all things, an opera singer and had gone into journalism. She was extremely patient with me; very demanding and yet very understanding. She was a great mentor for a 19-year-old kid. She gave me my first chance.
Persuade someone to read “West Like Lightning” in 50 words or less.
It’s the brief, legendary ride of the Pony Express and how it changed America. It’s got great characters: Mark Twain, Wild Bill Hickok and, of course, Buffalo Bill Cody. It’s clear from age and circumstance that Cody wouldn’t have ridden for the Pony Express. But he said he did.
