SANTA FE, Tex. — In many ways, Santa Fe High School followed the playbook for how to confront a school shooting.
When gunfire erupted on Friday morning, two police officers stationed at the school confronted the gunman within about four minutes, law enforcement officials reported Monday, offering new details on how the police brought the shooting spree to an end. The Galveston County Sheriff, Henry Trochesset, said the officers hemmed the gunman into one classroom and saved lives by drawing his attention and fire.
Even before then, the students and teachers at Santa Fe High had prepared for how to respond to a shooting: Through regular active shooter drills, they knew to barricade themselves in classrooms and flee the school grounds quickly and fluidly. Other police officers among the more than 200 who eventually responded had done “alert training” and kept their marksmanship honed.
All of this, and still 10 people were killed and 13 wounded.
That a 17-year-old armed with his father’s revolver and shotgun could exact such a toll despite what officials here have called a swift, aggressive response further underlined the limits of training, preparation and readiness.
“Luckily, the body count’s not higher,” Sheriff Trochesset said at a news conference on Monday.
The sheriff told reporters that the two officers — one of whom was critically wounded by the gunman — had kept the suspect, identified as Dimitrios Pagourtzis, “contained and engaged” as scores of officers from across the area rushed to the school to evacuate students and educators.
Sheriff Trochesset said the gunman tried to shoot at the police, and that officers fired “minimal” shots during a standoff before the suspect surrendered. Mr. Pagourtzis faces multiple murder charges and is now being held in the county jail under suicide watch, the sheriff said.
The sheriff said he did not believe that any of the 10 people who were killed were shot by law enforcement officers, but he said he could not definitively confirm that until after autopsies were performed. He declined to say how many officers fired their weapons.
“Again, this is a fluid investigation that is still ongoing,” he said.
The officers’ rush to confront the gunman offered a sharp contrast to how a Florida sheriff’s deputy responded to gunshots at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., in a Feb. 14 attack that left 17 people dead. The former Broward County deputy, Scot Peterson, was criticized for taking cover behind a wall and not heading inside to confront the gunman during the deadly six-minute rampage.
Sheriff Trochesset had special praise for Officer John Barnes, one of the two officers who first confronted the gunman. Officer Barnes was gravely wounded by a shotgun blast to the right arm, and remained in critical condition on Monday, the sheriff said.
Officer Barnes’s gun was out and his arm was extended, family members said, but it was not clear whether he had fired.
As he lay bleeding on the floor of the school, Officer Barnes urged the other officer to leave him behind and see to the students, according to his stepfather, Ronald Hatchett. The other officer later returned and tied a tourniquet around Officer Barnes’s arm.
Of the 13 people wounded in the deadly shooting on Friday, Officer Barnes, 49, may now face the hardest, most tenuous path.
Officer Barnes lost huge amounts of blood after the shotgun blast shredded his right elbow. His heart stopped twice, Mr. Hatchett said — once while he was being evacuated by helicopter to the hospital, and again on the operating table. His kidney function was still “in peril,” and doctors do not yet know how his arm will be affected, Mr. Hatchett said.
“He is by no means completely out of the woods,” he said.
For a while on Saturday, the doctors eased back on the sedation, allowing Officer Barnes to open his eyes from his hospital bed, hold his wife’s hand and listen to his family tell him that they loved him.
Since he was 10, John Barnes had wanted to be a cop, Mr. Hatchett said. In old photos that the family has been flipping through lately, he can be seen holding a BB gun with a law enforcement officer’s posture and authority.
He worked as a corrections officer in Tarrant County, which includes Fort Worth, until a spot opened up at the police academy in Houston in 1994. He struck other cadets there as friendly and engaging, introducing himself so often as “John Barnes from Tarrant County” that they nicknamed him Tarrant County.
He was interested in the intricacies of police work and asked instructors question after question, to the point that his questions ate into the cadets’ break time, according to a friend, Capt. Jim Dale of the Houston Police Department.
Among his assignments on the Houston force were investigations of sex crimes, and he once pulled a man from a burning car, family and friends said. He retired from the force in January and began working in the Santa Fe schools, where his wife, Ashley, is an assistant principal at Roy J. Wollam Elementary.
He told Captain Dale he was seeking a “simpler life,” one in which he would work closer to home and have summers free with his wife, 10-year-old daughter and 15-year-old son.
Even so, his stepfather said, Officer Barnes recognized the stress and complexities of working in a school of 1,400 students, and had trained with other officers for the possibility of a school shooting.
The force that covers the Santa Fe schools has seven officers — including a chief and assistant chief — as well as a dispatcher and auxiliary officers, according to its website. The school district’s police chief did not return a phone message seeking comment.
His family now takes turns staying beside Officer Barnes’s bed — all except his wife, who has been there constantly since she heard the news that a Santa Fe school officer had been shot. Amid phone calls and plaudits from the governor, other political figures and higher-ups in law enforcement, Ms. Barnes told her husband’s friend, Captain Dale, that she did not see what the big deal was about what he had done on Friday.
“John’s a hero all the time,” she told him.