Todd R. Howe, the federal government’s disgraced star witness who was arrested midway through his testimony in a recent Albany corruption trial, will not be called to testify in a second such trial scheduled to begin in two weeks, prosecutors disclosed on Tuesday.
Although the prosecutors did not state a reason, there seemed to be little doubt that they had calculated that any benefit his testimony could provide in the trial might be outweighed by the potential harm it could cause.
Mr. Howe, a former lobbyist in Albany and Washington who had worked for Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo when Mr. Cuomo served as secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development during the Clinton administration, had already pleaded guilty to eight felonies, and was cooperating with prosecutors in the trial of Joseph Percoco, a former top aide to Mr. Cuomo.
Mr. Howe’s arrest in February came after he admitted on cross-examination during Mr. Percoco’s trial that he had attempted to defraud a credit card company — in violation of his cooperation deal with the government, which included a provision that he “commit no further crimes whatsoever.” Mr. Percoco was nonetheless convicted in March.
The forthcoming trial involves allegations of bid-rigging in Mr. Cuomo’s signature upstate economic development plan, known as the Buffalo Billion. Mr. Howe was expected to testify for the government against the five defendants, including Alain E. Kaloyeros, the former president of the State University’s Polytechnic Institute and also a former ally of Governor Cuomo’s. The five defendants have pleaded not guilty.
The government has accused Dr. Kaloyeros of steering state contracts to COR Development, a Syracuse-area firm, and to LPCiminelli, a Buffalo developer, each of which had made “sizable contributions to the governor’s re-election campaign,” the indictment says.
A sixth defendant, Kevin Schuler, an executive with LPCiminelli, pleaded guilty on May 18 and said in court that he had agreed to cooperate with prosecutors.
At Mr. Percoco’s trial, Mr. Howe testified about a life of lies and unsavory business dealings, but it was only under a withering cross-examination that he admitted to attempting to defraud his credit card company.
A spokesman for the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan declined to comment after the hearing. The trial is scheduled to begin in Federal District Court on June 11.