PARIS — “It felt like an injustice to me,” said the rapper and novelist Gaël Faye, about having to leave civil-war-torn Burundi in 1995 to come live in France. Mr. Faye, who was 13 at the time, had to contend with the shock of a new culture and moving with his younger sister into the cramped space of his mother’s apartment in Versailles.
In his first novel, “Small Country” — a huge hit in France when it was published in 2016 and where it sold 700,000 copies — Mr. Faye wrote with a rare and subtle yearning about his youthful escapades in and around Bujumbura, the capital of Burundi. It has now been translated from French into English by Sarah Ardizzone and is being released by Hogarth on June 5.
“Small Country,” which in its original language shares the title of one of Mr. Faye’s most popular songs, “Petit Pays,” is told from the perspective of Gabriel, a 10-year-old boy with a French father and a Rwandan mother (the same mixed-race parentage as Mr. Faye). He is part of a gang of young boys sneaking beers in cabaret bars and stealing mangoes from local gardens to sell on the black market.
This mischievous idyll comes crashing down when Burundi’s first democratically elected president, Melchior Ndadaye, is assassinated in 1993 after winning a landmark election. Hutus and Tutsis who had previously lived peaceably start killing each other in a frenzy of recriminations for ancient slights. The violence spills over to startling effect in neighboring Rwanda, where members of Gabriel’s Tutsi family are caught up in a blood bath.
Mr. Faye’s apartment in Paris, where we met earlier this month, is decorated with several framed photographs. They mark the 24th anniversary commemoration of the Rwandan genocide, which began in April 1994 and lasted 100 days. Some 800,000 people, mostly Tutsi, were killed. There is a picture of Mr. Faye’s French-Rwandan wife’s Tutsi grandmother, who was killed after taking refuge in a church, and another of a gacaca community court — roughly meaning “justice among the grass” — where a perpetrator of the genocide is being tried.
Two years ago Mr. Faye left Paris with his wife and two young daughters to live in Kigali, the capital of Rwanda. He is now temporarily back in Paris with his family to promote foreign versions of his novel (it has been translated into 35 languages) and prepare for a tour of his music in France. Not for one second though did Mr. Faye give the impression of being harried.
Mr. Faye was already living in Kigali when “Small Country” was published in France. Its success, which included winning several French literary awards, took him by surprise. “To be honest I was expecting it to sell about 500 copies and then I would quietly go back to my music,” he said. The road to publication had been curious to say the least. Mr. Faye had not set out to write a novel but his songwriting talent came to the attention of Catherine Nabokov, an independent French editor.
Those first 10 pages begin with a child’s fascinating disquisition on the state of Burundian noses. First Gabriel asks his father whether the Hutus and Tutsis are at war on account of them not sharing the same land. Then he asks whether it’s because they don’t speak the same language or don’t have the same God. “No” his father replies to all of these queries. “So why are they at War?” Gabriel insists. “Because they don’t have the same nose,” his father replies.
Ms. Nabokov can’t wait.