Cormoran Strike has a more dramatic back story than your average television private eye. His dad’s a rock star, his mom was a fashion model who died in mysterious circumstances and he’s a war hero who lost his left foot in Afghanistan. In “C.B. Strike,” beginning Friday on Cinemax, we meet him as he agrees to investigate the death of a young supermodel.
The show’s interest in the wages of celebrity makes sense: It’s based on the mystery novels J.K. Rowling began writing, under the pseudonym Robert Galbraith, after her “Harry Potter” books made her one of the world’s best-known authors. The seven episodes of “C.B. Strike” (called simply “Strike” in Britain, where it was shown first on BBC) are adapted from the three Galbraith novels she’s finished so far.
It’s in the P.I. subgenre that pairs a damaged, brooding, headstrong detective who doesn’t sweat whether clients can pay with an organized, fiscally prudent female assistant. She could get a more regular, better-paying job, but she finds the work interesting and the boss attractive. A good recent comparison would be with the British series “Case Histories,” which happened to be based on books by Kate Atkinson, to whose work Ms. Rowling’s mystery novels have been compared.
Strike is played by Tom Burke, seen in the BBC “Musketeers” series, and his new receptionist and legwoman, Robin, is played by Holliday Grainger, currently appearing in Showtime’s “Patrick Melrose.” They’re both good, particularly Ms. Grainger, who balances sardonic efficiency with intimations of smoky passion, and their interplay is the main reason to watch the show.
It doesn’t quite make up, however, for the deficiencies of the mysteries, which are convoluted in conception and prosaic in presentation. Clues fall from the sky, obtained offscreen between scenes, and amazing leaps of deduction are made. In the initial, three-episode story, “The Cuckoo’s Calling,” Strike settles into a chair near the end and runs through all the major clues in his head. It’s both his case-cracking method and the show’s attempt to convince us that there’s a coherent solution.
There’s also the British casting bonus. Excellent performers like Tara Fitzgerald (a nervous witness), Martin Shaw (a creepy uncle) and, most notably, Sian Phillips (a victim’s mother) turn up in supporting roles.
Ms. Rowling’s skill at sketching in characters translates well to the series, but it’s harder to capture the qualities of tone, atmosphere and phrasing that, in the books, make up for the looseness of the mystery plot. “C.B. Strike” is still looking for the spell that would accomplish that.