Though a judge released the names of jurors who had convicted Bill Cosby of sexual assault, he counseled the jurors to limit their remarks about the deliberations.
PHILADELPHIA — A Pennsylvania judge on Friday released the names of the jurors who convicted Bill Cosby of sexual assault last month, saying he had waited more than three weeks after the verdict to do so because he wanted to give the jurors a “cooling off” period to return to their lives without being bothered by the media.
Even so, Judge Steven T. O’Neill of the Montgomery County Court of Common Pleas said in his ruling that the privacy of the jurors had already been compromised by attempts on the part of some news organizations to obtain interviews after the verdict.
As one example, he cited an unnamed news media outlet that had attempted to interview six jurors at their homes and by telephone on Sunday, Mother’s Day.
But in a written order, the judge said he was bound by a 2007 Pennsylvania Supreme Court ruling that the media has a constitutional right to the jurors’ names, as had been argued by lawyers for 13 media organizations, including The New York Times. The news media had pressed for the immediate release of the names after a verdict.
One juror has already spoken about the case — Harrison Snyder, 22, who, three days after the April 26 verdict, was featured on ABC’s “Good Morning America.” He said that Mr. Cosby’s own acknowledgment, in a deposition read into evidence, that he had obtained sedatives to give to women as part of an effort to have sex, had convinced him of Mr. Cosby’s guilt.
The remaining members of the jury released a joint statement a few days later saying they had been influenced only by the evidence, not by factors of race or the #MeToo moment, in coming to their unanimous decision to convict Mr. Cosby on all three counts of aggravated indecent assault for molesting Andrea Constand, a former Temple University basketball staff member, at his home outside Philadelphia in 2004.
Several jurors contacted by The Times on Friday afternoon said that they did not want to comment further.
“We put out a statement with the information we felt comfortable releasing, so I would refer you to that,” one juror, Cheryl Carmel, said.
But he told jurors that if they now choose to speak to the press, they may not disclose any arguments or comments made by other jurors during deliberations, should not talk about votes that were taken and may not discuss anything that was said or done in the jury room by other jurors that might indicate their thoughts or opinions.
He said that by respecting the confidentiality of the jury room, this panel would ensure that future jurors do not have to worry about speaking openly during deliberations, lest their comments become public.
Before the retrial, intense media interest in the case prompted the judge to ask potential jurors whether they had formed any opinion about Mr. Cosby’s guilt or innocence, and whether they had any views about allegations of sexual misconduct in the entertainment industry.
Jurors for Mr. Cosby’s first trial, which ended last June with a deadlocked jury, were selected from Allegheny County near Pittsburgh, some 300 miles from Philadelphia, because of the judge’s concerns that he would not be able to find an impartial jury in Montgomery County where Mr. Cosby has a home, and where coverage of the case had been intense since he was charged in December 2015.
Mr. Cosby is scheduled to be sentenced at a hearing before Judge O’Neill scheduled for Sept. 24 and 25.