On a beer-splotched wall of a Midtown sports bar, a forgotten relic from the heyday of cartooning, featuring Beetle Bailey, Fred Flintsone and some jokers from Mad magazine. With cameos by James Thurber, Ernest Hemingway and Marilyn Monroe.
In a dark booth at the Overlook, which resides in a little brick building that has defied demolition below the skyscrapers of East Midtown, two men were having a beer. The bar was rowdy with people eating wings and watching basketball on televisions, but the men were busy studying the cracked, aging wall beside them. Twenty feet wide and spanning the room’s length, it was covered with dozens of fading drawings of classic American cartoon and comic strip characters.
“And there’s Fred Flintstone,” said his friend, Marcel Alers.
“I grew up with all this,” Mr. Gold added. “My kids are in their 20s and probably have no clue who these characters even are. This is my childhood.” The crowds remained focused on the glowing television screens and the Buffalo wings.
This crumbling, beer-splotched wall in the back of a sports bar on East 44th Street is one of New York’s more neglected cultural treasures. Created in the 1970s, it is a veritable Sistine Chapel of American comic-strip art: the 30-some drawings across its face were left by a who’s who of cartooning legends, including a Spider-Man by Gil Kane, a Beetle Bailey by Mort Walker, a Dondi by Irwin Hasen, a Steve Canyon by Milton Caniff, a Hagar the Horrible by Dik Browne, and a Dagwood Bumstead by Paul Fung Jr. There’s also a self-portrait by Al Jaffee, a doodle by Bil Keane, and a Mad magazine-style gag by Sergio Aragonés. Old regulars are familiar with the wall’s past, and comic book scholars make occasional pilgrimages to the bar, but the Overlook’s cartoon mural remains largely unknown and untended.
Long before the back wall of the Overlook became the fading wallpaper of an anonymous sports bar, it was witness to a glamorous era of literary celebrity when the establishment was the site of a storied bar called Costello’s.
The wall wasn’t destined to become an artifact when it was drawn in 1976. Instead, it was created spontaneously in under 30 minutes. Although Costello’s opened on the corner of 44th and 3rd, it would relocate three times mostly within the span of a block, before settling at its final address, 225 East 44th Street, in 1974. It was here that the bar’s owner, Timothy Costello, wanted new art to accompany the Thurber murals, which had become famous showpieces of the saloon, so he enlisted the help of Bill Gallo, a Daily News cartoonist. But Mr. Gallo didn’t want to compete with Thurber’s simple, witty cartoons drawn on beaverboard panels. So he proposed to Mr. Costello something of a stunt: “You close this place up for 24 hours and offer up free drinks and food, and I’ll get the best cartoonists in the country to paint your wall,” he said. Thus, that spring, 30 or so of America’s best-known cartoonists gathered to doodle their signature creations in what later became the Overlook.
Sergio Aragonés, who is now 80 and still draws for Mad magazine, remembered the experience. “I got a beer and started drawing,” he said. “I thought up my cartoon right on the spot.” Mr. Aragonés added: “All the cartoonists still lived in New York at the time. We would all try selling our cartoons to magazines on Wednesdays and we would meet at bars like Costello’s afterward to drink and talk. There was lots of camaraderie. This mural represents a community that is no longer around.” Mr. Aragonés now lives in Ojai, Calif.
The wall is now a genuine time capsule. Bursting with zaniness, it is filled with dated humor and antiquated references: cartoon characters hoist martini glasses and tell bawdy jokes through word bubbles, a Sergio Aragonés scene features sombrero-wearing banditos with bulging eyes ogling a maiden, and a caricature of Abe Beame depicts the former New York mayor as haggard and waving a beggar’s cup (presumably in reference his shabby re-election prospects that year).
Mr. Jaffee, who couldn’t precisely recall what he drew in ’76, addressed the wall’s value wryly. “The scribblings on the caves in France also became more important in recent times than they were in their own times,” he said.
Credit...A new Sergio Aragonés illustration depicting the creation of the wall at Costello's.
Mr. Evangelista, who grew up in Queens and aspired to become a police officer, has become the wall’s proud steward since. “The wall is safe as long as I’m here,” he said. “If we leave, it will probably get gutted. But I won’t let that happen here until I drop dead.” He paid tribute to the wall in 2005 by gathering a group of the surviving cartoonists to draw a new mural in the dining room. Bright, clean, and with more wholesome humor, it will never be confused with the original.
At the Overlook one recent afternoon, construction workers and businessmen knocked back beers. These days, the focus is the television, not the wondrous relics from the Costello’s era hidden around the building: a metal cash register, a tin ceiling, rusty filing cabinets, a set of fluorescent lights, a tall safe with a combination dial. Mr. Evangelista pointed these out proudly, noting that legends like Ernest Hemingway and Arthur Miller probably once used his bathrooms. He poured himself some whiskey in front of the wall and toasted the cartoons. “Here’s to drinking in a literary bar,” he said.
