Harvey Weinstein was arrested Friday morning. Read more here.
Harvey Weinstein, the disgraced movie mogul, is expected to surrender to the police in Manhattan on Friday on charges that he raped one woman and forced another to perform oral sex on him, law enforcement officials said.
The charges follow an avalanche of accusations against him that led women around the world, some of them famous and many of them not, to come forward with accounts of being sexually harassed and assaulted by powerful men.
Those stories spawned the global #MeToo movement, and since then, the ground has shifted beneath men who for years benefited from a code of silence around their predatory behavior.
Mr. Weinstein, 66, had until recently seemed untouchable, harnessing his wealth and his influence in the movie industry to intimidate women out of speaking publicly and, only three years ago, withstand an investigation into groping allegations.
The Manhattan district attorney’s office faced an outcry over not charging Mr. Weinstein in the groping case, but the outcome this time was different.
He will be charged with first-degree rape and third-degree rape in one case, and with first-degree criminal sex act in another, law enforcement officials said, speaking on the condition of anonymity.

The victim in the rape case has not been publicly identified. Mr. Weinstein has been accused of sexually harassing and assaulting movie stars and employees of his former namesake company over the course of decades and then paying them or coercing them to stay silent.
Mr. Weinstein has agreed to surrender himself at a police precinct on Friday morning and will be arrested on a criminal complaint, law enforcement officials said. He is then expected to be taken to Manhattan Criminal Court to be arraigned on the charges.
As part of a bail package negotiated in advance, Mr. Weinstein will put up $1 million in cash and will agree to wear a monitoring device. His travel will be restricted and he will surrender his passport.
For years, Mr. Weinstein was the subject of rumors in media and entertainment circles, but he began facing official inquiries in New York, Los Angeles and London after revelations in The New York Times and The New Yorker.
Prosecutors in the office of the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., conducted dozens of interviews in New York and elsewhere and issued hundreds of subpoenas, and their inquiry is not over. An investigative grand jury, still convened, will look into other sexual assault allegations against Mr. Weinstein as well as possible financial crimes relating to how he paid women to stay silent, people familiar with the proceedings said. Among other things, the grand jury is delving into whether Mr. Weinstein used employees of his former production company to identify women for him to assault, to set up meetings with the women or to discredit them if they complained.
Three years ago, the Manhattan district attorney’s office decided not to prosecute Mr. Weinstein after an Italian model, Ambra Battilana, accused him of groping her breasts during a meeting in his office.
In the recent inquiry, detectives traveled to the United Kingdom and Canada to interview witnesses and investigators were in Los Angeles as recently as late April and early May, several people briefed on the matter have said. Prosecutors have also combed through Mr. Weinstein’s financial records in an effort to uncover any possible improprieties, several people have said.
Many of the complaints against Mr. Weinstein stemmed from encounters too long ago to be prosecuted under New York’s statute of limitations, law enforcement officials said. In other cases, victims did not want to testify.
But the accusations by Ms. Evans and the other woman were not subject to a statute of limitations because they involved forcible compulsion, for which any time limit was effectively lifted after 2001, the officials said.
Ms. Evans was a college student and an aspiring actress when Mr. Weinstein approached her at a New York club in 2004, she told The New Yorker. Mr. Weinstein and an assistant began calling her, asking to meet. After she arrived at the Miramax office for a daytime meeting, she told The New Yorker that Mr. Weinstein pulled her head down and forced her to perform oral sex, despite her repeated protests and attempts to get away.
Investigators are still hoping that more women might come forward.
In the course of the investigation, prosecutors created what amounted to an elaborate timeline of Mr. Weinstein’s whereabouts in an effort to take advantage of a section of New York State law that says the clock stops ticking toward the statute of limitations when a defendant is continuously outside the state. Investigators compiled instances in which Mr. Weinstein left New York to determine whether some accusations of assault, even if they appeared to fall outside the statute of limitations, could in fact be included in criminal charges.
Federal prosecutors have also been investigating whether Mr. Weinstein’s abusive conduct violated federal stalking laws and examined the movie producer’s finances, several people with knowledge of that inquiry have said.
The federal investigation, which began last year, focused on fraud allegations in connection with two auction items that were to be offered together at an AIDS charity fund-raiser in France in May 2015, the people have said. The items were a sitting with a famous fashion photographer and a package of tickets to a Hollywood awards event and party.
News outlets have reported on dozens of allegations against Mr. Weinstein, many of them sharing a common narrative: Women reported to a hotel or office for what they thought were work reasons, only to discover that Mr. Weinstein sometimes seemed to have ulterior interests.
But it remains to be seen how much supporting evidence prosecutors will be allowed to introduce in seeking to demonstrate a pattern of criminal behavior. Law enforcement officials said that even though some of the cases they have investigated fall outside the statute of limitations, prosecutors could still call those women to testify to establish a pattern of previous bad acts, just as prosecutors did in the Bill Cosby trial. A judge would have to permit their testimony.
That is one of many hurdles sex crime prosecutions often face, ever more so in cases of powerful men like Mr. Weinstein, who come armed with high-priced lawyers and private investigators.
New York Police Department officials said as early as November that detectives were gathering evidence with an eye toward preparing a warrant to arrest Mr. Weinstein. But as Mr. Vance’s investigation continued, the pace of prosecutors’ work fueled tensions between the police and district attorney’s office.
Mr. Vance’s office faced added pressure because it decided not to prosecute Mr. Weinstein after Ms. Battilana accused him of groping her in 2015. Mr. Vance said the evidence was not strong enough to win a conviction and dropped the investigation, despite having an audiotape of Mr. Weinstein acknowledging he had touched her breasts and promising not to do so again. The decision by prosecutors followed lobbying by Mr. Weinstein’s lawyers, who pointed to shifting accounts by Ms. Battilana in sworn testimony in another sexual assault case in Italy.
In recent months, Mr. Vance has been urged by activists and elected leaders to resolve his office’s investigation into Mr. Weinstein. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo ordered a review of his handling of the 2015 allegations and women’s advocates have criticized the slow pace of Mr. Vance’s investigation.