464 pp. Ecco/HarperCollins Publishers. $27.99.
When he first thought of it, “Chefs, Drugs and Rock & Roll” must have struck Andrew Friedman as a ripsnorter of a name for his account of what happened after members of the Woodstock generation decided that it would be fun to cook for a living. Now, of course, it calls to mind the slew of recent news articles documenting the groping and grabbing, insults and insinuations that certain male chefs with rock-star status have doled out to women who work for them.
Could any title, with the possible exception of “The Harvey Weinstein Massage Manual,” sound more off-key now?
As to what these godlike talents treated other people to, he leaves us in the dark. “Certain people known industrywide for a range of illicit behaviors and weaknesses don’t show any powder on their noses here, either because they wouldn’t cop to it themselves or denied it on the record,” he writes.
He does mention the discrimination and bullying the chefs Susan Feniger and Mary Sue Milliken experienced early in their careers, and has a passage about Cindy Pawlcyn’s time working for a male chef who, in one of his milder remarks, blamed her “woman juju” when anything went wrong.
Friedman is describing a class revolution in reverse. Tracing the similar paths taken by chefs both well known (Alice Waters, Wolfgang Puck, Jonathan Waxman) and more obscure (Len Allison and Karen Hubert of the long-gone New York restaurant Huberts; Marder, who now runs Capo in Santa Monica), he is very astute about the ways the blue-collar roots of kitchen work were scrubbed away.
These chefs had often been raised by parents who took them out to eat in expensive restaurants. An upper-middle-class background gave them the means to fly to Europe and stumble into restaurants where nouvelle cuisine was being hammered out. Later, it gave them the connections to raise funds for their own restaurants, a crucial step that brought creative freedom and, for a few, financial success. So much of what is now routine chef behavior — ambulating in the dining room, posing for photo shoots, talking about the artistic intention of a dish — might be traced to an original anxiety that spurred young chefs to prove they were contributing at least as much to society as dentists.
By no means do I wish “Chefs, Drugs and Rock & Roll” were longer, but it might have been leaner. The long quotes grow rambling and repetitious, and the chapter on what may have been the first dinner where each course was cooked by a different famous American chef proves only that such events were no more interesting then than they are now.
By rendering some of the fat, Friedman might have made space for the earlier generation that was being pushed out of the spotlight. When he writes of his chosen subjects, “They took a centuries-old profession with no real American strain and made it their own,” he seems to have forgotten about all the mom-and-pop restaurants serving regional American dishes from Texas chili to New England chowder. Also left out are the Italian chefs whose dishes from the southern end of the peninsula were about to be downgraded in favor of risotto, osso buco and other northern specialties.
Chinois on Main opened in 1983, almost two decades after the Immigration Act of 1965 had allowed more Asians into the country than ever before. Among them were some highly trained Chinese chefs escaping Mao’s Cultural Revolution who would go on to earn three- and four-star reviews in The New York Times. What we are seeing in that Chinois on Main anecdote is the moment when cooks of European descent learned they could translate Asian ideas into their own idiom and sell it for more money, more prestige, than the real thing. “Ironically” doesn’t quite cover it.
Even if Friedman doesn’t manage to tell the whole story, the one he does tell is still essential. The chefs he interviewed did change American culture, and changed it so thoroughly that it’s impossible to imagine a similar crew of neophytes knocking over the current order. As he puts it, “The idea that couples with scant, if any, formal training could even contemplate becoming chefs and restaurateurs in Manhattan would be laughable today.” After the revolutionaries stormed the palace, they drew up the drawbridge.