227 pp. Grove Press. $24.
At the outset of Chris Offutt’s new novel, “Country Dark,” a young veteran of the Korean War crosses from Ohio into Kentucky, and it’s not long before he’s facing down a gun. A wary, fierce country kid who doesn’t care for towns with “too many people doing too many things at once, and everything boring in its repetition and noise,” Tucker is built for trouble. As the coot giving him a lift draws down on him, Tucker turns his body to make a smaller target of his vital organs. The old derelict orders Tucker to take a drink of corn liquor from the glove box. You wonder where this goes and how fast.
If you’re familiar with Offutt’s fiction or can simply hazard a guess at the import of the title “Country Dark,” you get a grim idea. But after Tucker drinks, the man hands over the pistol. The derelict is just a lonely lush avoiding his old lady, and now he wants Tucker to make him throw one back. To this old sot, the gun represents some kind of high hilarity. That is, until Tucker aims it at the man’s head and calmly splits for the woods with both moonshine and pistol.
Soon Tucker is under the “unfathomable depth” of a cloudy night. “It was country dark. He closed his eyes feeling safe.” He’s back home in one of the two Kentuckys — “east and west, dirt and blacktop” — and you can guess which. The one populated by pale people who live shortened days in the hollers, where the air and forest are thick and heavy. Where the very first person you meet is the same midwife who will greet your siblings, your cousins and eventually your children. It is an old world, older than the 1954 in which the story begins.
It’s a darker world too, but darkness is cover. Raised in this hard country, Tucker is almost unfairly prepared for war: “He shot quicker. In hand-to-hand combat, he struck first.” When he hastens back with that pistol and booze, Tucker is like an animal back in his lair. Tucker cooks a squirrel and wood sorrel roots with henbit and dandelion. He sleeps. He eats a rattlesnake. He swims in a pool. Eastern Kentucky is a kind of Eden — for a minute.
Of course, the most dangerous thing in the woods is always other people, and soon Tucker is observing a woman running from a car on a dirt road. Then he is observing the driver attempting to rape her. Then Tucker isn’t observing anymore.
What ensues is a lot like the unexpected turn in the pickup, a beguiling hallmark of Offutt’s storytelling. Tucker subdues the man with a rock, saving his bullets for squirrels. We learn the man is her uncle. We learn the man is the sheriff. The girl, Rhonda, doesn’t want him killed on account of her conscience. Tucker can’t have the man coming after him, nor can he kill him. He conjures a solution out of threats and cash. Offutt’s magic is that all of Tucker’s entanglements are dealt with in a manner so roundly humane you feel bathed in light, not plunged in the dark.
Dazzled by this courageous man from the woods, Rhonda falls for Tucker, wondering already if their children will have his mismatched eyes. Tucker, for his part, can’t look at her because she’s so pretty. “Her cheekbones were as prominent as railroad gravel. She was as small a woman as he’d ever seen.” He already feels the weight of his love, the sheer responsibility of it, and now he has “to think like an officer and issue orders to himself.” Soldiering was but a preparation for the troubles the world has in store.
Social services are involved. They tell Rhonda to cease relations with her husband, that the state will care for the burdensome children. Rhonda is outraged. Tucker, who runs bootleg liquor to parts north, promptly takes steps to defend his family.
You oughtn’t know much more heading in. The story rollicks from 1964 to 1971, careening downhill. There is a fantastic climax, a satisfying resolution. And “Country Dark” is audacious without seeming so at all. Routinely shifting points of view, Offutt accesses feelings and tones within tense and complicated moments with playful alacrity. After transacting some nasty business in the book’s late going, Tucker realizes, “War and prison had taught him that sides didn’t really exist, that everyone was eventually caught in the middle of something.” Novels can teach the same thing. We see all the sides. We are caught.
There is a saying that the Lord doesn’t give folks more than they can handle, which is another way of saying people get what they deserve. However you put it, it’s a Puritan lie. Outside your door are people heaped with more than anyone could handle. We’d do well to remember we are all caught in something eventually.
Books like this tell the truth. You’d rather die than bear the unfair burden. It’s a bloody fight getting what you deserve.
“Either-handed” is an apt description of Offutt as well. His creative urges have found expression in memoir, short stories, comic books, essays and television. From his first collection of short stories, “Kentucky Straight,” to now, the quality always astonishes. His previous book, “My Father, the Pornographer,” found him reckoning with his dad’s career as an author of dark erotica and the man’s impact as a paternal and creative force on his son. I came away from that book with little wonder that Offutt’s own output is so catholic.
And yet it is surprising to realize that this is only Offutt’s second novel. His first, “The Good Brother” (1997), was so powerful that more seemed destined to come. Thankfully, his either-handed efforts still include novels of mythic power. This is the Chris Offutt book I’ve been waiting for — an achievement of spellbinding momentum and steadfast heart.