The United States government has three branches of government, and each branch provides a check and balance on the other two branches so no one branch becomes too powerful. This system was established by the Constitution.
Sometimes, however, constraints on a branch’s power come from norms and precedents — the way previous presidents, justices and members of Congress have carried out their responsibilities. One such norm in American government is that the White House does not make decisions about individual law enforcement investigations. We call this norm Justice Department independence.
Do you think Justice Department independence is an important norm for presidents to uphold? For example, should a president be involved in deciding who the Justice Department and the F.B.I. investigate? Or should those decisions be determined by career law enforcement officials, based on evidence and not politics? Explain your answer.
1. Why does President Trump’s public demand that the Justice Department open an investigation into the F.B.I.’s scrutiny of his campaign contacts with Russia breach an established constraint on executive power, according to the article?
2. What are some examples the article gives for how Mr. Trump has battered the Justice Department’s independence indirectly since he took office?
3. How did Rod J. Rosenstein, deputy attorney general, respond to Mr. Trump’s Twitter announcement, and why?
4. What details does the article give about whether a president has the lawful power to order the attorney general to open or close a case, especially one involving his personal interests?
5. What are the primary checks against a president abusing his power to fire and replace an attorney general who refuses his request or demand as unjustified?
6. What did President Barack Obama write in a Harvard Law Review article about the importance of constraints on presidential intrusion into specific Justice Department case decisions, and why?
The caption under the second photograph in the article states, “President Trump may have established a significant precedent by demanding an inquiry by the Justice Department.” What do you think? Has Mr. Trump broken with previous norms and established a precedent when he demanded that the Department of Justice look into whether the F.B.I. and the Department of Justice “infiltrated or surveilled the Trump Campaign”?
And if you think the president is establishing a precedent, do you think this is a big deal? Why? If not, why not?
