You commented on the alarming disparity of maternal mortality for black women compared with white and Latino women in the United States and particularly in New York City.
This unusually high death rate has been noted for many years and has been attributed to numerous factors, including being overweight, poverty, lack of education and access to health services.
The overt and unconscious racism that pervades our society and the medical community has not been adequately addressed. Decades of systemic racism cannot be erased quickly, and there is no silver bullet to eliminate the accompanying stress that black women endure.
It is time to incorporate anti-bias training throughout the medical and academic communities. Women of color may require additional support and attention when presenting to health clinics, doctors’ offices and hospitals.
Saving one mother and her newborn can lead to a paradigm shift whereby racial bias no longer acts as a deleterious factor in a woman’s health outcome.
The writer, a surgeon and global health consultant, is the founder of Life for Mothers, an N.G.O.
In response to the statistics that black women in New York City are 12 times as likely to die from childbirth as white women, the editorial explored some solutions, including improved response to three leading causes of death (hemorrhage, hypertension and blood clots), publishing hospital ratings and funding doula programs.
New York recently said it would expand Medicaid coverage for doulas. As a doula, a student nurse, a future student midwife, and a mom who experienced traumatic births, I can’t agree more.
As a student learning about public health perspectives, however, I also realize that these are downstream solutions. We are being taught to think more upstream.
Why are black women at higher risk for hemorrhage, hypertension and blood clots? The editorial talks about poverty and lack of access to health care. But why? Racism is also mentioned. If we think upstream, it seems clear that racism is the root cause of the disparity black women face. I’d love to see more discussion about how to reduce racism to improve health care outcomes.
One key seems to be to make the health care work force more diverse. To better care for black women, we need more black doulas, nurses, midwives and doctors.
Best practices outlined by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists have already been instituted all over the country. Doctors and nurses have been weighing blood-soaked sponges in every delivery and rolling “hemorrhage carts” for those resulting in excessive bleeding. That is good practice, but it does not seem to have affected the maternal death rate.
As for the use and financing of doulas, it’s a good idea, but do not expect much effect in the statistics.
Perhaps the country should take a new and more humane approach. It should start compensating fairly the doctors who labor in the inner cities with heavy loads of sick and uninsured patients. These doctors are well trained to treat pregnant women with diabetes and hypertension, but they get burned out trying to pay the student loans and make ends meet.
And what about the hospitals in poor neighborhoods? They are underfunded, understaffed and undersupplied.
This is rich country. We must find a way to stem the spiraling of the maternal death rate of its women of color.
The writer is a fellow of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.
Talk to any large sample of white women, and you will hear stories about how medical professionals condescended to them, refused to listen to them and put their lives in jeopardy out of arrogance and prejudice. Extrapolate that behavior to black women, and compound it with racism and the increased stress of being both black and a woman in our society.
This is clearly a case where prejudice is a matter of life and death. The medical profession needs to do a thorough self-examination and heal itself so that it will stop doing harm.
As co-chairwoman of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ District II Safe Motherhood Initiative in New York and as an advocate for care standardization and maternal mortality review boards, I believe that we are seeing some progress but that there is much more work to do.
The reasons behind the staggering rates of mortality for black women are complex, but we are committed to better understanding them and doing whatever is necessary to ensure that no woman or community experiences a preventable maternal death.
The initiative has shown me how collaboration at all levels of care and policymaking is critical for progress and how important the sharing of stories about maternal deaths and “near misses” is to inspiring and sustaining change in maternal health care. Please continue to share these stories.
The writer is chairwoman of the department of obstetrics and gynecology at NewYork-Presbyterian/Columbia University Irving Medical Center. Dr. D’Alton is a member of the advisory board of Merck for Mothers, which provided grant funding for the initial stages of the Safe Motherhood Initiative.
You struck just the right note in highlighting the racial disparities that are a stain on New York’s health care system. But one of the proposed solutions — giving pregnant women information about hospital outcomes to facilitate better choices — while meritorious on its face, creates an implication that is not wholly true.
Women are not choosing the wrong hospitals; poor women in particular do not have a full array of choices. The fact that more than 90 percent of births in some hospitals are Medicaid-funded while births in hospitals a short walk away have less than 10 percent Medicaid-funded births doesn’t reflect bad decisions; it reflects poor access.
Even hospitals that accept some Medicaid may have first-come, first-served policies for the slots reserved for poor women, such that the highest risk women — those with late entry into care — find themselves with even more limited choices.
Yes, women need to know where it is best to go for prenatal care, but there must be no barriers when they arrive.
The writer is chairman of obstetrics and gynecology at Maimonides Medical Center.
Confronting the ways in which racism and gender oppression conspire to create poor birth outcomes for black women requires public health departments to work in partnership with health care systems and community partners.
The New York City Health Department has pioneered surveillance of life-threatening complications during childbirth and recently started the Maternal Mortality and Morbidity Committee, including clinicians, birth activists and community partners, to review all maternal deaths and make recommendations to eliminate preventable deaths.
In addition, the Health Department and SUNY Downstate Medical Center are starting an initiative to improve obstetric care and disease management, a leading cause of racial disparities in birth outcomes.
By forging partnerships beyond medical experts, New York City can ignite sustainable change to achieve the same opportunity for healthy pregnancies and births for all New Yorkers.
Dr. Askew, a pediatrician, is the deputy commissioner of the Division of Family and Child Health at the New York City Health Department. Dr. Riley, an internist, is president of the Health Science Center at SUNY Downstate Medical Center.