Austin Beutner has been an investment banker, a Los Angeles deputy mayor, a candidate for mayor (briefly) and publisher of The Los Angeles Times (also briefly). On Tuesday, Mr. Beutner, 58, was named superintendent of the Los Angeles school district. This interview has been condensed and edited for clarity.
Q. A slightly cheeky question: Do you find it at all odd that Los Angeles of all places should be picking a middle-aged white guy with no experience in public education to run its schools?
A. I’m a bit of an unconventional choice, that’s clear. But if you put it in the context of where the district is, well, hard choices lay ahead. Maybe an unconventional choice is just what you need. An unconventional choice who understands the complexity of Los Angeles. An unconventional choice who understands how to frame the complexity about budgets.
Q. What do you see as your biggest challenges?
A. There’s still a big opportunity gap between what kids can achieve and what they are actually achieving. All the resources that need to go to the communities most in need are not getting to the communities most in need. Less than a third of the kids are proficient in math. That’s the language of the future. Less than 40 percent are proficient in English. I think we are looking at some hard choices ahead. There’s no way around it.
Q. Do you have ideas on how to deal with these?
A. I’ve got some ideas. Stay tuned. I’m humble enough to know I have a lot to learn.
Q. How severe are the district’s budget woes?
A. Fairly ominous. I’ll learn more. We’ll have a further and careful look.
Q. Are you looking at making significant cuts in teachers?
A. I don’t think we are that far ahead yet. The challenge is to make sure we understand what the dimensions are. Virtually all of what a school district spends money on is people. Fewer teachers mean less being taught. That’s not a good thing.
Q. How much do you see the teachers’ union as an obstacle in this regard?
A. Your words, not mine. I go into this with an open mind. Teachers’ unions have been made up of teachers. My mom was a teacher. Teachers go into a profession to help kids learn. It won’t be easy. I recognize they have a set of constituents and it’s their job to represent the best interests of those constituents.
For 12 years, Sabra Williams, an actress, was a fixture at The Actors’ Gang Theatre in Culver City, a small and cutting-edge theater company founded by Tim Robbins. But you could also find her most weeks over at the California Rehabilitation Center in Norco, where Ms. Williams and Mr. Robbins led a program that taught acting techniques to inmates as a way to help them prepare for life after their release.
Now, Ms. Williams, who was born in Britain, is receiving an honor for her work: the British Empire Medal, awarded for meritorious service. The ceremony is Thursday at the British Residence in Los Angeles.
The award for Ms. Williams, who left her position as director of outreach for the Actors’ Gang earlier this year to form her own arts-and-social-services organization, Creative Acts, is for the efforts to champion similar prison rehabilitation programs here.
“Sabra is a remarkable advocate, a shining example, and we are proud that she is being recognized for her contributions to society in California,” said Michael Howells, the British consul general.
As the announcement points out, Ms. Sabra from this day forward can put those three letters — B.E.M. — after her name.
