Those were the first words Rose McGowan tweeted after the disgraced Hollywood producer was arrested in New York, on charges that he raped one woman and forced another to perform oral sex.
Ms. McGowan, an actress, was one of the first women to come forward last fall about Mr. Weinstein’s history of sexual misconduct, setting off a tidal wave of awareness and activism, and prompting the #MeToo movement.
Also Friday, in keeping with a campaign promise, Mr. Trump signed a series of executive orders making it easier to fire federal workers, and rolling back the prerogatives of unions that represent them.
3. Irish voters were casting their ballots in a divisive referendum on legalizing abortion.
At stake is the Eighth Amendment of the Irish Constitution, which confers equal rights to the fetus and the mother. Currently, Irish law bans abortion even in cases of rape or incest, allowing it only if a mother’s life is at risk.
If the referendum passes, the government has said it would introduce a measure allowing unrestricted terminations during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy.
4. In Canada, investigators were looking for two people who detonated a homemade bomb inside a crowded Indian restaurant near Toronto late Thursday night. Fifteen people were wounded, three of them critically.
The police said the assailants had entered the restaurant and put down what appeared to be a pail or a paint can, which then exploded as they fled.
The police released a photo of the suspects, above, and investigators were examining video evidence and interviewing witnesses to try to find them. The motive for the attack was unknown.
5. Prosecutors are increasingly treating overdose deaths as homicides. But they aren’t just going after dealers: Friends and family who obtain or share the drugs are going to prison.
We looked at data from 15 states and found that the number of prosecutions or arrests in accidental overdose deaths doubled from 2015 to 2017. Charges ranged from involuntary manslaughter to first-degree murder.
Above, Elisa Malcolm, whose younger son was charged in the overdose death of his older brother. Here’s a look at the laws on sharing drugs.
6. We went to Hawaii’s volcano country, where the land is cheap and the living is risky.
Puna, the magnificently forested region of Hawaii’s Big Island, is where some of the Kilauea volcano’s most intense eruptions are taking place.
It’s among the most remote corners of the U.S., and for decades, it has lured people who want to live off the grid — and who have a colossal appetite for risk.
The destruction has focused scrutiny on the state’s housing shortage and questionable land use regulations.
7. The Rio Grande is drying up much earlier than usual this year, in a sign of what could come as the Southwest warms.
Sections of the nearly 1,900-mile river normally dry up later in the year as the water is diverted for irrigation. But right now, parts of it are just a dusty ribbon. And it’s only May.
Scientists say that warmer temperatures are having a major effect on the water level, and farmers may have to make some hard choices in the years to come.
8. Our film critic A.O. Scott says the new movie “Mary Shelley,” about the “Frankenstein” author, is a rarity: a literary biopic with an argument.
It’s a defense of genre fiction and female creativity, he writes. And rather than smother Shelley with soft cushions of antiquarian cultural prestige, the director, Haifaa al-Mansour, and the screenwriter, Emma Jensen, sharpen the sense of their subject’s modernity.
Mr. Scott applauded the performance of Elle Fanning, above, in the title role.
9. A friendly reminder: It’s not all bad news out there.
Here’s the week in good news, including an urban farm that’s helping ex-prisoners, above; a wildlife park that might be the most biologically diverse area in the world; and a breakthrough drug that promises to prevent migraines.
The Evening Briefing will be off on Monday; we’ll see you again on Tuesday.
