Recently Cesar Rosado took a late-night flight back to New York after working a job in Colorado. He slept for a few hours, taught some classes at the Atlantic Acting School and then settled into a seat at the Lucille Lortel Theater to see Lucy Thurber’s “Transfers,” an MCC production about two disadvantaged kids from the South Bronx, each nominated for a scholarship to an elite university.
Mr. Rosado, like his friend Alexander Lambie, who sat across from him at a bench at Think Coffee on a weekday afternoon, isn’t an ordinary “Transfers” audience member. The play, like most of Ms. Thurber’s work, melds fiction and polemic with biography and autobiography. Mr. Lambie and Mr. Rosado, both actors, both 26, inspired it.
Ms. Thurber, 48, who has known them since they were teenagers, joined them for a latte. All playwrights draw on their lived experience, but Ms. Thurber uses her own life more than most. “That’s always been present, I can’t help it,” she said. This is especially true of the Hill Town Plays, a quintet about a young woman (who has different names and somewhat different circumstances in most of the plays, but is always more or less Ms. Thurber) scrabbling to escape a precarious, violent upbringing in western Massachusetts.
When Ms. Thurber was a teenager, she won a scholarship to a nearby prep school. But that wasn’t escape enough. At home, “the violence was just that bad and I had a deep proclivity for drugs and alcohol,” she said. She found her way to a boarding school in Maine and then later to Sarah Lawrence College, where she concentrated in theater.
Those schools saved her, though she never felt comfortable at any of them. “When you’re a scholarship kid you’re sort of in the middle,” she said, “Because the people at home don’t understand what you’re going through on a day-to-day basis and the kids at school don’t know.” As a child she’d studied “how to run from the cops and do a lot of drugs and literally talk myself out of getting killed or raped or beaten,” she said. It wasn’t a curriculum most of her peers could comprehend.
College, she said, “was the most isolating time in my life, and that sense of isolation didn’t begin to evaporate until I met these guys,” she said, pointing to Mr. Rosado and Mr. Lambie.
She met Mr. Rosado first, when his older sister dragged him to after-school rehearsals for the drama club at the Bronx Academy of Letters, a club then led by Ms. Thurber. Mr. Rosado said he would clown around, making people laugh. “I annoyed Lucy to the point of loving me,” he said. She didn’t disagree.
Mr. Rosado was cast in “The Laramie Project” at the school. “Things felt right,” he said. “Things clicked kind of.” His therapist has told him that it’s a miracle he found theater when he did.
“It’s a miracle, as corny as it is, that we found each other,” Mr. Lambie added.
A few years ago, after both had won scholarships to the Atlantic Theater Company’s acting school and were dealing with what Mr. Rosado called “the culture shock of getting out of the Bronx,” she told them she had written “Transfers” for them.
David, an adult who works for a nonprofit called Community Leaders, is coaching them. He thinks it will help if Cristofer discusses his grandmother’s death with the interviewers, but Cristofer resists and Clarence supports him. “She wasn’t a story to him,” Clarence says.
Maybe that’s why Mr. Lambie and Mr. Rosado were sometimes reticent about telling their own stories, though Mr. Rosado mentioned that he undergoes eye-movement desensitization and reprocessing therapy to counter several incidents of post-traumatic stress disorder, and Mr. Lambie alluded to “foster care issues” that dovetailed with those in the play.
Ms. Thurber asked permission for every anecdote and detail she borrowed. She wanted the play to feel honest to their experiences, to feel fair. She’d hoped that they would star in it, but by the time MCC agreed to do it, “neither one of them looked 20 or 19,” she said. Mr. Rosado and Mr. Lambie did some halfhearted pouting. “You’re still fine, handsome men,” she said. (At the Lucille Lortel, Ato Blankson-Wood and Juan Castano play Clarence and Cristofer.) “Next time I’ll write a play for you with a longer shelf life,” Ms. Thurber said.
Still, neither character is a precise portrait. There’s a lot of Ms. Thurber in here, too, including the loss of the grandmother “and other secret things,” she said. Mr. Rosado, who like Cristofer is Hispanic, relates directly to Clarence’s breakdown. Mr. 
Mr. Lambie has seen “Transfers” twice, Mr. Rosado won’t see it again. But they’ll tell you that they aren’t the ideal audience. “It’s not about me. It’s not about us,” Mr. Rosado said. The mostly upper-middle-class and mostly white MCC subscribers are not the ideal audience either.
“I think there’s a way in which theater literally saved my life,” Mr. Rosado said. He hopes that some other troubled kid will see the play, that maybe this story, which is more than just a story, will save someone else.