Josh Greenfeld, an Oscar-nominated screenwriter who was also acclaimed for three forthright books about his autistic son, died on May 11 in Los Angeles. He was 90.
His oldest son, the writer Karl Taro Greenfeld, said the cause was pneumonia.
In the early 1970s, when people with developmental disabilities were still often hidden away, Mr. Greenfeld helped put their needs in the public arena with “A Child Called Noah,” published in 1972. It detailed in journal form the challenges his family faced in raising his younger son, Noah, who, born in 1966, was nonverbal and difficult to control.
The book was blunt and honest. “What’s the matter with Noah?” he wrote. “For the longest time it seemed to depend on what diagnosis we were willing to shop around for. We’ve been told he was mentally retarded, emotionally disturbed, autistic, schizophrenic, possibly brain-damaged, or he was suffering from a Chinese box combination of these conditions.
Two years after the book came out, Mr. Greenfeld shared an Oscar nomination with Paul Mazursky for the screenplay of “Harry and Tonto,” a movie about a road trip taken by a man and his cat. (Art Carney, as Harry, won the best-actor Oscar.) He was not, however, done with the story of Noah; two more books would follow: “A Place for Noah” (1978) and “A Client Called Noah” (1987).
At a time when the United States was beginning to face the issues of how to view people with disabilities and what services to provide them, Mr. Greenfeld’s books helped other families in the same situation realize that they could and should speak up, and become their own best advocates.
Joshua Joseph Greenfeld was born on Feb. 27, 1928, in Malden, Mass., to Nathan and Katherine (Hellerman) Greenfeld. His father was “in the wool and waste business, basically, what we now call recycling,” Karl Greenfeld said.
Mr. Greenfeld grew up in Brooklyn and attended Samuel J. Tilden High School and then Brooklyn College before earning his bachelor’s degree at the University of Michigan. He later received a master’s degree in English at Columbia University. In 1959 he met the Japanese writer and painter Foumiko Kometani at the MacDowell Colony for artists in New Hampshire; they married the next year. Ms. Kometani would also write about life with Noah, receiving top literary awards in Japan, including the Akutagawa Prize in 1986.
Mr. Greenfeld wrote reviews and feature articles for numerous publications, including The New York Times. He was also a playwright. His “I Have a Dream,” compiled from the writings of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., ran for 88 performances on Broadway in 1976, with Billy Dee Williams as King.
That third book may have been about acceptance, but it was as uncompromising as the first two, as Susan Kenney wrote in reviewing it in The Times.
Karl Greenfeld, who continued telling Noah’s story in his own book, “Boy Alone: A Brother’s Memoir” (2009), said his brother, now 51, is in an assisted living home in Lawndale, Calif. “My parents went to see him every weekend until my father’s condition deteriorated over the last three years,” he said.
In addition to his wife and two sons, Mr. Greenfeld is survived by two grandchildren.
Mr. Greenfeld once described to “60 Minutes” the process he went through in his thinking about Noah.
