Eric T. Schneiderman, the New York attorney general, resigned abruptly on Monday night after several women accused him of physical assault.
Much has happened since then, so let us catch you up.
The country reacted.
Mr. Schneiderman had cast himself as the anti-Trump, and a possible backstop to the special counsel’s investigation of the president. His resignation left both Democrats and Republicans wondering: Where does this leave the work his office was doing to oppose the Trump administration?
His past was re-examined — and questioned.
Most recently, he filed a lawsuit against the Weinstein Company, demanding justice for those who suffered at the hands of the filmmaker Harvey Weinstein and positioning himself at the forefront of the #MeToo movement. In Albany, those who worked with him were shocked by the apparent chasm between his public and private lives.
An investigation was opened, then another.
On Tuesday, the office of the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., began an investigation into the accusations against Mr. Schneiderman, which included choking, slapping and spitting on women with whom he was intimately involved. But by Tuesday evening, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo had pulled the inquiry away from Mr. Vance, assigning a special prosecutor to look into the claims. Legal experts said Mr. Schneiderman could face a host of criminal charges, including assault, harassment and forcible touching.
The search for his replacement began.
New York’s solicitor general, Barbara D. Underwood, will lead the attorney general’s office for now, but the State Assembly and the Senate will select a formal replacement for Mr. Schneiderman. State legislators met in Albany on Tuesday to begin brainstorming.
Many officials, including the governor, said a woman should be tapped for the job. Here are some of the leading candidates.
Here’s a small antidote to the political drama.
It’s another delightful day with bright skies, sunshine and a high near 73.
Jeremy Safran had severe wounds to his head and body, the police said.
• We’re still taking recommendations on what to add to our New York Survival Kit. Let us know your never-leave-home-without-it item by sending an email to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| • Mets at Reds, 12:35 p.m. (SNY). Yankees host Red Sox, 7:05 p.m. (YES).
The state’s Office of General Services is collecting old American flags for its annual Memorial Watchfire, a military tradition hosted by local Vietnam War veterans to properly retire the red, white and blue on Memorial Day weekend.
Collection centers opened across the state yesterday, and will continue accepting star-spangled banners until May 23.
If you live in the five boroughs, you can take yours to the Adam Clayton Powell Jr. State Office Building, on West 125th Street in Harlem, or to the Shirley A. Chisholm State Office Building, on Hanson Place in Brooklyn.