In 1831 Alexis de Tocqueville celebrated the American postal system as a marvel of its day — a “great link between minds.” According to Devin Leonard, it may soon vanish. Drenched in red ink, the United States Postal Service has shut offices, reduced opening hours, closed processing plants and slashed its work force. While Leonard’s diagnosis of the United States mail as a “dying institution” may be premature (the Postal Service is still America’s largest civilian employer after Walmart), the system is clearly in crisis.
Leonard’s “Neither Snow Nor Rain” and Winifred Gallagher’s “How the Post Office Created America” celebrate the mail system’s storied past, and chart its declining fortunes. Gallagher, a journalist whose earlier books often focused on behavior science, emphasizes the achievements that made the postal system a crucial American institution. Present in every community and known to every citizen, the service was an obvious marker of the federal government in an era when centralized governance was largely out of sight.
Her book is the work of an enthusiast, an ode to a little-heralded but flagship government enterprise. In contrast to the British Royal Post, which, before mid-19th-century reforms, served primarily as a channel of official government correspondence, the United States mail, she tells us, was republican at birth. For example, the Post Office Act of 1792 in effect subsidized newspaper circulation, spreading national and international news to far-flung states and making for an informed citizenry. She reminds us, echoing the historian Richard John, that the post office forged a communications revolution just as far-reaching as the later telegraph and internet revolutions. But these public channels of communication could deepen division as well as foster unity, which both Northerners and Southerners knew. In 1802, at the behest of slaveholders who feared free blacks would use the system to foster slave rebellion, Congress barred nonwhites from carrying the mail. Abolitionists, in turn, flooded the South with antislavery literature. After Charleston pro-slavery citizens broke into the local post office in 1835 and burned the mail, the postmaster general sanctioned the suppression of abolitionist mailings to the South, the first in a series of government actions limiting the free exchange of information through the post office.
Gallagher glosses over such controversies to present an almost mythic vision of the past, particularly the nation’s westward expansion. She tells us of the post office’s crucial role in moving information across great distances, and in forging a national presence in Western territories. In the process, however, she simplifies the history of cultural exchange, diplomacy, violence, expropriation and warfare in a West that was, however inconveniently, already settled. In framing Western expansion as a story of “peripatetic Americans” who “fled farming and civilization for a wild life in an unspoiled natural world,” she ignores generations of historians who have told a more complex story of settler colonial capitalism, and its tragic meaning for the indigenous populations.
Gallagher’s discussion of the postal system’s “Golden Age” during the Progressive Era is more convincing. Flexible and innovative, with rural free delivery and the popular new parcel post service, the post office stood as a “powerful counter to the argument that private industry always serves Americans better than the government.” The Populists revered the American postal system. It stood as a model of how large-scale, bureaucratic and publicly controlled institutions could modernize the nation and make it more equitable. They hoped to establish a postal banking system, and to extend public ownership over the telegraph, the telephone and the railroads. The government did authorize postal banks, but only in regions underserved by established banks, and for very small savings accounts. Private stakeholders fought against a more robust postal banking system.
Such battles between private interests and the postal system were as old as the service itself, and Devin Leonard, a staff writer at Bloomberg Businessweek, recounts many of them. His sweeping and entertaining history tells a less celebratory if no less colorful story than ­Gallagher, but he offers a host of interesting anecdotes, including one about an ­Idaho family who sent their child 75 miles by parcel post because it was cheaper than going by train. More incidents of “child mailing” led the post office to outlaw the practice. Leonard sometimes presents his historical actors via dialogue, an unusual choice for a history book, and a method that must have involved some creative reconstruction on his part.
Over all, Leonard emphasizes a darker side of postal history, from the corruption scandals that periodically erupted after Andrew Jackson politicized the service, creating a gargantuan patronage machine, to oppressive government censorship campaigns. He devotes much of a chapter to Anthony Comstock, the longtime postal inspector and self-styled “weeder in God’s garden,” who banned and prosecuted the mailing of birth control pamphlets, “marriage aids” and “indecent” literary works like Walt Whitman’s poems, lest they pollute public morals. Still another chapter charts the spree of mass killings by overworked, underpaid and aggrieved postal workers in the 1980s and early 1990s.
Despite their different emphases, both books present a narrative of decline. In the mid-20th century, the post office was a powerful institution, the lifeblood of commerce, with mail carriers delivering letters twice daily. But because of repeated bare-bones congressional appropriations, the service has been unable to modernize, and mounting volume in outdated facilities has resulted in chaos, inefficiency and dysfunction. In 1967, after Postmaster General Lawrence O’Brien declared the department to be in a “race with catastrophe” and proposed a new model, business interests succeeded in winning a seat at the table for planning its future. In 1970 Richard Nixon’s Postal Reorganization Act ended a more than century-long understanding of the post as a public service paid for from general revenues and turned it into a government corporation.
Lack of modernization and continued inefficiency opened the door for private express carriers. When the Postal Service argued that such companies infringed on its monopoly over letter delivery, lobbyists fought back, and legislators proved receptive, eroding the service’s ­dominance in commerce and business. Experiments with computerized mail delivery, a postal email service and methods to help customers pay bills online were all slapped down by powerful opposition from private stakeholders and Congress. In 2006, Congress hemmed in the Postal Service’s mandate to its core mission: delivering letters, packages and printed matter, constraining its ability to innovate in a digital age. In many European countries, by contrast, national postal systems have so far weathered the internet revolution by innovating and offering digital services. And Congress dealt the Postal Service another blow by forcing it to prepay its future retiree health care costs at the hefty price of $5.5 billion a year for 10 years, deepening its woes.
Is the Postal Service, once at the cutting edge of a communications revolution, doomed to become either a quaint relic of the past or a de facto subsidiary of Amazon? The answer depends upon the public and Congress’s willingness to reorient policy. Gallagher’s and Leonard’s reminders of a time when the post office department stood at the center of commerce and communication suggest that innovation and experimentation — a hallmark of the Postal Service at its apex — may be the best way to secure the system’s future in an age of instant communication. Perhaps the post office is the place to begin the revitalization — or reinvention — of America’s ailing public sector.