Illustrated. 331 pp. Bloomsbury Press. $28.
Odd coupling did not begin with Felix and Oscar. Think of all the rivals shackled together by history: Bernini and Borromini, Hemingway and Fitzgerald, Robert Moses and Jane Jacobs. The pairing of frenemies is a time-honored storytelling device used by biographers to help us understand their subjects more fully. It’s as if we can truly know them only by their differences, their personal grievances and philosophical feuds. The historian Hugh Howard now applies this approach, in “Architecture’s Odd Couple,” to two of architecture’s most outsize personalities, Frank Lloyd Wright and Philip Johnson.
Even as odd couples go, Wright and Johnson seem an unlikely choice for a dual biography. The two men interacted with so many cultural giants that Howard could have yoked each to any number of others — Wright and Louis Sullivan, Johnson and Mies van der Rohe. Then there is the matter of the achievement gap. Wright is one of the greatest architects of all time. While Johnson is certainly an important historical figure, Howard concedes that he was a lesser design talent (despite the book jacket’s claims to the contrary). Had it not been for Johnson’s gift for publicity, his famous razor wit, his work at MoMA and the public fascination with his Glass House, it is likely that he would be remembered today as just another accomplished member of the Modernist pack. The other difficulty facing Howard is that Wright and Johnson didn’t pal around all that much. Wright preferred to be as far from the East Coast as possible. For Johnson, New York City was the center of the ­universe.
So Howard has a case to make. He unpacks the story gradually, giving us a thorough examination of the occasions when Wright and Johnson crossed paths. Along the way, he breaks out to explore that thrilling moment when modernism was taking hold in America. Howard suggests that each architect did his best work as a rejoinder to perceived slights from the other. “They were essential foils for each other, and clearly discernible shifts in the careers of both men resulted when their careers collided,” he argues.
The attraction of a Wright-Johnson pairing becomes apparent as Howard sketches in the details and the congruences pile up. Both men were attention-­hungry celebrities who remained active into their 90s. Each designed a career-­defining house (Fallingwater and the Glass House). Each had his own signature fashion look. For Wright it was the cape and porkpie hat. For Johnson it was his round black eyeglasses, a borrowing from Le Corbusier. Wright was a thrice-married womanizer. Johnson was as openly gay as one could be in the mid-20th century. But these are really just surface details, and in the end, it’s their differences that matter more. Wright was a true originator, while Johnson was, ultimately, a very influential tastemaker, who relished his ability to recognize the talent of others.
Preparations for the show at MoMA did not go well. Johnson saw the exhibit as an opportunity to introduce European Modernists like Walter Gropius and J.J.P. Oud to the American public. In Wright’s mind, it was his work that should be the center of attention. Even after Wright agreed to let his models be displayed, the power struggles continued. Angered by Johnson’s lack of deference, Wright threatened to withdraw his cooperation at the 11th hour, just as Johnson was facing a catalog deadline. Johnson and his co-curator, Henry-Russell Hitchcock, had to enlist the critic Lewis Mumford as mediator to soothe the great man’s wounded feelings. The roller-coaster experience of dealing with Wright proved so exhausting that Johnson ended up checking himself into a sanitarium on opening night.
As fraught as this initial encounter was, Howard argues it was pivotal in Wright’s development, opening his eyes to important changes in architecture. The sparring with Johnson provided the spark for his late-career burst of creativity and ultimately led to the designs for two of his most brilliant and beloved projects, Fallingwater and the Guggenheim Museum.
None of this was immediately apparent from Wright’s outward behavior. Wright publicly criticized the show, dismissing the work of the Europeans. Yet all the while, Howard says, Wright was quietly absorbing their style and ideas. Wright soon began to pare away the exterior ornamentation on his buildings, in keeping with Modernist ideas expressed in projects like Mies’s Tugendhat house. By 1936, when construction began on Fallingwater in western Pennsylvania, the change was clear. The arrangement of crisscrossing planes, balanced dramatically over a waterfall, “would reflect the lessons Wright had learned at MoMA, compliments of Philip Johnson,” Howard writes. Wright had fused his own ideas about organic architecture with the Europeans’ Modernist functionality. Having disparaged Wright for years as yesterday’s man, Johnson had to acknowledge that Fallingwater was, as Howard puts it, “something utterly new and different,” and would have a tremendous impact on the direction of architecture.
Wright and Johnson may share a penchant for witty pronouncements and the genes for longevity. But in dwelling on their personal idiosyncrasies, Howard distracts us from his central claim. Did the uneasy relationship between Wright and Johnson really influence their architectural thinking, and the history of architecture in general, to the extent he suggests? The problem with Howard’s dual biography is that it is too much of a closed system. It’s hard to believe that the innovations of the European Modernists wouldn’t have eventually captured Wright’s imagination without Johnson’s interventions. While the tensions between Wright and Johnson probably did have some effect on their creative outlook, very likely so did plenty of other people and ideas. Sure, Felix may have succeeded in getting Oscar to clean up the kitchen occasionally, but that doesn’t mean he can claim credit for making him a neat freak.