David Margolis this year in his Justice Department office.
WASHINGTON — David Margolis, a brash and revered prosecutor who in more than 50 years at the Justice Department helped it navigate through some of its most difficult chapters, died on Tuesday in Falls Church, Va. He was 76.
The cause was heart-related illness, the Justice Department said.
Mr. Margolis was regarded inside the Justice Department as an all-knowing, Yoda-like figure. He started in 1965 as a longhaired, rumpled federal prosecutor in the Johnson administration and rose to become the department’s top career official as a consigliere and disciplinarian for both Democratic and Republican attorneys general in nine presidential administrations.
He was “a consummate public servant,” Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch said in announcing his death.
Inside the buttoned-up confines of the department, he was almost as famous for his gaudy attire and barbed wit as for his sharp legal mind. Mr. Margolis, who wanted to be a rock ’n’ roll disc jockey as a child, favored loud ties, brightly colored leisure suits (not infrequently stained with food), bell-bottom jeans and big brass belt buckles. His office was a proud mess of Yankee baseball memorabilia, comic-book magnets and an Elvis clock strewn among sensitive legal filings and photos of him with political leaders.
In recent decades he was in the middle of many of the Justice Department’s biggest mobster, political corruption, espionage and terrorism investigations. He often examined high-level cases in which the government’s own conduct was called into question, including the suicide of the Clinton White House aide Vince Foster in 1993, the leaking of the C.I.A. agent Valerie Plame’s name in 2003, and the botched corruption prosecution of Senator Ted Stevens of Alaska in 2008.
In perhaps his biggest test, he intervened in 2010 in a furious long-running dispute over the legal basis for the brutal interrogation tactics used by the C.I.A. against terrorism suspects after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
The Justice Department’s ethics lawyers had concluded that John C. Yoo and Jay S. Bybee, two of the department lawyers responsible for legal opinions authorizing brutal tactics like waterboarding, demonstrated “professional misconduct” and should be sanctioned.
But Mr. Margolis overruled that decision and concluded that their legal memos authorizing the tactics, while flawed, were tempered by the “context” of the frenzied period when they were written.
Criticized by some Democrats for going too easy on the lawyers, Mr. Margolis said later that he agonized over that decision more than any other he had made.
David Margolis was born on Dec. 18, 1939, in Hartford. Discouraging his early aspiration to become a D.J., his father, a local politician, urged him to become a lawyer instead. He received an undergraduate degree from Brown and a law degree from Harvard.
His survivors include his wife, Deborah; his daughters, Kim and Cheryl Margolis; a brother, Charles; and three grandchildren.
Mr. Margolis began his career in the United States attorney’s office in Hartford in 1965 and got his first taste of Justice Department celebrity four years later when he personally negotiated the surrender of an armed bank robbery suspect. One police officer at the scene said he mistook Mr. Margolis, with his long sideburns and “modish clothes,” for a draft card-burning hippie.
Not long after, he moved to the Justice Department’s headquarters in Washington to prosecute organized crime cases. He eventually became the senior career employee in advising the attorney general and other political appointees who set policy and oversee the department.
At a ceremony in 2005 observing Mr. Margolis’s 40th anniversary at the Justice Department, James B. Comey Jr., who was then the deputy attorney general, said Mr. Margolis would tell off anybody he thought was wrong, including the attorney general.
Mr. Comey, who is now the director of the F.B.I., was again part of a ceremony honoring Mr. Margolis last year, this time on the occasion of 50 years at the department. Mr. Comey roasted Mr. Margolis’s fashion sense by wearing a loud orange tie with a mismatched, untucked purple shirt.
“David Margolis was the United States Department of Justice,” Mr. Comey said in a statement after his passing.
His dry witticisms were so memorable that The Washington Post cataloged some of them last year. At one congressional hearing at which he testified, a lawmaker asked how many people work at the Justice Department. “About 60 percent,” he answered.
Mr. Margolis, known early in his career for chain-smoking Marlboros and having two desserts for lunch, dealt with heart trouble over the years.
In 1995, he suffered a heart attack that nearly killed him and required quadruple bypass surgery; Attorney General Janet Reno, Deputy Attorney General Jamie Gorelick and senior aides held an unofficial ceremony at his hospital room to award him his 30-year pin, according to “Main Justice,” a book by Jim McGee and Brian Duffy.
He continued working as the associate deputy attorney general until his death.