You’re Going to Sell Your Home. Should You Mention the Snakes?
We live in a large house on a one-acre plot, and one-quarter of that is a wooded ravine, full of wildlife like deer, raccoons, the occasional woodchuck, possum or even fox — and quite a few copperhead snakes.
We have lived here for 45 years. I see one to three snakes a year. They are not aggressive, and you learn to take precautions. Nevertheless, I have been bitten, as have several neighbors. They can show up in the backyard, in the driveway or in the gardens. Once, I found one lying across the threshold of my front door.
Scruples like yours help explain why real estate agents don’t like to have the sellers around when they bring in prospective buyers. The snakes themselves are sure to keep better hidden. Because the North American copperhead is so well camouflaged, experts say, it will often freeze, rather than flee, when approached. The strategy usually ends well for all concerned, but not always. It’s that whole “don’t tread on me” thing.
Your lawyer or real estate agent would be able to tell you whether you have a legal duty in your state to reveal the facts that you have told me. As a moral matter, though, you ought to mention these snakes to anyone who is serious about the property; you know they would want to know. If you’re wavering in your resolve, ask yourself how you would feel if you learned, after you sold your place, that the buyer’s child had been hospitalized from a copperhead bite.
Rational, informed buyers shouldn’t automatically avoid your property, so long as you give them all the relevant facts. For one thing, the copperhead’s bite is considered mild, as venomous bites go; it’s virtually never life-threatening, although the risks are greater for children and the elderly. In fact, the Centers for Disease Control estimates that only about five Americans die of snakebites of any kind each year. We’re in far greater danger of being electrocuted by our Christmas lights, asphyxiated by dry-cleaning bags or stung to death by bees.
And the risk of being bitten in your yard is pretty small. How often have you been bitten over the last 45 years? All these facts, along with information on how to discourage these snakes, what to avoid doing (picking up logs in your ravine) and what to do if bitten, should reassure rational buyers. You’ll be warning people of a very low-risk possibility, and in so doing, you’ll help to make the risks even lower.
A few years ago I reconnected with and befriended a former high-school acquaintance. She has very strong and sometimes very different opinions from mine (especially when it comes to service providers and restaurants and things like that).
I referred her to one of my doctors who has an excellent reputation and has repeatedly given me excellent care over many years. My friend went to this doctor for a minor operation. After the procedure, she has repeatedly and vehemently slandered him to me, saying he punctured her uterus and misread or ignored ultrasounds. I suspect (from how she finds fault and forms strong negative opinions in other areas) that these are her mistaken conclusions, and there is no proof of her assertions of malpractice. Or she may be correct.
Your doctor has obligations of confidentiality to your friend that rule out his discussing with you what happened. She, on the other hand, is free to reveal what happened to whomever she chooses, though not to damage the doctor’s reputation with untruths. You seem to think that she is often mistaken in the judgments she voices about the services others provide. In this case, she’s effectively saying she was the victim of serious malpractice. Furthermore, believing it happened when it didn’t would require either a considerable capacity for fantasy or a serious misunderstanding of what she was told. Yet you are skeptical. That suggests you think that for some reason she may enjoy telling this story even though she knows it isn’t true.
Because you put her in touch with the doctor, and because you think she is prone to what you consider unwarranted criticism, you feel you have some responsibility for the (possibly unjustified) damage she is doing to his reputation. Now you’re caught between your relationship with a doctor whom you trust and a friend whom you don’t.
Why not tell your friend that you feel obliged to bring up the issue with your doctor? (Even though he won’t be able to discuss it with you.) That’s consistent with friendship. If you believed her, after all, you would have reason to confront your doctor with the charges and express your concern. If your friend has been less than truthful, your plan may encourage her to backtrack.
I’m a white, male middle manager in a consulting firm in Asia. I have a few junior staff members, about half male and half female. As you may be aware, white men in this part of the world have a reputation as incorrigible lechers, mostly for good reason.
I’m happily married and have no interest in sleeping with my junior female employees, and though I haven’t explicitly told them that (it would seem weird, no?), I have tried to communicate that through the way I act in general.
Mentorship is really important to career development in this business, and I’m conscious of trying to offer equal time to male and female employees in my mentoring of them. I’m also conscious of the fact that certain one-on-one things that I can do easily with male staff members range from difficult (after-work dinners or drinks) to pretty much impossible (overnight business trips) with their female counterparts. Even if I am able to convince my staff that my motives are pure, others’ expectations could make things uncom­fortable for them.
I’m not going to be much use with tips, alas, but the sorts of events you mention — after-work dinners, drinks, trips — are things that you don’t have to do one on one, and they can involve mentoring regardless. Bear in mind, though, that most mentoring takes place in the office; it doesn’t have to involve activities that show up on your travel-and-entertainment account. You say you have “a few” junior employees: You have time to make sure that all of them, women and men, get the guidance that your greater experience allows you to give and the endorsements that move the good ones higher.
Sheryl Sandberg, who notes (and shares) the widespread perception that women have a harder time finding mentors than men do, says that employees are selected as protégés on the basis of their performance and potential. Mentoring is, in part, talent scouting. So if the concern is fairness in female advancement, we might think beyond the mentoring model. Treating the women on your team respectfully all the time is probably the most important thing you can do. It will make it easier for them to focus on doing the best job they can. Some of the women will outperform some of the men, and you’ll be able to report that in their reviews and in your informal discussions with your fellow executives. There’s more than one way to climb a ladder.