Olympic officials said on Sunday that all Russian athletes were tainted by the country’s state-run doping system and would not be allowed to compete in the Summer Games unless they convinced individual sports federations of their innocence.
The showdown between Russia and Olympic officials was rich with intrigue beyond the playing fields in Rio de Janeiro. President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia had suggested the doping allegations were politically motivated and meant to undermine his country’s standing in the world. The Olympic leadership had been under pressure to expel a major sports power for perpetrating one of the most expansive doping programs in history and corrupting results at the Summer and Winter Games.
In the end, Russian officials received a reprieve, in their view. The Russian flag and at least some of the country’s athletes will be a part of the Rio Olympics. The burden now shifts to sports federations to vet Russia’s individual Olympic candidates.
“This may not please everybody on either side,” Mr. Bach said Sunday, repeating his desire to balance “the individual justice to which every human being is entitled” with collective punishment.
Russian sports fans were in good spirits in Moscow on Sunday after the International Olympic Committee issued a statement saying that though the country's athletes would have to show individually that they had no history of doping, the country would not be barred from the Rio Games.
The decision by the Olympic Committee’s executive board tarnished the reputations and performance of all Russian Olympic athletes, reversing the presumption of innocence and outlining a steep climb for those hoping to compete in Rio. It also served as strong affirmation that Russia had carried out an elaborate cheating scheme under government orders.
Russian officials have forcefully denied detailed allegations of cheating. But after forensic evidence and computer records were presented last week by the World Anti-Doping Agency, Mr. Putin announced suspensions of several officials who had been implicated.
With the opening ceremony in Rio scheduled for Aug. 5, the implications of the Olympic decision may be muddy, with governing bodies for various sports taking on the complicated task of scrutinizing hundreds of athletes in less than two weeks. Many of the organizations are ill-equipped to handle such a process, and some have strong ties to Russia.
Olympics officials on Sunday outlined criteria for athletes to gain eligibility, creating the possibility that Russia’s Olympic delegation in Brazil will be severely depleted. Officials instructed sports organizations to analyze each athlete’s history of drug tests; to consider only tests that had been conducted by a reliable antidoping authority, presumably outside Russia; and not to consider a clean record to be an automatic signal of an athlete’s purity.
Reacting positively to the announcement, Russia’s minister of sport, Vitaly Mutko, expressed confidence that a “majority” of Russian athletes would meet the criteria. Mr. Mutko himself, however, will not attend the Rio Games, after Olympic officials said last week that no employee of Russia’s Sports Ministry would be welcome.
Many sports federations have shown little interest in rooting out drug violations — which can affect public confidence in competitions, along with television ratings and sponsor money — and they are not expected to take an aggressive approach now.
The worst fears of some antidoping officials were realized when, only a few hours after the Olympic committee’s announcement on Sunday, the tennis federation cleared for competition all eight Russian athletes who had qualified for the Games with seemingly little scrutiny. Officials cited 205 doping samples among the eight players since 2014.
In laying out qualifying criteria, Olympic officials had specifically emphasized that a history of clean drug-test results did not assure a Russian athlete’s innocence.
Asked how the criteria presented Sunday would be applied consistently across the 28 individual sports federations that participate in the Summer Games, Mr. Bach said that the Olympic committee would exercise final authority, and that the decisions would be reviewed by an independent arbitrator — all before Aug. 5.
Mr. Bach called it “a very ambitious timeline,” but pointed to the recent results of an investigation that six days earlier had confirmed the account of Russia’s longtime antidoping lab chief.
Among those who said on Sunday that they wished officials had taken stronger was Lauryn Williams, a sprinter and bobsledder from the United States who is a member of the World Anti-Doping Agency’s athletes’ committee. Even if a small number of Russian athletes make it to Rio, she said, she is disappointed in what she considers to be a lack of leadership from Olympic officials.
Pressure to discipline Russia had mounted in recent months. Russia’s Olympic weight lifting team and entire Paralympic team are facing a ban, and the country’s track and field team was barred by that sport’s governing body in June, a decision that withstood a court challenge last week.
Russian sports officials welcomed the International Olympics Commitee decision on Sunday, saying the Russian national team would perform well, despite the tough new regulations imposed.
Track and field officials had allowed Russian athletes to petition to compete, presuming athletes guilty rather than innocent. Over the last month, they rejected more than 60 applications and approved just two — including one from a Russian whistle-blower, the middle-distance runner Yuliya Stepanova, who spoke out against widespread doping in Russia after she herself was caught with an infraction; she has been branded a traitor by Russian officials.
On Sunday, Olympic officials rejected a request by Ms. Stepanova to participate in the Olympics as a neutral athlete rather than for Russia. The Olympic committee said it would not accept the entry of any Russian athlete with a prior drug violation, even if a penalty had been served in full.
“She put her life on the line,” Ms. Williams said, expressing disappointment at that decision.
Joseph de Pencier, chief executive of the Institute of National Anti-Doping Organizations, a trade group, called Sunday “a sad day for clean sport,” criticizing the Olympic Committee for its choice to outsource decisions and its failure to approve the whistle-blower’s request.
Katie Uhlaender, a winter Olympian, wondered about the implications for the Winter Games held in 2014 in Sochi, Russia. The recent investigation confirmed that Russian officials tampered with doping samples at Sochi, where Ms. Uhlaender placed fourth in the women’s skeleton competition, behind a Russian who won the bronze medal but was identified as among those whose steroid-laced urine samples were surreptitiously made to appear clean.
The Olympic board’s deliberations stemmed from a confession by the longtime director of Russia’s antidoping lab, Grigory Rodchenkov, who told The New York Times last spring how Russian officials had perpetrated one of the most elaborate doping programs in sports history. He shared spreadsheets of the athletes who had doped, along with the recipe for a three-drug cocktail of steroids and liquor he devised ahead of the 2012 Summer Games in London.
When Russia hosted the 2014 Olympics, Dr. Rodchenkov said, the country saw it as an opportunity to manipulate lab results and dope throughout competition, prompting him and Russia’s intelligence service to tamper with athlete samples nightly at the Games.
“It was very serious work — deliberate, structured, the best hands in Russia,” Dr. Rodchenkov said, reflecting on the scheme with pride for having successfully carried out complex orders without detection.
Dr. Rodchenkov suggested that Russia be barred from the Rio Games.
“If you’re fighting doping, Russia should be withdrawn from the Olympics,” he said in May in Los Angeles, where he fled with the help of a filmmaker, Bryan Fogel, whom he had been advising on a doping regimen for a documentary.
The World Antidoping Agency, which commissioned an investigation into Dr. Rodchenkov’s account, subsequently recommended to the Olympic committee that Russia be barred. Last week, the Canadian lawyer who conducted that inquiry said that forensic evidence, computer metadata and corroborating interviews had confirmed the schemes.
Mr. Zhukov urged the Olympic committee not to become “hostages of geopolitical pressure,” echoing statements by Mr. Putin that scrutiny of Russia’s doping record was politically motivated.
Dr. Rodchenkov said that although he thought all nations were guilty of doping, it was fair to pay particular attention to Russia, as the I.O.C. did Sunday.
