TOKYO — Pikachu, Bulbasaur and other creatures of the Pokémon universe returned like conquering heroes to their home country on Friday, and they brought with them a message: Eat at McDonald’s.
Pokémon Go, the wildly popular mobile game, was released on Friday in Japan, the country that gave rise to the entertainment franchise two decades ago. By evening, more than 10 million people had downloaded the game, its developers said.
The game’s highly anticipated introduction here — several weeks and tens of millions of downloads after it became an unexpected megahit in the United States and other countries — was treated as a national event, with widespread news coverage and a cautious endorsement from the government.
It also offered a test of how Pokémon Go and games like it might find new ways to make money. The game’s creators have struck a deal with the Japanese affiliate of McDonald’s to make most of its 2,900 stores in the country available as special game locations.
At these in-game “gyms” and “Poké spots,” Pokémon Go players can pit their monsters against other players’ menageries, or collect items that bolster their creatures’ power. The fast-food company hopes they will buy Big Macs and French fries, too, but does not require it.
McDonald’s hopes to draw players like Takahiro Notoya, 33, a web developer who said he had captured five Pokémon by midway through his lunch break in the crowded Shibuya neighborhood. As he walked by a McDonald’s outlet with a colleague, the chain’s red-and-gold logo popped up on his smartphone screen.
“I played Pokémon games and watched the TV show when I was a kid, and it’s amazing to see it take off like this,” he said. Just then, his colleague Naoki Kaneko, 23, announced he had spotted a caterpillarlike Caterpie near the restaurant’s entrance and began flinging virtual balls at the creature on his screen to capture it.
Technology companies have increasingly turned to mobile as consumers give up their desktop computers and shift much of their time to smartphones and tablets. But mobile has proved to be a difficult area to make money, in part because smaller screens do not offer as much space for advertising.
One widespread strategy has been to give players a chance to spend real-world money to buy items they can use to make their digital alter egos more powerful. But Pokémon Go and other so-called augmented-reality games, which fuse digitally created fantasies with physical locations, have additional options, like charging businesses to direct game players to their doorsteps.
Like old-time treasure hunts, augmented reality games unfold in real neighborhoods, and for every grumpy resident who wants to keep players off their lawn there is a business that is happy to attract them. Because the game’s creators decide where the treasure is hidden, they can effectively dictate where players go.
Pokémon Go will have both in-app purchases and sponsored locations, John Hanke, the chief executive of Niantic, said in a recent interview. Niantic, a spinoff of Google, is one of the companies behind Pokémon Go, along with Nintendo of Japan.
Niantic honed the revenue model for Pokémon Go with a previous augmented reality game, a science fiction role-playing game called Ingress that had the Circle K convenience store chain as a location sponsor.
For McDonald’s, the association could give a needed push in Japan, a market in which it has stumbled lately. The Japanese affiliate has closed about 200 restaurants in the last two years, and it lost 34.9 billion yen, or about $329 million, last year, as it has struggled to adapt to changing consumer preferences and regain trust after several food-contamination scandals.
Shares in McDonald’s Japan jumped to a 15-year high after news of the sponsorship leaked this week, while Nintendo’s market value has swelled by billions of dollars since Pokémon Go made its debut in the United States.
Niantic and Nintendo did not explain why the game was released late in Japan, although securing enough server capacity has been an issue in other markets. Many players said they had grown frustrated with the wait.
“I’ve been studying up on all the tricks to catch Pikachu,” the game’s signature yellow monster, said Tomoki Tanaka, a 15-year-old-high school student who was hunting for Pokémon with a classmate, Ryuta Mizusawa. They had not been born when Nintendo introduced Pokémon as a game for its classic Game Boy hand-held console in the mid-1990s, but they grew up with subsequent iterations of the franchise.
