WARSAW — President Obama and European leaders tried to project a united front at a NATO summit meeting on Friday, with Mr. Obama dismissing as “hyperbole” any fear that Britain’s vote to leave the European Union would unravel the broader trans-Atlantic security alliance.
But lurking beneath a veneer of unity was growing evidence in Warsaw of fissures within Europe that go beyond its highly visible split with Britain. Most revolve around the question of whether to deter or placate Russia as it continues to prowl unpredictably to the alliance’s east.
From NATO’s economic sanctions to pressure Russia to the alliance’s military exercises meant to deter it, Germany, France and Italy are showing signs of wavering from the hard-line stance they adopted after President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia annexed Crimea two years ago.
The argument over how clearly to signal a more muscular alliance — one that is prepared to push back if Mr. Putin overreaches or is ready to strike back if Russia attacks a former Soviet state now part of the alliance — was visible at the meeting in many forms.
Until the annexation of Crimea, members of the alliance rarely used the word deterrence in speaking about Russia. The Russians often came to meetings like this one as part of a “NATO-Russia Council” that was meant to bleach all sense of confrontation out of the relationship.
Before the summit meeting, NATO agreed to make cyberspace a new domain of conflict, alongside ground, air, sea and outer-space operations. This was intended as a warning to the Russians, officials said, about the use of hybrid methods of disruption, including the cyberattacks in the last decade have struck Estonia, Georgia and, most recently, Ukraine’s electric power grid.
Perhaps the most notable indicator of the argument over whether to openly deter Russia or to tone down any potential provocations centers on nuclear weapons, once the keystone of the alliance’s ability to hold Russia at bay.
For the first few years of the Obama administration, there was debate inside the alliance about whether to rid Europe of the B-61, a nuclear weapon that was stored on the Continent and could be carried by numerous NATO aircraft.
To keep the Russians guessing, the article said that “exercises should not point at any specific nuclear thresholds” that might signal to the Russians what it would take to provoke a nuclear response.
It is hard to imagine the Germans, in particular, signing up for that strategy. But the Obama administration has promoted the improvement and retention of some kinds of nuclear weapons, even while vowing to reduce their numbers.
Politics play a part in Europe’s changing views. Mr. Steinmeier is a leader of Germany’s Social Democratic Party, and his criticism of the military exercise in Poland was calculated partly to distinguish his center-left party from the conservative Christian Democrats of Chancellor Angela Merkel before elections next year.
In a speech to the German Parliament on Thursday, Ms. Merkel reiterated the traditional message of supporting deterrence by NATO nations and pursuing dialogue with Moscow. She stressed that the alliance’s former Soviet bloc members were “most profoundly disturbed” by Russia’s recent actions in Crimea and eastern Ukraine and on Russia’s western borders.
Still, she insisted that robust deterrence and dialogue were “inseparably connected” and praised not just the conservative defense minister, Ursula von der Leyen, but also Mr. Steinmeier.
Over the last two years, Germany has played a more active global role, diplomatically and militarily. It recently increased its military spending to just over 37 billion euros ($41 billion) this year. Yet that is still far below the target set at the last NATO summit meeting in Wales.
The president expressed confidence that Britain and Europe would be able negotiate an amicable separation. And he said Britain’s eventual exit need not curtail the sanctions that the United States and Europe had imposed on Mr. Putin’s government.
Donald Tusk, a former Polish prime minister who is the president of the European Council, echoed that message and pledged that other union members would not follow Britain’s lead.
But even if Britain were to be the lone departure, some analysts said its absence would be disproportionately felt.
