There were more than a few dropped jaws when the Silicon Valley investor Peter Thiel agreed to a prime-time speaking slot on the final night of the Republican National Convention, barely an hour before the acceptance speech of Donald J. Trump. Mr. Trump wants to emboss a big fat T on government, promising huge infrastructure projects, starting with a wall between the United States and Mexico. What was a former Ron Paul supporter and proud libertarian like Mr. Thiel doing on the same stage?
Mr. Thiel’s endorsement puts him at odds with many Silicon Valley chief executives and investors who oppose Mr. Trump on issues like climate change, same-sex marriage and, of course, immigration (they want more visas available for software engineers). It is easy to depict Mr. Thiel, a co-founder of PayPal, board member at Facebook and influential investor, as an outlier even in the oddball tech world: He believes there will be a cure for death, promotes the construction of floating islands exempt from society’s rules and secretly financed a lawsuit to take down Gawker.
But Mr. Thiel isn’t just embedded in the business of Silicon Valley. He’s also deeply embedded in the worldview of Silicon Valley that, despite many disagreements with the Republican platform, matches up surprisingly well with Mr. Trump’s ideas about fixing government.
Twenty years later, Mr. Thiel’s embrace of Mr. Trump reflects a different time in Silicon Valley, as tech companies are increasingly moving into offline real-world businesses and bumping up against government regulations and traditional institutions. The car-hiring service Uber fights local taxi rules; Airbnb seeks to avoid being treated as either a hotel, with safety rules, or a renter that must follow guidelines against racial discrimination; there are high-tech attempts to centralize and privatize education, which battle with teachers’ unions; and Facebook has undertaken an effort to provide a free, Facebook-centric form of internet access that has been blocked by the Indian government.
But Silicon Valley doesn’t hate government categorically. When Mr. Thiel harked back to the great projects of the past, like building the atom bomb, creating the internet and landing a man on the moon, he was citing three of the most important United States government initiatives of the last century. He praised them in his speech for inspiring the tech dreamers of Silicon Valley, who today inspire America to be great again.
Mr. Trump claims this because he is a builder whom we can trust to get things done. Mr. Thiel comes from Silicon Valley, where the belief in talent, and the rewards owed to talent, are paramount. “My industry has made a lot of progress in computers and in software, and, of course, it’s made a lot of money,” he said. Mr. Trump’s appeal to someone like Mr. Thiel is that they both believe that government should be brash and bold, while politics as usual produces tame mediocrity. They also believe they are the right kind of people to change that.