Science|Continents Split Up at the Same Speed Finger Nails Grow. And That’s Fast.
Continents Split Up at the Same Speed Finger Nails Grow. And That’s Fast.
Continents cruise in the slow lane.
Moving just millimeters at a time, it took the ancient supercontinent Pangea hundreds of millions of years to break apart into today’s landmasses. But a study published Tuesday shows that the journey wasn’t always a leisurely drive. When under extreme strain, the tectonic plates hit the throttle and accelerated to speeds 20 times faster than they were traveling before.
After analyzing seismic data from across the world and building a model, Dr. Muller and his team discovered that plates move in two distinct phases: a slow phase and a fast one. During the slow phase, the continental crusts, which can be more than 20 miles thick, are stretched out little by little while remaining connected. But then suddenly, one or both of the continents step on the gas pedal.
Using a computer simulation they illustrated the points in geologic history when pairs of land masses shifted speeds as they drifted apart. This is most dramatically seen between North America and Africa during Pangea’s initial rift some 240 million years ago.
At that time, the slabs of rock that carried these present-day continents crawled apart from each other at a rate of a millimeter a year. They remained in this slow phase for about 40 million years.
Then, around 200 million years ago the plates entered their fast stage, accelerating for 10 million years until they reached speeds of 20 millimeters per year, which is similar to how fast fingernails grow. Around 189 million years ago, the pair stopped accelerating and remained at a constant speed until they completely split approximately 173 million years ago, according to the model.
Their computer simulation, which is available to the public, also shows the slow and fast phases for every landmass pair that broke up in the last 240 million years, such as India and Madagascar; Australia and Antarctica; Europe and Greenland; and South America and Africa.