He will next appear at the Public Theater in a revival of David Hare’s postwar drama “Plenty.” “It’s my summer of inscrutable men in difficult British plays,” he said. These are excerpts from an interview in Manhattan.
We had this two-day boot camp, where this special operator came in and had us march and hold guns and clear rooms. And then there was military-style exercise three times a week, lots of pull-ups and push-ups and squats.
Do you think about contemporary parallels to the show?
It’s not necessarily the most compelling thing for a liberal like myself, to be making an impassioned plea for the divine rights of kings, and for observing the hierarchy of order, of class and authority. There are definitely some things I say that, in my own head, are about things that are going on in the world. And yet there is something really fun about being the bad guy.
How did you come up with your voice for “Café Society”?
Woody threw me for a little bit of a loop, because when he offered me the role, the one thing he said was, “I don’t want you to have any sort of accent, just talk in your normal voice.” I thought, O.K., that’s a little strange, I don’t really think I talk like a 30s gangster. And then the first day on set, he was like, well, you need some sort of accent. I just winged it, but luckily I had been watching a lot of gangster movies.
What was it like to shoot on location for “Girls”?
We had this one scene right in Times Square, and I thought, we’re gonna make this big scene, kissing with this guy [a boyfriend played by Andrew Rannells], but people didn’t care. Because it was just Times Square — there was a Naked Cowboy over there, and then there’s like a drunk Pokémon.
You’ve now been killed off on a show and been a killer in another one — which is harder to play?
On “The Strain,” they have these blind child vampires that we have to kill, and that is difficult. I really don’t mind the gore and the blood but like, beating small stuntmen who are dressed as children, it’s a little disturbing.
Do you think you might do kids’ movies soon?
Absolutely! A lot of actors will start to do that, and I totally get it now. My wife was pregnant while we were promoting “Ant-Man,” and that was very exciting, to see, like, action figures of myself, as we’re getting the nursery ready. I have “Ant-Man” crib sheets.