WASHINGTON — Six weeks before the anti-secrecy organization WikiLeaks published an archive of hacked Democratic National Committee emails ahead of the Democratic convention, the organization’s founder, Julian Assange, foreshadowed the release — and made it clear that he hoped to harm Hillary Clinton’s chances of winning the presidency.
How we analyzed in real time the second night of the Democratic National Convention, featuring Bill Clinton, Madeleine Albright and Lena Dunham.
Efforts to reach Mr. Assange for comment were unsuccessful, and a Clinton campaign spokesman did not respond to an inquiry. In November 2010, when WikiLeaks and its news media partners began publishing the cables, Mrs. Clinton strongly condemned it.
“In addition to endangering particular individuals, disclosures like these tear at the fabric of the proper function of responsible government,” she said then.
Mr. Assange’s remarks last month received only scattered attention, in part because in the interview Mr. Peston appeared to mistakenly assume that WikiLeaks had obtained still-undisclosed emails from the private server Mrs. Clinton had used while secretary of state and kept cutting Mr. Assange off to ask about it.
But it now seems clearer that Mr. Assange was trying to talk about the Democratic National Committee emails.
Mr. Assange spoke from the Ecuadorean Embassy in London, where he has been holed up for four years. Sweden is seeking his extradition for an investigation into sexual misconduct allegations; his supporters have expressed fear that if he is arrested, he could be sent to the United States and prosecuted for publishing leaked documents.
After the Democratic chairwoman, Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz, resigned Monday when Sanders supporters reacted angrily to revelations in the emails that party officials had privately rooted for Mrs. Clinton to win the presidential nomination, Mr. Assange told the news program “Democracy Now!” that he had timed their release to coincide with the Democratic convention.
Asked on that program whether the Russian government had given him the emails, Mr. Assange said that he never revealed sources but also that “no one knows who our source is.” He also said the Democratic National Committee might have been hacked on multiple occasions by different intruders.