Liz Marina Cardozo, an owner of Araras Coffee & More in White Plains, was giving me a quick tour of her cheery cafe — the shelves stocked with Brazilian products, the cooler with creamy desserts — when I asked if she was still making the alfajores I had heard about. The week had been too busy, she said, and inquired if I had sampled her version of the popular South American cookie on a previous visit. I said no.
Happy to have an excuse to stop by — Araras is an automatic mood elevator — I was back two days later. On the counter was a tray of alfajores — delicious, almost feathery rounds filled with dulce de leche and sprinkled with coconut. The owners, Ms. Cardozo and Celina Bredemann, specialize in desserts. Ms. Cardozo makes at least one cake a day, like carrot with a drizzle of chocolate or a dulce de leche cake dotted with plum and frosted with snow-white meringue. Ms. Bredemann makes the brigadeiros, the two-bite, truffle-like treats made with condensed milk and butter (flavors include coconut, almond, Nutella and a wonderfully intense chocolate).
Araras, which opened in late 2014, also offers a variety of tasty Brazilian snacks made by a friend of the owners. There are empadinhas, miniature potpies filled with chicken and a tart green olive. Quibe, the Brazilian version of the Lebanese kibbeh, avocado-shaped croquettes of bulgur wheat stuffed with ground beef. Esfirra, baked triangles with chicken, beef or ham and cheese. Coxinha, crunchy cones with chicken or a combination of chicken and the Brazilian cream cheese Catupiry; pastels, crisp rectangles with beef (my current favorite); and the slightly chewy, slightly cheesy puffs called pão de queijo, which make for a buoyant breakfast.
Everything on the menu, savory and sweet, goes well with the excellent coffee (from cups to cappuccinos), Café Tres Pontas from the state of Minas Gerais in southeastern Brazil.
It was coffee — Brazilian coffee — that led to the meeting of Ms. Cardozo and Ms. Bredemann, and then, several years later, to inspiring the idea for Araras.
When Ms. Cardozo, who is from Paraguay, came to the United States in 2007, her search for good coffee took her to a store in White Plains called Alo Brasil.
To help them get started, they enrolled in a program run by the local nonprofit group Women’s Enterprise Development Center. There, they decided on the name Araras, the Portuguese word for macaws (Brazilians “love this bird — it’s beautiful,” Ms. Bredemann said).
