Kat Sullivan decided to come forward now about one awful night at an elite private school 18 years ago after a fellow classmate, long troubled by the episode, contacted her.
Ms. Sullivan said that on that night in 1998, at Emma Willard School, she had been bound and gagged with her own underpants in the apartment of a history teacher with whom she was involved in a relationship, and then anally raped.
But just as painful, Ms. Sullivan said, was the response then of the administration at Emma Willard, an elite girls’ boarding school in Troy, N.Y., near Albany. She said that when she told school officials, who knew about the relationship, what had happened, they told her she could either withdraw or be expelled. They then put her on a bus to New Orleans, where a friend of hers lived, the next day.
Ms. Sullivan said she was traumatized and confused when the episode occurred, and did not report it to the police. In April, she did report it to the Troy Police Department. Because there is no statute of limitations in cases involving rape in New York State, the teacher could still be charged.
The accusations against the teacher and the school have spawned a Facebook group with more than 1,200 members and hashtags like #IStandWithKat on social media. Nearly 600 alumnae ranging in age from 18 to 84 signed a letter to the administration listing a dozen demands, including one that all employees undergo mandatory training on sexual assault and misconduct.
Efforts to contact the Troy Police Department, as well as Ms. Robertson and the teacher were unsuccessful.
Ms. Sullivan’s story is the latest in a string of sexual abuse claims against private boarding schools. Similar accusations of rape and molestation by alumni against teachers and staff have rocked Horace Mann in the Bronx, Phillips Exeter Academy in New Hampshire and St. George’s School in Rhode Island.
Ms. Sullivan, who said she became homeless after reaching New Orleans, has retained Roderick MacLeish, a lawyer for dozens of St. George’s alumni. Mr. 
Unlike the other private schools, Emma Willard, founded in 1814, has been the subject of one public accusation — Ms. Sullivan’s — though officials have acknowledged “reported incidents” from the 1970s and 1990s in letters to alumnae.
Officials have said that no current administrators or trustees were present when Ms. Sullivan was a student. But the school commissioned an external investigation to study Ms. Sullivan’s claims and those of other former students. And it appointed a task force to study current policies on sexual assault.
A statute of limitations prevents Ms. Sullivan from suing the school. Nonetheless, she has asked Emma Willard for an apology and to pay for counseling, among other things.
Ms. Sullivan in 1997.
Ms. Sullivan said that in its apology, the school had not taken full responsibility for mishandling her ordeal.
Amid the furor erupting online among alumnae, school officials said they were taking pains to respond sensitively. “We feel tremendous compassion and grief for any survivor of sexual assault,” a statement said.
The teacher had given her keys to his office and apartment, and a faculty member had seen her leaving his residence, according to Mr. MacLeish.
Despite the school’s policy against relationships between students and faculty, the only punishment the teacher got was removal as a chaperone for a trip to Ireland, Mr. MacLeish said. That infuriated the teacher so much, Mr. MacLeish said, that he became even more sexually aggressive.
The morning after the rape, Mr. MacLeish wrote, Ms. Sullivan received an angry phone call from a former student with whom the teacher also had a relationship. A classmate of Ms. Sullivan’s had apparently told the former student, and so Ms. Sullivan went to the classmate’s dorm room and vandalized a few of her belongings, Mr. MacLeish wrote. Soon after, still bleeding from the attack, Ms. Sullivan was summoned by school officials. It was then that she told them she had been raped.
“At no time did any of the adults in the room offer to provide medical assistance to this rape victim, or refer her to a mental health counselor or the police,” Mr. MacLeish wrote in the letter, to Dr. Susan Groesbeck, the acting head of school.
Rather than releasing Ms. Sullivan into the care of her parents in Georgia, school officials failed to tell them about the episode, Mr. MacLeish said, and instead told them that she had destroyed property and then chosen to drop out.
The Daily Gazette reported the dismissals at the time. The article said that the Troy police had looked into the relationships and found no criminality, but Ms. Sullivan insisted that she was never contacted by the police.
The school acknowledged to Ms. Sullivan that it had provided a letter of reference to the teacher in 1999, but retracted the recommendation in May this year.
Ms. Sullivan said her decision to go public, after the former friend contacted her, was difficult, but empowering — though she hesitates to use the word.
