A verdant expansion of parkland opened on Governors Island this week, a 10-acre parcel called the Hills, with singular views of Upper New York Bay, far across to the bustling docks of Bayonne, N.J., out toward the arc of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, or north to the spiky Manhattan skyline.
It was designed by an esteemed landscape architecture firm, West 8, and has been endowed with an appropriately inscrutable piece of concrete art, “Cabin,” by an award-winning artist, Rachel Whiteread.
Fine. Great! But what about the slides?
There was plenty for kids — and adults — to do on the island already, said Leslie Koch, president of the Trust. She noted the miniature golf course, playgrounds and water sprinklers, a vegetable garden and a pair of friendly goats named Rice and Beans. All of which have helped the island grow more popular.
“We’re at 20 percent more than last year, already,” said Ms. Koch, who plans to step down this year.
But is bigger really better when it comes to slides? Accompanied by two freelance critics — experts in the field — a reporter set out to investigate.
In an interview aboard the Governors Island ferry, the critics — Hudson, 5, and Jacqueline, 3 — proffered a slippery set of criteria, verging on the tautological.
“What makes a good slide?” a reporter (a.k.a. Dad) asked.
“That it’s a good slide,” Hudson replied.
“Yeah,” Hudson said.
Pressed to elaborate, the critics acknowledged that they had not yet encountered a disagreeable slide. But they allowed for the possibility that one could exist.
From its base, Slide Hill is just the least bit vertiginous at 40 feet, with four shiny metal tongues wagging their way down.
“Me,” both critics said.
Negotiations continued in this vein until a settlement was reached. The elder critic went first, followed by his junior colleague.
They quickly agreed: This slide, and its three smaller neighbors, needed more extensive testing before a judgment could be rendered.
This further research took 10 minutes. The slides were deemed impressive.
“Ten thumbs up,” Hudson said as the critics prepared to depart.
Ms. Koch seemed pleased with the verdict and shared a bit of advice.
