EUGENE, Ore. — Boris Berian did not take any recommended route to becoming a champion 800-meter runner and an advocate for athletes’ rights by standing up to Nike.
In May 2014, Berian lost his eligibility at Adams State University in Colorado because of poor grades. He left school and began working the day shift at McDonald’s. He trained alone at night and slept on a friend’s couch.
“You’re going to work there forever,” his mother, Silvia Deen, admonished him.
Become a firefighter, she told her son. Join the police academy.
“Just give me time,” Berian told his mother.
He was pretty sure he could do something big with running. His friends and his mother were pretty sure he was wrong. His backup plan was to join the Army.
On the track, Berian, 23, is a front-runner, preferring to lead, not to follow. He ignored his doubters and kept running to escape obscurity. In March, he emerged by winning the world indoor championship in the 800. His personal best is 1 minute 43.34 seconds.
Monday night at the Olympic track and field trials, Berian did not get to the front early and was caught late by Clayton Murphy, the victor in 1:44.76. Still, Berian finished second, in 1:44.92, and qualified for the Summer Games next month in Rio de Janeiro, where he hopes to be a medal contender.
In the past month, Berian has also become a potent, if inadvertent, symbol of athlete advocacy in track and field for staring down Nike, his former sponsor. The shoe company sued him for breach of contract, then dropped the lawsuit, which had become a public-relations nightmare and perhaps a sticky legal situation.
“Nike is a very powerful corporation; a lot of times, they use bullying tactics when they maybe don’t necessarily have a strong legal leg to stand on,” said Nick Symmonds, a six-time national outdoor champion in the 800 and a longtime activist for athletes’ rights, who had a shoe contract with Nike but is now sponsored by Brooks.
Last June, Berian signed a brief contract with Nike that expired Dec. 31. Afterward, he began wearing spikes and apparel made by New Balance, intending to sign with the new suitor. Nike had 180 days to counter competing overtures, and it contended that it had matched New Balance’s offer of $405,000 over three years.
Berian objected because unlike New Balance, Nike would have reduced payments if he failed to meet certain standards of performance. It is a common, but not universal, practice in the sport. Things got nasty.
Nike sued Berian in May, saying that it would sustain irreparable harm if he endorsed a competitor’s gear. Berian was served with legal papers while watching friends compete at a meet in Los Angeles. A court order prevented him from running in non-Nike gear.
Merhawi Keflezighi, Berian’s agent, called the contretemps a “David-versus-Goliath battle” and started a “Free Boris” campaign, seeking to raise $25,000 through crowdfunding to defray legal costs. In the niche world of track and field, Nike began to lose in the court of public opinion.
The widespread attitude was this: Why would a corporate behemoth act with such a heavy hand against a little-known athlete? Why would Nike support a sprinter like Justin Gatlin, who has previously been banned for doping, and make life difficult for a relatively obscure 800-meter runner?
The news came as a surprise and a relief, Berian said. He signed with New Balance just before the trials began.
“It’s a big weight off my shoulders,” he said. “I didn’t know how much it was really bothering me until” Nike dropped the suit.
Nike’s place in track and field is complicated. It is the dominant apparel company and will spend about $20 million a year to sponsor U.S.A. Track & Field through 2040. It also sponsors the United States Olympic track team. In a struggling sport, Nike has provided a financial lifeline. Its swoosh logo is ubiquitous at the Olympic trials.
But the company is also viewed as domineering by a number of athletes, who are not unionized and who complain that Nike limits their commercial opportunities with other sponsors.
Berian, who will be allowed to wear New Balance spikes in Rio, feels torn about Nike.
Shy and quiet, Berian did not set out to become an advocate for athletes’ rights, according to his agent.
In November 2014, after flipping burgers at McDonald’s for five months, Berian got an invitation to join a training group in Big Bear Lake, Calif. He is coached by Carlos Handler, whose wife, Brenda Martinez, won a bronze medal in the 800 at the 2013 world track and field championships in Moscow.
Berian had run the 400 in 46.9 seconds in high school, but he fell off the radar during his abbreviated college career.
Somehow, he held on.
The favorite in Rio will be David Rudisha of Kenya, who won a gold medal at the 2012 London Olympics while setting a world record of 1:40.91. Last year, after narrowly losing to Rudisha at the Adidas Grand Prix meet in New York, Berian sought a photograph with the Olympic champion, Handler said.
