It is only in the past couple of generations that women have emerged as a force at the national political conventions. The Times's senior editor for politics, Carolyn Ryan, explains their evolving role since 1940.
PHILADELPHIA — When Hillary Clinton clinched the Democratic presidential nomination last month, her campaign put together a video that framed Mrs. Clinton’s victory as a giant leap in the women’s movement. Scenes of suffragists, Gloria Steinem and little girls in their mother’s arms flashed on the screen.
The footage brought some of Mrs. Clinton’s advisers to tears, but others asked a practical, and delicate, question: What might men be thinking?
As the Democratic National Convention begins here on Monday, there have been debates inside Mrs. Clinton’s operation over how much her nomination this week should be focused on women. Some advisers believe that overemphasizing Mrs. Clinton’s historic achievement as the first woman to accept a major party’s nomination could backfire, driving away men who favor her Republican opponent, Donald J. Trump, and alienating younger women who are less motivated by gender.
The result is what Democrats describe as a cautious mix, attaching the women’s movement to issues like the economy and health care.
Milestones in politics when women and minorities were first elected to federal, state and local government.
There will be glossy videos and testimonials highlighting moments like Mrs. Clinton’s 1995 speech in Beijing, when she declared that “women’s rights are human rights.” Mrs. Clinton’s mother, Dorothy Rodham, who overcame a childhood of poverty and neglect, will be frequently mentioned. A video on Tuesday will underscore Mrs. Clinton’s place in history, and her daughter, Chelsea, will introduce her on Thursday as a champion for women and girls.
There will even be attention to women offscreen: The convention center will have lactation rooms set up by the Democratic Party.
“You can’t tell the story of Hillary Clinton and her public service without also telling an important part of the story of the modern women’s movement,” said Anita Dunn, a Democratic strategist and former aide to President Obama.
But speakers will also try to make the most out of topics that are not specific to gender, like Mrs. Clinton’s work on the Children’s Defense Fund in the 1970s and her efforts as first lady to get the Children’s Health Insurance Program passed. Elected officials will frequently speak about the economy and national security.
“This has been a long, drawn-out debate,” said Tracy Sefl, a Democratic strategist who worked for Mrs. Clinton in 2008 and has been involved in discussions with her 2016 campaign about women’s outreach.
The debate inside the campaign about the focus on women during the convention was described by a person involved in the planning who requested anonymity to discuss private conversations.
The discussions date to the start of the campaign, when some advisers suggested she choose Seneca Falls, N.Y., the birthplace of the modern women’s movement, to hold her kickoff rally. Others questioned whether she should visit the town at all. In the end, she started her campaign in New York City, and in April, her daughter organized a “Women for Hillary” event in Seneca Falls in her mother’s place.
In an interview on CBS’s “60 Minutes” on Sunday, Mrs. Clinton said that when she accepts the nomination, “I’ll be thinking about all the women who came before, all the women who went to Seneca Falls and, for the first time in history, talked about women’s equality and women’s rights, the suffragists, the — the women who knocked their heads against all kinds of barriers and broke through in everything from, you know, space to politics.
The convention speakers include an eclectic mix of prominent women, like the actresses Lena Dunham and Star Jones; activists like Sarah McBride, the first transgender woman to speak at a national convention; and Cecile Richards, the president of Planned Parenthood.
The lineup is an implicit contrast to last week’s Republican National Convention in Cleveland. Other than the testimonial by Ivanka Trump, Donald J. Trump’s daughter, about her father’s support for women, Mr. Trump and the other speakers mostly focused on security and toughness.
Still, the Clinton campaign is aware that she is not running as strongly with men. A New York Times/CBS News poll this month showed her trailing Mr. Trump among men by 13 percentage points, while she leads among women by the same margin.
And younger women who did not live through the eras of equal rights and women’s liberation are not necessarily inspired by her history.
After the convention, Mrs. Clinton and her running mate, Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, will focus on jobs and the economy during a three-day bus tour through the Rust Belt. They are scheduled to visit areas the Republican nominee Mitt Romney won in 2012, places like Cambria County, Pa., which is 94 percent white and has a median household income of about $42,000.
Some Democrats noted that in 2008 the convention did not spend much time on the fact that Barack Obama was the first African-American to accept a major party’s nomination.
“The historic nature of her candidacy will be self-evident every time she’s on stage,” said Ms. Dunn, the former Obama aide.