Responding to written questions from a United States senator about the effects of concussions in hockey, N.H.L. Commissioner Gary Bettman continued to deny a link between concussions and the brain disease chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or C.T.E.
He blamed the news media for fanning fear of the long-term effects of head injuries and defended the N.H.L.’s “more measured approach” to the growing science of concussions.
C.T.E. has been diagnosed in at least six deceased N.H.L. players, along with roughly 100 former N.F.L. players. Scientists believe it is caused by repeated blows to the head. The N.H.L. is fighting a class-action lawsuit by dozens of former players who say that the league did not warn them of the long-term effects of head injuries.
“The science regarding C.T.E., including on the asserted ‘link’ to concussions that you reference, remains nascent, particularly with respect to what causes C.T.E. and whether it can be diagnosed by specific clinical symptoms,” Mr. Bettman wrote.
In late June, Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut and a ranking member of the Senate’s Consumer Protection subcommittee, sent Mr. Bettman a letter asking pointed questions about the league’s position regarding concussions and C.T.E. He requested answers by July 22, and Mr. Bettman’s 24-page response was filed Tuesday in United States District Court in Minneapolis as part of the so-called concussion lawsuit.
N.H.L. Commissioner Gary Bettman's 24-page response to Senator Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut, who in June sent the commissioner a series of questions about the effects of concussions in hockey.
“As the premier professional hockey league in the world, the N.H.L. has an obligation not only to ensure the safety of your players, but to also engage in a productive dialogue about the safety of your sport at all levels,” Senator Blumenthal wrote.
Mr. Bettman wrote his response in lawyerly language and footnoted it throughout, most likely knowing that it would be used in litigation and made publicly available. (“The N.H.L. believes that such tactics are highly inappropriate, and the court overseeing the litigation has admonished the parties not to litigate the case in the media,” he wrote.) It never addresses the specific questions, laying out the N.H.L.’s case in broad sweeps rather than in a question-and-answer format.
“We respond to each of these subjects below and in the course of our discussion hope to answer the questions you posed,” the letter reads.
The letter addresses related issues, such as fighting (relatively few concussions come from fighting, Mr. Bettman said) and the league’s history of concussion oversight and protocols, which have been widely criticized as little more than window dressing.
Mr. Bettman repeatedly blamed the media for spreading the fear of C.T.E., and accused the plaintiffs in the concussion case for a public relations assault on the topic. He ended the letter by retelling the story of the former N.H.L. player Todd Ewen, who died of a reportedly self-inflicted gunshot wound last year at age 49. He was the latest in a string of former enforcers, including Boogaard, Bob Probert and Wade Belak, who died young after displaying symptoms related to C.T.E., including memory loss and depression.
Unlike some of the other brains posthumously examined, however, Ewen’s did not show signs of C.T.E. That surprised Ewen’s wife, who said she hoped that others would take comfort that C.T.E. might not always be the culprit of a loved one’s unraveling. Mr. Bettman saw that as proof that public opinion had gotten unreasonably ahead of science.
“The answer to that is certainly, yes,” Mr. Miller said.
A couple of weeks later, old emails involving Mr. Bettman and the N.H.L. deputy commissioner Bill Daly surfaced through the concussion lawsuit. In one exchange in 2011, Mr. Daly suggested a correlation between fighting and long-term health problems.
“Fighting raises the incidence of head injuries/concussions, which raises the incidence of depression onset, which raises the incidence of personal tragedies,” Mr. Daly wrote.
Mr. Blumenthal wanted the N.H.L., after years of denial and obfuscation — a strategy that the N.F.L. employed for years until lawsuits, deaths and C.T.E. diagnoses became a financial and public relations problem — to state its case on the record.
Mr. Bettman’s letter shows that the N.H.L. is sticking to its defenses, arguing that it has done all that it could to protect players, and that the science did not demand a bolder course.
