Joe Nocera reported on the company’s efforts to destroy the traditional cable model even as it relies on content from the traditional networks to survive.
I would dispute several aspects of Joe Nocera’s cover story.
Saying “House of Cards” was “an immediate hit with viewers” cannot be substantiated, because Netflix does not report viewership statistics. Second, the article claims that “no one had ever made a show for a streaming service” before “House of Cards.” There had already been companies producing content for online services for 10 years.
Nocera also fails to mention that Netflix’s catalog shrank by 32 percent in the past two years: 2,159 fewer movies and 412 fewer TV shows.
Ted Sarandos’s belief that ratings are irrelevant to Netflix doesn’t apply to the studios that license their content to the service. Since Sarandos does not want to report viewership statistics (also known as ratings data), TV executives have asked Nielsen and comScore to do so. It’s in the best interests of studios and TV networks to have this information objectively measured and audited so the data can be analyzed and used to better negotiate the licensing fees with Netflix. Without quantifiable evidence, we cannot take Sarandos’s word that he has found the magic formula for producing popular programming. Craig Jaffe, Eastchester, N.Y.
The article by Joe Nocera about Netflix irked me on at least one score: the suggestion that nobody gets DVDs in red envelopes anymore. I recall an article in The Times’s business pages within the last year or so that made it clear the DVD operation was still one of Netflix’s cash cows.
From my point of view, Netflix is a backup for movies I missed in theaters, sometimes intentionally. If a film features a favorite actor in a supporting role or a particular landmark for a research project of mine, the easiest approach is often fast-forwarding through a DVD to the scenes I really want to see. Try that with streaming: The latest thing in movie-viewing can’t handle it efficiently. I wish Netflix offered many more obscure movies in red envelopes. Fenwick Anderson, Takoma Park, Md.
Moises Velasquez-Manoff reported on people who ingest parasitic worms to try to fix their diseases.
I greatly appreciated Velasquez-Manoff’s article about treating inflammatory bowel disease with parasites. Our society is afflicted by an obsession with cleanliness and sterility and an aversion to natural dirt. As a community gastroenterologist, I struggle daily to help those ravaged by Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis, resistant to traditional medications.
I personally welcome any new therapy that helps these people, regardless of the “unclean” image associated with ingesting parasites. The first rule of medicine is “First, do no harm.” When Barry Marshall infected himself with the bacterium Helicobacter pylori to help prove that this infection led to peptic ulcer disease, he was mocked in the medical community. Then he won the Nobel Prize, and now we treat this infection routinely.
So let’s do more with worms. For some patients it obviously makes sense. Neil Cohen, M.D., Marlton, N.J.
The article by Velasquez-Manoff proposes to explain the rising trend of inflammatory disorders in North America and Europe.
Unfortunately, his arguments ignore the stark realities that worm parasites cause inflammation and actually represent some of the world’s leading causes of asthma, inflammatory bowel disease, anemia and even cancer.
Moreover, the article fails to mention that worm parasites never really went away in the United States. Today, toxocariasis, a parasitic infection acquired from dogs, affects 20 percent of African Americans, especially those living in poverty — the same group that is most at risk for some of the diseases discussed in the article. Such findings probably explain why most of the clinical trials of worm treatments fail to achieve beneficial effects as they expand in scale and scope. We urgently need to implement aggressive global programs to eliminate the world’s worms, which today represent some of the most devastating human pathogens and global health scourges. Neima Briggs; Jill Weatherhead, M.D.; Jagannadha Sastry, Ph.D.; Peter Hotez, M.D., Ph.D.