Wherever Danny McBride goes, Kenny Powers is right there with him.
Earlier this year, Mr. McBride was playing blackjack in an Australian casino, on a break from acting in a new “Alien” movie for Ridley Scott. Suddenly, he was accosted by a drunken gambler who recognized him and cheerfully pelted him with swear words.
This fan’s apparent mistake, Mr. McBride later explained, was thinking he was addressing Kenny Powers, the monstrously arrogant baseball player he played on four seasons of “Eastbound & Down,” the HBO comedy series that ended in 2013.
It’s a testament of sorts to Mr. McBride’s acting talents that after seeing him play comic narcissists on “Eastbound & Down” and in films like “Pineapple Express,” “Tropic Thunder” and “This Is the End” (which cast him as an especially egotistical version of himself), viewers cannot tell when he is being playfully cocky and when he means it.
And it’s something of a surprise when he is introduced in his new HBO series, “Vice Principals,” which makes its debut on Sunday, July 17, as Neal Gamby, a seemingly strait-laced high school administrator in a sweater vest and tie. But rest assured that his scheming, back-stabbing inner Kenny Powers is eventually unleashed.
Over the span of two seasons and 18 episodes — which, in an unusual move, have already been ordered, written and produced — “Vice Principals” tells the story of its title characters: two rival high school officials (played by Mr. McBride and Walton Goggins) who vie furiously to be named principal, then become unlikely allies when they lose the job to an outside candidate (Kimberly Hèbert Gregory).
If “Eastbound & Down” was a story about pure ego, Mr. McBride said that “Vice Principals” (created with his frequent collaborator and college classmate Jody Hill) is about friendship, morality and how much someone will compromise his personal beliefs in pursuit of a goal.
“Vice Principals” is also a project that dates back more than a decade, when Mr. McBride and Mr. Hill were breaking through with “The Foot Fist Way,” their 2006 independent comedy (written with Ben Best, and directed by Mr. Hill) in which Mr. McBride played an overconfident martial arts instructor.
Looking for a quick follow-up project, they contemplated a screenplay set at the high schools they had attended (Mr. McBride in Virginia and Mr. Hill in North Carolina) and where Mr. McBride had worked as a substitute teacher during a lull in his Hollywood career.
At that time, Mr. McBride and Mr. Hill felt they could not come up with a movie script that felt surprising or distinct. But after concluding “Eastbound & Down,” they presented HBO with the idea of pursuing “Vice Principals” as one long story, played out over two semesters of a school year.
Naturally, Mr. McBride would have to play some sort of self-aggrandizing character, with a heart of gold far, far beneath.
“We’re not these bruiser Southern guys, so I think we’re always amused by guys like that,” Mr. McBride said of himself and Mr. Hill.
Ms. Gregory (“Devious Maids”), who plays Dr. Belinda Brown, the new principal targeted by Gamby and Russell’s wrath, said she might have been more concerned about the show’s racial optics, but she trusted the sensibility of Mr. McBride’s world, where every character has shortcomings and faces punishments for them.
Over the span of about eight months of filming “Vice Principals” in South Carolina, Mr. McBride said that there were still plenty of opportunities for serendipitous surprises: among them, recruiting Bill Murray to play the outgoing principal whose retirement sets off the story.
The story of “Vice Principals” is almost certainly complete after two seasons — “I won’t be silly enough to say you’ll never see another ‘Vice Principals’ again,” Mr. McBride said.
But he said that its creation allowed him to work with friends he has known for years and to measure how they have (or have not) matured since the last project.
