The Mets were counting on Matt Harvey this season, hoping he would build off his strong comeback in 2015 and help lead the team back to the postseason for the second year in a row.
But from the start of the 2016 campaign, something about the 27-year-old Harvey was not right. He struggled, would rebound a little bit, and then would struggle again. Neither he nor the Mets could really explain why.
Only after he complained of a dead pitching arm this week did the Mets get a sense that there was a serious physical problem. And on Friday, a day after Harvey visited a specialist in St. Louis, the almost inevitable outcome of that visit became a painful fact: Harvey will have surgery to alleviate thoracic outlet syndrome between his neck and shoulder and will miss the remainder of the 2016 season.
The Mets did not provide a date for the surgery, but Harvey’s agent, Scott Boras, said it would occur within the next week or so. The operation will be performed by Dr. Robert Thompson, the director of the Washington University Center for Thoracic Outlet Syndrome in St. Louis and the specialist who evaluated Harvey on Thursday.
“I’m extremely disappointed to learn that I’ll be out for the season, but I’m relieved to have answers and get back to doing what I love,” Harvey wrote on Twitter.
The Mets’ general manager, Sandy Alderson, said in a team-issued statement that he and Mets Manager Terry Collins had met with Harvey on Friday.
“Although we all feel badly for him, we expressed our support in this decision and know he will work as hard as possible to get back on the field for the 2017 season,” Alderson said in the statement.
Once one of the best pitchers in baseball, Harvey’s issues this season were jarring. In 17 starts, he had a 4-10 record and a 4.86 earned run average, almost twice what it was last year. He was not able to consistently maintain his pitching mechanics, and his command suffered.
“Matt didn’t feel his control has been right since spring training,” Boras said.
After his rough start against the Miami Marlins on July 4, Harvey told the Mets that not only did his right arm feel dead but that he could not really feel the ball, either. Mets officials said it was the first time Harvey expressed any real concerns this season relating to his arm.
“I didn’t have any indication that he had this kind of issue,” Collins said on Friday.
In a telephone interview, Boras said that while Harvey’s symptoms didn’t really emerge until his July 4 outing it was logical to assume something was not right before that. “We didn’t know what it was but we knew there was something going on that was not allowing him’’ to pitch effectively, he said.
The conservative option for treating Harvey’s condition, in which nerves or blood vessels are compressed between the neck and upper torso, would have been nerve-blocking injections, although the effectiveness of that procedure was not assured.
In the end, Harvey opted for surgery and a chance to start over in 2017.
Collins said that Harvey, in his meeting with team officials on Friday, refused to attribute his ineffectiveness this season to his newly discovered injury and was optimistic about the prognosis.
Boras said Harvey’s condition was nerve-related. He said the operation would remove a rib, allowing more space for the muscles around Harvey’s neck and shoulder. That, he said, would alleviate pressure on the nerves that caused the loss of feeling in Harvey’s hand and fingers. The rehabilitation timetable is six months.
“He just didn’t have the command of the baseball and the feeling in the fingertips in his final release point,” Boras said of Harvey.
For Harvey, this will be his second operation in four years. He had Tommy John surgery on his right elbow in the latter part of 2013. When he returned in 2015, there were inevitable questions about how much he should throw in his first season back.
Boras initially wanted to cap Harvey’s total at 180 innings. But the Mets were headed to the postseason for the first time in a decade, and Harvey ended up pitching nearly 190 innings in the regular season and 26 ⅔ more in the postseason.
On Thursday, Alderson said he did not believe Harvey’s relatively heavy 2015 workload played a factor in this new injury.
In Harvey’s place, Logan Verrett will start for the Mets on Saturday against the Washington Nationals. Verrett has a 4.01 E.R.A. in 23 games this season, five of them starts.
