CHIANG MAI, Thailand — On the 10th day of Peter Dahlin’s captivity in a secret Beijing jail, Chinese state security officers sprang one of their big surprises — something he found even more astonishing than hearing a colleague being beaten in a room above his cell.
They showed him a document about the organization he had started in China to promote access to legal services, complete with descriptions of employees, associates and grant recipients. But it was not written by the officers. It appeared to have been prepared by the National Endowment for Democracy, a nonprofit group based in Washington that is largely funded by the United States Congress.
The internal report laid out how Mr. Dahlin’s small organization had received financing from the nonprofit for the last five years, and it discussed his program in detail. It seemed to have been meant for circulation only among the nonprofit’s top directors.
“I realized it must have come straight from N.E.D. itself somehow,” Mr. Dahlin said in an interview, adding that he had never seen the document before.
Mr. Dahlin, a Swedish citizen, was detained and interrogated for 23 days this year by China’s Ministry of State Security, a powerful spy and counterespionage agency. The authorities showed him on national television apologizing for unspecified crimes. Then they deported him.
His ordeal, which he described for the first time in an interview with The New York Times, offers an unusually clear view into the suspicion directed toward foreign nongovernmental organizations by the Chinese security apparatus and the lengths to which it goes to police such groups.
President Xi Jinping has warned that Western nongovernmental organizations dedicated to building civil society — through training for lawyers and journalists and programs to address income inequality, for example — are working to undermine Communist Party rule. He has overseen a broad effort to both restrict Western influence and clamp down on grass-roots Chinese activism.
In April, the government passed a law requiring all foreign nongovernmental groups in China — about 7,000 by one estimate — to find an official Chinese sponsor and register with the police, who will have new supervisory authority over them.
Peter Dahlin, a Swede, was detained by the Chinese authorities and forced to perform a prepared confession on national television. After 23 days of interrogation, he was deported.
sometime before 10, there were would be a loud persistent knock on my door as I was in bed.//So I opened the door in my underwear and outside in the alley, //was a number of people dressed up in official uniforms, telling me they were from state security and here to search my house. SLATE: FOR 9 YEARS PETER DAHLIN RAN AN ORGANIZATION TRAINING LAWYERS TO FIGHT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS IN CHINA SLATE: ON JAN 4TH 2016 HE WAS DETAINED FOR QUESTIONING BY CHINESE AUTHORITIES. 00:17:09- So I was kept in a specialized new facility for what I assume must be longer terms interrogations and investigations. there would be a period of 10 or maybe 12 days there would be full light on, 24 hours a day,// Most interrogation sessions would last 4 to 6 hours// often in the evening when you were a little bit tired, they would start it.// //I would have two main interrogators. The one that would interrogate me for the first three days// His role was very likely to be that of the bad cop. 00:26:49 // He would get very angry if I asked questions back, instead of simply giving him a straight answer, which I would do quite often// DAHLIN’S CHINESE GIRLFRIEND WAS ALSO DETAINED. My girlfriend was pressured quite heavily to cooperate and inform on me. Her refusal to do that meant that they would deprive her of food and sleep I believe for 3 days. TAPED CONFESSIONS AIRED ON CHINESE STATE TV HAVE BECOME COMMON SINCE CHINESE PRESIDENT XI JINPING CAME TO POWER. (GRAPHIC TO COME WITH STILLS OF CONFESSIONS) for the interview, they would give me a paper with the questions and answers written down. And they would give me a few minutes to memorize these answers. // ***When I saw the questions and answers, it became even clearer, okay, this is part of a PR campaign, this is going to be on CCTV. I’m going to be a star. //the intention in the audience is for them to think that I’m admitting doing or supporting illegals acts. But that’s not actually something I say. The charge against me//using foreign funding for illegal activities in China that are harming national interests, stability of the state. So the scale of punishments ranges from 5 to 10 years. 01:22:21-I was in for 23 days, beginning on the evening of January 3rd, I was deported in the afternoon on the 25th. 01:24:43-// daydreamed about this kind of thing happened before, I thought maybe I would have regretted it. But once it actually happened, there’s //no regrets of the way I spent my time in China.
Mr. Dahlin’s relatively obscure Chinese Urgent Action Working Group, which he helped found in 2009 to promote the development of an independent judiciary in China, is exactly the type of organization that Mr. Xi is trying to stifle.
After Mr. Dahlin’s expulsion, a colleague and I tracked him down in northern Thailand, where he was trying to make a fresh start. The authorities have used televised confessions with growing frequency to intimidate foreigners and their Chinese colleagues, and few have dared speak publicly about the experience afterward.
But Mr. Dahlin, 36, who had studied political science and worked in government in Sweden, agreed to an interview after concluding that his Chinese friends would not face retaliation.
Mr. Dahlin said he and a Chinese lawyer, Wang Quanzhang, had established their organization in Hong Kong as a private business, because there were no regulations for registering foreign nongovernmental organizations in mainland China before the new law was adopted. They employed about 15 to 20 people, most of them part time and all of them local Chinese except for Mr. Dahlin and an American.
The group quietly held seminars for lawyers and others interested in suing officials and agencies, and it offered crisis legal aid. It specialized in explaining China’s freedom-of-information statutes and ran a training program for investigative journalists.
Mr. Dahlin knew the security apparatus was watching the organization, he said. But he said the scrutiny intensified in 2013, soon after Mr. Xi took office. Then came a broad crackdown on activist lawyers last year. Several who had worked with Mr. Dahlin’s group were arrested, including Mr. Wang, who had already left the organization.
Security officers had surveillance photographs of Chinese citizens arriving for a training session the group held last year in southern Thailand, Mr. Dahlin said.
Mr. Dahlin was detained on Jan. 3, just hours before he planned to leave the country to renew his visa. More than a dozen officers showed up at his home in an alleyway in Beijing with warrants for him and his girlfriend, Pan Jinling, a Chinese citizen.
They seized computers, phones, hard drives, bank cards, receipts, a safe with about 175,000 renminbi, or $26,000, in cash, and medicine that Mr. Dahlin takes daily for a rare adrenal disease. They rushed him to an unmarked detention center — known as a black jail by many in China — near an airport. All the rooms were padded.
Mr. Dahlin said he was questioned daily, usually in a single session lasting for hours at night, when he was tired. The interrogations took place in a separate room with a desk and glaring lights.
The officers did not beat him, he said, but tried different tactics to pressure him.
Early on, they tried to deprive him of sleep, keeping the fluorescent lights on in his cell at night. Mr. Dahlin told a woman running the center that this amounted to torture under international conventions, and the practice soon stopped.
Mr. Dahlin said the officers had wanted to tie him and his group to gatherings that an activist in southern China, Su Changlan, had organized in support of the pro-democracy demonstrations in Hong Kong in 2014. They also sought to implicate his group in an effort to smuggle to Myanmar the teenage son of a lawyer who had been arrested.
Mr. Dahlin denied any role in those activities, and the officers eventually focused their questions on the workings of nongovernmental organizations in mainland China and Hong Kong, especially the relationship between international groups and those in China.
They appeared intent on gathering information about groups financed by the National Endowment for Democracy, for example, even though the European Union had given more money to Mr. Dahlin’s group, he said.
The National Endowment for Democracy said in a statement that it had not determined the origins of the document shown to Mr. Dahlin nor how the Chinese authorities obtained a copy.
The officers also mentioned or showed Mr. Dahlin the names of almost every lawyer in China who had worked with his group, as well as recent emails exchanged by the group’s employees.
After two weeks in custody, Mr. Dahlin said, he was told to sit in front of a camera and face a reporter for China Central Television, the state broadcaster. Both were ordered to read from a script.
The script had seven or eight questions and answers. Mr. Dahlin said he had agreed to cooperate because the authorities already signaled they would deport him, and he wanted to expedite that process and get Ms. Pan released.
In less than an hour, Mr. Dahlin said that his group had acted illegally and that he had stolen money. He also said he had “hurt the feelings of the Chinese people.” But he refused to label three associates as “criminals” as the officers had demanded.
CCTV broadcast the confession the night of Jan. 19. Two days later, Mr. Dahlin was told that he was being granted a medical parole and would be sent home. The police returned almost everything they had confiscated, except about $3,500 that they said they had used to kennel his cats and to buy him a one-way ticket to Stockholm.
On Jan. 25, Mr. Dahlin was blindfolded and driven to the airport in a five-car convoy.
In a reception hall there, an official read an order barring him from China for 10 years. Then the officers escorted him to the plane and a seat in first class. A flight attendant handed him a glass of Champagne.
The day of his deportation, the Foreign Ministry said that Mr. Dahlin was suspected of “funding criminal activities harmful to China’s national security.” Ms. Pan was released the same day.
