Forest Hills Stadium was falling apart in 2012. Wooden benches were decaying, and weeds were growing beneath them. The old tennis court, so steeped in history, had cracks running throughout. Concrete fell from the passageways as a result of water damage.
“It was a mess,” said Bob Ingersole, the tennis director at the West Side Tennis Club, the former home of the United States Open.
This weekend, professional tennis will return to the club and its gem, the stadium, for the first time in eight years with a newly formed World TeamTennis franchise, the New York Empire. The team’s captain will be Patrick McEnroe, who once played junior events at Forest Hills and was a ball boy when the Open was played there.
Forest Hills Stadium nearly became history in 2010, when West Side considered selling it to developers who wanted to turn the land into condominiums.
But Ingersole said that the club could not let the stadium go.
The club turned a corner in 2013 when the horseshoe-shaped stadium, where the Beatles once played, was refurbished as a concert venue by the live entertainment company Madison House Presents.
Built in 1923, Forest Hills Stadium housed the United States Singles and then the Open before the event moved to its current home in Flushing Meadows in 1978. Kloss won the junior girls’ title there in 1974, while Billie Jean King won there three times in the early 1970s as the Open era began.
On Sunday night, the Empire, featuring Andy Roddick and the New York-area natives Christina McHale and Noah Rubin, will make their debut against the Washington Kastles.
There has been modern-day tennis in the stadium, though not since 2008. The W.T.A. had a small United States Open lead-in event there for five years starting in 2004, and lower-tier pro circuit events took place there in the mid-2000s.
But W.T.T.’s return means professional tennis is back for certain, and on Thursday the paint for the league’s signature multicolored courts was drying ahead of Sunday’s match. Not far away, at the 71st Avenue underpass of the Long Island Rail Road (which subway riders walk through en route to the stadium), a new mural features King, Althea Gibson, Arthur Ashe and John McEnroe, a nod to tennis’s royal past in this Queens neighborhood.
W.T.T. plans to hold its league final at the stadium on Aug. 26, the Friday before the United States Open starts, but King could not contain her excitement for Forest Hills’s renaissance to really begin.
