Real Estate|You’re Taking That With You, Right?
You’re Taking That With You, Right?
Two years ago, when Lee Silber wanted to downsize from a house in the Midwood section of Brooklyn, she found a five-room co-op right in the neighborhood, made an offer and went into contract.
There was just one little problem with the new apartment. Actually, there was one big problem with the apartment: a wall unit the size of a woodshed in the guest room.
In every conversation with the seller, either Ms. Silber, a semiretired fashion designer, or one of her three children sought reassurance. “You’re taking the wall unit with you, right?” they would ask. Yes, the seller would promise, he was taking the wall unit. Absolutely, positively? Absolutely, positively.
Of course, you know where this is headed. The seller went. The behemoth wall unit did not.
Real estate closings are hobbled, sometimes even derailed, by a seller’s last-minute adjustment of terms. What the buyer had believed was included in the transaction — the Viking stove, the Sub-Zero refrigerator, the sconces in the living room, the fresco in the dining room, the brass carpet rods on the staircase — isn’t part of the deal after all.
But perhaps more vexing are the things sellers forget to take with them or quite deliberately leave behind — furniture that’s too much of a hassle to take apart, too unwieldy and costly to clear from the premises. True, years ago, they managed to get that monster sofa into the apartment, but now they can’t think how to get it out. Maybe that marble-topped dining table is too big for the new, tighter quarters the sellers are moving to across town. Or maybe they just plain don’t like it anymore.
Usually, buyers know ahead of time that they’ll be getting more than they bargained for or paid for. “If there are items that are required to be removed before the closing, the contract should provide for that in detail,” said Eva Talel, the head of the co-op and condominium practice at the law firm Stroock & Stroock & Lavan.
On the walk-through — and it should be a thorough walk-through — “If things are not gone, and if we’re talking about things that will cost a great deal of money or take a lot of effort to remove, money should be escrowed at the closing,” Ms. Talel continued.
But sometimes, as in the case of Ms. Silber and the wall unit, buyers are blindsided. Very occasionally, the orphaned item, however unexpected, is accepted with pleasure.
Such stuff includes air-conditioners, because they’re too much trouble to take out of the window, and shower curtains, just because. “Sellers will leave one cuff link, one earring, a belt on a top shelf,” said Mr. Splendore, who has happened upon false teeth left in a dishwasher, keys, keys, many keys, awards, diplomas, a wedding band and photos of family members back in the old country.
“I’ll send notes and ask if the sellers want the pictures, and often I don’t get a response,” he said. “Clearly they aren’t important to them, or maybe they just didn’t like that side of the family.” As for that errant wedding band, it was appraised and bought by a jeweler for $35; Mr. Splendore sent the seller a check.
Everybody involved was suspicious about a safe in the basement of a Lower Manhattan townhouse, an estate sale. “The deceased owner had had some underworld connections and his family didn’t want to open the safe because of what they might find,” said Craig L. Price, a partner at the law firm Belkin Burden Wenig & Goldman who was representing the bank in the transaction.
“The issue came up at the closing when the purchasers asked if the safe had been removed,” Mr. Price said. It had not. “Then the purchasers asked if the safe had been opened.” Again, no.
To avoid having the deal scrapped, the brokers arranged for the safe to be removed, and the sellers told them they could keep the contents as a thank-you for their trouble. The good news: There was nothing in there to take to the police. The bad news: There was nothing in there to take to the bank. “Just some old meaningless documents,” Mr. Price said.
She said her client, who declined to be interviewed, initially balked. He didn’t share the owner’s taste and was put off by a particular piece, a hyper-realistic resin sculpture of a woman in a bathing suit.
A few have left more lavish tokens.
Lo and behold, there it was at the walk-through: The seller had left the mirror behind as a gift.
This may be the gift that keeps on giving. When it comes time to move, “we’ll probably leave the piano,” Ms. Cleland said.
Moving is a stressful time. In the midst of the chaos, it’s perfectly reasonable that a seller might neglect to empty the medicine cabinet or check the far corners of a closet, might forget, well, who knows what.
A dozen years ago, Kiono Thomas, a saleswoman at Engel & Völkers, was representing the seller of a large co-op at the Westbury on the Upper East Side.
Eventually, the co-op sold. Ms. Thomas showed up for the walk-through to make sure everything was going according to plan, and to say goodbye to her client, who was moving to London the next day.
The apartment was broom clean and all packed up — except for the turtle in its little bowl. “I said, ‘What are you going to do with the turtle? You can’t leave it,’ ” Ms. Thomas recalled.
Her client told her that she should take the turtle.
Ms. Thomas named the little reptile Lucy and took her home to her penthouse in Tudor City, an apartment that overlooked the United Nations and yes, Turtle Bay. “I still have her. She’s now 12 years old and huge,” said Ms. Thomas, who has since moved with Lucy, and her custom tank, to Park Avenue.
About 20 years ago, Ellen Saland, an associate broker at Halstead Property, represented the buyer of a co-op with a large terrace on the West Side, and happened to be at the apartment one day when the seller came by.
