Despite the government’s promises seven years ago to stem the waste that fouls Rio’s expansive Guanabara Bay and the city’s fabled ocean beaches, officials acknowledge that their efforts to treat raw sewage and scoop up household garbage have fallen far short.
In fact, environmentalists and scientists say Rio’s waters are much more contaminated than previously thought.
Recent tests by government and independent scientists revealed a veritable petri dish of pathogens in many of the city’s waters, from rotaviruses that can cause diarrhea and vomiting to drug-resistant “superbacteria” that can be fatal to people with weakened immune systems.
Government officials and the International Olympic Committee acknowledge that, in many places, the city’s waters are filthy. But they say the areas where athletes will compete — like the waters off Copacabana Beach, where swimmers will race — meet World Health Organization safety standards.
Still, Olympic officials concede that their efforts have not addressed a fundamental problem: Much of the sewage and trash produced by the region’s 12 million inhabitants continues to flow untreated into Rio’s waters.
Still, Olympic organizers say the sports venues are nearly complete, and the federal government has provided emergency funds to the state. Many athletes expect the Games to proceed without serious complications.
For many, the sewage crisis is emblematic of the corruption and mismanagement that have long hobbled Brazil, Latin America’s largest country.
Rio officials claim to have spent billions of dollars on sewage treatment systems since the 1990s, but few are functioning.
In its 2009 bid for these Games, Brazil pledged to spend $4 billion to clean up 80 percent of the sewage that flows untreated into the bay. In the end, the state government spent just $170 million, citing a budget crisis, officials said.
Asked what had happened, he threw up his hands. “In Brazil, they say sanitation doesn’t get votes,” he said.
He has sailed past more than a few dead bodies, including the corpse of a man bobbing in the water last month, his legs bound in rope.
Irenaldo Honorio da Silva, 47, who leads the residents’ committee in Pica-Pau, a favela with 7,000 residents, said local officials had been promising to address the sanitation crisis for decades.
Residents still throng the beaches on the weekend, but Prof. Renata Picão, a microbiologist at the Federal University of Rio, has refused to step foot in the water since she began sampling it three years ago.
Professor Picão has documented high levels of drug-resistant microbes at five of the city’s best-known beaches. The Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, a government-run lab, found superbacteria in the Rodrigo de Freitas lagoon, a body of water ringed by high-priced condominiums.
She said the pathogens, potentially fatal to those with compromised immunities, probably come from local hospitals that discharge untreated waste. Although superbacteria may not pose a threat to healthy people, the organisms can remain in the body for years and wreak havoc if a person becomes otherwise sick.
Professor Picão and other health experts say that unlike residents, who have been repeatedly exposed to sewage-borne pathogens, foreign visitors are more likely to fall ill after contact with contaminated waters.
