The Metropolitan Transportation Authority plans to close a tunnel that carries the L train, one of New York City’s most crowded subway lines, creating what officials acknowledge will be among the largest disruptions in the transit system’s history.
After months of uncertainty, the authority said on Monday that the tunnel, which runs under the East River between Manhattan and Brooklyn, would be shut entirely for a year and a half, starting in January 2019, to repair serious damage caused by Hurricane Sandy.
The plan promises to upend the commutes of tens of thousands of people along a popular line that has become synonymous with the hipster culture of the Williamsburg and Greenpoint neighborhoods. The reaction was swift, with regular L riders expressing despair.
“Instead of three stops, I’ll have to take three trains,” Marley Cavalcanti, 30, of Greenpoint, said as she waited on a platform in the Bedford Avenue station on her way into Manhattan on Monday.
Others offered little sympathy, suggesting that commuters learn to love the bus. “2019 is the year Williamsburg dies,” a headline in The New York Post blared in a bit of hyperbole.
The agency had considered two proposals for shutting down the nearly century-old tunnel, ultimately deciding on the 18-month closing instead of a partial three-year shutdown that would have allowed some trains to continue running. Subway officials wanted to complete the repairs as quickly as possible to limit the inconvenience for riders.
“This is the, ‘Get in, get done, get out’ option,” said Veronique Hakim, president of New York City Transit, the authority’s division that runs the city’s subways and buses.
Still, the plan will result in the closing of critical parts of one of the city’s most congested subway lines at a time when ridership across the system is surging, prompting widespread and frequent complaints of packed cars. It is the latest disruption facing transit systems in the Northeast, where riders in Washington are dealing with widespread closings for maintenance work and commuters in Philadelphia saw a third of regional train cars pulled from service because of cracks in their equipment.
In New York City, the L line currently handles about 400,000 passenger trips each weekday, with about 225,000 of those riders taking the line under the East River each day and the others traveling within Manhattan or Brooklyn.
During the repairs, the trains will continue to operate in Brooklyn between the Williamsburg and Canarsie neighborhoods, but will not run west of the Bedford Avenue station in Brooklyn. All five L train stops in Manhattan will close, along with the tunnel.
On Monday morning, New York City’s first deputy mayor, Anthony Shorris, said the city was concerned that the state-run authority had not yet provided details on alternative service plans for L train riders.
“While we recognize the need for the M.T.A. to perform these important repairs and upgrades, we are deeply concerned that it would announce an 18-month shutdown of this critical service without a clear plan or a commitment of resources for mitigating the impact of this closure on hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers,” Mr. Shorris said in a statement.
The authority is considering several travel options, including extra subway service on nearby lines and new bus or ferry service. Cars are likely to be added to trains on the G line, which is known for having short trains that riders must sometimes scramble across the platform to board.
Ms. Hakim brushed off the city’s criticism, saying the authority had plenty of time to pull together a plan. “We have time to do this thoroughly and get it right,” she said, noting that the authority would also examine an idea to create a dedicated bus lane on the Williamsburg Bridge.
Asked about the closing, Mayor Bill de Blasio echoed Mr. Shorris’s concerns, saying he would press the authority to make sure that riders have “good and consistent alternatives.” A spokesman for Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, John Kelly, said in a statement that service plans should be based on advice from local elected officials and riders.
No matter what contingency plans are created, it is clear that travel will become more difficult and consume more time when the tunnel closes.
Even in a booming subway system, the L train is famously cramped. Since a rezoning of Williamsburg in 2005, residential buildings have spread across the neighborhood, and their occupants have grumbled about crowded subway platforms and frequent delays.
Some fear the closing will push renters to leave the neighborhood, and local restaurants and bars will lose business. Blake Orlandi, 33, who works in e-commerce in Manhattan, said the decision might motivate him to move.
“I don’t know if I’ll be here,” he said of the 2019 starting date, adding that he might switch to Uber, the car service, if there were no L train.
In a glimpse at the future, L trains were halted between Manhattan and Brooklyn on Monday morning because of a police investigation at the First Avenue station. When Mr. Orlandi’s L train arrived, it was packed, with people holding on to the ceiling with their fingertips.
“This is just the cherry on top of the announcement,” Mr. Orlandi, surrounded by the sweaty crowds, said.
This year, the authority held a series of public meetings to explain why the move was necessary and to elicit comments on the two proposals. From early on, authority officials appeared to favor the 18-month shutdown over closing one of the tunnel’s two tubes at a time over three years, which would have reduced service by 80 percent.
A survey taken this spring by the Riders Alliance, a transit advocacy group, found that 77 percent of those who responded preferred the 18-month closing.
The L train tunnel, officially known as the Canarsie tube, was one of several subway tunnels swamped by Hurricane Sandy in 2012. Authority officials have said that the tunnel is safe, but that it requires major work to fix crumbling walls and to repair tracks and cables. The tunnel repairs and improvements to stations on the line are expected to cost more than $800 million, with the federal government expected to finance a large portion of it, officials said.
The authority has already rehabilitated several flooded subway tunnels, including the Montague tunnel, which carries the N and R trains between Manhattan and Brooklyn. Those repairs took about 13 months, but riders had the option to use several other lines. The L line is the only convenient subway route in certain neighborhoods.
Carlo A. Scissura, the president of the Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce, said that he supported the authority’s decision, but that it would be a “very, very tough 18 months” for riders and businesses who rely on the line — which, he noted, did not include just Williamsburg. The authority should provide round-the-clock bus service, even on weekend nights, he said.
