In choosing Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia as her running mate, Hillary Clinton has selected someone who shares her political philosophy and pragmatic approach to governing. Here are Mr. Kaine’s positions on some key issues, and how they align with Mrs. Clinton’s views.
Mr. Kaine is an outspoken advocate of free trade, but he appears to be shifting that position since Mrs. Clinton selected him on Friday.
He has defended the North American Free Trade Agreement and voted in favor of “fast track” authority for the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a 12-nation trade pact that President Obama has championed. It now appears that Mr. Kaine, in joining the Democratic ticket, will oppose the deal.
Where Mrs. Clinton stands: She once called the Trans-Pacific Partnership the “gold standard” of trade deals, but she now expresses opposition to it. Generally she has grown more cautious about trade since her primary battle with Senator Bernie Sanders.
Mr. Kaine personally opposes the death penalty, but he oversaw 11 executions during his tenure as governor, and Virginia has had the second-highest number of executions since the 1970s. He said his obligation to uphold the law as governor overrode his moral opposition to capital punishment, which was shaped by his Roman Catholic faith. In the Senate, Mr. Kaine has advocated overhauling the criminal justice system and supported a measure that would give judges more flexibility on sentencing.
Where Mrs. Clinton stands: Mrs. Clinton supports the death penalty “for very limited purposes” as punishment for heinous crimes such as mass killings and domestic terrorism. She thinks that death penalty cases should be overseen by the federal justice system. She has also said, however, that she would not be disappointed if the Supreme Court or states moved to eliminate capital punishment. She also backs legislation to end racial profiling by law enforcement and reduce prison sentences for nonviolent drug criminals.
Mr. Kaine, a gun owner himself, is a consistent supporter of gun control measures and has backed broad background checks and restrictions on the sale of combat-style weapons and high-capacity magazines. The 2007 massacre at Virginia Tech inspired Mr. Kaine, then the governor, to close loopholes in Virginia law that allowed some people to buy guns despite failing background checks. In the Senate, he supported the Manchin-Toomey bill, which would have expanded background checks to cover gun shows and weapons sold over the internet. He also backed banning gun sales to terrorism suspects on the government’s “no-fly” list.
Where Mrs. Clinton stands: She made gun control a key issue in her primary campaign. She wants to expand background checks and supports legislation to keep guns away from suspects of domestic abuse, violent criminals and those with severe mental illness.
Mr. Kaine, who sits on the Senate’s Foreign Relations and Armed Services Committees, backed the Iran nuclear deal and the normalization of relations with Cuba. He has argued that Mr. Obama must seek authorization from Congress to carry out airstrikes against the Islamic State. And he has called for the establishment of safe zones in Syria to protect civilians.
Where Mrs. Clinton stands: She has urged a no-fly zone with coalition forces to protect Syrians and has supported arming Syrian rebels. She endorsed the nuclear deal with Iran but expressed skepticism about Iran’s intentions. She has called for a more aggressive American-led operation to defeat the Islamic State.
Last week in Cleveland, New York Times photographers covered the Republican National Convention at — and outside of — Quicken Loans Arena.
Mr. Kaine supports Mr. Obama’s executive actions that would have shielded as many as five million undocumented immigrants from deportation and allowed them to legally work in the United States. He also backs a comprehensive immigration overhaul that would allow those living in the country illegally to gain legal residency if they pay taxes and a fine.
Where Mrs. Clinton stands: Mrs. Clinton has vowed to restore and expand Mr. Obama’s executive actions and to protect the parents of children who are in the country legally. She is expected to push for the comprehensive immigration overhaul in her first 100 days if she is elected president.
When he was governor of Virginia, Mr. Kaine helped expand the state’s preschool programs that serve at-risk children in families with incomes near or below the poverty line. He also introduced a bill in the Senate to expand nationwide access to prekindergarten programs. Mr. Kaine supported the Every Student Succeeds act, which de-emphasized standardized testing and gave states more flexibility to set education policies. On higher education, Mr. Kaine has pushed measures to reduce the cost of attending college.
WhereMrs. Clinton stands: After an aggressive primary challenge from Mr. Sanders, Mrs. Clinton shifted leftward on the financing of higher education. She supports eliminating tuition at in-state public colleges or universities for families earning up to $125,000 a year.
Mr. Kaine cites Virginia’s river and bay cleanups as evidence that stronger environmental policies can stimulate tourism and fishing economies. Mr. Kaine has expressed concern about the rising sea levels along the coast of Virginia, which he fears could impair military operations and endanger businesses. But he also supported opening Virginia’s coast to offshore oil drilling.
Where Mrs. Clinton stands: Mrs. Clinton wants to invest in infrastructure to protect communities at risk from rising seas. She also wants to create a task force to protect low-income and rural communities that face environmental risks.
Mr. Kaine backed extending marriage rights to same-sex couples, and he campaigned against a 2006 amendment to the Virginia Constitution banning same-sex marriage in the state.
Where Mrs. Clinton stands: Mrs. Clinton’s views on gay marriage have changed over the years. In 1996, she called for strengthening “traditional” marriage. Her tone gradually shifted on the issue, and last year Mrs. Clinton said that she favored marriage equality and hoped that the Supreme Court would guarantee it as a constitutional right.
As governor of Virginia, Mr. Kaine supported some restrictions on abortion and said as a “traditional Catholic” that he was personally against abortion but supported abortion rights. As a senator, Mr. Kaine has voted in favor of funding Planned Parenthood and against attempts to restrict access to legal abortions. But he has also sought to reduce the number of abortions through education programs advocating adoption and abstinence.
Where Mrs. Clinton stands: Mrs. Clinton wants to protect funding for Planned Parenthood and believes that women should have access to safe, legal abortions. She strongly denounced Donald J. Trump after he said abortions should be banned and women who had the procedure should be punished.
Mr. Kaine supports “targeted spending reductions” but wants to close tax loopholes for the wealthy.
Where Mrs. Clinton stands:Mrs. Clinton wants to cut tax loopholes and tax breaks that benefit the rich and corporations, and she wants to invest in research and infrastructure — rather than imposing deep spending cuts — to spur the economy.