EUGENE, Ore. — Randall Cunningham, the former cutting-edge N.F.L. quarterback, is now a soft-spoken minister and the coach of a high-jumping prodigy, who happens to be his daughter, Vashti Cunningham. On Sunday, she qualified for the Rio Olympics a month after graduating from high school.
Only 18, Vashti Cunningham is the reigning indoor world champion. She is also tied for the highest jump internationally this year, with a leap of 6 feet 6 ¼ inches. She finished second Sunday at the United States Olympic track and field trials with a jump of 6-5 ½. Tall and long-limbed, she seemed to hover above the bar like a tilde above a Spanish ñ.
“She’s just really lithe and elastic and just very natural,” said Amy Acuff, a five-time Olympian.
The next step in Cunningham’s ascendant and newly professional career is the Summer Games in Rio de Janeiro next month. Her father sees no reason she could not win a gold medal.
As a quarterback, Randall Cunningham was a master of improvisation and the unconventional. And so he is as a coach. He has his daughter binge-watching video of her rivals as if the clips were a Netflix series. She picks and chooses from their jumping styles, and learns something about their personalities, too. From Ruth Beitia of Spain, a two-time European champion, Vashti Cunningham learned the value of being calm and joyful and celebrating the simple elation of floating over a bar.
She trains only four times a week and does leg lifts, but no squats, in her weight training, seeing no need to bulk up and seeking to avoid knee and ankle injuries that have, in Acuff’s words, left many high-jumping careers littering the freeway leading to the Olympics.
Her response, she said, was a verbal eye roll.
“Dad, please leave me alone,” she said.
As a father, Randall Cunningham wants his daughter to be a normal teenager. As a coach and a former elite athlete, he implores her to aspire to victory in every competition. The high-jump bar is viewed as an opponent, not merely an impediment. When the bar is set high, above her 6-foot-1 height, she sometimes approaches it and stares it down as if it were a boxing opponent at a weigh-in.
The idea is to conquer the jump with her mind before she does with her body.
Until high school, she preferred volleyball to track. But the Cunninghams are a high-jumping family. Randall Cunningham jumped 6-9 in high school in Santa Barbara, Calif., and might have gone higher but for a degenerative bone condition in his right knee. His son, Randall II, won the 2016 N.C.A.A. outdoor championship as a sophomore at Southern California and also qualified for the Olympic trials.
It would be a fascinating contest, Vashti Cunningham said, to see who could jump higher, her father or her mother, Felicity de Jager, a retired ballerina who performed for the Dance Theater of Harlem.
In March, she won the United States indoor championships with a personal best of 6-6 ¼, a world junior record.
A week later, she won the world indoor title with a jump of 6-5, beating some of the international competitors whom she had previously seen only on video. At least indoors, where there was no wind or heat or tens of thousands of spectators to contend with, she was now the equal of her celluloid rivals.
“It was kind of just an eye-opener for me that I can be great as well,” she said.
Weeks before her senior prom at Bishop Gorman High School in Las Vegas, she turned professional and signed a contract with Nike. The competition in college would probably not be sufficiently challenging, she said. Now it is on to Rio, which will be her first major outdoor international competition.
