The attacker, Mohamed Lahouaiej Bouhlel, carried out the assault on Thursday evening using a 19-ton refrigerated truck and an automatic pistol. The death toll remained at 84, but the number of injured rose to 303, of whom 121 were in hospitals, 26 of them in intensive care.
France, traumatized by three major terrorist assaults in 19 months, began three days of national mourning on Saturday.
The claim must be greeted with caution, because there was yet no evidence suggesting that the driver was radicalized, or had even been exposed to the Islamic State’s propaganda.
Tunisian relatives and friends of Mohamed Lahouaiej Bouhlel, who attacked the French seaside town of Nice on Thursday evening, were left shocked by the news of his deadly assault.
In 2014, the Islamic State’s spokesman, Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, called on the group’s followers to attack Westerners in retaliation for strikes by the United States-led coalition fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. He has repeatedly singled out France, which is part of the coalition, as a main enemy.
No evidence has emerged that Mr. Lahouaiej Bouhlel got training or orders from the Islamic State, unlike the perpetrators of attacks in and around Paris on Nov. 13 and Brussels on March 22. The Islamic State has blurred the line between operations planned and carried out by its core fighters and those carried out by sympathizers inspired, only at a distance, to commit violence.
But on Saturday, France’s defense minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, said: “I remind you that Daesh’s ideologue, Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, has for several weeks repeated calls to attack directly, even individually, Frenchmen, in particular, or Americans, wherever they are, by any means necessary.” Daesh is an Arabic name for the Islamic State.
Mr. Lahouaiej Bouhlel, 31, a native of Tunisia, had a history of petty crime going back to 2010. He received a six-month suspended sentence this year for assaulting a motorist, but was not on the radar of French intelligence agencies. Indeed, he seemed more like a surly misfit — he beat his wife, until she threw him out — than a prospective terrorist.
The son was prescribed medication for emotional problems, the elder Mr. Lahouaiej Bouhlel said, adding that his son was “always alone, always depressed” and often silent.
The father said he and his family had almost no contact with his son since he left for France. The son appears to have arrived in Nice around 2005 and to have returned to Tunisia for a sister’s wedding in 2012.
Four people acquainted with Mr. Lahouaiej Bouhlel are in police custody, along with his estranged wife.
Since Thursday evening, several French officials — particularly from right-leaning parties opposed to President François Hollande’s Socialist government — have criticized the government’s handling of intelligence gathering and law enforcement, especially after attacks in January and November killed a total of 147 people.
Christian Estrosi, the president of the region encompassing Nice, wrote in an open letter on Saturday that he had asked for additional security for Bastille Day, but was rebuffed because there was no specific threat.
“Why, while I have for the past two years never ceased to ask the government for new means of fighting terrorism, means to arm our national and municipal police, regulatory means, legislative means, have I never received an answer?” Mr. Estrosi said.
Mr. Le Foll said security in Nice on the night of the attack was as tight as it was during the Euro 2016 soccer tournament, which was held in France and ended on July 10. The tournament was targeted by several plots that the authorities thwarted, according to Mr. Cazeneuve.
The police prefecture for the Alpes-Maritimes department, where Nice is, said security measures on the night of the attack included random searches, the addition of plainclothes officers and the blocking of access points.
The truck “forced its way through, by driving onto the sidewalk,” bypassing a checkpoint where police vehicles blocked the entrance to the promenade, the prefecture said. It added that 64 national and 42 municipal police officers had worked together to secure the area, along with 20 soldiers.
Mr. Cazeneuve said the French state, or national government, had worked with the City of Nice to protect the Bastille Day celebrations, as well as events like the Cannes film festival, which takes place about 25 miles west of Nice, and the annual Nice carnival.
“If one of the authorities — the state or the city — had at one point considered that the level of security was not adequate, the state or the city could have decided to ban the July 14 festivities, which neither did,” Mr. Cazeneuve said.
People returned to the beach on Saturday, in far smaller numbers than in the days before the attack, but signs of a shaken city were still in evidence. Local officials observed a moment of silence at a makeshift memorial on the Promenade des Anglais, the site of the carnage.
The promenade reopened to vehicular traffic on Saturday afternoon. It had been closed to traffic for the Bastille Day fireworks celebration and remained closed after the attack as it was turned, in effect, into a 1.5-mile crime scene.
Many streets were still blocked, parents were still searching for missing children, and hospital staff members who have been dealing with scores of victims continued to treat dozens of patients, including many children, who had life-threatening injuries.