It’s 2016, and we’re rewriting the 1990s. Monica Lewinsky has transformed herself from the butt of a joke into an antibullying advocate. The first lady who refused to stay in the White House and bake cookies is running for president as a kindly grandmother. And “political correctness,” the decade’s shorthand for liberal politics, has returned as something more menacing.
“Politically correct” was born as a lefty in-joke, an insidery nod to the smugness of holier-than-thou liberals. As Gloria Steinem put it: “ ‘Politically correct’ was in­vented by people in social-justice movements to make fun of ourselves.” In the ’80s, the Brown University student Jeff Shesol’s “Doonesbury”-esque campus comic strip, “Thatch,” introduced a cape-wearing vigilante called Politically Correct Person, who faced off against his archenemy, Insensitive Man. Shesol went on to serve as a speechwriter for Bill Clinton.
But these wry liberals, smoking beneath the bleachers, unwittingly started a fire that engulfed the entire movement. By the early ’90s, the term was reduced to an abbreviation and inflated into a right-wing boogeyman. This time, the joke was on liberalism itself. Rush Limbaugh’s 1993 book, “See, I Told You So,” included a satirical “politically correct liberal lexicon.” The new “P.C.” exaggerated the excesses of the left, condemning it as hopelessly insular and divided from the rest of the country by its narrow concerns. It made liberals into an other, one that spoke its own esoteric language.
 In the ’90s, the college campus served as ground zero for the culture wars. As Rick Santorum once said of Satan, “The place where he was, in my mind, the most successful and first successful was in academia.” But now, academic language has spilled off campus and into online public spaces like Tumblr and Twitter, and the P.C. war is fought in a new theater.
Social media is rich with talk of microaggressions, privilege, trigger warnings and safe spaces. These buzzwords can serve as a helpful shorthand for discussing complicated dynamics of identity, history and power, but the smugness that ’80s liberals detected in their ranks can be spied here, too. The more pedantic forms of language scolding on Twitter can come across as coastal Ivy League whites trying to absolve themselves of their privilege by wielding it against poorer, less worldly and less educated white people. And the standards shift so quickly that it’s hard to keep up. Clinton has herself assumed the cool posture of the in-the-know Twitter enforcer who shames people for their garbage posts: “Delete your account,” she tweeted at Trump in June. For people who have never actually set foot in a college classroom, this can all feel like a bad dream where you’re handed the final exam for a class you never attended.
The white nationalist Richard Spencer recently told The Times: “The discussion that white Americans never want to have is this question of identity — who are we?” Donald Trump offers his followers the comfort of an easy answer, one that avoids even reckoning with words like “privilege,” let alone their meaning. His call to “make America great again” also signals a personal regression — a return to childhood, when the outside world stretched only as far as your own backyard, and you were allowed to scream nonsense with no consequences. 
But the new anti-P.C. isn’t so gloriously liberating as it purports to be. The right-wing verve for pointing out political correctness has emerged as its own form of speech policing. When President Obama addressed the nation after Orlando, he “disgracefully refused to even say the words ‘Radical Islam,’ ” Trump said. “For that reason alone, he should step down.” Words matter, this approach seems to say. Sometimes, they can hurt people.