I thought of Callaway when the Department of Defense recently announced that it would no longer bar transgender soldiers from military service. Some service members will have a similar reaction to working with these soldiers — not to mention gay and female soldiers, given that the Pentagon also ended its “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy in 2011 and allowed women to assume combat roles in 2015.
In addition, civilian conservatives can’t admit that their recent political attacks on gay and transgender people — via “bathroom bills” and state “religious freedom” acts — now put them in direct conflict with the policies of the United States military, an organization they normally praise.
So they’ll cite concerns about the “readiness” of these soldiers.
These concerns will be as bogus as the concerns about the readiness of black troops in 1944. Callaway and his men drove supply trucks because the white infantry didn’t trust them to fight. So they excelled at their task, delivering fuel and ammunition for Gen. George S. Patton’s advance across France.
You could use the same image for all the soldiers, over the years, whose skills and stories have been buried because of race, gender, sexual orientation or gender identity.
That’s why the military’s recent, progressive run of decisions should be celebrated. You never could be too poor to serve in the military. Or too rich, too Hispanic, too Jewish or too Italian. Now you can’t be too anything. You will work with people who are different from you. And you might be called on to risk your life for those people, or watch them risk theirs for you.
So why does the military get so little credit for its diversity in the popular imagination? Or for guaranteeing equal pay for equal work? Some of this is self-inflicted. President Harry S. Truman’s order to integrate the United States military in 1948 was progressive for its time. But years of silence about moving women to combat roles and gender identity followed. “Don’t ask, don’t tell” was a disastrous cop-out. The military’s record on sexual assault has been bleak. Minorities aren’t yet proportionally represented in the higher ranks.
But another reason for the lack of credit is that the leads in our war movies about Iraq and Afghanistan look exactly like the leads in our contemporary World War II films. White, straight, cisgender men.
Hollywood should be embarrassed by this. The military doesn’t just look like Tom Hanks or Jeremy Renner. It also looks like Representative Tammy Duckworth, the Illinois Democrat who lost both her legs in Iraq and recently drove her scooter in jubilant celebration in Chicago’s Pride Parade. It looks like Capt. Sage Fox, who legally changed her gender from male to female, then fought to return to the Army Reserves. The true stories of who our soldiers really are need to be rescued from the muck of our contemporary political life.
In June, about 10 years after she rescued that Buffalo, I asked now Lieutenant Colonel McDonough to meet with me in Washington. I’d written a novel about a female soldier in Iraq, based in part on her stories.
Of course it was appropriate. But that part of her life had remained buried when we’d met. The same could have been said for transgender soldiers like Captain Fox, up until last month.
It took too long for the military to remember this ideal. But we should all be glad it has.