For Elizabeth Swados, being nominated for four Tony Awards in one year while still in her 20s — for “Runaways,” in 1978 — led to success in an unexpected direction. Or, rather, in several unexpected directions.
Ms. Swados, who died in January at 64, composed scores for Brecht and Euripides plays. She wrote a series of oratorios and other works on Jewish themes. She made a graphic novel and an animated film about her history of depression. She taught and employed countless promising theater artists. And she worked with pretty much every Off Off Broadway theater company that could accommodate her big casts and bigger beats.
Directed and choreographed by two of her former New York University students, Sam Pinkleton and Ani Taj, “Runaways” prompted a look back at some of the theater she created over 40 years, told by those who worked with her.
I met Liz when I was in my second year at N.Y.U. I was studying musical theater and dreaming about being a chorus boy. On the first day of class, she basically said, “If you aren’t careful, you’ll end up being a chorus boy.” And she made me write and direct and sing and choreograph and do all of the things that made me panic. She encouraged me to do the more radical thing always always always.
Her knowledge and precision in pronunciation of the ancient Greek texts were invaluable to everyone. There were sounds involved that are not part of the English language at all. She had confidence in her gut and in the guttural!
We spent six months crafting “Runaways” using a lot of improvisation (and profound personal sharing). That was a unique experience — trusting and collaborating, melding nonfiction with story so openly. Liz was a catalyst in young people being heard and finding a way into expression.
I just remember Elizabeth as a person with an inexhaustible creative energy — her half-closed eyes during any musical rehearsal, head turned up and half away from us, like she was waiting for instructions from on high, or a different galaxy. And then jumping to her feet from the floor (she always preferred to sit on the floor), bursting with visions and revisions, and let’s just do it again, AGAIN!! She was like a 7-year-old in a grown-up’s body, with teenage hair, hair that was her shield and tent and quiet room. She was the weirdest combination of exuberant and shy, shy, shy. Certain of her musical ideas, no doubt, no equivocating — but terrible anxiety about just standing in the room with people. The voice that emerged — unique, female, eternally young and tied to childhood — has not been duplicated in the theater.
I was Liz’s token friend from above 14th Street, and I never quite understood why. Next to her, I was hopelessly unhip. With “Doonesbury,” Liz played in my world — a mainstream Broadway musical comedy with lovable characters. But with “Rap Master Ronnie,” a downtown political revue with complicated characters, I was in Lizworld. I came to prefer the latter, scrambling for money and audiences, huddling behind the bar at the Village Gate, reworking numbers on the spot — the kind of on-the-fly theater Liz was so brilliant at.
When we were working on a “Caucasian Chalk Circle” adaptation at La MaMa, the way she made words come alive through rhythm made it seem so natural. She made this craggy Brecht text come to life. There are more ways of setting words to music than are in our textbook philosophies, and I learned that from Liz.
For mentors to be truly great, they need to get something out of the relationship as well. And I think she really fed off working with young people. She had the drive and the energy and the curiosity of a teenager in many ways. And unlike many of us directors who sit behind the table and ask others to do crazy [stuff], she would be the first one on her feet doing it. She was the first one to be vulnerable.
She told me once that opening night was her least favorite part of the theater because it was no longer hers. She didn’t get to play anymore.
Liz was always searching. Her eclectic style, mixed with a renaissance curiosity, helped her develop in contradictory ways. She was confusing to the critics — they didn’t know what to do with her. Her endlessly changing vocabulary was taken as a provocation. Her early flush on Broadway was an accident; she was never meant to be commercially famous. Her avidity for experiencing all aspects of life was more important.
She worked very quickly. I think that’s why she needed an editor, frankly, because she would generate so much. She had already been working on “Kaspar Hauser” for, I think, eight years when I got hired to work for her. She had written 10 different songs for the same moment, and then she would offer to write a new one!
SCHELLENBACH She really clicked into kids’ minds. She looked to us for style and choreography and the way young people talked and moved. But she was a very tough taskmaster. She held everyone to the same standard.
I was very attracted to her drive to, as she put it, “redefine the idea of song.” And that never changed, nor did her emphasis on activism and justice.
She never really stopped. Even when she was ill and in recovery mode, she was talking about this book and this show and this other thing she was developing. Sometimes I’ll think, man, how can she work with these kids so much? But I really think they gave her energy.
