IS there a war on cops? With five police officers shot dead and seven more wounded in Dallas, and three killed, three wounded in Baton Rouge, La., it is hard to argue that there isn’t. Hours before the slaughter in Dallas, a man in Bristol, Tenn., went on a shooting rampage with anti-white, anti-cop motives (according to a preliminary inquiry), killing a woman and wounding three other people, including a police officer.
Officers were attacked in their homes in Indianapolis and St. Louis by black men enraged by recent events. Other police officers have been shot, shot at and killed in the past two weeks, under circumstances in which politics played no obvious part. Last year, there were 40 police officers killed by intentional gunfire across the United States; this year, there have been 30, and the summer isn’t over.
Still, I don’t believe there is a war on cops.
Twenty-one years ago, when I was sworn in as a New York City police officer, I entered the police academy beneath a sign that read “Fidelis ad Mortem” — Faithful Unto Death — and hoped that it was a promise I wouldn’t have to keep, either by giving my life or by taking another’s. Since then, 160 members of the department have proved its truth, many from illnesses contracted in the aftermath of Sept. 11.
But while violent death was always a risk for cops, it was a daily reality for the African-American and Latino residents of the South Bronx, where I worked. It was the reason we were there. There was a war going on, it often seemed, but most of us were on the same side.
While the job is inherently adversarial at times, the notion that people like them live in perpetual terror of people like me exists at a hallucinatory remove from my experience. Many police officers are involved, with an extraordinary degree of intimacy, in the ordinary lives of poor African Americans. During the two years I walked a beat in a housing project in the South Bronx two decades ago, I was called all the time, hailed on the street or summoned through 911, because kids weren’t doing their homework or because the toilet wasn’t working.
No problem was too small for me to be asked to fix it; I often felt like an electrician hired to flip a light switch. I was called to settle countless arguments between neighbors, brothers and sisters, mothers and sons, boyfriends and girlfriends, that were not only nonviolent, but also didn’t even seem particularly loud.
Hundreds of people knew my face on my beat, and the divide between those who were relieved to see it and those who weren’t wasn’t strictly fixed. One strong-minded lady who volunteered for the tenant patrol never let me forget it if I didn’t check on her when she sat in the lobby. When I locked up her son for fighting, she wasn’t happy about it. But after a while, things went back to normal. She knew we had to keep on working together, in the hope we’d need to see each other less.
The last two weeks have seen killings by the police in Baton Rouge and St. Paul, and then the killings of police officers in Dallas and Baton Rouge. There seemed to be a rhyme to the pattern, if not a reason, and the killings have inspired a morbid round of pro- and anti-police scorekeeping. The tally is now two black civilians, eight cops (one of whom was black). Does one side hold the moral high ground until the casualty count shifts?
No one can avoid a measure of unequal emotional identification with one death or another. Wenjian Liu and Rafael Ramos, two New York police officers who were killed, unprovoked, while sitting in their patrol car in 2014, will always mean more to me than Philando Castile and Alton Sterling, even as the pity and outrage many African-Americans feel for Mr. Castile and Mr. Sterling cannot and should not be denied.
For the last two years — 50, really — the same circular argument has been going on. Do cops treat blacks differently because of racism, or because blacks commit a disproportionate number of violent crimes? The answer is yes. Yes, thousands of black men kill one another every year, and while many grieve, many do not protest. And yes, police killings are different, because cops are sworn and paid to protect the public. The arguments don’t cancel each other out, no matter how loudly they’re shouted. But it’s absurd to insist that police conduct is an entirely different subject from the context of policing. Race, racism and crime — cause and effect, action and reaction — are not separate histories or separate realities.
That’s why I don’t believe the “war against cops” is real, just as I know, with even more certainty, that the “open season on black men” claim is a lie. Everyone should look at the numbers, consider the facts and remember the names. No cry for justice should be ignored.
But no one should forget or deny that even at the most polarized moments in the most polarized places — Ferguson, Mo., Baltimore, Baton Rouge, wherever — people never stopped calling the police. Many calls came from the neighborhoods that activists claimed were where the police weren’t wanted, weren’t trusted, weren’t needed. And the police kept coming, as they always will.