249 pp. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. $24.
Noga, a 42-year-old professional harpist and the headstrong, elliptical heroine of A. B. Yehoshua’s new novel, “The Extra,” doesn’t want children. Nine years earlier that refusal led to her divorce, and since then she has left Israel for a job with a Dutch orchestra and drifted into an amiable affair with a colleague. But after her father dies she returns to Jerusalem and faces the questions that loved ones and strangers just won’t stop asking. Is her childlessness a quirk, a stigma or an affliction — or does it perhaps offer her an opportunity to reset the course of her life?
Yehoshua is one of Israel’s pre-­eminent novelists and, with his fellow writers Amos Oz and David Grossman, among the country’s most insistent voices pleading for engagement and peace with the Palestinians. Yehoshua often uses his fictional characters as test cases for political issues, and Noga is no exception. After all, fertility is a subject of political anxiety and religious injunctions in Israel. The first divine commandment voiced in Genesis instructs man to “be fruitful and multiply”; it’s the reason for both the prodigious numbers of children in ultra-­Orthodox families and for Israel’s liberal fertility laws. The memory of a million Jewish children murdered during the Holocaust also weighs heavily on many couples planning a family. Add to that fears of a demographic imbalance fed by the high birthrate among Palestinians and Israeli Arabs, and it’s no wonder that women like Noga are on the defensive.
“The Extra” is an engaging, slack and sometimes frustrating novel, translated in dignified but stilted prose by Stuart Schoffman, that reflects both Yehoshua’s gift for surreal comedy and his penchant for schoolmasterly expositions. (Few writers are quite so fond of explaining their own metaphors.) The book’s title refers to the work Noga finds upon her return to Israel as an extra on film and television sets. Her music has been put on hold for three months, the duration of “the experiment,” as her brother, Honi, calls it, during which their mother agrees to try out assisted living in Tel Aviv while Noga house-sits her apartment in Jerusalem. Oddly for a professional musician — or perhaps emblematic of a certain self-sabotaging streak — Noga makes no arrangements to secure a harp on which to practice while she is in Israel, even though the orchestra has promised her a rare solo in Mozart’s Concerto for Flute and Harp upon her return to the Netherlands. Instead, she drifts into occasional jobs in a succession of comically absurd and sharply drawn vignettes.
On the set of a courtroom drama she plays a jury member bidden to read out the guilty verdict. For a hospital show, she enacts a patient in a wheelchair. In a documentary, she stands in for the ­camera-shy ex-girlfriend of a professor. In an open-air production of Bizet’s “Carmen” at Masada, the ancient fortress in the Judean Desert, she slips into the guise of a peasant woman pulling a donkey cart.
Meanwhile she presides over her own Masada in the form of her mother’s apartment in a Jerusalem neighborhood, formerly a “bastion of secularism,” that has recently turned “black” with ultra-­Orthodox residents. The shadowy lawyer of the absentee landlord continues to stalk her: If the apartment should appear to be uninhabited, even briefly, he’s ready to seize it and turn it over to a religious tenant. At the same time, two children from a neighboring ultra-Orthodox family persist in slipping into the living room to watch forbidden TV. Even Noga’s ex-­husband still has a key, and is not shy to use it.
To readers familiar with the rhetorical currency of the Middle East conflict, the metaphor is transparent: Legitimacy demands continued presence. Without it, Jewish claims to the Holy Land, or a Palestinian family’s claim to its ancestral home, are naught. To drive home the point, Noga must watch helplessly as her orchestra moves up the Mozart concerto and replaces her with another harpist. The ultra-Orthodox boys also test, and come up against the limits of, Noga’s maternal instincts. Threats and curses, a new lock for the front door and a camel-driving whip purchased in East Jerusalem can’t keep the boys away.
For the most part the novel’s characters are too self-absorbed and too caught up in a hazy world of as-ifs — the mother’s “experiment” with a high-end retirement home, Noga’s work as an extra in stories that haven’t yet been fully plotted — to register much interest in terrorism or war. “Who am I to decide if the danger is real or exists only in newspaper articles?” Noga asks indignantly when her ex-husband speculates that her refusal to have children stemmed from pessimism about Israel’s future. Her work as an extra only confirms to her how arbitrary and fluid the borders are between what is real and what is being imagined for us by others.
Eventually, Noga will return to her passion for music. In compensation for the stolen Mozart concerto, she is given the opportunity to play the prominent first harp part in Debussy’s “La Mer” — Yehoshua is very intent on spelling out the French homonym of “sea” and “mother,” or “mère” — on what may prove to be a sweetly cathartic tour to Japan.
