Several months ago, I was at the international airport in Tbilisi, Georgia, waiting for a flight to arrive from Doha, Qatar. I’d come in from Moscow the night before. The people around me were holding signs with names written in Arabic; mine was the only one in Hindi. I’m Russian, and J. is Indian.
We moved swiftly to the taxi area. It was 6 a.m., and we were heading to our hotel. The place was located on Iakob Gogebashvili Street, a 30-minute ride from the airport. As we rode along in the back seat, it felt evident that we would need some time to revive our feelings after the break. It felt as if we were not next to each other but still near computer screens, waiting for the other to show up online. Nothing felt quite real.
We originally met in Doha and spent eight months together. Eventually I had to return to Moscow because of a visa problem. She stayed in Qatar, where she worked at a consulting firm. We knew that few couples survived long-distance relationships, and that it was going to be hard, but still, we decided to stick together.
Our cultural and ethnic differences added to the difficulty. I used to live and study in America, where interracial dating was not a big problem, compared with our parts of the world. But as an Indo-Russian couple in Doha, we often seemed exotic to others. When we went out, people often stared. Sometimes it became a show, with people making grimaces of disgust when they saw us together. Sometimes we avoided going out altogether. We didn’t like it, but we couldn’t do anything about it.
Neither of J.’s parents could even think of her marrying somebody who wasn’t Indian. When we decided to meet in Georgia, she told them that she was going there for a conference. Many Indian and Arab women who live in Doha do the same kind of thing — they come up with explanations to give their parents so that they can travel abroad and secretly spend time with their boyfriends. For my part, I had found a job in Moscow, but the ruble’s collapse and sanctions made it hard for me to travel often. I slept in hostels and tried to save up every ruble. For a while, we would visit each other every two months, but soon it became too difficult, and we had to make it less often. My family accused me of being irrational and silly, especially considering how many single and beautiful women were in Russia. I did not listen; I could not imagine being with anyone but J.
Our five days together in Georgia were unforgettable. It turned out Tbilisi was the perfect place for us. Perhaps we looked like an Azerbaijani couple and did not seem exotic at all. J. even got used to hugging me in public. Our feelings toward each other came back quickly. It was 21 degrees Celsius, which locals said was unusually warm for October. We strolled through the city and had our first lunch at the famous Café Gabriadze, right next to the marionette theater. We took the funicular to get to the Mtatsminda plateau to see the city’s panoramic view.
On our last night, we went to a restaurant to celebrate our two-year anniversary. We ordered a bottle of Kindzmarauli wine and stayed up late in the night. Then, as we were returning to the hotel, walking uphill to Iakob Gogebashvili Street, J. got scared: Chestnuts were falling from the trees and crashing onto parked cars. Every time a chestnut fell, she grabbed my hand. Whenever she did that, I felt as if we were a part of some fairy tale that couldn’t last. I did not want to admit that we would be apart again soon.
I could not return to Doha because of my visa issues. She could not move to Moscow because it is impossible to find a job there without speaking Russian. We thought of moving to some other country together, but it was hard because of our passports; besides, we were just building our careers, and it was a struggle to find suitable jobs elsewhere. We both came to the realization that our future was doomed. J. broke up with me two months after our trip. It was heartbreaking, but one of us had to do it.
Sometimes I think about what could have happened if we weren’t from different cultures and countries, if we didn’t have to face so many obstacles. I really do not want to know the answer. We talk now, as friends, and have our different lives in Moscow and Doha, but I do not think that either of us will ever forget the falling chestnuts of Tbilisi.