VLADIVOSTOK, Russia — Cui Rongwei, a businessman from northeastern China, could not afford a trip to Paris, so he settled for an exotic taste of Europe right on China’s doorstep. He liked Vladivostok so much that he has made three trips there to savor a city so strikingly different from his own hometown just a few score miles away.
Yet, like nearly all Chinese who visit a city whose Russian name means “master of the East,” Mr. Cui is absolutely certain about one thing: The place should really be called Haishenwai, the name it had back when China was master in these parts.
Such concerns recently gained prime-time treatment on state-run Russian television when Nikita Mikhalkov, a prominent film director known for his nationalist and somewhat paranoid views, spoke at length about a film script he said he had received. It featured a Chinese military invasion of the Russian Far East fired by demands for vengeance against past land grabs by czarist Russia.
After recounting in detail how Chinese forces would seize Khabarovsk, Vladivostok and other Russian cities in the Far East and then sweep across Siberia toward Moscow while Russia’s elite partied in Western Europe, Mr. Mikhalkov said he would not make such a film because he did not do “horror movies” and did not want to offend his Chinese friends.
All the same, the scenario he presented along with footage showing the Chinese People’s Liberation Army training for battle revealed a deep fear of China that still grips many Russians.
“History is always used for political speculation,” Mr. Larin said, adding that demanding Vladivostok back was as unrealistic as Russia’s asking the United States to give back Alaska.
The name Chinese use for the city, Haishenwai, roughly translates as “sea cucumber bay,” though some historians believe the name is not Chinese at all but Manchu, the language of the court during the Qing dynasty, which ruled China from 1644 to 1911.
Whatever the language, Chinese tour guides and guidebooks nearly all give Haishenwai as Vladivostok’s original and true name.
Even under Russian rule, Vladivostok has at times had nearly as many Chinese residents as Russians. In 1912, for example, nearly 30 percent of the population was Chinese, with the rest divided between Russians and a large number of Europeans, Japanese, Americans and other foreigners.
That all changed with Russia’s 1917 revolution, after which the Soviet authorities declared the city a sensitive military zone and sealed it off. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, foreigners have been allowed back.
