COLUMBIA, S.C. — The F.B.I. is being sued by survivors of last year’s Charleston church shooting, who say federal negligence enabled Dylann Roof to buy the .45-caliber handgun he used.
Lawyers for three people who survived the attack and the estates of five of the nine people who were killed at Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in June 2015 accused the bureau of failing to thoroughly check Mr. Roof’s background before he bought the gun last year.
If the agency had done its job, according to lawsuits filed Thursday, Mr. Roof’s prior drug arrest would have shown up, and the bureau would have denied his purchase.
Andy Savage, a lawyer for the plaintiffs, said Friday that his clients hoped the litigation would lead to improvements in gun safety. “In this case, you had an unqualified purchaser that slipped through the cracks,” Mr. Savage said.
Patrick Rodenbush, a Justice Department spokesman, declined to comment on the lawsuits.
The attack by Mr. Roof, who is white, against black parishioners who had welcomed him to their Bible study renewed debates about race relations in the South.
Mr. Roof had posed online with a Confederate flag and told a friend that he intended to kill people at the historic black church to start a race war. The shooting led to the Confederate battle flag’s removal from many places of honor.
Law enforcement agencies have acknowledged mistakes involving Mr. Roof’s April 2015 gun purchase. James Comey, the F.B.I. director, has said the transaction should have been denied, and he promised a full review.
Lexington County’s sheriff, Jay Koon, said that a jail clerk had entered incorrect information for Mr. Roof’s February 2015 drug arrest, and that while the mistake was noticed within days, it was not fixed in a state database.
When Mr. Roof sought to buy the gun two months later, an F.B.I. examiner spotted the arrest but called the wrong agency to get his record. Without the necessary documents, the purchase had to go through.
Congress has limited federal background checks to three days. South Carolina legislators filed bills to expand the window after the shootings, but none advanced. The chairman of the State Senate Judiciary Committee promised a hearing this summer, but it has not been scheduled.
Mr. Roof, who could face the death penalty, is in jail awaiting trials in both state and federal court on charges including murder and hate crimes. His federal trial is scheduled for November, but state prosecutors want their case to start first.