Fourteen of the nation’s top young chess masters came to New York this week for an elite clinic at the Marshall Chess Club. Four of them were girls. For proponents of gender parity in chess, this was progress.
It is one of the vexing questions in chess: Why, in a sport where physical differences do not matter, are boys and men so much more prominent than their female counterparts, despite efforts to attract more girls and women?
In response, several female players, using the hashtag #sexisminchess, wrote of being belittled, harassed, stalked or propositioned at tournaments. Some of the strongest response came from the retired grandmaster Judit Polgar, who beat Mr. Short eight times, with only three losses and five draws.
The gender gap has especially perplexed educators, who say chess helps students learn to solve problems, improve their concentration, delay gratification and socialize with peers. At school tournaments, boys typically outnumber girls by two or three to one, and the gap gets wider as the level of play rises; none of the world’s 100 highest-rated players is female.
Explanations for the imbalance ring familiar: a shortage of female role models, less encouragement from parents and teachers, an unwelcoming atmosphere in what has traditionally been a boys’ club.
To Carissa, the gender gap was an advantage.
Her father, Percy Yip, who works in information technology, said that when she started, he had some “misconceptions” about girls and chess.
To address the gender gap, some programs, like the Success Academy charter school network, have created separate clubs or tournaments for girls.
At the Marshall Chess Club on Wednesday, three of the girls were silent through most of the lessons, while a group of boys practically bounced out of their seats, periodically getting sent out of the room for their behavior.
But Mr. Shahade, whose sister Jennifer is a former national women’s champion and author of the books “Chess Bitch” and “Play Like a Girl,” said the behavior had more to do with age than gender: The rambunctious boys were younger, and the girls had been just as loud at their age.
Maggie Feng, 15, the oldest and quietest girl in the group, said she was drawn to the abstract side of chess: analyzing novel positions or strategies. In spring, she became the first girl ever to win the American championship for players in ninth grade and younger, a title previously won by Fabiano Caruana and Hikaru Nakamura, the two top players in the United States.
Most of her female peers, Maggie said, were not interested in chess. “Not many girls really know chess,” she said.
To test the social effects of gender on chess, researchers in Padua, Italy, matched male and female players of equal ratings and had them play online.
The 2007 study, reported in The European Journal of Social Psychology, was very small but produced intriguing results. When women did not know their opponents’ gender or thought they were playing other women, they won about half of the games. But when they thought their opponents were male, they won only one in four games, even though they faced the same opponents in all conditions.
The women also played less aggressively and displayed lower self-esteem against “male” opponents. The researchers surmised that a reason men dominate the game’s top levels may be that women perceive themselves as minorities in tournaments and lose confidence, causing them to perform below their abilities.
Ms. Polgar, who is widely considered the best female chess player ever, said women were often held back by lower ambition, choosing to play in the less competitive all-female events rather than in open tournaments.
At the Marshall, Jennifer Yu, 14, from Ashburn, Va., said she hoped to break that stereotype, adding that before she became known, boys often expected her to be a weak player because she was a girl.
