BANGKOK — The government of Vietnam, breaking its silence about a huge fish kill in April, said on Thursday that the coastal disaster was caused by a Taiwan-owned steel factory that discharged a combination of chemicals, including cyanide, into the ocean.
Mai Tien Dung, minister chairman of the government office, said the government was seeking $500 million in compensation from the Formosa Ha Tinh Steel Corporation for the chemical spill, which killed marine life and poisoned people along 120 miles of coastline in central Vietnam.
Mr. Dung said at a crowded news conference in Hanoi that the spill had occurred during trial operation of the newly built factory’s wastewater discharge system.
In a video played for reporters, the board chairman of Formosa Ha Tinh Steel, Tran Nguyen Thanh, acknowledged that the company, a subsidiary of the Formosa Plastics Group, had caused the spill.
“The company would like to take responsibility and apologize to Vietnam,” he said.
The spill, one of Vietnam’s largest environmental disasters, wiped out fish, squid and other marine life off the coast of four provinces south of the factory, destroying the livelihood of fishermen in the region.
Many tons of dead fish washed up on beaches in central Vietnam for days starting in early April. An untold number of people who ate the fish became sick before the government banned their consumption.
Some criticized the government for withholding the names of the toxic agents even from poison victims and the doctors who were treating them.
The disaster led to widespread anger at the government, with protesters demonstrating throughout the country for more than a month. But instead of providing answers, the government cracked down on the protests. More than 500 people were arrested, and some were beaten by the police.
The government has not disclosed the number of people who became ill nor has it offered an estimate of the damage to marine life.
In addition to cyanide, the government said the factory dumped phenols and iron hydroxide into the sea, creating a toxic mix. The government is still monitoring water quality offshore and has not declared the water safe for fishing within 20 nautical miles of the coast.
Officials said that it had been necessary to restrict news coverage of the disaster while the investigation was underway.
“Some forces took advantage of this incident to provoke, to cause unrest among the people,” said the minister of information and communications, Truong Minh Tuan.
The steel factory had been widely suspected of being responsible for the spill, especially after a company representative appeared to confirm that in April.
His comments prompted widespread criticism on social media and the creation of the popular hashtag #Ichoosefish. He was fired soon afterward.
Before the news conference on Thursday, Formosa Ha Tinh Steel sent a letter to its employees blaming the fish kill on mistakes by its subcontractors, but without providing specifics.
A company representative reached by phone in Ha Tinh Province said that the government’s investigation had found a violation of proper procedures but that the company had not been told what that violation was.
The government said that compensation paid by the company would go to aid fishing villages in the disaster zone, provide job training for fishermen who are out of work and rehabilitate the marine environment.