As dozens of families and friends crowded into William F. Moore Park in Queens on a sweltering night last week, it was hard to tell what was louder: the cries of children who would not share their Italian ices from the Lemon Ice King of Corona, or the crash of bocce balls on the park’s floodlit court.
There may have been little agreement on whose balls were closer to scoring, but everyone seemed to agree that the park was especially busy this summer — and many agreed on why.
“It used to be quieter, scarier, before they changed the lights,” Reuben Mendoza, who moved here from Mexico 19 years ago, said during a break.
In May 2015, New York City’s Department of Transportation came to the Queens neighborhoods of Corona, Elmhurst and Jackson Heights to start replacing the old “cobra head” lights on major thoroughfares with new fixtures housing light-emitting diodes, better known as LEDs. The light switch was proposed last decade, and will eventually encompass all 250,000 streetlights in the city’s five boroughs.
The city undertook the changeover less to eliminate the jack-o’-lantern glow of the old high-pressure sodium lights and more for the benefits of LEDs. They are not only more efficient, but they also have a 15-year life span, which means less maintenance. The city expects to save $6 million per year on energy and $8 million a year on repairs.
But the truer hues of the LEDs, which appear much brighter to the naked eye than the old lights, have other benefits.
Yet where some now see better, others see only a nuisance. Residents of Corona may have embraced the LEDs as a crime deterrent and a pedestrian safeguard, but those in more upscale neighborhoods are fighting them. Many have argued that the lights’ rays blast through windows and ruin the charm of the night.
In underserved neighborhoods like Corona, though, “too bright” is exactly what residents want.
“I haven’t gotten a single complaint,” said Councilwoman Julissa Ferreras-Copeland, a Queens Democrat. She had to spend $500,000 from her capital budget for the new LED lights on Roosevelt Avenue, which run beneath the elevated No. 7 train from 90th to 111th Street. She used to live on the avenue and knows how scary it can be, especially when the subway comes roaring overhead.
That might just happen. The City Council is considering a bill to lower the color temperature on the LED fixtures. This would reduce glare but also, perhaps, clarity. And after the Department of Transportation received 150 complaints last year, it began installing lower-powered lights: 72 watts compared with 78 watts.
The differences are stark, even within a few miles.
Representatives for three Brooklyn community boards east of Prospect Park, covering Crown Heights, Flatbush and Brownsville, said that the new lights have been warmly welcomed with no complaints.
Councilwoman Helen Rosenthal, a Democrat who represents the Upper West Side, helped get a set of new LEDs on 86th Street switched off because they were beaming into residents’ windows. She said, however, that she also sympathizes with those communities clamoring for LEDs.
“It’s a good question, why, historically, has a district like mine and the Upper East Side been well-lit while others have not?” Ms. Rosenthal said.
But many areas like the South Bronx and Upper Manhattan, communities that would presumably like to have the LEDs, will be last to get them.
Installation has focused on areas like brownstone Brooklyn and stretches of Manhattan, including Central Park, and all 22,000 lights on the city’s highways, which were replaced in 2014. Brooklyn has received 95 percent of its roughly 61,000 new lights, compared with barely a third of Queens’ 81,000 streetlights. There are thousands in Manhattan but almost none in the Bronx or on Staten Island, excluding the highways. A Transportation Department spokesman said this was simply a result of old contracting patterns. The lights have been installed at 1,000 dangerous intersections citywide as part of the mayor’s Vision Zero program.
Research differs on whether better lighting leads to a reduction in crime, though a 2007 meta-analysis of 13 cities around the world, including eight in the United States, showed an overall reduction. “I believe in New York, you would expect to see a positive result,” said Brandon Welsh, a professor of criminology at Northeastern University who helped lead the analysis.
Many drivers — or those on two wheels — said they welcomed the improved illumination, too.
