Truman Capote, stern-faced, looks down from the spiral staircase of his sprawling home in Brooklyn Heights. Three women — one framed by her furs — sit by the glow of a window at the Hotel Bossert, once known as the Waldorf Astoria of Brooklyn. A dignified W. E. B. Du Bois poses in his house at 31 Grace Court, near the Brooklyn Bridge.
All of these portraits and more were taken in 1958 by the commercial and fine-art photographer David Attie while he was on assignment for Holiday magazine. They spent decades boxed away and never published and, in many cases, his negatives were only recently printed.
It took years of a son’s sleuthing to unearth his father’s long-forgotten work, but now 40 of these images have made their way to the Brooklyn Historical Society in the exhibition “Truman Capote’s Brooklyn: The Lost Photographs of David Attie,” on view through next July.
One of the photos of Capote, shadowy and composed in the crook of the staircase — “floating upward in white, swan-simple curves to a skylight of sunny amber-gold glass,” as Capote once described it — has a Hitchcockian quality. Other images are atmospheric glimpses of an era that feels both bygone (horse-drawn wagons for delivering flowers) and ever-present (children on the stoops of Brooklyn’s classic brownstones).
The show “really captures that time when Brooklyn Heights was not the wealthy place that it was in the mid-1800s, when it was the original suburbs, and certainly not the place it is now, but was a little marginal,” said Marcia Ely, who organized the exhibition with the help of the Attie family.
Eli Attie, David’s son, was an adolescent when his father died in 1982. He knew of the work, which often took place in their home studio, but only recently did he realize the extent of the archive and the number of 20th-century luminaries his father photographed. Procrastination, he admits, led him to the discovery. While working on a script — he is a television writer whose credits include episodes of “The West Wing” and “House” — he looked up his father on Google. The results were few and disappointing.
Eventually, the younger Mr. Attie found a 2011 blog post about his father’s graphic design during the early 1950s.
A British photographer, Brian Homer, reached out to Eli on Twitter to say that he had been influenced by his father’s 1977 photography book, “Russian Self-Portraits,” and asked if there were more images on hand that could be used to revive and exhibit David’s work.
They met at Eli’s childhood home, a townhouse in Manhattan where his mother, the painter Dotty Attie, still lives.
He was told that if he wanted his father’s work to get any attention, he would need to gather any photos he could of famous people. In searching, he found surprising photographs and undeveloped outtakes. When Mr. Attie was younger, “I didn’t give his work much thought,” he said. As an adult looking in earnest, he was impressed to find his father’s photos of the Band, Leonard Bernstein and Bobby Fischer, among others.
Capote’s writing, like David Attie’s photography, is impressionistic: small sketches of life in the neighborhood and his home, which was owned by the stage designer Oliver Smith. (Capote, true to his character, often said he was its owner.) Later printed as a small book, the essay was reissued last fall with the photographs, under the title “Brooklyn: A Personal Memoir, With the Lost Photos of David Attie,” with an afterward by Eli.
It’s possible that “Breakfast at Tiffany’s” played a role in the photographer’s hiring for the magazine piece.
Mr. Brodovitch hired David Attie to illustrate “Tiffany’s” with montages of images layered upon one another, the elder Mr. Attie’s signature style at the New School. But Bazaar pulled out. Capote sold the story to Esquire, and wrote in a letter to its fiction editor, L. Rust Hills, “I would not be interested if you did not use Attie’s photographs.” Esquire published only one of the montages — “a laughing girl with an El Morocco background,” in Capote’s words — but that, Eli said, helped his father’s career take shape.
Did the writer and the photographer keep in touch after Capote’s essay was published? The unanswered questions have piled up.
It was. Ms. Ely, of the Brooklyn Historical Society, asked the Du Bois biographer David Lewis about the connection. They speculated that, as neighbors and writers in Brooklyn Heights in the 1950s, Capote and Du Bois may have occasionally crossed paths; another theory is that the elder Mr. Attie knew Du Bois and was paying him a visit while on assignment. Eli also found correspondence between the two writers, from around the time the Capote photo shoot took place.
And, with the book and exhibition, he is beginning to raise his father’s profile.
