391 pp. Atlantic Monthly Press. $25.
For her 14th book, “Exposure,” Helen Dunmore has chosen to explore the murky terrain of the spy novel. It’s an apt choice, and an apt title — so much of Dunmore’s work has been about what lies hidden beneath the surface. She sets her stall out in the very first lines: “It isn’t what you know or don’t know,” the book opens: “It’s what you allow yourself to know.” This holds true until the very last page. Dunmore has always been fantastic on the complexity of people’s motivations and the secret reasons they act as they do. This book is no exception.
The story is set in 1960s London, when the shadow of World War II still falls over everything and some windows even retain their blackout blinds. There’s another war raging, though — the Cold War. There’s a palpable fear of being on the brink of nuclear war, and the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament has begun to mobilize.
This is no conventional spy novel, however, and the narrative plays out not in the usual offices and safe houses but in the homes and gardens of suburban England — the not-so-safe houses, as they turn out to be. Lily Callington is married to Simon. It seems an unremarkable existence: She teaches languages and carefully budgets a decent life for their three children. Her husband has a job in the Admiralty although he’s no high flyer.
But England is not safe. When ­Simon agrees to pick up a briefcase of top-­secret documents that his superior should ­never have taken from the office, the couple become embroiled in an escalating disaster. What ensues forces all of Lily’s carefully hidden differences into the harsh light. But it’s not only Lily who is concealing her true history and identity. Simon has secrets, too, ones that could unravel his little family and fling them to the wolves.
Dunmore switches perspective with ease; some of the best and most moving parts of the book come from Lily and Simon’s 10-year-old son, Paul. The textures of the times — the daily lighting of fires, the lumpen food and unwieldy domestic appliances — are drawn with poetic sensibility. It all adds up to a richly satisfying story. This may be an unconventional thriller, but it’s still a page turner for that. Ultimately though, the focus is the couple — Lily and Simon — rather than the more usual twists and turns of plot in this genre. As the narrative unfolds we realize that this is the novel’s beating heart: It’s as much a surprising love story as it is a tale of spies.