Much the same could be said of Milan. Italians are a little more fluent in English — 34 percent — and Milan has excellent restaurants and arguably the best shopping in the world. It’s already Italy’s financial center. But it lags in every other category, including business climate, where Italy is ranked 45th by the World Bank. Its two main airports are badly in need of refurbishing.
Poland’s appeal is primarily its flexible labor laws, favorable business climate, a hard-working, well-educated populace and a low cost of living. Warsaw would welcome an influx of financial professionals with open arms, in contrast to many more affluent European cities. But it ranks very low on Mercer’s quality of life index, and luxury housing is limited. Still, one major banker told me his firm would move a contingent there from London and expand its technology operations, though its top investment banking professionals would balk at the idea of relocating there.
Residents of Luxembourg are the most affluent and multilingual in Europe (56 percent speak English, and 84 percent speak at least two foreign languages). Known in part as a tax haven, it is already a sophisticated financial services center, and is home to the European Investment Bank and the European Court of Justice.
Mercer ranks it relatively high on quality of life (19th in the world) and it has a surprising number of Michelin-starred restaurants, a reflection of its proximity to France.
But the World Bank rates its business climate last among these finalists. Its international airport ranks a dismal 99th. And the entire country had a population of just 576,000 at the beginning of this year. London has more than 360,000 employees in its financial services sector alone. It’s hard to imagine how Luxembourg could absorb even a small percentage of them.
Already a major financial services center and easily the most culturally appealing city in the European Union, Paris seems an obvious choice. Its regional population of 12 million is the only one that rivals London.
But Paris’s score is dragged down by almost every other category. Only 39 percent of the French are fluent in English, and despite big improvements in recent years, they maintain a reputation of being inhospitable to people who don’t speak French well.
Its airports have low rankings and its rigid school system is inhospitable to foreigners (although it has excellent English-language private schools). France has strict limits on the ability to fire people, and it ranks just 27th on the World Bank’s list. Paris is among the most expensive cities in Europe after London, and is a distant 37th on Mercer’s quality of life index.
Every financial services executive I interviewed mentioned an intangible factor: French hostility to the wealthy. President François Hollande tried to impose a 75 percent “wealth tax,” which prompted an exodus of rich French citizens before Mr. Hollande dropped the proposal.
Not surprisingly, Dublin gets top scores for English-language facility (albeit with an Irish lilt), and also for excellent schools. Dublin is charming, with good restaurants, theater and night life. It offers many of London’s advantages, but is much less expensive. It ranks high on ease of doing business, and of all the European capitals, is probably the most enthusiastic about attracting high-paid talent from London. The Industrial Development Agency Ireland is already reaching out to financial institutions to entice them to Ireland, the Irish Times reported.
Several banking executives told me they would definitely be moving some operations to Dublin.
Dublin’s main drawback is its relatively small size (1.8 million people in the metropolitan area) and lack of infrastructure. Dublin is more distant from the European Union’s other countries and it lacks London’s direct rail link to the Continent. Its relatively small airport ranked 80th.
Vienna emerged as a surprisingly viable contender. Seventy three percent of Austria’s population is fluent in English; its rank in ease of doing business is just behind Ireland’s; Vienna has an excellent airport with high on-time performance, and it is Mercer’s top-ranked city in the world for quality of life. Its restaurants and wines have attracted international acclaim. “It’s a fantastic place to live,” Mr. Yeandle said.
Like Paris, Vienna has the air of a world capital, which it was until Austria lost its empire after the First World War. And that, bankers told me, is part of the problem: Vienna feels like it has been asleep for much of the last century. It’s not a major financial capital now, and no one I spoke to has any immediate plans to start or expand operations there. Still, they told me they might have to reconsider.
In many ways Frankfurt is the obvious choice, because it is already home to the European Central Bank. It’s the financial capital of Germany, Europe’s largest economy and dominant political force. It ranks high on the ease of doing business index, although German labor laws can be as rigid as the French’s. After Heathrow outside London, it has the second-ranked European airport, next to a modern rail terminal connecting it to every major city in Europe. Its population of 2.5 million could absorb a large influx of financial professionals.
But some of those same factors work against it. Even as most people I spoke with said Frankfurt would most likely emerge as the next London, they didn’t seem very enthusiastic about it. Some already think there’s too much power in Germany — and that London has acted as a financial counterbalance.
And some said Frankfurt was simply too boring. It ranks low on the Michelin-star rankings (and far behind other German cities like Berlin and Munich) and isn’t known for its night life or culture.
Language and schooling are potential drawbacks as well.
