What Makes a Politician ‘Authentic’?
Clinton’s hot sauce looked a lot like pandering — even though, back in 2001, the journalist Michael Tomasky wrote that Clinton was “known to carry around a little bottle of Tabasco sauce on her person.” But Clinton has been dogged for years by what pundits like to call her authenticity problem: She seems forever “at pains,” as a reporter for CNN put it, “to convince Americans that she is a real person,” to prove that she actually means it when she says she regrets her vote on the Iraq war, or when she says she opposes the Trans-­Pacific Partnership and cuts to Social Security. To listen to her critics, the real Clinton is a shape-­shifter, with any avowals of authenticity dismissed as the expedient work of a conniving opportunist.
Trump, on the other hand, has polled as one of the most authentic candidates in this election, despite statements and behavior that might also be called brazenly inconsistent. In fact, his authenticity problem looks like the opposite of Clinton’s: Nervous Republican politicians have been trying to suggest that what they themselves call his “racist” invective is merely for show. In other words, Trump’s establishment supporters seem to be hoping that his authenticity is the expedient work of a conniving opportunist.
The words “authentic” and “authenticity” derive from the Greek “authentes,” a word that can denote “one who acts with authority” or “made by one’s own hand.” But in Greek mythology, it also had another meaning. The literary critic Lionel Trilling noted that authentes was “not only a master and a doer, but also a perpetrator, a murderer.” In a series of lectures he gave in 1970, later published as “Sincerity and Authenticity,” Trilling traced the development of moral life in the West from the humanist ideal of sincerity, an individual honesty that maintained social relationships, to the authenticity that is the expression of an individual’s truest self, even if it threatens to destroy social relationships. The self-­realization culture of the hippies was a quest for authenticity, as was the alienation and aggression expressed by much 20th-­century art. “What destroys our authenticity is society,” Trilling writes, and what is authentic is irreducibly real — realer than the polite sheen of civility that lubricates social and political life.
Needless to say, what we consider to be real and authentic has changed over time and has varied according to whom you ask. For Freud, our authentic selves wanted to sleep with our mothers and murder our fathers, and it was civilization and psychoanalysis that kept our murderous ids in check. For Rousseau, authenticity was man’s blissful state in nature, before he was corrupted by society.
This anxiety might look like a symptom of its late-1990s cultural moment — don’t we have bigger things to worry about than the willingness of moneyed white folk to pay exorbitant amounts for minuscule tubs of hand-­churned butter? — but Glenn was suggesting that the commodification of authenticity often involved “fetishizing people darker and/or poorer than themselves.” The search for authenticity becomes a way of “knowing” other people without really knowing them. In its most presumptuous and insidious form, we believe we have access to people’s inner lives, that we know where they’re coming from and what motivates them — when that knowledge is heavily filtered through a mishmash of our own projections, prejudices and how much they remind us of us.
The impulse to think in terms of who someone really is can have serious policy implications too. It finds expression in the American criminal-­justice system, in which prescriptions of punishment or rehabilitation are predicated on determinations of whether a person’s actions reflect something authentic about him — determinations that typically fall, according to sentencing statistics, along racial lines. It informs legislation like the new measure governing bathrooms in North Carolina, where the law defines transgender people according to the sex listed on their birth certificates, rather than accepting how they define themselves. We persist in deciding who people authentically are even though we often get it wrong — and even when it’s ultimately beside the point.
For a long time, Americans decided that the most authentic politicians were the most likable ones. This method of appraisal wasn’t entirely frivolous. Samuel L. Popkin, the author of “The Candidate,” says that the interest in the personal qualities of politicians stems from legitimate concerns in a diverse democracy: “Are you real or not? Because you’re not like me.” Officeholders end up having to make decisions in unforeseen situations, so we gauge their judgment based on how much we like and trust them. In “The Politics of Authenticity in Presidential Campaigns, 1976-2008,” the pollster Erica J. Seifert sees a pivotal moment after Watergate, when the electorate, betrayed by Richard Nixon, voted in the avuncular outsider Jimmy Carter.
This hasn’t stopped some Republicans from claiming that Trump’s brand of authenticity is as artificial as they come. Reince Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, insists that Trump’s taco-­bowl tweet, not his repeated inflammatory comments, reflects Trump’s “gracious and personable” self. “Honestly,” Priebus told Politico, “he’s trying.” Whether Priebus’s words amount to desperate optimism or disingenuous salesmanship remains to be seen — or not, because at a certain point, what a politician believes in his heart of hearts matters less than what he summons in his supporters. In the end, their demonstrations of tolerance or bigotry may offer as good a measure as any of the differences between authenticity and the real thing.