On Friday, as he announced Mr. Pence as his choice and prepared to claim the Republican nomination at the party’s convention next week, Mr. Trump still lacked a detailed foreign policy agenda and a deep bench of advisers, appearing instead like a man who had taken his cues about war from Fox News commentators and Twitter users.
These latest statements strike the same chords of hostility and suspicion toward Muslims and immigrants that are at the heart of Mr. Trump’s appeal to many voters who feel insecure amid terrorist attacks abroad and mass shootings at home. His ideas may be unworkable, according to some foreign policy experts in both parties, but his message has unquestionable political power.
A State Department spokeswoman, Elizabeth Trudeau, confirmed that two American citizens, Sean Copeland and his son Brodie, 11, were killed in the attack in Nice.
“. We can confirm that we are aware of two U.S. citizens -Sean and Brodie Copeland - who were killed in the attack in Nice. We express our condolences to their family and friends. 3. Cutaway 4. SOUNDBITE (English) Elizabeth Trudeau, Director, State Department’s Office of Press Relations: “Our consulate in Marseille continues to make every effort to account for U.S. citizens in the city. Privacy considerations also prevent us speaking more on any specific case absent written authorization. Additional consular officers from U.S. Embassy Paris are on route right now to Nice to provide assistance to U.S. citizens in need.
Mr. Trump’s remarks after the carnage in Nice, France — such as agreeing with Bill O’Reilly of Fox News that “we are in a world war scenario” — are the latest in a startling pattern in which he has projected an image of a country willing to throw out international laws and treaties and use any means to protect Americans at home and abroad.
 He has suggested that he would not be as concerned as President Obama about the Islamic State’s use of civilians as human shields. He has advocated killing the family members of terrorists. And on Thursday night, during one of two appearances on Fox News, he endorsed Mr. O’Reilly’s suggestion to declare war on terrorists — even though such a move would bog down a Trump administration in a lengthy congressional debate.
“From Trump’s point of view, a declaration of war probably sounds strong and bold and makes his opponents look weak, but it’s really just symbolic,” said David A. Martin, a professor of international law at the University of Virginia who was a deputy general counsel of the Department of Homeland Security under President Obama.
Documenting devastation along a one-mile stretch of waterfront.
At the Pentagon, interviews with more than a dozen top generals revealed alarm over many of Mr. Trump’s proposals for the use of American power, even among officers who said privately that they lean Republican. While no serving officer interviewed was willing to speak publicly about Mr. Trump — reasons ranged from wanting to maintain a distance between the military and politics to not wanting to criticize a potential commander in chief — a number of top-ranking admirals and generals said the military is governed by laws and rules of engagement that are far stricter than politicians may realize.
Hillary Clinton, who reacted to the attack more cautiously, saying “we will never allow terrorists to undermine” American values, has been caustic in rebuking Mr. Trump’s comments on national security and war, arguing that he would put the United States in danger and wreck its traditional alliances.
Still, Mrs. Clinton’s ringing defense of alliances like NATO does not have the same emotional resonance for some Americans as Mr. Trump’s America-first language. Mr. Trump has drawn passionate crowds to his political rallies with his promises to wipe out the Islamic State and, initially, to bar Muslim noncitizens from entering the United States.
He has changed that proposed ban to focus on countries with links to terrorism while, domestically, calling for greater surveillance of mosques and possibly shutting some down. He has not echoed Mr. Gingrich’s call for a test for Muslim citizens about loyalty and Shariah law — a proposal that is almost surely unconstitutional.
“He would be asking Americans to agree to put our service members into a blood bath, where there would be carnage up to our necks,” said Gunnery Sgt. Emir Hadzic, a Marine who came to the United States as a Bosnian-Muslim refugee from Sarajevo in 1995.
Sergeant Hadzic, a Republican who plans to write in a candidate for president in November, said he believed that references to war declarations and religious tests were “all about scoring political points.” Asked what he thought about posing a Shariah test to American soldiers who were Muslims, he was silent for several seconds.
