This sparely theatrical and uncommonly evocative exhibition consists of three sculptures and a video. At one end of the gallery, two busts on pedestals make up a tableau about creative imagination. One portrays the composer Giuseppe Verdi. Rendered in dark wax over plaster by the Italian sculptor Vincenzo Gemito (1852-1929) in 1873, Verdi is beetle-browed with deep-set eyes, thick hair and a heavy beard, and appears profoundly thoughtful. Looking toward him is “Italian Woman,” a gleaming, stainless-steel, Rococo-style representation of a beautiful woman made by Jeff Koons in 1986. She might be Verdi’s muse. Letters inscribed into the sculpture’s base identify her as Lucia Mondella, a character from an 1827 novel, “The Betrothed” by Alessandro Manzoni, considered one of the great works of Italian literature.
At the gallery’s other end, the subject is hands, the sculptor’s primary tool. Urs Fischer’s “Foxtrot” (2015) has a realistic pair of detached hands resting on the back of a red plastic chair. Next to it, Richard Serra’s three-minute, black-and-white film, “Hand Catching Lead” (1968), loops on a small screen. It shows the artist’s dirty hand repeatedly attempting and usually failing to catch small sheets of lead falling from above.
If sculpture’s basic task is to think imaginatively about three-dimensional form and challenge the relationship between space and objects, Anna Sew Hoy does so beautifully in “Invisible Tattoo.” But as the enigmatic title of the exhibition suggests, Ms. Hoy sets out to do more, teasing the boundaries between art and craft, melding different artistic lineages and evoking a sense of vision and form as a kind of mirage.
This is most obvious in the eponymous work, “Invisible Tattoo” (2016), a two-part sculpture made of deconstructed jeans molded around oval mirrors and placed on cinder-block pedestals. Here you feel the organic shapes and mind-bending distortions of 1960s art and architecture as well as mirrors that recall Lewis Carroll’s “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland,” which became a psychedelic touchstone for that era.
Other sculptures use wires and steel and jeans ripped down to their seams or stuffed and resewn, snaking up the wall or slithering across the floor. Ms. Hoy’s use of denim feels appropriate for a moment when jeans are so popular they range from artisanal to mass-produced, from skinny to boyfriend to high-rise. We seem to have unlimited choice – but this, too, is a mirage, constricted by culturally dictated ideas about beauty and sexiness. In the gallery, Ms. Hoy offers a glimpse of a different realm, fantastic and impossible, where you could get a tattoo, an indelible mark on the body that just might be invisible.
In this surreal presidential election year, the unlikely idea of an artist-run super PAC seems normal enough, and there is one, advertised as a first, headquartered at both branches of Shainman Gallery in Chelsea. Founded by Eric Gottesman and Hank Willis Thomas, the organization uses the money it raises, directly from donors or through the sale of art, less to advocate specific presidential candidates than to push social ideals that some of them may, with encouragement, promote.
The basic ideals are the Four Freedoms defined by Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1941 — freedom of speech and worship, freedom from want and from fear — and illustrated by Norman Rockwell in paintings that became posters for war bonds two years later. Copies of the posters are in the show, surrounded with less confidently utopian material by politically minded contemporary artists, some familiar (Trevor Paglen, Dread Scott, Mickalene Thomas, Carrie Mae Weems), others with still-building careers (Nina Chanel Abney, Wyatt Gallery, Coby Kennedy, Kameelah Janan Rasheed, Michele Pred, Will Steacy).
Both Shainman spaces have been set up as a combination of office and workshop. On certain days those present include an artist in residence (Ahron D. Weiner, designer of the super PAC’s advertising campaign) and a scholar in residence (Domingo Borges, a former prison inmate, who gives presentations on the criminal justice system). A schedule of activities is at forfreedoms.org.
Although the leftward political leanings of this particular super PAC are unmistakable, the goal set by Mr. Gottesman and Mr. Thomas is general: demonstrate that art can be introduced into the mechanism of mainstream politics, and argue that activism in art is an end in itself, beyond partisanship. The results here take many forms.
Text posters by Ms. Rasheed cut Rockwellian romanticism with street-smart humor. A painting by Pablo Helguera, which consists of the words “All proceeds from the sale of this art work will go to the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund,” seamlessly unites message and medium. A banner by Mr. Scott emblazoned with the phrase “A Man Was Lynched by Police Yesterday” brings together history (a similar banner, without the words “by police,” appeared outside the offices of the N.A.A.C.P. in Manhattan in the 1930s) and current topical politics.
When Mr. Scott placed the banner outside Shainman’s 20th Street space in the days after the fatal shootings of Philando Castile, Alton B. Sterling, and five police officers in Dallas, the gallery was the target of protests. The banner, which now hangs in the gallery window rather than over the street, is solid evidence that, if its message is strong and the timing is right, art in the public sphere can cause a stir. “For Freedoms” is bent on widening that sphere and extending the stir.
Ms. White does not actually depict skaters and surfers. Instead, she channels the ethos of that scene and era with large blue-and-gray abstract paintings, sometimes draped with rainbow netting, and decals printed on the canvases and the wall. Pieces of black plastic cut into a heart with jagged edges and a cloud with three raindrops, both suspended from the ceiling by colored rope, conjure early computer icons and suggest an easy-to-use approach to art.
By drawing on the ’80s Ms. White evokes a sense of nostalgia that is particular to her own experience but that translates well into the art realm. Artists, surfers and skateboarders all lament the professionalization of their spheres, in which the passionate play and radical experimentation are transformed into “training” or “branding.” Painters now get graduate degrees to participate in the art system; elite skaters and surfers are sponsored by companies manufacturing everything from energy drinks to underwear. Artists aren’t generally sponsored like that yet, with a list of products and companies associated with their names, but maybe it’s just a matter of time before they are.
While nearly all the show’s works focus on men’s bodies, hardly any do so with the sort of lubricious avidity often seen in female nudes by men. Painted with exactingly sensuous realism, Catherine Murphy’s “Harry’s Nipple” (2003) represents a man’s hairy breast seen through a hole in his shirt, a comic rejoinder to the fetishization of female nipples. Sylvia Sleigh’s “Paul Rosano in Jacobsen Chair “ (1971), a portrait of a nude young man, turns the tables on the female odalisque.  In Cecily Brown’s “Raspberry Beret” (2015-16), the image of a nude reclining man nearly dissolved into a busy allover welter of painterly gestures, there’s more erotic sensuality in the paint than in the figure.
Several works concentrate on the penis. It seems to be viewed with horrified fascination in “White Nob” (2013) by Sarah Lucas, a monstrous, snowy white plaster sculpture of an erect phallus standing 43½ inches. It could be in homage to the ancient fertility god Priapus.