Though Tom Kibble never received a Nobel Prize in Physics, the consensus among his colleagues is that he deserved one. His research was at the root of at least three seminal discoveries that earned others the coveted prize.
Dr. Kibble, who died on June 2 in London at 83 and who was long associated with Imperial College London, conducted research that spanned the scales of physics, explaining fundamental interactions among the building blocks of matter as well as theorizing about the topology of the cosmos.
Most notable, Dr. Kibble helped discover the Higgs mechanism, which explains why particles have mass. The discovery helped lay the foundation for the so-called Standard Model of particle physics, a theory that classifies and describes the interactions of subatomic particles.
He spent much of his later career contemplating how, after the Big Bang, the universe cooled and went through successive phase transitions (when a medium changes form, such as liquid freezing into solid). Most significant, he predicted that topological defects would emerge in the universe at each phase transition, similar to the cracks that form when water freezes.
Much of Dr. Kibble’s work revolved around spontaneous symmetry breaking, a process by which a symmetrical system randomly ends up in an asymmetrical state. To understand it, think of a pyramid of playing cards. As long as it is upright, the pyramid remains symmetrical down the middle. If one card buckles, however, the whole system collapses and loses its symmetry.
In the fall of 1964, Dr. Kibble, with the American physicists Gerald Guralnik and Carl Richard Hagen, proposed a spontaneous breaking mechanism for a mathematical symmetry at the center of the Standard Model. This so-called gauge symmetry dictates that the fundamental forces of nature retain their basic structure through space and time.
Models at the time predicted that certain fundamental particles would be massless, but the mechanism that the three physicists proposed explained how these particles could have mass.
The summer before, three others had independently described the same mechanism: first, the Belgian physicists François Englert and Robert Brout, then a British physicist, Peter Higgs, for whom the mechanism would be named. Though Dr. Kibble and his two colleagues were the last to publish on the topic, many physicists agree that their paper was the most comprehensive of the three.
The findings from the three groups led, in 2012, to the discovery of the Higgs boson, the last subatomic particle predicted by the Standard Model to be found. For that achievement, Dr. Higgs and Dr. Englert were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2013. Dr. Brout, who died in 2011, was ineligible because the prize is not awarded posthumously.
The Nobel Prize committee would have also been unable to recognize Dr. Kibble’s entire team, because the award’s rules dictate that no more than three recipients can share a prize. Ultimately, the committee left the third slot empty. Many theoretical physicists, among them Dr. Higgs, expressed disappointment that Dr. Kibble had not been awarded the prize.
What Is the Higgs?
Two physicists, Peter Higgs of Britain and François Englert of Belgium, on Tuesday won the Nobel Prize in Physics. But just what is the Higgs Boson?
Thomas Walter Bannerman Kibble was born in Madras (now Chennai), India, on Dec. 23, 1932, to Walter Kibble and the former Janet Bannerman. His father was a math professor at Madras Christian College, and Dr. Kibble grew up playing on the grounds of the college and solving math puzzles his father gave him.
At age 11, he was sent to Edinburgh to attend boarding school. He then attended the University of Edinburgh, where he eventually earned a Ph.D. in mathematical physics. He met Anne Richmond Allan at a university dance, and they married in his final year of graduate school. They then moved to California, where Dr. Kibble spent a year at the California Institute of Technology as a Commonwealth Fund fellow.
Dr. Kibble joined the theoretical physics department at Imperial College London after returning to Britain in 1959. He remained at the college until his death.
After Dr. Kibble published his seminal work with Dr. Guralnik and Dr. Hagen in 1964, he continued to study the Higgs mechanism independently. In 1967, he expanded the theory to explain how the symmetry breaking mechanism gives mass to certain particles while leaving others, like the photon, massless.
His findings sowed the seeds for discoveries by others including Abdus Salam, a Pakistani physicist, and Steven Weinberg, an American physicist. Working independently, they described how two of the four fundamental interactions of nature — electromagnetism and the so-called weak nuclear force, which is responsible for radioactive decay — could have emerged from what is known as the electroweak interaction, as the early universe expanded and cooled to lower energies.
In 1979, Dr. Salam and Dr. Weinberg, with Sheldon Glashow, an American physicist, were awarded the Nobel Prize for their elucidation of this interaction.
In 1976, Dr. Kibble applied spontaneous symmetry breaking to the study of the early universe, introducing the idea that the universe, symmetrical at its start, lost symmetry and acquired defects as it expanded and cooled. He theorized the existence of cosmic strings — one-dimensional defects that stretch like strings across the universe. If discovered today, cosmic strings would provide critical insights into how particles behave at energies beyond what scientists can directly measure in particle accelerators.
Among the many awards Dr. Kibble received was the American Physical Society’s J. J. Sakurai Prize for Theoretical Particle Physics, for his work on the Higgs mechanism. He was made a Commander of the British Empire in 1998 and knighted in 2014. This month, he was posthumously awarded the Isaac Newton Medal, the highest honor for physics in Britain, for his outstanding contributions to the field.
Of all his awards, his son said, Dr. Kibble was proudest of the lifetime creative mentoring in science award given annually by the scientific journal Nature and the National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts, a British charity, of which he was the first recipient in 2005.
By all accounts a gentle man who was comfortable with silence, Dr. Kibble nevertheless held many leadership positions. He was the head of the physics department at Imperial College from 1983 to 1991, and the chairman of the British Society for Social Responsibility in Science from 1974 to 1977 and Scientists Against Nuclear Arms from 1985 to 1991.
Dr. Kibble is survived by a son, Robert, who confirmed his death; two daughters, Helen Wilson and Alison Martin, and seven grandchildren. His wife died in 2005.
