But Mr. Talese might have underestimated just how unreliable Gerald Foos, the owner, really is.
The book, which Grove Atlantic is to publish on July 12, follows the strange story of Mr. Foos, who used a hidden observation platform at his motel in Aurora, Colo., to spy on his customers for decades, and kept detailed notes on their behavior. The book was excerpted in The New Yorker in April, and film rights were optioned by Steven Spielberg.
Now Mr. Talese has acknowledged that Mr. Foos might have failed to share some key facts. An article published by The Washington Post on Thursday night revealed that Mr. Foos sold the motel in 1980 and did not repurchase it until 1988.
Informed of that by The Post, Mr. Talese, 84, told the publication that he regretted trusting Mr. Foos and did not plan to promote the book because “its credibility is down the toilet.” But on Friday he said that he stood by the book.
While a majority of the narrative takes place before 1980, one scene of voyeurism occurs in the period when Mr. Foos was not the owner, casting doubt on some of his recollections.
Morgan Entrekin, the chief executive and publisher of Grove Atlantic, said the company would move forward with the publication and the promotion of the book, and might add a new author’s note.
Much of the narrative is based on journals that Mr. Foos kept, recording his observations of the motel guests’ behavior, including sexual encounters and crimes. Other sources confirmed that Mr. Foos spied on his guests, using a secret platform he built in the ceiling, with vents that provided views of the rooms. He claims to have spied from the late 1960s to the 1990s.
Mr. Talese was apparently unaware of the 1980 sale of the motel until a Washington Post reporter asked him about it this week. But he had his own doubts about Mr. Foos’s memories, and noted that the motel owner’s recollection of facts could be inconsistent.
“I cannot vouch for every detail that he recounts in his manuscript,” Mr. Talese wrote in the New Yorker excerpt.
Among the inconsistencies: Mr. Foos dated his first journal entries about the motel guests to 1966, but didn’t own the motel until 1969.
David Remnick, the editor of The New Yorker, said in an email message that the portrait of the motel owner in the magazine was not in dispute.
Mr. Talese first heard from Mr. Foos in 1980, after the motel owner learned of Mr. Talese’s book “Thy Neighbor’s Wife,” about the sexual revolution in the 1970s. He told Mr. Talese he bought the motel to satisfy his voyeuristic impulses and invited the writer to visit. Mr. Foos did not want to be identified by name at the time, so Mr. Talese wrote nothing then.
In one particularly disturbing scene, Mr. Talese joins Mr. Foos in the attic and spies on a couple having oral sex. “Despite an insistent voice in my head telling me to look away, I continued to observe, bending my head farther down for a closer view,” Mr. Talese wrote in the article.
The same week that the article was published, Mr. Talese was engulfed in another controversy over remarks he made at a writing conference at Boston University. When asked to name female writers who had inspired him, Mr. Talese mentioned Mary McCarthy but then said he couldn’t think of any from his own generation. The comment was met with outrage on social media, where Mr. Talese was condemned as sexist and out of touch. Many took to Twitter with the hashtag #womengaytaleseshouldread.
If more questions arise about “The Voyeur’s Motel,” it could leave a stain on Mr. Talese’s storied legacy. In a career that spans more than 60 years, he has written 14 books, including “The Kingdom and the Power,” about The New York Times, where he worked as a reporter for 12 years. He was a pioneer of New Journalism, a style of literary reportage that emerged in the 1960s. Among his most influential works were 1966 Esquire profiles of Frank Sinatra and Joe DiMaggio.
Whether his new book will withstand further scrutiny remains to be seen. In his statement, Mr. Talese emphasized that the central premise of his story held true. “Gerald Foos, as no one calls into question, was an epic voyeur, and, as I say very clearly in the text, he could also at times be an unreliable teller of his own peculiar story,” he said.