Howard Raiffa, an economics professor whose mathematical formulas for decision making were applied to the search for a missing nuclear bomb and the siting of a Mexico City airport, and were even suggested as a way to resolve a strike by professional hockey players, died on July 8 at his home in Oro Valley, Ariz. He was 92.
The cause was Parkinson’s disease, his daughter, Judith Raiffa, said.
Professor Raiffa (pronounced RAY-fa), a co-founder of the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard (now the Harvard Kennedy School) and a member of the university faculty for 37 years, pioneered what became known as decision science — an academic discipline that encompasses negotiating techniques, conflict resolution, risk analysis and game theory.
He was an innovative and often abstruse theoretician, but he applied his postulates to real-world cases of conflict, cooperation and compromise in planning curriculums, publishing guidebooks and making videos. He was also the founding director, in 1972, of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, a joint American-Soviet research organization that explored energy, pollution and other issues as a cooperative venture during the Cold War.
“I learned a lot about the theory and practice of many-party negotiations in the presence of extreme cultural differences,” he once said.
He became an applied mathematician and statistician and, after conducting a “primitive multiple-value analysis” of 10 variables involved in competing job offers, went to Harvard. He held the Frank Plumpton Ramsey professorship of managerial economics at the Harvard Business School and the Kennedy School until his retirement from the faculty in 1994.
Among his 11 books were “Games and Decisions: Introduction and Critical Survey” (with R. Duncan Luce, 1957), “Applied Statistical Decision Theory” (with Robert Schlaifer, 1961), “The Art and Science of Negotiation: How to Resolve Conflicts and Get the Best Out of Bargaining” (1982), and two more accessible volumes: “Decision Analysis: Introductory Lectures on Choices Under Uncertainty” (1968) and “Smart Choices: A Practical Guide to Making Better Decisions” (with John S. Hammond and Ralph L. Keeney, 1998).
Professor Richard Zeckhauser of the Kennedy School said that while Professor Raiffa’s “major intellectual contributions were highly conceptual and theoretical,” he devoted his later career to practical subjects.
In helping the Mexican government decide where to build an airport, he assisted in weighing variables like safety (one possible location required planes to make a steep descent over mountains), noise pollution and convenience.
He delivered a lecture on handicapping horse racing that helped Navy scientists search for a hydrogen bomb lost after a B-52 crash near Palomares, Spain, in 1966. The formula described so-called Bayesian methods of probability, which involve quantifying knowledge or belief.
Howard Raiffa was born in the Bronx on Jan. 24, 1924, the son of Jacob Raiffa, who sold wool products, and the former Hilda Kaplan. He graduated from Evander Childs High School, where he was captain of the basketball team. Math was his best subject, but he dreamed of being a basketball player or coach.
In 1945, he married Estelle Schwartz. She and his daughter survive him, as do a son, Mark, and four grandchildren.
After teaching at Columbia University from 1952 to 1957, Professor Raiffa joined the faculty of the business school at Harvard. There, with Graham T. Allison Jr., Francis M. Bator, Ernest May, Frederick Mosteller, Richard E. Neustadt, Thomas C. Schelling and others, he was a founder of the Kennedy School, which evolved from the Graduate School of Public Administration and was renamed in 1966.
His students engaged in sometimes cutthroat simulated negotiations, which prompted The Harvard Crimson to ask him in 1979 whether the curriculum taught students to lie in actual business dealings. He replied by citing a letter about the former president of the University of Chicago.
