Milton Glaser still loves New York, but these days, he said, it sometimes worries him. Mr. Glaser, 87, created one of the most potent designs of the last century: I ♥ NY, a rallying symbol for New York when the city and state were in crisis in 1977. On a recent afternoon, he puzzled over what design he would create for the New York of 2016.
This city, he said, is in a different crisis, brought on by its own success.
New York is, famously, a town of transience, with newcomers arriving constantly, either making their mark or coming a cropper, then leaving for jobs overseas, or back home, or the sun of California. The human tides are as regular as the cycles of boom and bust and boom.
But there are also the lions who didn’t leave, who put their imprint on the battered city of the 1970s and remain part of the metropolis that emerged from it. New York is filled with them: Felix G. Rohatyn and Gloria Steinem, Charles B. Rangel and Robert M. Morgenthau, Diane von Furstenberg and Grandmaster Flash, Harry Belafonte and Larry Kramer. When others left, they kept on keeping on.
Milton Glaser’s 87-year love affair with New York is a fable of the city itself, beginning in one era of economic and ethnic division, the 1930s in the South Bronx, and arriving now in another one, with different fault lines and promises. Along the way, his I ♥ NY logo, first drawn on a scrap of paper in the back of taxi, has declared that love in a nearly universal language, understood in every corner of the planet.
During a visit to his studio, where the front door bears the motto “Art Is Work,” Mr. Glaser smiled when asked why he kept working. Upstairs, he and Clay Felker started New York magazine in 1968; on another floor, he once had 30-odd workers designing displays for Grand Union supermarkets.
“You really want an answer?” he said. “It’s the greatest source of pleasure in my life. I am so thrilled by making something that didn’t exist before. There’s nothing, nothing even close. I never go to the theater, I never go to concerts, I no longer go to movies. I don’t do anything except work. It’s like magic.
Some of the logos designed by Milton Glaser over the decades.
Mr. Glaser was born in 1929, the son of Hungarian Jewish immigrants, into a communist-leaning Bronx apartment house called the United Workers Cooperative Colony, known to everyone around as the Coops (rhymes with hoops). Flanked by equally insular communities of Italian-Americans and Irish-Americans, the Coops was a hotbed of leftist activism, where the elders pushed education and argued politics in Yiddish.
It was at the Coops that Mr. Glaser learned that he liked to draw, and that making art had a practical payoff: other boys flocked around him for his depictions of the naked female form. He ventured south to the High School of Music & Art and then to Cooper Union, ultimately teaming with his classmates Seymour Chwast and Edward Sorel to form Push Pin Studios. There he splashed his boldly colored, exuberantly referential designs across posters, record covers, book jackets and magazines; along the way, he took up with another Cooper Union graduate, Shirley Girton, a photographer and eventually his collaborator on two children’s books. They married in 1957.
The designer Milton Glaser describes the birth of the ubiquitous “I ♥ NY” logo and the early days of New York magazine.
Mr. Glaser was just getting started.
Some of that kaleidoscopic energy made it into his 1967 poster included with Bob Dylan’s “Greatest Hits” album, showing a silhouette of Mr. Dylan with bright plumes of hair billowing up. The design, which Mr. Glaser created at his house in Woodstock, was erudite and playful, a psychedelic riff on a famous self-portrait by Marcel Duchamp, infused with the influence of Persian painting. It made Mr. Glaser a leading voice in the design world.
By the following year, when Mr. Glaser and Mr. Felker started New York magazine by reassembling the elements of a weekly insert in the recently folded New York Herald Tribune, it was a response to another iteration of New York City. This one was rocked by the new youth culture and upended by showdowns between the city and its unions, including a bitter 1968 sanitation workers’ strike that left the streets strewed with 50,000 tons of uncollected garbage. Mr. Glaser soon hired Mr. Bernard to be the art director.
The decline and the exodus were just beginning. The Glasers left the East Village for West 67th Street when the old neighborhood started to feel unsafe.
The city in those years would be unrecognizable to anyone who has moved here in the last decade, except through the peculiar nostalgia of works like Garth Risk Hallberg’s novel “City on Fire” or HBO’s short-lived “Vinyl.” Instead of romanticizing the era’s bright side, these works luxuriate in the chaos: rampant crime, open-air drug markets, homeless encampments, the collapse of the school system, buildings abandoned or in flames.
The “I Love New York” concept was a reaction to this sense of decline. Many have claimed credit for the line. If New York was an unlovable wreck, a city on fire, a state in a slump, that only made it the kind of place a certain kind of New Yorker could boast about loving. The state tourism office launched a $4 million ad campaign, commissioning a jingle writer named Steve Karmen, a Bronx-born child of Russian Jewish immigrants, to make the slogan sing. The logo came later.
To Mr. Glaser, the slogan was appealing because it was less a sales pitch than an oath, a statement of belief. It did not try to persuade people to buy or do anything. He spent two weeks drawing a logo with the words “I Love New York” inside two lozenges, and submitted it to the state for approval. Then, in a taxi ride to his studio one day, he had another idea. Using a red crayon on a scrap of paper, he sketched out the four characters in the logo that would be seen around the world.
The original scrap of paper is now in the Museum of Modern Art. The logo, for which he received a $2,000 fee — less than the cost of producing the mock-ups, he said — now generates more that $1 million annually for the state in licensing fees, and keeps a bevy of state lawyers busy writing cease-and-desist letters for its unlicensed use.
Mr. Glaser’s touch has not always been so golden. When he tried to recapture the magic for the State of Rhode Island this year with the slogan “Warmer and Cooler,” people complained that the design was trite and overreaching, ultimately forcing the state’s chief marketing officer to resign.
For all the changes in his life, and the city’s, Mr. Glaser begins each morning as he has for almost 60 years, by having breakfast with his wife. “I don’t know what I’d do without it,” he said.
