WHAT do you do with 14 Christopher Wools?
And what if you want to exhibit them — or your four Bacons, 10 Warhols, four Lichtensteins and three Twomblys — alongside some of your 34 Renaissance and Baroque bronzes?
You open your own museum.
At least, that is what J. Tomilson Hill has decided to do in a two-story space on West 24th Street in Chelsea, which, when it opens in the fall of 2017, will become one of the few private galleries in New York City largely made up of a personal collection.
It sits inside a new condominium building named the Getty, for the former gas station on the site. Peter Marino, who designed the Getty as well as the museum’s 6,400-square-foot interior, has done seven residences for Mr. Hill and his wife, Janine, the director of fellowship affairs at the Council on Foreign Relations.
The couple collect together (although he is the more obsessive of the two) and now have established the Hill Art Foundation, for which the gallery will be named.
“We’ve got so much art in storage,” Mr. Hill, 68, the billionaire vice chairman at the Blackstone Group, a private equity firm, said in an interview at their Upper East Side apartment.
Spending time with Mr. Hill offers a window into the thinking of a major player in the art world: how he approaches collecting and why he’s now decided to share some of his extensive holdings regularly with the public.
The gallery will draw mostly from the Hill collection, valued at more than $800 million, which includes prime examples of Modern and contemporary art, as well as old masters. It may also borrow works from collections “where I have a relationship,” Mr. Hill said.
The Hills’ apartment — like their homes in East Hampton, Paris and Telluride, Colo. — is something of a museum itself.
It’s hard to take it all in: Lucio Fontana’s glazed terra cotta crucifix from the 1950s; Alessandro Algardi’s 17th-century bronze “Corpus Christi.” Mr. Hill casually passes Willem de Kooning’s “Clamdigger” sculpture in the entryway, Picasso’s portrait of Sara Murphy above the fireplace and Ed Ruscha’s “Hollywood” pastel and graphite on paper in the master bedroom.
Mr. Hill — who, with his slicked-back hair and smooth demeanor, is said to have inspired the look of Gordon Gekko in “Wall Street” (a claim Mr. Hill says is inaccurate) — not only wants to share more of his collection with the public. He also wants his gallery to provide arts education to city students.
“They’re cutting out arts programs in the public schools,” he said.
When the Hills’ bronze collection was featured in an exhibition at the Frick Collection in 2014, for example, students at an East Harlem elementary school studied the labors of Hercules for a week before seeing the bronze depictions of him by artists like Giuseppe Piamontini and Antonio Susini in the show.
“These are kids who wouldn’t even think the Frick was accessible to them,” Mr. Hill said.
The foundation also plans to become a partner in educational efforts with institutions like the Studio Museum in Harlem and the Metropolitan Museum of Art, where Mr. Hill serves on the board.
In preparing for this venture, Mr. Hill said he considered other private museums, including the financier Glenn Fuhrman’s FLAG Art Foundation in Chelsea; the oil trader Andrew Hall’s art foundation in Germany; and the billionaire industrialist Mitchell P. Rales’s Glenstone museum in Potomac, Md.
Some private museums have been criticized as tax-exempt exhibition spaces that allow collectors to deduct the full market value of the art, cash and stocks they donate.
But he also said he would never open a gallery near one of his residences, as the paper magnate Peter Brant has done in Greenwich, Conn.
The space, with free admission, is to be open during the week (at hours to be determined) and on Saturdays, when Chelsea galleries typically get the most traffic. Mainly, Mr. Hill wants to have more of what he owns on view.
They originally concentrated on eight: Francis Bacon, Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein, Cy Twombly, Mr. Ruscha, Brice Marden, Lucio Fontana and Agnes Martin. More recently, they added Mr. Wool and Mark Grotjahn.
Would the value of the contemporary Chinese art he bought increase, for example? “I don’t really care,” he said.
Nor is Mr. Hill interested in putting his name on a building, he insists, though he has the means to do so. (Last year Forbes estimated his net worth at $1.2 billion.) As a Met trustee, he could conceivably christen that museum’s planned contemporary and Modern wing, for which the institution needs to raise money.
Walking through his apartment, he likened the three Wools in his study to “a cup of black coffee” and described Warhol as “an incredible draftsman” in pointing out the artist’s “Campbell’s Soup Can: Consommé” and “Red Close Cover Before Striking,” both from 1962.
That circle now includes Richard Prince, Mr. Grotjahn and Mr. Wool.
“If you own their work, they’re interested in, ‘Who is that person who wants to buy this from my personal collection?’” Mr. Hill said.
He also said that it bothered artists when collectors sell their work. When the former hedge fund manager David Ganek sold Mr. Wool’s “Apocalypse Now,” for example, at Christie’s in 2013 for $26.5 million, “that really upset Christopher,” Mr. Hill said.
Born and raised in New York City, Mr. Hill grew up going to museums. (His mother sculpted in clay and bronze until her death at 98 last September.) After a blue-chip education (Buckley in Manhattan, Milton Academy in Massachusetts, Harvard for college and business school), Mr. Hill married in 1980. The couple started buying still lifes by the Danish painter Johan Laurentz Jensen, ultimately acquiring 14.
In the 1990s, the pair grew more serious, buying the Warhol Soup Can at auction for $400,000.
They have two grown daughters, Margot, a financier at Morgan Stanley, and Astrid, an art adviser who trained at Christie’s (where Mr. Hill is on the advisory board).
Mr. Hill credits conversations with curators like Diane Waldman, formerly of the Guggenheim Museum, and James Demetrion, the former director of the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in Washington — where Mr. Hill served as chairman — for helping him understand artists like Rothko.
These days, Mr. Hill said he and Sheena Wagstaff, the chairwoman of the Met’s department of Modern and contemporary art, “have deep conversations” about artists like Mr. Wool and Mr. Grotjahn.
In his new space — which will have a full-time curator and security staff — Mr. Hill is particularly interested in the juxtaposition of different artists and eras, just as the Frick show paired his bronzes with his postwar art.
He is considering a show on the use of palette knife techniques, which enabled artists like Jean Dubuffet and Twombly to develop their figuration.
And Mr. Hill plans to discuss with the dealer Mr. Marks the idea of a show on how Mr. Marden was influenced by the Greeks.
