Here are the top 10 comments of the week on our digital platforms, as selected by our readers and the journalists who moderate nearly every comment.
This is demeaning to women — that is, she is a victim? Hardly.
Even by The Times’s own reporting on her history, Mrs. Trump has played her hand repeatedly — capitalizing on her looks and when seeing an opportunity (here I paraphrase a friend), she seized it to ostensibly improve her place in society. Thus, her union with Trump.
She claimed she wrote the speech herself; she claimed to have read it only once before giving it. This is just another example of the Trumpesque political burlesque that we have been watching for a year now.
— Nancy Rose Steinbock in Venice, reacting to an article about accusations that parts of Melania Trump’s speech were lifted from one Michelle Obama gave at the Democratic National Convention in 2008.
This comment received more than 2,100 reader recommendations.
2. Whatever your feelings about her husband, it would have been cold-hearted not to root for Melania last night, to put yourself in the shoes of someone who never signed up for this, and was not even speaking in her native language. She soldiered on when she realized she flubbed a word or two, and to her great credit, never lost her composure. It’s a shame, then, that she was undermined by a rookie apparatus that in the end made her come off as some kind of fraud.
— LLNYC in New York.
3. I was and am no Cruz fan but I have to give Cruz credit for having the guts and sense of honor not to endorse the man who relentlessly called him “Lying Ted,” who insulted him and his wife, and who insinuated that his father was a criminal.
Why should Cruz or any of the other candidates have respected a pledge to support a nominee who subsequently revealed himself to be so mean-spirited and disrespectful of civil discourse, to say nothing of proving himself to be woefully unqualified and temperamentally unfit to be president? At least Cruz has not caved in as have so many other ambitious Republicans.
He has probably committed political suicide. Could be vindictive on his part, but maybe the man does have a conscience and the strength of his convictions.
— Libra in Maine, reacting to an article about Senator Ted Cruz declining to endorse Donald J. Trump during his convention speech Wednesday.
4. Cruz just ended his political career. And I say that as someone who supported Cruz in the primaries.
There is a time and a place for everything.  It is bad enough that he has gone back on his promise to support whoever won the GOP nomination. ... What he did tonight was beyond rude — and then standing there at the podium with a smirk on his face.
Until tonight I thought the rest of the Senate hated him because he would not play ball.  I will never support him again.
— Ken S. in Virginia.
This comment received more than 770 reader recommendations.
5. I haven’t seen this many angry old white people since Matlock was canceled.
— Bob in Rhode Island.
6. I have several issues with this story. A professional therapist rushes out to prevent harm on an autistic person, just to become the one harmed. The juxtaposition of what the therapist did and what the police, who are committed to serve and protect, did are distinct and heartbreaking.
The fact that you can and will still get shot by a cop even when you announce your title and the reasoning of the situation, all with your hands up, sends chills down my spine. Comply, they say, and you won’t be shot. No sudden moves, they say, you won’t be shot. Show them your hands, they say, you won’t be shot.

— Frederick Douglass Wallace on The Times’s Facebook page, responding to an article about Charles Kinsey, who was shot by a police officer in North Miami, Fla., while trying to an assist an autistic patient who ran away from the group home where Mr. Kinsey worked.
This comment received more than 1,260 likes.
7. This must stop. We cannot allow our police officers to be targeted in this way. The overwhelming majority of our law enforcement personnel are good people who put their lives on the line for us every day. Without effective police, our society will collapse.
Part of the solution, however, is for police leadership and rank-and-file to come to terms with the historically unfair treatment law enforcement has meted out to people of color.
They must also weed out those few officers who use excessive force against citizens, and realize that tasers and guns are not the solution to every infraction.
— Madeline Conant in the Midwest, reacting to an article about Gavin Long, who shot and killed three police officers and wounded three others in Baton Rouge, La.
8. I’m an HR manager, in both private industry and currently in federal government. Pressure is intense in not only matters of sexual harassment but other things to “go along to get along” for things if not outright illegal on the shady side.
I’ve worked at too many companies, watched it happen too many times. The best companies demonstrate that they will not tolerate sexual harassment and demonstrate to employees that they will investigate and deal with it if it occurred. But without those assurances, you may be risking your job for nothing.
Once fired, nothing to lose.
— Ann in Virginia, reacting to an article about the ouster of Roger Ailes, the head of Fox News, after the former Fox anchor Gretchen Carlson filed a sexual harassment suit against him this month.
9. I see many Kremlin apologists drawing comparisons between Lance Armstrong and the state-sponsored Russian doping program. The big difference is that Lance was not aided and abetted by the U.S. government, and he was ultimately held accountable and shamed for his doping. What the World Anti-Doping Agency has uncovered is massive state-sponsored doping on a scale not seen since the Cold War. Russia abused its position as host of athletic competitions to hide the doping of dozens of its athletes. It is not only in the interests of fairness that Russia should be held accountable. Doping endangers the lives of the athletes. The unmasking of the East German doping program revealed not only gold medals and world records won via chemistry. Time to hold Russia accountable.
— Alex in Washington, reacting to an article about antidoping officials’ call for the entire Russian team to be barred from the Rio Games after confirmation of government-ordered cheating at the 2014 Sochi Olympics.
10. I’m not the world’s biggest Leslie Jones fan. However, there is no excuse for heaping racist and sexist abuse on anyone. It’s sickening that in this day and age there are so many people who not only are so ignorant but are so open and proud about their ignorance, too.
— Dana Quarrier on The Times’s Facebook page, responding to an article about Leslie Jones, a co-star of the new “Ghostbusters” movie, who left Twitter after becoming the target there of racism .
This comment received 170 likes.