William J. Bratton will not remain the commissioner of the New York Police Department past next year, he said in an interview with The New York Times, providing his most definitive comments to date on his future at the helm of the nation’s largest police force.
His comments threw a wild card into Mayor Bill de Blasio’s 2017 re-election campaign at a time when other Democrats are considering a run against him. Mr. Bratton was the mayor’s most consequential appointment at the start of his administration and has been among his most powerful and consistent defenders.
Mr. Bratton, among the nation’s best-known police figures, also left open the possibility that he could leave even sooner.
The statements went further than Mr. Bratton had a year ago when he told an interviewer from City and State that he would not last through Mr. de Blasio’s second term, if the mayor was re-elected.
Mr. Bratton, 68, said he had already created a “line of succession” at the Police Department and “a strong team, so that the city is not dependent on just one person.” While not naming his possible successor, he spoke about the leadership of James P. O’Neill, the chief of department and its highest uniformed member.
The news appeared to catch City Hall off guard.
For two and a half years, Mr. Bratton has been a bulwark for Mr. de Blasio, who was elected on a platform of police reform, against the ire of many rank-and-file officers and some commanders.
Mr. Bratton has repeatedly said that his views and the mayor’s are exactly aligned. Mr. de Blasio, for his part, endorsed his commissioner’s focus on quality-of-life crime, even as the reform advocates who helped elect him bristled. He has given the Police Department bigger budgets, new equipment and, after initial resistance to Mr. Bratton’s entreaties for more officers, an additional 1,300 last year, the first expansion of the department in more than a decade.
Mr. Bratton buttressed Mr. de Blasio during perhaps the most trying time of his mayoralty, after the killing of Officers Wenjian Liu and Rafael Ramos in December 2014, when officers angered by Mr. de Blasio’s comments about the police turned their backs on the mayor en masse and, for about two weeks, engaged in an unauthorized work stoppage.
For much of that time Chief O’Neill, who began his career as an officer with the New York City Transit Police in 1983, has been rising in prominence. He is leading the department’s most high-profile effort under Mr. Bratton: the creation of a program of so-called neighborhood policing, to remake how officers patrol the streets with the goal of improving frayed relations with minority communities while keeping down crime.
And Chief O’Neill frequently appears at news conferences, at Mr. de Blasio’s side, when Mr. Bratton is not available.
Chief O’Neill met Mr. Bratton in 1990, as a young officer running the video unit for the transit police. He became a precinct commander in 1998.
Looking back over his career, Mr. Bratton said his work creating a neighborhood policing model in Boston in the 1970s was “what got me noticed” and appointed as superintendent-in-chief of the Boston Police Department, becoming its highest-ranking uniformed officer.
At the Monday news conference, Chief O’Neill expressed his love for his current role. “The beauty of my job is that it’s apolitical,” he said. When pressed as to whether he had been involved in discussions with Mr. Bratton about succeeding him, the mayor jumped in.
