Hillary Clinton on Friday rejected the F.B.I.’s assertion that she had been “extremely careless” with classified material as secretary of state, offering her first public comments on the matter since the Justice Department closed its inquiry without bringing charges against her this week.
In interviews on CNN and MSNBC, Mrs. Clinton tried to put the controversy surrounding her use of a private email server to rest, brushing off a rebuke from James Comey, the F.B.I. director, who had criticized her for being negligent.
Although Mr. Comey, in a congressional hearing on Thursday, pointed out several contradictions between what Mrs. Clinton had said publicly about her email use and what she said in sworn testimony, Mrs. Clinton insisted Friday that she did not intentionally send or receive any classified information through her private account. She also appeared to be spreading the responsibility to her State Department staff.
Some leading Republicans have argued that Mrs. Clinton should not be given access to the classified information that presidential nominees usually receive because she could not be trusted with it. Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, has been hammering her as inept as well.
At the congressional hearing on Thursday, Mr. Comey also criticized Mrs. Clinton’s lawyers for their handling of her emails and suggested that they might have deleted classified material without her knowledge. And he said that thousands of Mrs. Clinton’s work-related emails had not been turned over for review, despite claims that they were.
During her television interviews on Friday, Mrs. Clinton clung to Mr. Comey’s remark at the hearing suggesting that some of the emails that she sent or received were not clearly marked as classified.
“Well, I think the director clarified that comment to some extent, pointing out that some of what had been thought to be classified apparently was not,” Mrs. Clinton said, when asked to acknowledge that she was careless.
On MSNBC on Friday, Mrs. Clinton said she was confident that such a breach did not occur.
