I cry all the time. But I don’t think I’ve ever cried for Clinton. “She’s the wrong woman,” other women say. Some feel weighted down by her baggage rather than lifted by her historical achievements. Younger women sometimes say they don’t see what the big deal is, assuming another better woman candidate will emerge down the line. But it is a big deal. It’s huge. And there’s a reason Clinton is the woman, ideal or not, who is taking the baton of leadership from the younger man she worked for, after he defeated her. It’s related to the reason she’s carrying all that baggage around.
Clinton, at 68, is from the Moses generation of the women’s movement, as Amy Sullivan and Garance Franke-Ruta pointed out in Yahoo. She’s a founder. By contrast, Obama, who was 45 when he won the Democratic nomination eight years ago, is from the Joshua generation of the civil rights movement. He could leave behind some of the mistakes and encumbrances of his forerunners and emerge as a freshly inspiring leader. And he could appear to be self-made. Clinton has all those years in the desert to account for, the stumbles and the downright wrongs of the 1990s (like her characterization of criminal young “superpredators”). With more years in the public eye, she has more to apologize for. It’s hard to dispel the idea that as first lady, she was tone deaf about domesticity, however understandable her frustration seems now. (Here’s the comment that got her into trouble in 1992: “I suppose I could have stayed home and baked cookies and had teas, but what I decided to do was to fulfill my profession, which I entered before my husband was in public life.”) Because she has been through the wringer so many times, she overguards her privacy, which leads to big mistakes, like her personal email server and a general wariness, which, however justified, doesn’t serve her well as a politician.
Moses didn’t make it to the Promised Land. Founders don’t usually persuade their grandchildren or even their children to accept that the older generation should lead. It would probably be easier for the country to embrace a 40-something first female nominee. She would be Obama’s analog. But what Joshua-generation woman do you see out there, ready to lead her party or her country? Elizabeth Warren is 68. Carly Fiorina is 61. Our next-generation female standard-bearer isn’t waving to us yet from the shore.
Those are the undercurrents of how gender is playing out in this election. Then there’s the straight-up misogyny — the inevitable T-shirts that Clinton haters peddled at the Republican Convention, and the more shocking chants of “lock her up” that turned the arena into a witch hunt. Clinton is the one fighting her way through that fire, facing off against an opponent, himself age 70, who has used and shamed and mocked women as sport. In polls, Clinton is faring worse than Obama did with white male voters, especially those who don’t have a college degree, while faring better with basically every other group. Donald Trump’s message is pitched to those men, as Nate Cohn points out. But is it possible to separate sexism from the legitimate reasons they have for choosing Trump over Clinton? Some men could make a convincing case, no question. But surely gender is depressing Clinton’s numbers with men as a group. It’s an enduring struggle for her, worsened by an election season soaked in resentment of the other, fed by Trump’s appetite for forging allegiance through alienation.
It’s entirely possible that as summer turns to fall, the electorate will simultaneously take Clinton’s first woman candidacy for granted and reject her for it. Feminists, of every gender and stripe, should not make the mistake of denying her credit. Whether or not we vote for Clinton, we all owe her for the unending work and breathtaking determination and sheer stubbornness that got the country to this moment. Maybe the next time, the country will take a female presidential candidacy in stride. But this campaign is going to be a rough ride. Clinton shouldn’t win the race just because she’s the woman running. But that’s hardly a danger. The greater worry is that gender will blow her off course. That shouldn’t be what decides this election.