Sunday Review|Could Women Be Trusted With Their Own Pregnancy Tests?
In 1967, Margaret Crane was a 26-year-old product designer at Organon Pharmaceuticals, sketching face-cream bottles and ointment jars. One day, as she walked through a lab at the company’s headquarters in New Jersey, she spotted rows of test tubes on shiny racks that twinkled under the industrial lights.
“What are these?” she asked one of the scientists.
Pregnancy tests, he said. A doctor would collect urine from his patient and send it to the company’s lab for analysis. The results would be sent back to the doctor, who would then inform the patient.
But Ms. Crane immediately saw another possibility: Why not cut out the doctor entirely?
This was the dawn of the sexual revolution, when abortions were generally illegal and 26 states barred single women from obtaining birth control. Many a single woman slipped on a ring before entering the medical office and added a Mrs. to her name. Few laws protected “girls” in the workplace from gender discrimination, and bosses had the right to lay off women who became pregnant.
“I knew a number of women who’d had abortions and went through misery to find one,” Ms. Crane told me recently. She understood what an at-home pregnancy test would mean: It was a way for a woman to peer into her own body and to make her own decisions about it, without anyone else — husband, boyfriend, boss, doctor — getting in the way.
That night Ms. Crane, a real-life Peggy Olson, started building her own prototype, eventually coming up with a sleek and user-friendly version of what she’d seen in the lab. Inside a clear plastic box that had been holding paper clips on her desk, Ms. Crane fitted an eyedropper, along with a test tube that sat just above a mirror. The customer would squeeze a few drops of urine into the tube, and then peer through the transparent wall of the box at the mirror. In its reflection, she could watch the bottom of the test tube, where a compound was reacting with the drops. If, in two hours, a red circle appeared, she was pregnant.
Fifty years later, it’s hard to remember why her idea seemed so disturbing. Today, eight out of 10 women learn they are pregnant from a drugstore device. The test allows women to quickly begin prenatal care or seek out an abortion. The home-testing wand has become a bit of everyday magic.
And yet the test did not become available in the United States until 1977 — four years after Roe v. Wade, and 10 years after Ms. Crane proposed it. Pharmaceutical companies were afraid of antagonizing doctors and aligning themselves with the “fast women” who desired a fast test.
Ms. Crane’s story offers a lesson about the social and political forces that can keep even trusted and easy-to-use medical tools out of the hands of patients, and especially the hands of young female patients. An entire crowd of chemists, biologists and engineers made the technology possible. But it took Ms. Crane — a Greenwich Village artist — to grasp the meaning of the device, and to fight for it.
She didn’t start fighting right away. After Ms. Crane’s bosses said no to the pregnancy test, she retreated to the office that she shared with a secretary. There, she busied herself with her usual work, sketching lipstick cases and cosmetics bottles.
She found her boss in a conference room with a group of freelance product designers. On the table, the designers had lined up their proposed models. In an effort to appeal to female customers, the male designers had covered them in flowers and frills. Ms. Crane thought this was insane: What customer would want to analyze her urine in a box with a tassel?
As the meeting came to order, a lanky adman appeared in the doorway and shook hands all around. This was Ira Sturtevant, who had been hired to oversee the marketing plan. He was decked out in the male plumage of Madison Avenue — the dark suit, the mane of hair, the easy confidence. He inspected the line of prototypes, and then pounced.
Happily, her work on the application had required that she meet with Mr. Sturtevant. When he asked her out for drinks at the Barclay Hotel bar in Midtown Manhattan, she wore a little navy dress from Ohrbach’s, with her hair in a bun. After a few martinis, she walked him back to her apartment.
In 1970, as Organon prepared to introduce a home pregnancy test in Canada, the company hired the partners to oversee the process. A year later, the Predictor test appeared with the slogan “Every woman has the right to know whether or not she is pregnant,” and Ms. Crane had the satisfaction of seeing the test on store shelves in Montreal.
But it stirred up a lot of debate. “I was shocked, frankly,” she said, especially by the fears that the product unleashed in the United States. When a mail-order New York firm tried to sell Organon test kits to American consumers in 1971, it faced opposition from the United States Public Health Service. In 1973, a New Jersey drugstore bought kits made by the drug company Roche and offered fast and private tests to their customers, and though the technology was similar to that available in medical clinics, the state medical examiner questioned the legality of the service.
Why so much opposition? Some regulators worried that “frightened 13-year-olds” would be the main users of the test kits. But after the product did become available in the United States in 1977, it appealed instead to college-age and married women — many of whom desperately hoped for children.
The tale of the home pregnancy test is not unique. Breakthroughs that give patients control over their bodies are often resisted. Again and again, the same questions come up: Are patients smart enough? Can they handle bad news? And do they have the right to private information about their bodies?
When home H.I.V. tests were being developed in the 1980s, they inspired the same kind of fears as the pregnancy test — including unfounded dread that if people learned bad news alone at home, many of them would kill themselves. The Food and Drug Administration approved the first home H.I.V. testing kit only in 1996. Customers would take a blood sample at home, mail it to a lab and hear results over the phone, often from a counselor. The first rapid, truly private H.I.V. home test didn’t reach drugstores until 2012.
Meanwhile, in most areas of the United States, women still need permission from a doctor to buy birth control pills, even though they are arguably safer than a lot of other drugs now sold over the counter and there are very few health risks involved. It’s true that some women with conditions like liver disease, breast cancer and hypertension may be at risk of developing complications from the pill, but labels can warn them against using it. We can trust women to figure this out.
Indeed, dozens of other countries make birth-control medications available to women without a prescription. According to a recent Reason-Rupe poll, 70 percent of Americans believe that we should follow their example.
“I think that the medical profession grossly underrates human abilities,” said Eric Topol, a cardiologist and professor at Scripps Research Institute. “Doctors often don’t feel consumers have the wherewithal to make a diagnosis, even if they’re using validated strategies like the pregnancy test.” Numerous studies have shown that when a test is reliable, people prefer to use it at home rather than trek to a doctor’s office, and patients can be quite skilled at doing this, he said.
Dr. Topol encourages his own patients to use their smartphones to keep track of their heart rate, blood pressure and glucose levels, and even to do electrocardiograms to detect heart arrhythmias at home. Not all patients want to monitor themselves, but those who do can often uncover problems that would be invisible to their doctors. “The patients know what’s going on in their life, and can put the information into context,” he said.
Smartphone cameras can detect problems like jaundice, ear infections and melanomas. Some of these tools are already performing as well as doctors when it comes to making the right diagnostic calls — and every year, the tools get better.
Consumers do need to be protected from false advertising and faulty devices. But they don’t need or want to be protected from accurate information about their own bodies. The popularity of these products proves this.
Despite all the fear-mongering about home pregnancy tests, American women embraced them. By 1978 home testing was a $40 million market, and today it no longer seems the least bit controversial.
In 2012, I became part of her story when I wrote a short article for The New York Times Magazine about the history of home pregnancy testing, and didn’t mention Ms. Crane. At that point, she had yet to claim her due as a pioneer, and even some of her friends had no idea of the role she had played.
“Frankly, your story in The New York Times made me sit up pretty straight,” she told me. She realized that if she stayed silent, her memories might be lost forever. So she dug the original Predictor prototype out of a closet and auctioned it off as the first of its kind; its purchase by the Smithsonian’s National Museum of American History attracted a flurry of attention.
