The teenager who killed nine people and in a shooting rampage in Munich on Friday had material at home indicating an obsession with violent attacks, but German authorities found no links to ISIS.
MUNICH — He had been bullied at more than one school. He played violent video games, and developed a fascination with mass shootings. He kept a copy of the German edition of “Why Kids Kill: Inside the Minds of School Shooters,” a study by an American academic psychologist, and he was treated for psychiatric problems.
Somewhere along the way, Ali Sonboly got his hands on a 9-millimeter Glock handgun, and hundreds of rounds of ammunition for it. And at 5:52 p.m. on Friday, at a McDonald’s in Munich a few miles from where he lived with his mother, father and brother, he started shooting.
Mr. Sonboly, 18, moved on to a shopping mall across the street, then to the top level of an adjacent parking garage. By the time his rampage was done, he had killed eight other young people and one middle-aged person. 
It was the third mass attack in Europe in little over a week, after the killings of 84 people in Nice, France, and an attack by a young refugee wielding an ax and a knife in Germany that left five people wounded.
In a span of six days in July, four high-profile attacks occurred in Germany, putting the nation on edge. Ten people were killed and more than 40 wounded in Würzburg, Munich, Reutlingen and Ansbach.
But unlike those two attacks, the one in Munich appeared, based on initial evidence, to have no overt links to the Islamic State or other terrorist groups, officials said Saturday. Nor did it seem to be directly linked to the wave of migration that has fueled racial, ethnic and religious tensions in Germany and across Europe.
Instead, according to accounts by the police, prosecutors, and neighbors and schoolmates of Mr. Sonboly, this most recent assault appeared to be of a less ideological and more personal sort: a sudden, violent outlet for a quietly troubled young man.
There were indications that Mr. Sonboly’s rampage might not have been entirely without political overtones. It was carried out on the fifth anniversary of a massacre in Norway by Anders Behring Breivik, a right-wing extremist who killed 77 people. Asked about a possible link based on the date, the Munich police chief, Hubertus Andrä, said that “this connection is obvious” and was part of their investigation.
“We must assume that he was aware of this attack,” Chief Andrä said.
But the initial picture of Mr. Sonboly that emerged in the hours after police officers found him dead, less than a mile from the shopping mall with a backpack full of ammunition and a single bullet wound to his head, was of a young man whose concerns were much closer to home.
Born and raised in Munich, he held both German and Iranian citizenship. His parents immigrated to Germany, and his father drives a cab. A student at a nearby public school, he was known to adult neighbors as a polite boy who delivered newspapers. He grew up in a secular household, neighbors said, and the family took pleasure in celebrations like birthdays and the Iranian New Year.
Some news reports identified him as David Ali Sonboly, though he was known to everyone as Ali.
But officials and neighbors said Saturday that Mr. Sonboly had been struggling on several levels. He had two previous encounters with the police, both times as a victim, once having been bullied by three other young people and once having been robbed. He spent considerable time playing violent online video games. He had been getting psychiatric treatment, possibly for depression, officials said.
“He was always nice, kind, helpful,” said a 14-year-old neighbor who attended the same school on Alfons Street as the attacker and asked to to be identified only by her first name, Safete.
People in Munich on Sunday expressed their grief, disbelief and solidarity at a shopping mall where a gunman killed nine people and then himself on Friday.
Safete said the gunman had argued at one point with a schoolmate, “and said that he was going to go on a shooting rampage.” She added that she could not remember the name of the schoolmate, or the date of the altercation.
Safete’s 15-year-old cousin, who gave her name as Majlinda and attends the same school, said the gunman had been bullied at his current school and a former one.
A woman in a neighboring building, whose balcony faced the Sonboly family’s balcony, said she and her 10-year-old son had become friendly with Ali. But the woman, who asked to be identified only by her first name, Paulina, said she and her son had both noticed something off about him.
Maps and timeline of the events according to the German police.
There were hints that his rampage had been premeditated. In a raid at 3:30 a.m. Saturday on his family’s apartment in the Maxvorstadt neighborhood, which includes some of the city’s renowned art museums and is adjacent to the city’s historic center, the authorities found newspaper articles on police responses to other shooting rampages, as well as the book on school gunmen. The police also removed computer equipment, documents and other materials.
Officials said they were investigating reports that the gunman might have hacked a girl’s Facebook page and promised food at an especially low price to lure people to the McDonald’s shortly before the first shootings. They were also investigating whether he had specifically targeted young people.
Three of those killed were 14 years old, two were 15, and the others were 17, 19, 20 and 45. Three of the nine were female. All lived in the Munich area, officials said.
After a gunman killed nine people in Munich Friday, before taking his own life, German officials said preserving democratic rights was the highest priority.
Of the 27 people injured, 10 were in critical condition, including a 13-year-old boy.
After carrying out the shootings in the shopping mall, Mr. Sonboly retreated to the parking garage. From the top level, he engaged in a shouting match with one or more people at a distance, with the expletive-filled exchange recorded on video.
One of the bystanders fumed at “Turks,” and the gunman replied, “I am German,” “I was born here,” and “I grew up here in a Hartz IV area,” a reference to a tier of unemployment and welfare benefits — meaning that he was from a bottom rung of society.
He seems to have eluded the police at that point, while the authorities were scrambling to respond to reports, later proved unfounded, of gunfire elsewhere and that there might have been as many as three attackers armed with long guns. At the height of the emergency, 2,300 officers were deployed throughout the city.
When the police found Mr. Sonboly’s body, they feared that the backpack he was carrying might contain a bomb. It did not, but it held 300 more rounds of ammunition.
“We are assuming at the moment that we are talking about only one perpetrator, one perpetrator who committed suicide,” said Thomas Steinkraus-Koch, the chief state’s attorney in Munich.
Among the many questions facing the authorities on Saturday as Munich slowly returned to normal was how Mr. Sonboly had gotten a handgun and so much ammunition, despite Germany’s strict gun laws.
The serial number of the Glock had been scratched off, complicating the authorities’ ability to trace the firearm, said Robert Heimberger, the chief of the Bavarian State Criminal Police, at a late morning news conference. The teenager did not have a license to own a gun.
There will also be questions about whether schools, social services and Mr. Sonboly’s family failed to take sufficient notice of his problems, and about the degree to which other attacks and violence in popular culture might have influenced him.
“We cannot ignore — and I don’t know the solution, but without a doubt, and this was the case in this instance — that the glorifying of violence in internet games has a damaging effect on the development of young people,” Thomas de Maizière, the German interior minister, said on Saturday.
Chancellor Angela Merkel, after meeting with top officials in Berlin, told the nation that the “night of horror” was traumatic for a Europe already reeling from attacks this month in Nice and on a train headed to Würzburg, Germany.
“We are in deep and profound mourning for those who will never return to their families — the families, the siblings, the friends for whom everything will be void and empty today,” she said.
Klaus Hurrelmann, a professor of public health and education at the Hertie School of Governance in Berlin, who wrote the introduction to the Germany edition of the academic study found in the gunman’s room, said the book examined 10 school killers in the United States. It found that they had mental illness, had been exposed to violence and had access to weapons — all of which appear to be the case for the Munich teenager.
