There was scant evidence in the empty space of the vital man who had occupied it for the previous four years. It was James Houghton’s last day as the artistic director of the Signature Theater Company, which he created 25 years ago, and his office, in a pristine corner of a compound on West 42nd Street designed by the architect Frank Gehry, had been stripped bare.
A few photographs remained on the walls — art borrowed from the collection of Peter Norton, a longtime patron of the theater — including a portrait of Marilyn Monroe, looking drowsy and invitational. “It reminded me of Arthur,” said Mr. Houghton, 57, whose whittled figure, casually but tidily dressed, seemed to match the spareness of his environment.
That would be Arthur Miller, one of many American playwrights with whom Mr. Houghton has been on a first-name basis during the past quarter century. Some of them — Miller, Edward Albee, August Wilson, Tony Kushner and Sam Shepard — are names with instant recognition value; others, such as Adrienne Kennedy and Lee Blessing, are known principally to theater cognoscenti.
But they have all been the focus of Mr. Houghton’s missionary dedication to providing playwrights with a control and context that they are seldom afforded by commercial theater. Starting with Romulus Linney in 1991, Signature has devoted successive seasons to the work of a single dramatist, “the misfits as well as the hits,” as Mr. Houghton says.
It was Signature that, in 1993, brought fresh work by Mr. Albee to New York stages after a decade’s absence, signaling a new and fertile chapter in that writer’s career. And it was Signature that confirmed the place of the Texas-born Horton Foote (“The Trip to Bountiful,” “The Orphans’ Home Cycle”) as a major American dramatist. Its current 75,000-square-foot headquarters, completed in 2012, has three theaters and supports three separate programs, which allows as many as nine dramatists to be in residency at the same time.
A few weeks earlier, he had been honored with a starry gala performance in which the actor Ty Burrell portrayed Mr. Houghton while an airborne Mr. Kushner, looking like one of the title characters of his “Angels in America,” showed up as the celestial spirit who guided Mr. Houghton on his sacred quest on behalf of American playwrights.
Now, on his last day as the leader of Signature, Mr. Houghton — his voice raspy from recent chemotherapy but still suffused with passion — sat down to reflect on the origins and evolution of his theater. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
Twenty-five years ago, when it was starting off, was anything like this in your head?
Gosh no. It really came out of a passion for Romulus’s work. I was a young actor and director then, getting work here and there, and waiting tables and doing carpentry.
You’ve spoken of the importance of being cast in Linney’s “Heathen Valley,” which he directed in 1986 at Theater for the New City.
I just fell in love with this process with Romulus. There was just something so spontaneous — anything could happen in the room. New lines would come, a cut would come, just because of something you either inhabited the script with, or because you asked a question.
At the same time, Romulus, at age 60, was folding his own programs and hanging his own lights, and it just felt like it wasn’t right that he was still pushing so hard, pushing a boulder up the mountain. Anyway, that planted seeds.
I know you’ve said that playwrights are seldom presented in context in the way that, say, painters are in museums.
You could walk through five rooms of Picasso and understand he had a Blue Period, and better understand those two Picassos that are already in your head; those rooms are a telling of Picasso’s life. We do that for music, we do it for fine arts, we do it for dance. We don’t do it for theater. And so I tripped my way into that idea.
How long did it take to realize that idea?
I had gone to see a play on Theater Row that Romulus was doing. And there was a restaurant where we all went afterward. And just at that table — and it was the first time I said it out loud, “You could do a whole season of his body of work, and you could engage him,” so he’d feel included versus feeling like an outsider.
That night a maintenance man, a friend of someone at the table who worked as a bartender, told the group that a building on Bond Street, which would become the Campo Center, was looking to rent one of its recording studios as a theater.
The samurai spirit — and that rare combination of an aesthetic vision with a business sense — where did that come from?
I learned on my feet. I didn’t have a budget for the first season. I just did it. My wife had done a Dawn dishwashing soap commercial. We raised a little money through some tiny fund-raisers, and the soap commercial helped pay for some of it. That first year cost $35,000. You think: from 85 seats and $35,000 to here. It’s kind of crazy.
What was your budget for this year?
It’s about $13 million. And we raised $70 million to do this building.
Weren’t there times when you were terrified?
God, yes. In the first year, I was determined that I wasn’t going to build a company on the backs of artists with broken promises. The first season, we had done two full productions of Romulus’s and were going to do the next, but we needed $2,500 to get to opening night. At this point, the box office was the closet in my kitchen. And I got a check in the mail, unsolicited, for $2,500, from somebody who had a family foundation, from someone who saw one of the Romulus plays.
How about working with the playwrights? How did Edward Albee feel about the invitation from such a young company to return to New York?
I think for him it was a sense of returning to simpler days. When you go down to Provincetown Playhouse or the Cherry Lane, you think of Edward starting out in these little tiny theaters. So I think he liked the whole idea of saying: “The hell with it. Let’s get back to this — to this honest engagement.” The work was just as complex, but the scale was simpler. And I think that ignited his imagination.
It was so thrilling for me to experience the lyrical dialogue of Adrienne Kennedy, whom I’d known only through reading.
To hear Adrienne’s work for the first time, and the excitement of seeing each writer engage with their own work, to see their fear and expectations, to see their joy — this was consistent through every one.
Your manner is soft-spoken, gentlemanly. But you have obviously had to be aggressive.
Determined. I would say determined.
When did you learn you had cancer?
And what you’re leaving behind is this incredible physical complex and not one but three programs: the one for the playwright-in-residence, another one that nurtures young voices like Branden Jacob-Jenkins and Annie Baker, and the legacy program, in which artists revisit their work.
What running these three programs simultaneously is about is that we get to collide. The artists and audience get to breathe the same air. We have such an appetite for it, whether we’re colliding with ourselves in the story we’re seeing, or the people we’re seeing it with, or the artists we bump into. To me, that’s what theater is. I hope this one gives much pleasure to many people for many years to come.