MATAWAN, N.J. — On a sweltering July afternoon in 1916, Lester Stillwell, 11, jumped into the secluded Matawan Creek here, not seeing the large mass moving toward him in the water.
“Watch me float, fellas!” Lester gloated to his friends, according to published accounts of the day.
Suddenly, a huge fish rose, snatched Lester’s arm and flung him up and down, then dragged him deeper into the creek.
That attack in this small town was the third of four killings by what was believed to be the same great white shark as it traveled — hungry and confused — north along the New Jersey coastline that summer, said Al Savolaine, a Matawan historian and author of “Stanley Fisher: Shark Attack Hero of a Bygone Age.” The Matawan attack was unusual because it occurred in an inland creek — no more than 40 feet wide and 20 feet deep — about a mile and a half from the closest bay.
A hundred years later, the attacks still draw visitors to the quaint town of fewer than 9,000 people. Since Saturday, the town has been hosting a nine-day commemoration of the events, which is expected to give a hefty boost to tourism.
Matawan residents welcome the attention but are sensitive to the fact that local men and boys died in the attacks.
Jeanette Walker, 61, a librarian at the Matawan-Aberdeen Public Library, called the commemoration “overwhelming,” because of the influx of visitors and phone calls to the library.
Last month, while eating lunch in Matawan with his father, Ryan Bielenda, a 10-year-old from nearby Old Bridge, talked about a report he wrote on the 1916 attack for his fifth-grade class last spring. When he went swimming in the ocean the first couple of times this summer, he said, his mind was on the shark.
Mr. Savolaine, the historian, recounted the attacks on the bank of Matawan Creek, peering past the bushes on the shore and pointing to where Lester’s body was found.
The fatalities began on July 1, when Charles Vansant, 25, was attacked in Beach Haven, N.J., and bled to death. Five days later, Charles Bruder, 27, was killed in Spring Lake, N.J.
After Lester was attacked while skinny-dipping in the creek, his friends ran, still naked, to the town’s main street, screaming, “A shark got Lester!,” Mr. Savolaine said.
Stanley Fisher, a tall, athletic, 24-year-old tailor, ran into the creek. When he dove in, he found Lester’s body and began pulling it with him until a shark bit his leg, taking out 10 pounds of flesh, Mr. Savolaine said. Other residents rushed him to a train, which brought him to the closest hospital, in Long Branch, N.J., where he died.
But later that day, three-quarters of a mile downstream, the shark bit the leg of Joseph Dunn, 14, while he was swimming. He survived.
The 1916 episodes are noted by shark experts as rare instances in which a single shark appears to have killed multiple people, said George H. Burgess, director of the Florida Program for Shark Research and the International Shark Attack File.
Only one other similar episode has occurred, Mr. Burgess said, and that was off the coast of Egypt in 2010, when a single shark was believed to have attacked two people. However, the events in New Jersey, in which one shark attacked five people on the same coast within two weeks, remains unique.
“It has been more than 100 years and we haven’t had the same thing happen again,” Mr. Burgess said. There also has not been a fatal attack in New Jersey since the 1920s, he added.
The grave of Stanley Fisher, who was killed by a shark in Matawan, N.J., in 1916 while retrieving the body of Lester Stillwell.
“Over the years, like anything that only happens once, it starts to disappear from memory,” Mr. Burgess said.
Then came “Jaws.” The 1974 novel by Peter Benchley, followed by the movie directed by Steven Spielberg, brought sharks into the spotlight, and led to the proliferation of shark attack-related movies and TV series, such as Discovery Channel’s “Shark Week,” which debuted in 1988.
Before “Jaws,” most people rarely believed John S. Nichols’s story about a shark killing his great-uncle, Mr. Fisher, who had tried to save Lester. But in recent years, Mr. Nichols, a professor emeritus at Pennsylvania State University, said his family has received international attention because of the 1916 attacks.
“I know when ‘Shark Week’ is on TV because when I’m in a grocery store, a neighbor will offer their condolences,” Mr. Nichols, a resident of State College, Pa., said.
Mr. Nichols and his extended family will be here this week for the commemoration, which will include a memorial service and wreath-laying at the graves of Lester and Mr. Fisher on Tuesday.
The events will include a “hero walk” that retraces Mr. Fisher’s route to the creek and the unveiling of a monument in a park in the center of town on Sunday. Trolley tours and a shark exhibit are also scheduled.
At Lester’s grave, a collection of toys surround the tombstone — a baseball glove, a teddy bear and two gray toy sharks. Up the hill, Mr. Fisher’s grave is a short walk away.
“It’s almost like Stanley is overlooking Lester’s grave in death,” Mr. Savolaine said.