Donald J. Trump has asked his wife, Melania, to address “women’s issues” in her speech at the Republican National Convention, he says, and his daughter Ivanka will talk about “her passion for gender equality.” He plans to read their remarks beforehand and perhaps suggest “ideas, jokes, points about Trump.” And when they take the podium in Cleveland, he may hop on Twitter to offer his own analysis and feedback.
A political newcomer, an impulsive provocateur, a man who likes total control: Mr. Trump is unlike any presidential nominee who has tried to organize and execute a convention before. For some Republicans, his fiery and free-form style has heightened their excitement about the four-day political pageant that begins Monday, while others are fearing what’s in store.
These Republicans are queasy over the possibility of Mr. Trump going off half-cocked if a convention moment is not to his liking or rebellious delegates go ahead with a plan to try to block his nomination, while some are concerned that he will be heavy-handed in urging speakers to attack the Clintons, immigrants or others with language that alienates undecided voters.
With waves of protesters expected outside Quicken Loans Arena and more than 850 delegates inside the hall who are pledged to Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio and John Kasich, Mr. Trump will have only so much ability to influence the proceedings or keep the cameras away from his antagonists. His take-charge instincts have fueled peculiar behavior before, like calling the CNN control room this spring to try to shape coverage of a critical story. If he indulges in rash decisions, they could easily create media firestorms that overshadow the convention themes and messages that are intended to unite and rally the party.
He could also undercut one of his top goals at the convention: to rebrand himself as a steady leader, caring father and unwaveringly optimistic American after a stormy two months when his temperament and character have been relentlessly attacked and even fellow Republicans have accused him of making racist statements.
Conventions can be a golden opportunity to recalibrate battered campaigns, as George Bush, Bill Clinton and George W. Bush all discovered. Yet the Republican convention looms as one of the most unpredictable in recent history because of Mr. Trump’s own shoot-from-the-hip nature.
The city is expecting 35,000 to 50,000 protesters a day during the Democratic National Convention.
Steve Schmidt, a senior adviser to the Republican nominee John McCain in 2008, said the convention was riding on Mr. Trump’s behavior, unlike in past years when the speeches and the rollout of the running mate were more significant factors.
Mr. Trump’s management of the convention has not been reassuring to many Republicans. While he said in the interview that Cleveland would be “overbooked with speakers,” his list of speakers came out only on Wednesday night — a week later than originally planned — and he has so alienated leading Republicans and rising party stars that many of them, from the two former presidents Bush to various Senate candidates, plan to stay away.
At one point, Mr. Trump even said that Mr. Cruz, a Texas senator, and Mr. Kasich, the Ohio governor, would not be invited to speak at the convention unless they endorsed him. Mr. Cruz, after a meeting with Mr. Trump last week, is now expected to speak; Mr. Kasich has indicated that he won’t be spending time inside the convention hall — an unheard-of snub for a governor of the state hosting his own party’s convention.
At his office at Trump Tower in Manhattan, Mr. Trump has been hands-on about the four-day event — calling up political allies and friends to invite them to speak — but also delegating organizing duties to top aides who already have enormous responsibilities, given the relatively small number of campaign staff members.
Two Trump advisers declined to predict how the nominee would react to the day-to-day proceedings and media coverage of the convention, though one of them expressed concern that Mr. Trump might say something or unleash a Twitter post that undercuts a unifying message or roils Republicans in the arena. They described planning for the convention as somewhat haphazard, saying that Mr. Trump’s focus on lining up speakers had been hot or cold on any given day, and that he had not spent much time making calls to convention speakers to strategize about their remarks and encourage them.
The advisers, who spoke on condition of anonymity to describe private conversations, said they could not rule out Mr. Trump making decisions on the fly next week to try to influence the convention.
Low points at past conventions, like the empty chair next to Clint Eastwood at the 2012 Republican convention and Pat Buchanan’s fiery and divisive speech in 1992, were the result of impulsive decisions, according to several Republicans involved with those gatherings. They warned that Mr. Trump could do himself real damage if he injected himself or his opinions into carefully scripted or choreographed convention moments.
Some of the most successful convention moments were often the result of careful planning, stagecraft and writing.
For some Republicans, Ann Romney delivered the best speech of the party’s gathering in 2012 because she went to great lengths to present a loving portrait of Mitt Romney that was more fully rounded than his reputation as a wealthy businessman. The energetic performance of Sarah Palin electrified the 2008 Republican convention, and the 2004 Democratic keynote address by Barack Obama, then a Senate candidate from Illinois, catapulted him to national prominence.
And Bill Clinton enjoyed one of the biggest post-convention bounces in the polls in 1992 after several nights of uplifting speeches and pageantry, from the glowing documentary film “The Man From Hope” to memorable moments from Hillary Clinton, a beaming Virginia Kelley (Mr. Clinton’s mother) and the nominee himself.
James Carville, the senior strategist for the 1992 Clinton campaign, said Mr. Clinton had had a specific problem to fix at the convention: Too many Americans assumed he was an entitled baby boomer, perhaps even a child of privilege who grew up to become a wealthy liberal elitist.
Mr. Trump, during the interview in his Trump Tower office, pointed to his decades as a real estate developer and popular television personality as evidence that he knows how to manage major projects without being unnecessarily controlling or impulsive.
He said he would be happy if Americans came away from the convention with a clearer understanding of his hopes and aspirations for the nation and a better sense of him as a person, which he is counting on his wife and his children to provide in their speeches. And while he said he cared greatly about his poll numbers, his top goal wasn’t to leave the convention with a greater edge over Mrs. Clinton.
