Nine miles away, on the outskirts of South Dallas, Pastor Frederick Douglass Haynes III addressed a congregation of hundreds, most of them black, at Friendship-West Baptist Church. He told them he was not interested in preaching a message of reconciliation if that did not come with change, or of healing if that simply meant patching over the injustice that had led to last week’s violence.
At Watermark Community Church in Dallas, those who dropped off their children for Sunday school walked by the place where Sgt. Michael J. Smith had stood for years, sometimes on Sundays, sometimes during the week, by the glass doors leading to the preschool classrooms.
He had been there the previous Sunday, but he was not there for this one. Sergeant Smith, who provided security at the church while off duty and was also a member, was one of the sniper’s victims on Thursday night.
“As part of that war, darkness has been growing in our country because for some time leaders and citizens alike have mocked” the light of God, he wrote.
Onstage Sunday, Pastor Wagner reiterated that theme but also called for a greater sense of understanding among the races.
“They very first time I heard ‘Black lives matter,’ I was like: ‘What? Why would you make such a racist statement?’” Pastor Wagner, who is white, said during an impassioned sermon. Later, he said, he realized that he needed to listen to those making the declaration, try to understand the source of their hurt, love them and preach the Gospel.
In Baton Rouge, about 20 worshipers, nearly all of them black, gathered at the Ark of Safety, a storefront church sometimes attended by relatives of Mr. Sterling, who was selling CDs in a parking lot before he was killed by the police on Tuesday.
The Rev. Tommie Gordon told congregants that if they trusted in the world, they would be lost — that if they demanded justice from the world, they would be lost.
Brandon Lee, 22, who knew Mr. Sterling and whose father bought CDs from him, expressed a belief that did not exactly echo the message of the service.
Elsewhere, easy answers seemed equally difficult to come by. At Nativity Lutheran Church in St. Anthony, Minn., not far from where Officer Jeronimo Yanez shot and killed Mr. Castile, the Rev. Glenn Seefeldt called for prayers for both men.
Pastor Seefeldt, whose congregation is mostly white, mentioned “white privilege” and urged members to think deeply about their actions and hidden biases.
This peculiar and tangled American moment seemed even more vexing for Rose Tolbert, 58, a member of the Friendship-West church in Dallas. Ms. Tolbert works for the Dallas County Sheriff’s Department and has two sons in law enforcement.
Ms. Tolbert is also African-American, and she had wanted to attend Thursday’s protest in a stand against police killings of black men but had to work that night. When she got news of the shootings, she called to make sure her family was O.K. Then she fell asleep crying over the tragedy that had befallen her fellow law enforcement officers. At the same time, she remained devastated by the deaths of Mr. Sterling and Mr. Castile.
On Sunday morning, her preacher invited her to the altar for a special prayer for law enforcement officers and their families, for protesters, and for children who he said were being traumatized by violence.
Ms. Tolbert went to the altar, then returned with tears streaming down her face.
“I needed consolation — I needed the word from God,” she said, her voice breaking. She paused and then collapsed against a pole in the church lobby, sobbing.
