Opinion|A Real Estate Developer Can Go Bankrupt. A President Can’t.
A Real Estate Developer Can Go Bankrupt. A President Can’t.
Most Britons have retirement savings and college tuition in pounds. For most Americans, a house is a major asset and a basis for a secure retirement, in addition to being where they live and raise a family.
But not for Mr. Trump. In both cases, what is tumult for most people is for him just another way to win at the roulette wheel.
The comments offered revealing glimpses into Mr. Trump’s mind-set as well as the essence of his longstanding business code: turn the losses of others into opportunities for his own profit.
What does Mr. Trump’s record as a real estate developer say about him? From his extensive use of debt financing to his manipulation of government officials, he has demonstrated that he is resourceful, but also selfish and even reckless, with little regard for the public interest.
In real estate development, you can take on staggering financial obligations with little personal risk. “I’m the king of debt,” Mr. Trump recently proclaimed.
Which it did — but the key words there are “for my benefit.” That’s the Trump theme song.
Mr. Trump created his business empire using what the economist Hyman Minsky called Ponzi financing. In that arrangement, debt is supported by rising asset prices; when those prices come down — in Mr. Trump’s case, the value of real estate — then creditors discover that the debt will not be repaid.
Professor Minsky wrote that Mr. Trump’s lenders “failed to recognize that the arithmetic of his cash flows was virtually identical with that of” developing countries.
Bankruptcy has been the building block for Mr. Trump’s wealth accumulation. Indeed, looked at in light of the presidency, Mr. Trump’s record in real estate development is almost entirely based on financing methods that are contrary to the laws governing the nation’s debt.
Few industries have as much direct contact with government as real estate. Public agencies issue building permits and certificates of occupancy and enforce zoning and environmental regulations. The typical developer tries to minimize government interference since it can slow down projects with requirements for community involvement, worker safety and sustainable construction.
In his dealings with government agencies, Mr. Trump has a long history of misleading public officials. One of his earliest deals involved the Commodore Hotel, next to Grand Central Station. When the hotel’s owner, the Penn Central railroad, went bankrupt in the 1970s, Mr. Trump, with the aid of his father’s political allies, acquired the right to redevelop the hotel.
Mr. Trump displayed his agility with the truth when, as Michael D’Antonio notes in his book “Never Enough,” Mr. Trump deliberately sent city officials an agreement stating that Penn Central had designated him to acquire the hotel as developer. But it had only his signature, not that of the railroad.
In another instance, in 1980, Mr. Trump broke his pledge to preserve artistically significant Art Deco limestone reliefs of dancing women on the exterior of the Bonwit Teller department store building on Fifth Avenue, which he was demolishing for his Trump Tower. As Mr. D’Antonio reports, Mr. Trump promised to donate the friezes to the Metropolitan Museum of Art. But his word was empty: Citing the time and cost of removing the friezes intact, he destroyed them instead.
Mr. Trump is not in the mold of visionary real estate developers like James Rouse, who preserved historic structures like Faneuil Hall Marketplace in Boston. The best developers forge partnerships that harness their private interests to public objectives. Smart developers recognize that the value of a property’s value rises when the community around it thrives.
A president does not govern by making a series of separate deals. Every decision in government is connected to everything else. But if you mess up in real estate, your investors absorb the loss.
Mr. Trump argues that his business success qualifies him to be president, but precisely the opposite is true. His business practices would poison America’s reputation as a land of economic stability and fiscal integrity. He also claims that he wants to put these skills to work for the public. But the Trump playbook is fundamentally wrong for the responsibilities of the White House.