My first home after moving to Mississippi had a bubble on the ceiling from when Hurricane Katrina punched it hard on the roof. It was cheap, but drafty. The doors didn’t keep out the insects, which local residents insisted were water bugs or palmetto bugs, anything but roaches. My first wife, Candace, and I soon found a new rental apartment. It was brick with a wide front door and a big living room. Most important, it had space for a piano.
Candace grew up playing piano. In college, she spent all day in the practice rooms of the music department. When she came to Mississippi to be with me, she lost that. For months, she didn’t play anything. There was a piano store in the mall, but we never went inside. You could see the prices through the windows, and their cheapest instrument would cost more than our car.
With her birthday coming up, I called music stores. “A cheap one,” I said. “Used. Even broken, so long as it can be fixed.” Nothing was in our range. She worked at Target, and I was a grad student. Apparently we weren’t the sort of people who could afford a piano of any kind.
But I was stubborn. Having grown up in a small town in Arkansas, I was accustomed to driving hours to find what I wanted. I checked Craigslist for the whole state. I called every flea market from Vicksburg to Biloxi. Weeks later, I found one I could afford. The woman on the phone said that some of the keys were stuck but the wood looked fine. The piano had been there for as long as she could remember.
After searching online, stuck keys didn’t seem like such a problem. I didn’t have much, but I could pay what she was asking. Without telling my wife, I rented a truck for the day, asked my friend Ellis to come and drove deep into the country.
We drove west for two hours, crossing the county line where liquor sales stopped, on roads that were cracked and narrow. We passed houses shattered by the hurricane, buildings knocked into hills of lumber, now overgrown with vines.
The flea market was in an old tin barn. The piano sat alone in a corner of the building. It had a small bench with a hinged seat, hiding a stack of old music manuals. I put my hands on the keys. Many were stuck, far more than the woman had let on. But I pressed one, and inside the unseen hammer fell to loudly strike a note. I handed her my money.
Even with Ellis’s help, the piano was agony to load. Its wheels were rusted, so we had to carry it. It was a miracle we got it in the truck, then home and through the door. When I returned the rental, I was charged four times the estimate, because we had driven so far. I didn’t have the money to spare, but I knew I would never find a piano so cheap.
My wife was in awe of it. Before she even played, she called her parents to tell them. Finally, she sat and started into a song. The keys fell stiffly and stuck. It wouldn’t play so much as a nursery rhyme.
The next day, I called a piano repairman. It was more money to spend, but I needed to see her play it. The repairman came and opened the back of the piano. I couldn’t wait to see him place clean keys and lay new felt and to have the hammers rise and fall in waves. But he studied it for a short time before putting his tools away. He said that he was sorry. The piano was badly water-damaged; the wood was warped and the metal was rusted. It would be far cheaper to buy a new piano. He recommended some music stores in town. I said that I would give them a call, knowing that I wouldn’t.
That night, while Candace watched, I shoved the hulking thing across the tile, through our door and across the concrete parking lot. It was midnight when I got it out, and the stuck wheels shrieked over the cement. One wheel broke off, and the wooden stump bobbed and scraped.
In the morning, the piano stood next to the trash bin. After all the money and time I’d spent, it was only garbage. I had to borrow money from friends and explain what happened to my wife’s family. Long after I tried to forget the experience, scars ran across the cement from my front door to the trash, reminding me, every time I came home, of my failure to give Candace a piano. In our relationship it seemed as if we never were able to give each other the things we needed, and a few years later I filed for divorce, throwing our marriage out too.
Last summer, I married for the second time. I drove from Arkansas to Florida with my new wife, Brenda. In the middle of our trip, we cut through Mississippi to see where I’d lived. I had told her the story before, and I showed her the apartment and the trash bin. The marks on the concrete were still there.