Not so anymore. While the collectors are away, the curators will play — at least, that’s the mantra many New York galleries are adopting this summer. From Chelsea to Bushwick, quirky and creative group shows are invigorating what used to be a sleepy time for the art world. Rather than closing for the season, these days, gallerists work during the off months in order to get ahead of the demands of the international art calendar. “You have more activity behind the scenes,” says Sperone Westwater’s assistant director, Andrew Lee, whose team has met major art-fair deadlines in the last few weeks. And because many big-ticket buyers are out of town — “they’re all in Greece or the Hamptons,” Lee points out — directors have more room to get playful in the front of house.
For their summer show, Lee and his team brought in Eileen Jeng, a former employee who’s now the operations manager at the nonprofit art organization RxArt. Jeng secured a loan for a Sol LeWitt sculpture called “Splotch #3” and built a group exhibition, “Splotch,” around the piece. The show is “about the controlled and methodical process of creating a seemingly free-form mark or spot,” she says — and, notably, it includes artists beyond the gallery’s roster, including Lynda Benglis, Keltie Ferris and Angel Otero.
Likewise, Glimcher handed responsibilities at Pace Gallery for the season over to Adrienne Edwards, a Ph.D. candidate at New York University and an established curator unaffiliated with the gallery. Edwards didn’t need to worry about finances: “Let me just be very clear,” she says. “Pace gave me absolute carte blanche.” It’s a funny term to use, given the show she eventually came up with: “Blackness in Abstraction,” which assembles a group of monochromatic black works, created from the 1940s through the present, by artists ranging from Robert Irwin to Carrie Mae Weems to Oscar Murillo. The exhibition, based on her dissertation work, explores the role of the color across a range of artistic practices.
