Coastal Carolina capitalized on two errors on the same play to score four unearned runs in the sixth inning Thursday in Omaha, and the Chanticleers won their first national championship in any sport with a 4-3 victory over Arizona in Game 3 of the College World Series finals.
Coastal Carolina became the first team since Minnesota in 1956 to win the title in its first College World Series appearance.
Andrew Beckwith, who led N.C.A.A. Division I with 15 wins, went five and two-thirds innings and picked up his third victory of the College World Series. He was named the tournament’s most outstanding player.
In the sixth inning, Arizona second baseman Cody Ramer could not get a handle on Zach Remillard’s grounder, allowing David Parrett to score from third. When Ramer tried to get Michael Paez running from second to third, he overthrew Kyle Lewis and allowed Paez to come home.
A DESIGNATED PITCHER San Francisco Giants pitcher Madison Bumgarner batted ninth in the lineup against the host Oakland Athletics after Manager Bruce Bochy decided not to use a designated hitter at an American League park. Bumgarner doubled to lead off the third inning and scored a run.
The last time a team intentionally did so was when the Chicago White Sox allowed Ken Brett to bat in 1976. The Tampa Bay Rays were forced to bat pitcher Andy Sonnanstine in 2009 because of a lineup card mix-up.
AROUND THE MAJORS Cameron Maybin capped an eight-run ninth inning with a tiebreaking three-run double as the visiting Detroit Tigers overcame a five-run deficit to beat the Tampa Bay Rays, 10-7. • Carlos Carrasco struck out a season-high 14 as the visiting Cleveland Indians matched a franchise record with their 13th straight win, beating the Toronto Blue Jays, 4-1. • Kendrys Morales had his sixth straight multi-hit game as the visiting Kansas City Royals beat the St. Louis Cardinals, 4-2.
The United States men’s national team will play its first friendly in Cuba since 1947 on Oct. 7, U.S. Soccer announced. The United States’ only visit since then was a 2008 match during World Cup qualifying.
AROUND SOCCER Neymar extended his contract with Barcelona until 2021, ending speculation he would move to another team. • Vicente del Bosque is stepping down in Spain after eight years during which he guided the team to World Cup and European Championships titles. • Southampton hired Claude Puel as manager after being impressed with his command of French team Nice. • Shanghai SIPG signed Brazilian forward Hulk from Zenit St. Petersburg for an Asia transfer record $62 million.
Members of Royal Troon Golf Club will vote Friday whether to end the club’s male-only membership policy. Royal Troon, which will host the British Open from July 14-17, is the only club in the British Open rotation that does not allow female members.
Royal Troon’s constitution requires only a simple majority to approve the change. In June, the club reported that a survey of its members had shown that three-quarters of the respondents supported change.
The World Rowing Federation said the Russian men’s quadruple sculls team had been disqualified from the Rio Olympics for a doping violation, and will be replaced at the Games by New Zealand. Trimetazidine, a banned substance, was found in a urine sample given by rower Sergei Fedorovtsev in an out-of-competition test on May 17.
The Nets waived point guard Jarrett Jack, who tore an anterior cruciate ligament in January. The Nets will owe Jack just $500,000, instead of the $6.3 million he would have been paid next season if he remained on the roster.
Jack started all 32 games he played in last season, averaging 12.8 points and 7.4 assists. He was a reliable backup to Deron Williams the previous season.
ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGES The N.B.A. hired Byron Spruell, who has spent 20 years at Deloitte L.L.P., as president of league operations. He will oversee rule changes, training and evaluation of referees, and discipline.
Johnny Manziel was suspended four games for violating the N.F.L.’s substance-abuse policy, and the free-agent quarterback could face further discipline over his domestic violence case if he signs with a team.
Manziel, released by the Cleveland Browns in March, faces a misdemeanor assault charge in Dallas involving his former girlfriend Colleen Crowley.
SUSPENSIONS ARE ISSUED Jets defensive lineman Sheldon Richardson was suspended for the team’s season opener for violating the N.F.L.’s personal conduct policy. He can participate in all preseason practices and games.
Richardson pleaded guilty in January to resisting arrest after the police clocked him driving at speeds as high as 143 miles per hour in Missouri last July.
Dallas Cowboys linebacker Rolando McClain was suspended for 10 games for again violating the N.F.L.’s substance-abuse policy, and defensive end DeMarcus Lawrence received a four-game ban for his first violation.
BIG PAYDAY N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell earned just over $31 million for 2015, according to the league, a 7 percent decrease from his 2014 salary of about $34 million.