A day after Black Lives Matter supporters and protesters shut down streets in Wichita, Kan., amid national turmoil over the recent killings of black civilians and police officers, the city’s police chief faced a pressing question: What could be done to ease tensions?
So the chief, Gordon Ramsay, along with protest organizers and other community members, came up with an idea: They would hold a barbecue.
Up to 2,000 people gathered on Sunday in McAdams Park, located in a north-side neighborhood with entrenched grievances against the police. Businesses donated hamburgers, hot dogs and grills. Volunteers flipped burgers. Uniformed officers danced the Nae Nae and the Cha-Cha Slide with residents as a D.J. played music from a portable table set up on the grass.
The Wichita event, called the First Steps Community Cookout, was the first of its kind in Wichita as the police, activists and other residents tried to find common ground to address — or dance off — some of the national angst that had been building after recent killings in other cities.
It came at a particularly trying time for race relations in the United States. The fatal police shootings of Alton B. Sterling in Baton Rouge, La., and Philando Castile in Falcon Heights, Minn., touched off new protests by activists and supporters of the Black Lives Matter movement. And police departments mourned after officers were fatally ambushed in Dallas and in Baton Rouge.
As racial tensions intensified after the shootings, law enforcement departments looked for new ways to engage in community policing and to avoid further alienating neighborhoods, all while dealing with the deaths in their own ranks. The most recent officer fatally shot, Capt. Robert Melton of the Police Department in Kansas City, Kan., was killed on Tuesday while responding to a call about armed suspects, the department said.
He was among the three officers who were shot dead on Sunday.
After the shootings in Dallas, Chief Tracey G. Gove of the Police Department in West Hartford, Conn., published an open letter in which he said his department was examining ways to improve community relations. He highlighted measures such as diversity in hiring and cameras that recorded officers’ interactions.
“Every incident is viewed as a learning opportunity,” he wrote.
Some departments are incorporating ways to reach out to residents who protest peacefully or to neighborhoods where tensions have traditionally been high. Videos of officers dancing have become a recent online sensation. An officer in Arkansas, Tommy Norman, curates his social media accounts with images of sharing snacks, dancing and even playing on a Slip ’N Slide.
The Wichita cookout was conceived after a Black Lives Matter protest on July 12, The Wichita Eagle reported. The day after the demonstration, Chief Ramsay met with activist leaders and other community advocates, and an idea was born: Instead of holding another protest planned for July 17, they would have a party.
Chief Ramsay said that four similar events were planned for August, or until school starts, but that they would be smaller social gatherings for residents to become acquainted with their local patrols. Other planned initiatives include developing ideas for a civilian review board for complaints about the police, an independent prosecutor to investigate officer-involved shootings and diversity training.
In addition, a “God Squad” of clergy members would advise the chief about concerns in the community, he said.
A. J. Bohannon, a local leader of the advocacy group I.G.Y.B. (for “I got your back”), said in a phone interview that the meeting with the chief was a start. Mr. Bohannon said the party was held in an area where most residents are African-American and unemployment is high.
One officer, Aaron Moses, earned the nickname “Officer Brown With the Get Down” after a video of his dancing was shared widely on social media, the TV station KSN reported.
In addition to the food and dancing, there was a question-and-answer session with officers. Chief Ramsay said some people expressed fear of looking like suspects in an open-carry state and asked what to do when stopped by the police. In a Facebook Live posting after the cookout, Chief Ramsay challenged other departments across the country to hold similar gatherings.
