MADISON, Wis. — Of the hundreds of monkeys in the University of Wisconsin’s primate center, a few — including rhesus macaque 827577 — are now famous, at least among scientists tracking the Zika virus.
Since February, a team led by David H. O’Connor, the chairman of the center’s global infectious diseases department, has been conducting a unique experiment in scientific transparency. The tactic may presage the evolution of new ways to respond to fast-moving epidemics.
Dr. O’Connor and his colleagues have been infecting pregnant female macaques with the Zika virus, minutely recording their symptoms, and giving them blood tests and ultrasounds. But then, instead of saving their data for academic journals, the researchers have posted it almost immediately on a website anyone can visit.
The openness of the process thrills scientists, who say it fosters collaboration and speeds research.
Back-to-back epidemics of Ebola and Zika have driven some infectious disease specialists to embrace greater speed and openness. Until now, they felt forced to hoard data and tissue samples: Careers depend on being published in prestigious journals, which often refuse to publish work that has previously been released and may take months to edit papers.
Why scientists are worried about the growing epidemic and its effects on pregnant women, and how to avoid the infection.
At the same time, Dr. O’Connor’s openness has exposed some of the more macabre requirements of scientific research.
Animal rights activists are upset at the brutal reality of infecting female monkeys and dissecting their babies. They argue that the work is unnecessary because scientists have already learned a lot by drawing blood from Zika-infected human mothers and dissecting some human fetuses that have died in the womb or were aborted.
“We question whether this work needed to be done in the first place,” said Kathy Guillermo, a senior vice president of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, which rejects medical research on animals.
Early this month, 827577 was anesthetized and her baby delivered by cesarean section. The newborn was then dissected so 60 different tissues could be tested.
The laboratory posted the barest possible description of the results.
With their large brown eyes and bright pink skin, the macaques have very human faces, and Ms. Guillermo said she hoped showing the whole process would repel visitors enough to make them oppose the research.
Even though 827577 was infected in her first trimester, her newborn did not develop microcephaly, a small skull and underdeveloped brain. Thus far, the lab has found Zika virus only in the optic nerves, bone marrow and one lymph node.
This may suggest that monkeys are imperfect mimics of human infection, but Dr. O’Connor argued that using them was the only way to do experiments, for example, in which knowing the moment of infection was essential.
Many labs capable of highly specialized tests need tissue samples, as well, and relatively few mothers infected with the Zika virus allow autopsies on their fetuses or babies.
Monkeys are also used for tests too dangerous to do on humans — such as infecting a pregnant woman with dengue then Zika to see whether the first worsens the second, as happens in patients with successive dengue infections.
Dr. O’Connor’s lab has already done one test that would be unethical in humans: It showed that monkeys who recovered from infection with an African strain of the virus could not be infected with the strain now circulating in the Americas.
That suggests that the current American strain will not spread in Africa or Asia, because earlier strains, which have circulated on those continents for decades or centuries, are protective.
Dr. Van Rompay also noted that many pharmaceutical companies are screening their “libraries” for drugs that might cure a Zika infection. Ethically, they must be tested first in mice and then in monkeys before they are tried in humans.
Experiments on monkeys at the Wisconsin lab have confirmed another finding noted in a few humans: Live virus remains in the blood of a pregnant female for months instead of disappearing in less than two weeks, as it normally does.
Dr. O’Connor said he did not know whether that happens because pregnancy normally weakens a mother’s immune system (so her body does not reject her baby), or because the fetuses cannot clear the virus and keep reinfecting their mothers.
The veterinarians who run the primate center here argue that in making these discoveries, they cause the monkeys as little pain and suffering as they can and that posting their work publicly saves other monkeys’ lives.
“It helps people in other labs not do redundant studies,” said Dr. Saverio Capuano, the center’s attending veterinarian.
Dr. Van Rompay, for one, has refrained from infecting pregnant macaques because he knew Dr. O’Connor did so; he infected only fetuses instead.
Here is a look at the most prominent rumors and theories about Zika virus, along with responses from scientists.
Female monkeys that have given birth are not killed and autopsied, said Dr. Heather A. Simmons, the center’s chief pathologist. They return to the breeding colony, which itself could help answer another important question: whether a mother who had had one Zika-infected child can later safely have other offspringr.
Planning for the Wisconsin experiments began in November, when Brazilian virologists with whom Dr. O’Connor had long collaborated on H.I.V. and hepatitis C research asked him to help investigate a little-known African virus suspected of causing severe birth defects, including tiny heads, in dozens of newborns in northeast Brazil.
But it took weeks to get Zika virus samples out of Brazil. Export regulations “were dubious and conflicting,” said Dr. Esper Kallas, an infectious disease specialist at the University of São Paulo and one of Dr. O’Connor’s collaborators.
“Finally I said, ‘This is an emergency — I will share them, and if they want to arrest me, I’ll call the media and they can film me being arrested,’” Dr. Kallas said in a telephone interview.
It then took weeks for Dr. O’Connor to receive permission from his university’s ethics board to run experiments on the monkeys. On Feb. 14, he announced on his Twitter feed that he had started.
At first, “it was roundly ignored,” he said. Then on Feb. 23, the journal Nature wrote about it. Other researchers congratulated him, asked for tissue samples and advice on growing the virus, and offered to be co-authors on papers.
He was inspired to defy the system, he said, by the work of Dr. Pardis Sabeti, an evolutionary geneticist at Harvard University and the Broad Institute. Early in the 2014 Ebola outbreak, her lab posted Ebola virus genomes it had sequenced on a public website.
Greater speed was worth losing the screening that the journal reviewers performed, she said, even if shaky data was sometimes picked up by the news media.
“I imagine the system will self-correct,” she said.
Dr. O’Connor’s decision was the most radical manifestation of a trend already underway. In early February, more than 30 of the most prominent academic journals, research institutions and research funders signed a “Statement on Data Sharing in Public Health Emergencies” in which the journals agreed to make all articles about the Zika virus available free instead of charging their subscription fees, which can be hundreds of dollars.
The journals also agreed to consider articles that had first been posted for comment on public forums like bioRxiv, which is hosted by the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on Long Island. The funders agreed to make everyone receiving their money share data as widely as possible.
Now Dr. O’Connor is left shaking his head at his new celebrity.
