Where can citizens privately sponsor refugees?
Canada is the rare country with a longstanding policy of letting individuals sponsor refugees without any family connection. Australia recently started a similar program, and New Zealand is planning one as well. Argentina and some states in Germany allow residents from Syria to sponsor relatives or friends. A similar effort in Switzerland was flooded with applications and shut down.
Does the United States allow private sponsors to resettle refugees?
Not right now, although efforts are underway to change that. While citizens can volunteer or donate money, and may use the word “sponsor” to describe their work, they never steer the process and are not able to affect the total number of refugees accepted.
How are refugees resettled in the United States?
The president determines the number of refugees accepted each year in consultation with Congress, which appropriates the funds, and the government contracts with nine agencies, six of which are faith-based, to resettle them. Refugees are given federal money to learn English and pay for essentials, and they are expected to start working in the first couple of months.
Financial help and volunteer work from citizens and charitable organizations are important, too, because “the government funding isn’t really enough to do this right,” said Melanie Nezer, the chairwoman of Refugee Council USA, the coordinating body for agencies that handle resettlement.
Is there any push for private sponsorship in the United States?
Yes. Refugee aid organizations, Arab-American groups and a libertarian think tank are exploring whether a form of private sponsorship could be used in the United States. The newcomers would be resettled through partnerships between citizens and the agencies that already handle the process.
“The magic of sponsorship is the personal relationships,” said Betsy Fisher, the policy director of the International Refugee Assistance Project, who is working on the new effort. The groups plan to refine their proposal over the summer so it is ready when President Obama meets with world leaders in September about the refugee crisis. Some advocates, though, fear that too much private effort could lead to cuts in established programs.
Weren’t there private efforts in the United States over the years to resettle some refugee groups — Southeast Asians fleeing after the Vietnam War, Soviet Jews in the 1980s?
Before 1975, resettlement organizations took care of refugees largely on their own, using churches and other networks. Responding to the influx of refugees after the Vietnam War, the federal government started providing a supplementary stipend, but without oversight. “It was like, ‘Come get your refugee family and do the best you can,’” Ms. Limón said.
The results were mixed, and refugee resettlement was professionalized starting in 1980. Private efforts that began during the Reagan administration allowed nonprofits to fund the resettlement of 16,000 refugees, mainly Cubans and Soviet Jews, and advocates hope this precedent will aid their efforts.
American resettlement agencies say that since the Syrian crisis came to the public’s attention, interest in donating goods and volunteering has surged, and they often cannot take advantage of the outpouring. “In some places, we have more volunteers than we have refugee families to match them with,” said Anna Greene, the policy and advocacy director for the International Rescue Committee’s domestic program.