Chris Froome is not invincible. While Froome, a British member of Team Sky, remains the race favorite, the first mountain stages have undermined the once generally held view that no one can match Froome on the climbs. Froome was unable to shed Nairo Quintana of Colombia, the American rider Tejay van Garderen of the American BMC team, the Australian Richie Porte, also of BMC, and others by attacking uphill on two mountain stages. It remains to be seen, however, if anyone in that group can drop Froome.
Adam Yates may prove to be the big surprise of the Tour. Yates was in the news this week as the rider who had the misfortune of being under the red inflatable structure that marks the final kilometer each day when it sagged and collapsed. Yates, who is British and rides for Australia’s Orica-BikeExchange team, is only 23 and, while talented, was not expected to contend for the overall lead of the Tour. But he now finds himself second over all, 16 seconds behind Froome. At a team news conference on Monday, Yates played down the idea of challenging Froome all the way to the finish in Paris. But many think it’s a possibility.
The behavior of spectators isn’t improving. On Saturday, Froome feared he would collide with a spectator in a yellow fright wig running toward him and punched the man. Froome was fined 200 Swiss francs. But it just was one of many near misses this year. As hail, rain and lightning fell on Sunday near the Arcalis ski resort in Andorra, several riders had to dodge and ride around spectators standing or running in the middle of the road, including one person in a green body suit. A woman standing well out from the curb was knocked to the ground by a rider. Spectators aren’t the only issue. In March, the Belgian rider Antoine Demoitie died after he was struck by a race motorcycle during a one-day race. On Monday, several German riders took the occasion of the rest day to renew their calls for a variety of safety measures, including replacing heavy motorbikes in the race with potentially less lethal mopeds.
Britain’s Team Sky has become less British. Team Sky originated as part of a system to develop British cyclists, but only four of the nine riders that the team brought to the Tour — an event dominated by British riders — are from its home base. That has suited other teams just fine. The Britons Mark Cavendish and Steve Cummings have won four stages combined for Dimension Data, which is based in South Africa. Just behind Cavendish in one of those sprints was Daniel McLay, a 24-year-old who rides for Fortuneo-Vital Concept, a low-budget French team. And Yates, now second over all, rides for Orica-BikeExchange.
Oleg Tinkov may or may not be leaving cycling. Tinkov, the Russian banking oligarch, is most likely keeping his word and shutting down his Tinkoff team, which employs both Peter Sagan, the current world champion, and the former Tour winner Alberto Contador. But during the first week of racing, Tinkov hinted that he might have a change of heart before the end of the season. If he does take his money and go, the race will lose the spectacle of seeing Tinkov riding some of the route ahead of the riders most days. This year, a video taken by a Dutch television crew revealed that Tinkov had found a novel way to shower after his rides. It showed Tinkov stripping naked next to a team car parked along the route. His shower came from a team employee who standing on the car’s bicycle roof rack with a large watering can.