Kathleen Durst’s storybook marriage to a wealthy real estate heir had descended into violence and recrimination by 1982, when she suddenly vanished on a rainy winter night from the couple’s stone cottage on Lake Truesdale, about 50 miles northeast of Manhattan.
Ms. Durst’s body never turned up. Nor is there an official crime scene.
Legally, Ms. Durst has been considered an “absentee.” But for decades her family, her friends and investigators in three states have suspected that Mr. Durst killed his wife in the midst of a heated argument on that rainy night.
This month, Mr. Durst’s lawyers responded in Surrogate’s Court, saying that it “can and should presume that she died three years after the date of her unexplained absence.” (Three years is the time after which a missing person may legally be presumed to have died.) The lawyers deny the allegations that Mr. Durst murdered her.
They also contend that Ms. Durst’s family is making an “ill-motivated and legally flawed” request based on “inadmissible hearsay” and a “heavily edited, sensationalized ‘docudrama’ called ‘The Jinx,’” which was broadcast by HBO in 2015.
“The Jinx,” a six-part documentary, included lengthy interviews with Mr. Durst, who conceded that his marriage was punctuated by “fighting, slapping, pushing,” and that he lied to the police about talking to Ms. Durst after she left their house on Lake Truesdale for the last time.
Ms. Durst’s mother, Ann McCormack, who was said to have clung to life in the hope of justice for her daughter, died at home on May 15 at the age of 102. Ms. McCormack’s daughter, Carol Bamonte, now represents her mother’s estate.
Separately, the family has filed a $100 million lawsuit against Mr. Durst.
Lawyers had assumed that Ms. Durst had already been declared dead. In 1999, her court-appointed guardian concluded that “there is no evidence that Kathleen may be alive.” Mr. Durst then sought a portion of her estate in Surrogate’s Court.
At the time, a temporary administrator prepared a stipulation for all the parties — including Mr. Durst — to sign, declaring that Ms. Durst was dead. Mr. Durst never signed the document.
The Surrogate’s Court battle is only the latest chapter in the bizarre tale of Mr. Durst’s life of privilege, mystery and mayhem. The Dursts own a dozen skyscrapers in Manhattan, although Mr. Durst has long been estranged from his family.
Mr. Durst, 73, frail and worth an estimated $100 million, is currently in jail on gun charges in New Orleans. He is awaiting extradition to California, where he has been charged with the December 2000 killing of his onetime confidante, Susan Berman, allegedly to prevent her from revealing to the authorities his role in Ms. Durst’s disappearance.
In 2003, Mr. Durst was acquitted of murder in Galveston, Tex., despite admitting in court that he had dismembered his neighbor’s body and thrown the body parts into Galveston Bay. Mr. Durst insisted that the man’s death was both an accident and an act of self-defense.
Dick DeGuerin, Mr. Durst’s lead lawyer in the Galveston case and now in Los Angeles, insists that his client had nothing to do with either Ms. Berman’s death or the disappearance of his wife.
Lawyers for Mr. Durst in the Surrogate’s Court case did not return calls requesting comment.
In March 1990, Mr. Durst obtained a divorce from his wife without telling her family or friends, arguing that she had abandoned him. He sold the cottage on Lake Truesdale and later married Debrah Lee Charatan, a real estate broker. Ms. Charatan controls Mr. Durst’s financial affairs and oversees payments to his legal team, although she lives with another of Mr. Durst’s lawyers.
Mr. DeGuerin said that it is now likely that Mr. Durst will be arraigned on murder charges in Los Angeles in September. He is recovering from back surgery he had in June and is wearing a brace.
The Federal Bureau of Prisons has not yet determined where it will send Mr. Durst, although he is likely to end up at Terminal Island, a minimum-security prison outside Los Angeles.
The prosecutor in the murder case, John Lewin, has indicated in court papers his intention to link Ms. Berman’s death in 2000 to the disappearance of Ms. Durst 18 years earlier. The authorities contend that Mr. Durst went to Los Angeles in 2000 shortly after learning that the authorities had reopened the investigation into his wife’s disappearance.
In 1982, Ms. Berman was living in New York and dealt with reporters and others on Mr. Durst’s behalf after his wife vanished.
Investigators in New York and Los Angeles have long said that Mr. Durst told Ms. Berman details about what happened in January 1982.
Mr. Durst married Kathleen McCormack, a 19-year-old dental hygienist, in 1973 after a whirlwind romance. The couple was happy for a number of years, friends say, but Ms. Durst grew unhappy after Mr. Durst pushed her to have an abortion and became controlling.
Ms. Durst later graduated from nursing school and went to medical school as she sought to define herself. She disappeared three months before the medical school’s graduation.
In a 2015 interview, Mr. Durst insisted that he did not know what happened to his wife. But he complained about constant hectoring from her family.
“We’ve heard Kathie’s family saying, Why won’t he tell us what he did with her, on and on, as if they actually expect me to say, I put her over there near the lamppost,” he said.