The house, which had been built by Mr. Harding’s German Jewish great-grandfather Alfred Alexander in 1927, is the subject of his book “The House by the Lake,” which traces German history through the five families that occupied the property. The book became a best seller in Britain when it came out last fall and was released last week in the United States.
What started as a family history quickly turned into a history of families — the five that shaped the plot and the house from the time of the kaiser to its desertion in 2003 in a reunited Germany. The labor of one writer fostered a team effort involving Harding family members in Britain and locals in Gross Glienicke. The Alexander House, as it is now called, is scheduled to open as a public memorial in 2017. A facility for interfaith and intercultural dialogue and reconciliation is planned for 2019.
For Mr. Harding, the history of the house by the lake is one of trauma and loss many times over — “same location, different people, different tragedies, different times,” he said.
Three years ago, the abandoned house was earmarked for demolition by the city of Potsdam, which was planning to build housing on the spacious plot. But people in Gross Gleinicke who had been researching the history of the Jewish families in the region alerted Mr. Harding to the parlous state of the house in 2013.
Mr. Harding is generous about sharing credit for what will happen once construction crews move in this summer. He also had help from his sister, and the backing of once-reticent family members, including his father. “I’d say there are 15 to 20 people who are right at the core of this,” he said. But behind all of them looms his grandmother Elsie, who died in 2004.
Elsie Harding, née Alexander, loved the house by the lake more than her sister, or her brothers Hanns and Paul. She loved it even though the family — led by her father Alfred, a Berlin doctor who was awarded the Iron Cross in World War I — fled Nazi Germany in 1935.
The house’s recovery is what Mr. Harding called “our story of coming together.” It is a powerful narrative for the residential center’s prospective tenants. A Jewish and a Muslim educational charity, and the University of Potsdam, have committed to aid the project.
