LONDON — Maria Sakkari of Greece had dreamed of playing Venus Williams, a five-time Wimbledon champion.
That wish came true for Sakkari on Thursday in a second-round match, but with a different backdrop than Sakkari had expected: They played on Court No. 18, which is the sixth-largest venue at Wimbledon, with a capacity of 782, or 5 percent of Centre Court.
But the eighth-ranked Williams — who has many times been relegated to courts beyond the two principal venues, Centre Court and Court No. 1 — deflected an assertion that her exile to Court No. 18 had been disrespectful.
But then she pivoted.
Williams seemed to be emphasizing the word “all,” alluding to the fact that the top seeds and past champions on the men’s side have rarely been relegated to courts beyond the tournament’s largest ones. The seven-time champion Roger Federer has not played outside of the two biggest courts since he won his first title in 2003, and the two-time champion Rafael Nadal has not played on an outer court since 2004, four years before he won at Wimbledon. Novak Djokovic and Andy Murray have also not played on outer courts since they have become top players.
This year’s tournament has been complicated by heavy rain, which forced organizers to plan for play on the middle Sunday, which has traditionally been a day of rest. Because of the backlog, top players have been spread across the grounds more often than usual, but men have maintained the majority of the matches on the main courts.
Williams has been a defender of women’s tennis at Wimbledon, most notably in securing equal prize money in 2007, 44 years after that milestone had been achieved at the United States Open.
She and other leaders in women’s tennis thought that they had achieved a breakthrough on court placements at Wimbledon two years ago when women’s matches were given equal or greater time on the largest courts early in the tournament. But the next year, the old patterns returned.
After the setback, Williams said Wimbledon organizers should continue to see total equality as a goal.
Representatives of the All England Club had no comment about Williams’s remarks after emphasizing that she had initially said she had no objections to playing on Court No. 18.
Other top female players who have been scheduled on Court No. 18, including the two-time champion Petra Kvitova and the 2016 Australian Open champion Angelique Kerber, echoed Williams in accepting their placements.
Not all players have been as amenable, however. Jelena Jankovic complained about playing on Court No. 18 in 2008, when she was seeded second, and joked that she had to take a helicopter to the court. She reiterated during the first week this year that relegating top players to smaller courts showed a lack of respect.
The WTA chief executive, Steve Simon, cited the weather as a challenge to scheduling but did not dismiss Williams’s call for progress on the two main courts.
On Friday, Williams added praise for the tournament’s heritage of men and women competing together. That combination, largely unique to tennis among major sports, has become one of the sport’s greatest strengths.
Williams said the equality she has striven for at Wimbledon reflected larger issues in the world.
Despite her frustrations, Williams said she had maintained a positive outlook toward the tournament.
