Pavel G. Sheremet, 44, who had worked for Russian state television before moving to Ukraine to host a radio news program, was killed in a car bombing in Kiev on Wednesday.
MOSCOW — The red Subaru was making its way through an intersection in central Kiev on Wednesday when the driver’s door suddenly blew ajar with a burst of smoke.
The blast threw the driver, Pavel G. Sheremet, a prominent journalist, into the back seat. The vehicle stopped then rolled backward, and for a moment, he seemed to be struggling to crawl free of the wreckage, closed circuit video showed.
Bystanders rushed over and pulled him out, before the car burst into flames in front of a McDonald’s restaurant. But Mr. Sheremet was fatally wounded. The bombing left a small crater in the road, charred metal, melted glass — another political murder mystery in a part of the world that has had many of them.
Ukraine's Interior Ministry said that the bomb had been placed in or under the vehicle and detonated by remote control.
By the afternoon, President Petro O. Poroshenko called an emergency meeting of his national security staff and strongly hinted that Russia had been behind the brazen assassination.
But in Moscow, Dmitry S. Peskov, a spokesman for President Vladimir V. Putin, issued a statement noting that Mr. Sheremet was a Russian citizen and that the Kremlin was not only “seriously disturbed” by the killing, but hoped for a rapid and impartial investigation.
Russia’s Foreign Ministry posted a statement on its website saying Mr. Sheremet was indeed a critic of the Russian government but that he had never been threatened by “physical violence” for those views while in Russia. “The incumbent Ukrainian government, supported by its Euro-Atlantic patrons for its purportedly successful democratic reforms, did not manage to protect him,” the statement said.
On Tuesday, another journalist was attacked in Kiev but survived, though it was unclear if the two cases had any connection.
A knife-wielding man ran toward Maria Rydvan, a reporter for the Ukrainian version of Forbes magazine, in a park and stabbed her before fleeing. “It was all very strange,” Ms. Rydvan wrote on her Facebook page. The police issued a statement saying they were investigating.
Mr. Sheremet, 44, a onetime employee of Russian state television turned critic of the Kremlin, was among several prominent journalists who had moved from Russia to Ukraine, where restrictions on the news media are looser. Members of this group have also been highly critical of the new leadership in Ukraine.
Mr. Sheremet had been a reporter for ORT, the leading Russian state television channel, until 2008. In Ukraine, he had a program on Radio Vesti — he was on his way to the studio when he died — and wrote for Ukrainska Pravda, an online news outlet.
The car belonged to Mr. Sheremet’s girlfriend, Olena Prytula, a founding editor of Ukrainska Pravda, whose journalists, like others in the former Soviet Union, have been singled out for retribution. Speaking on Echo of Moscow, a radio station, on Wednesday morning, Mr. Sheremet’s colleagues speculated that Ms. Prytula might have been the intended target.
In 2000, a Ukrainska Pravda reporter, Georgiy Gongadze, who had been highly critical of the Ukrainian president at the time, Leonid Kuchma, was abducted and killed, a crime that still haunts Ukrainian journalists.
In the former Soviet countries, Mr. Kiselyov said, journalists are killed for a range of reasons, but the murders are rarely solved. That includes the 2006 killing of Anna Politkovskaya in Moscow.
