BAYREUTH, Germany — A large security force, with police officers and checkpoints, was present on Monday for the opening of this summer’s Bayreuth Festival, featuring the premiere of a new production of Wagner’s “Parsifal.” This was understandable, given the tensions here in southern Germany after a spate of violent attacks — four in just the last week, at least two of which were perpetrated by individuals claiming ties to radical Islamic groups.
Bayreuth administrators had special cause to be worried. Early news reports suggested that the production, by the German director Uwe Eric Laufenberg, was disrespectful of Muslims. It was rumored that in a scene in Act II, the Flower Maidens under the spell of the demonic sorcerer Klingsor are presented as temptresses in Islamic dress covering skimpy undergarments.
As for the threats the festival is grappling with, the night before “Parsifal” opened, a Syrian refugee who had been denied asylum in Germany was turned away from a music festival in Ansbach, some 70 miles from Bayreuth, and set off a suicide bomb, killing himself and injuring many. This “Parsifal” production, which focuses on what unites us across religious lines, could hardly be more relevant.
In an interview in the program book, Mr. Laufenberg explains that he sees the opera as not exactly religious, but as “pan-religious,” or “post-religious,” a work that goes “beyond religion” and that at the same time “explores the origin of religion.” His production certainly underlines the explicitly Christian elements of an opera that is about a band of knights devoted to the protection of the holy grail, who experience a spiritual crisis as their leader, Amfortas, suffers a mysterious wound. In a daring performance by the American bass-baritone Ryan McKinny, this Amfortas is a handsome man in his 30s who appears during the ritual ceremony of Act I as a stand-in for Christ on the cross, wearing a loincloth and a crown of thorns, dripping blood from the wound on his side that will not heal.
To convey the continuous crisis this community of knights is enduring, Mr. Laufenberg chose to set the story not in the libretto’s Gothic Spain, but in a place where Christianity feels under threat. The knights seem to occupy a battle-torn, crumbling church in the Middle East, in roughly modern times. Soldiers in fatigues with assault weapons keep watch over the knights. The church space is dominated by a huge basin, like a baptismal font, where two of Amfortas’s men take him for a healing bath.
It’s clear that these knights practice charity in their town. At the start of the performance, we see people in need sleeping alongside the knights on cots, even a family with a baby carriage. Mr. Laufenberg’s stage imagery blurs religious distinctions in affecting ways. Wagner’s mysterious Kundry, who serves the knights, is an ageless woman who has suffered for centuries, yearning for redemption. She is also a classic femme fatale. All those qualities come through in the performance of the soprano Elena Pankratova, who brings an alluring blend of cool, gleaming sound and piercing expressivity.
Mr. Laufenberg aptly commented in his interview that no character in Wagner says and knows so much, yet reveals so little of himself, as Gurnemanz, a veteran knight, respected by all. This production boasts the German bass Georg Zeppenfeld, whose voice carries natural heft and authority without a trace of huffiness or posturing. Trim and purposeful, wearing glasses and a simple cap, he exudes patience and understanding, even when exasperated by Parsifal’s denseness.
With his long, fair hair and physical restlessness, Mr. Vogt makes a baffled Parsifal, the young, rootless man who seems to chance upon the community. Is he the prophesied innocent who can redeem the knights by his experience of compassion? Or is he, as Gurnemanz at first concludes, just a fool? Mr. Vogt’s impressive voice is focused and penetrating, yet meltingly tender in soft, high-lying phrases.
For Act II, which takes place in Klingsor’s castle, the set transforms into a vaguely Islamic temple. The twisted Klingsor (the strong bass-baritone Gerd Grochowski), who once tried to be one of the knights, now hates them. But his ambivalence is suggested by the room full of crucifixes that he secretly maintains. His Flower Maidens do appear at first in black robes covering all but their faces. When Parsifal comes into their midst, and they remove those garments, they’re wearing cheesy-looking outfits, like storybook exotic Arabian dancers. Mr. Laufenberg may be inviting us to see the scene as a little ridiculous. Some devotees of Wagner’s score feel that the maidens’ waltzing music of seduction is, by intention, sickly sweet, an interpretation that comes through here.
In Act III, Parsifal, who has spent years wandering and lost, returns to the sanctuary of the knights, where his spiritual transformation is completed through the metaphoric act of baptism. Amfortas, now grown old and wrinkled, is asked to perform the grail ritual for his father, who has died. In this staging, the shaken ruler is turned to not just by his band of Christian knights, but also by Jews wearing prayer shawls and Muslims carrying prayer books.
Mr. Laufenberg skirts cliché with this idea. The scene could have come across like some banal moment of Wagnerian kumbaya. Yet, the choral writing here is a babble of desperate, clamoring voices, a quality enhanced by this powerful concept. The message, it seems, is that everyone is confounded by spiritual issues and that we’re all in this together. At the end, the knights, and all the people in the community, wander off into a misty distance as the houselights brighten, signaling that the audience, too, is part of this redemptive act.