SEOUL, South Korea — South Korea and the United States announced on Friday that they have decided to deploy an advanced American missile defense system in the South, despite strong protests from China, which sees it as a threat to its own security.
The United States military emphasized that Thaad would “be focused solely on North Korea” and would contribute to a layered system enhancing the alliance’s existing missile defense capabilities against North Korean missile threats.
South Korea agreed to consider the Thaad deployment after the North’s launching of a long-range rocket on Feb. 7, an event widely seen as a cover for developing a long-range ballistic nuclear missile. In March, Washington and Seoul established a task force to discuss a possible deployment.
South Korea’s military has said that Thaad will bolster its defense against North Korean missiles, but its political leaders had been reluctant to commit to it because of China’s objections.
They have expressed fear that the deployment might prompt China to move closer to North Korea as a buffer against the United States and South Korea, and that China might retaliate economically. China is South Korea’s No. 1 trade partner and sends more tourists than any other country.
China is particularly concerned about Thaad in South Korea because its powerful radar could give the United States military the ability to quickly detect and track missiles launched in China, analysts said. The United States military already has a Thaad battery deployed on Guam and operates powerful radar in the region, as well as satellites over China.
While United States policy makers have increasingly worried about North Korea’s efforts to develop a capability to deliver a nuclear warhead on an intercontinental ballistic missile, South Koreans have tended to be less concerned. For decades, they have lived in the shadow of North Korea’s ability to deliver catastrophic destruction: Seoul, the capital, is within the range of thousands of conventional North Korean rockets and artillery pieces.
North Korea had no immediate reaction to the announcement.