New Yorkers can increasingly charge their smartphones anywhere — on buses, at sidewalk kiosks and in parks. But there is one place where they are not welcome: the Staten Island Ferry.
New York City’s Transportation Department regularly shuts off power to the ferry’s outlets to prevent gadget-wielding riders from fighting over them. After that policy recently came to light, some riders were frustrated to learn that the outlets had mostly gone dark.
Waiting for the ferry in Manhattan on Wednesday morning, Anthony Cardona, 40, said he had seen people rushing for seats near the outlets. The problem could be solved, he said, if there were more outlets.
The department, which runs the ferry, said the problem was real: A ferry worker was punched sometime in the last year after trying to break up a fight between two riders over an outlet. Some regular riders agreed that things had gotten out of hand.
“When people start fighting, that tells you something — cut the power,” Bob Russo, 63, said as he rode the ferry home to Staten Island. Mr. Russo, a college professor, had little sympathy for riders who found their phones running out of juice.
“You’re that busy that you can’t take the time to charge your phone?” he asked.
A report in The Staten Island Advance last week on the ferry’s power-free outlets prompted a backlash, but city officials said the policy began several years ago under the administration of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg. At times, the outlets do have power for cleaning and maintenance work, city officials said, the duties for which they are more appropriate.
On Wednesday, Scott Gastel, a spokesman for the Transportation Department, said the agency would move to add USB ports in the ferry terminals and eventually on the ferries.
While the Staten Island Ferry currently limits access to outlets, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has promoted its plans to add USB ports to city buses and subways in a nod to smartphone-obsessed millennials. If ferry commuters grow agitated over outlet jostling, imagine subway riders reaching to charge their phones on a crowded No. 6 train during rush hour.
For Maxine Williams, a nurse from Staten Island and regular ferry rider, the prospect did not sound pleasant. “There are so many people on the subway using their phones — you’d have a long line of people waiting to charge instead of charging at home like me,” she said.
Still, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, appeared to be delighted over the consumer-friendly touch, smiling broadly at an event this spring to unveil new buses with USB ports overhead. This week, Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, showed images of the sleek subway car of the future with USB ports. Stations with USB ports also appear on Link kiosks across the city and in parks.
But the Staten Island Ferry has a different approach. A visit to the ferry on Wednesday revealed that many outlets on two ships did not have electricity. But when a reporter found a working outlet to charge an iPhone on the second floor of a newer ship, named for former Sen. John J. Marchi, a ferry worker appeared surprised.
“Shh, don’t advertise it,” he said.
On an older ferry, named for John F. Kennedy and commissioned in 1965, at least two outlets were working on the first floor. An outlet upstairs did not have power, though a nearby water fountain was out of service as well, suggesting perhaps that the boat, in general, had seen better days.
In recent years, the Staten Island Ferry has seen growing ridership, with about 67,600 riders on weekdays, up from about 61,500 weekday riders in 2013, the Transportation Department said. In a sign of its popularity, Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat, last year said the city would soon offer boats every half-hour around the clock.
One regular rider, Kayla Ymani Edwards, said she would like the outlets to be restored so that she could charge her laptop on the ferry while she did homework on her way to class at the College of Staten Island.
