CLEVELAND — With thousands of protesters expected to descend on Cleveland for next week’s Republican National Convention, city officials have devised intricate plans to handle mass arrests should chaos break out on the streets, identifying jail facilities to house more than 975 arrested protesters and keeping courts open for 20 hours daily to process cases.
Twelve judges will be working 10-hour shifts in the Cleveland Municipal Court to handle what could be a flood of cases. And to guard against violence, the authorities have been collecting intelligence on extremist groups to identify any possible threats. The killing of five officers in Dallas last week added urgency to the planning, as officials tightened their security plans for handling what was already expected to be a volatile atmosphere surrounding the nomination of Donald J. Trump.
The convention and the national stage it promises is attracting myriad groups, with agendas that range from white supremacy to in-your-face body art. The groups include the American Freedom Party and Blood & Honour, whose members are white nationalists, along with skinheads and the Westboro Baptist Church, a Kansas-based congregation known for picketing funerals with signs arguing that accepting gay rights has doomed America to be punished. An effort called “Everything She Says Means Everything” is working to have 100 naked women gather outside the convention site, while a bus full of about 21 nuns will also be in town serving lemonade to crowds and asking delegates about their fears for this election cycle.
Despite concerns about widespread unrest, city leaders said they are ready for the convention after more than two years of planning.
Mr. Jackson said those coming to the city should know that officials are intent on keeping people out of danger while also protecting the city’s property from being damaged.
The F.B.I has been looking into domestic and foreign terrorism threats but has found no direct threat from any group targeting the convention. But the agency will continue to gather information on groups and people who may be seeking to stir up trouble.
Agents have cast a wide net, looking into environmental activists, anarchists, white supremacists, black separatists, extremist gun rights groups whose members may have illegal weapons and sovereign citizens groups that believe they do not need to abide by federal laws.
F.B.I. agents and Cleveland police officers have also been knocking on local protesters’ doors and asking questions about their plans for the convention, a tactic that has alarmed some who think that the authorities are already being too aggressive.
One resident, Dionne Hudson, said two officers came to her home last month asking about her 20-year-old daughter, who had been arrested on suspicion of disorderly conduct last year during a protest over a police killing. Ms. Hudson said that the charges were ultimately dropped and that her daughter, who works as a store cashier, was not home when the police came to question her.
Cleveland is bringing in roughly 2,500 law enforcement officers from as far away as California, Texas and Florida to bolster its own convention-dedicated force of about 500 officers. It is deploying a video unit to document crowd management and police activity.
The city is expecting 35,000 to 50,000 protesters a day during the Democratic National Convention.
In an interview, Cleveland’s police chief, Calvin D. Williams, said his officers planned to be restrained but expected to face difficult situations.
But some are worried that the city’s Police Department, which is being monitored by the Department of Justice, could be eager to use some of the equipment it bought using a $50 million grant it received for convention security.
The Ohio chapter of the National Lawyers Guild, which is training legal observers to ensure that people’s rights are not violated, said the city has purchased 2,000 sets of riot gear, 2,000 steel batons, 24 sets of bulletproof vests and helmets and 10,000 sets of plastic handcuffs.
“These items indicate that there is a readiness and a preparedness to engage in arrests that may end up being more forceful than necessary and arrests that may be unlawful in the first place,” said Jacqueline Greene, a lawyer and one of the coordinators of the guild’s Ohio chapter.
Municipal Judge Ronald B. Adrine said city officials had a “good dry run” last month when more than a million people came downtown for a parade celebrating the Cleveland Cavaliers’ National Basketball Association championship. But he is still nervous.
