Edgar Allan Poe isn’t exactly known as frolicsome company, so I was skeptical about the fun potential of a musical based on his work — let alone a show called “A Scythe of Time.” Can we agree that it’s a terrible title?
 A ghoulishly prankish satire set in Victorian London, it’s the most fully realized of three productions I saw on Saturday at the New York Musical Festival, which recently changed its name (formerly New York Musical Theater Festival) to match its longtime acronym, NYMF.
Like “Icon,” another show I caught, “Scythe” has some accomplished Broadway talent. Like “Eh Dah? Questions for My Father,” the solo piece that rounded out my day, it goes to impressive lengths to do more with less. “Scythe,” though, is the one I kept envisaging in a jewel-box theater somewhere, charming the crowds.
Running through Tuesday at the June Havoc Theater, “Scythe” revolves around one Signora Psyche Zenobia, cleverly played with merry high spirits by the marvelous Lesli Margherita, who is best known for originating the role of Mrs. Wormwood in “Matilda the Musical” on Broadway.
The colorful editor of a small periodical called the Bluebatch, Zenobia is a stubborn obstacle to the ambitions of one Mr. Blackwood (P. J. Griffith), who wants to control all of London’s news. The soulless newspaper publisher of The Blackwood Articles, he has lately been commissioning writers to tell the stories of their own suicides — a feature that has proved popular with readers and is thus a magnet for authors.
“They get an article published but are dead,” Zenobia says, puzzled about their motivation.
“Writers claim to be shy, but really what they want is fame,” Mr. Blackwood explains.
Soon Zenobia decides that she, too, wants to take a commission, but without actually dying at the end. That’s when things become gloriously weird, which is saying something for a musical that trots out a chorus made up of dead writers.
With a book by Alan Harris and music and lyrics by Mark Alan Swanson, the show is based on Poe’s short stories “How to Write a Blackwood Article” and “A Predicament” (originally titled “The Scythe of Time,” so Poe does bear some name blame here). The script is occasionally too on the nose; contemporary resonances don’t need pointing out. Otherwise, it’s a smart adaptation.
David Alpert’s festival production is simple by necessity — the period costumes (by Lindsay McWilliams) are its most ornate feature — but simplicity becomes this show. And unlike “Nevermore,” the Poe bio-musical seen Off Broadway in 2015, “Scythe” doesn’t insist on creeping us out.
Among its assets, one of the greatest is its cast, especially the terrific double act of Ms. Margherita and Danny Rutigliano, who plays Zenobia’s love-struck servant, Pompey.
In Jonathan Kaldor and Sebastian Michael’s “Icon” — a palace musical set mostly in the 1920s that vibrates with the specters of two princesses, Diana and Grace — it’s the dapper private secretary Gualtieri (Tony Sheldon) who’s loyal beyond the call of duty.
Needing a princess for its prince, a precarious monarchy in a fictional principality taps a pretty young American named Constance (Charlotte Maltby), the trouble being that Crown Prince Cedric (Ben McHugh) is already taken, in love with his personal assistant, François (Patrick Connaghan).
Constance marries Cedric unaware and, aided by Gualtieri, pluckily determines to excel at her job anyway. Earning the affection of the people, she also wins the devotion of Alvaro Vigna (Sam Simahk), a musician and onetime rebel who becomes her lover.
Directed by Paul Stancato at the Duke on 42nd Street, the production is heavy on flapper-era glamour (the costumes are by Liene Dobraja) and amour. In Act I, Ms. Maltby and Mr. Simahk make a thoroughly winning romantic odd couple, vocally alluring in duets and solos alike. But in Act II, when things go wrong for Constance and Alvaro, they go wrong for the show, too.
This is largely because its clunkiest element — a 1960s strand involving a piano teacher (Donna McKechnie) living in exile, narrating plot points to Gualtieri’s unnecessarily abrasive grandson (Chase Crandell) — suddenly comes to the fore. Ms. McKechnie, a Tony winner for “A Chorus Line,” is a selling point for the show, but she is wasted here.
In “Eh Dah? Questions for My Father,” directed by Corinne Proctor at the June Havoc, Aya Aziz is writer, composer and star, embodying more than a dozen characters to tell a story of her family and her place in it.
A native New Yorker with an American-born mother, an Egyptian-born father and some beloved Muslim immigrant relatives who have trouble grasping her secular ways, Ms. Aziz is an appealingly comical and disarmingly vulnerable performer. Protean in her ability to create instantly vivid characters, she fails at this only, and interestingly, in depicting her father.
“Eh Dah?” — which, we’re told, means “What’s this?” in Arabic — is an investigation into identity, and ultimately a celebration of it. With a skilled three-piece band, it’s the most musically adventurous of the shows I saw: part indie, part Arabic, almost a little bit jazz.
As a vocalist, Ms. Aziz succeeds best when she doesn’t push her seemingly narrow range, which she too often does. Yet she pushes it once more in the last line of the show, and when she hit those notes on Saturday night, it made for a surprisingly moving finish.