EUGENE, Ore. — Justin Gatlin pointed his left index finger into the sky as he surged across the finish line late Sunday afternoon to secure a first-place finish in the men’s 100-meter race at the United States track and field trials.
He clapped six times in joy and then dropped to one knee for 15 seconds, covering his face in his hands.
Gatlin’s time, 9.80 seconds, was the fastest in the world this year. But he insisted he was not paying attention to that.
Trayvon Bromell (9.84) and Marvin Bracy (9.98) finished behind him to fill out the men’s 100 team.
Tyson Gay, the world champion in 2007, finished fifth in 10.03. At 34, he has very likely missed his last chance for an Olympic medal in the 100.
The men are now formally involved in what will be one of the most compelling plotlines of the coming Olympics in Rio de Janeiro: the quest to beat Usain Bolt of Jamaica, who has won gold in the event in the previous two Games.
Bolt withdrew from the Jamaican team trials last week with a left hamstring tear. But the Americans fully expect him to obtain a medical exemption from the Jamaican team and run in the Olympics.
For Gatlin, 34, this could be a final opportunity to overcome Bolt on the sport’s biggest stage. He won a gold medal in the 100 at the 2004 Games in Athens at the age of 22. He served a four-year ban, from 2006 to 2010, for doping, leaving a serious blemish on his career résumé.
Though his form has been strong in the years since his return, he has operated mostly in the shadow of Bolt. At the 2012 Olympics, Gatlin finished 0.16 of a second behind Bolt in the 100, settling for the bronze. He has remained Bolt’s closest rival — though he has beaten him just once, at a 2013 event in Rome.
The frustration has continued. In May 2015, Gatlin improved his personal best time to 9.74 at a meet in Doha, Qatar. He was in fantastic shape. And still, three months later, at the World Championships in Beijing, he finished second, 0.01 of a second behind Bolt.
Before the men’s final, English Gardner, 24, of Voorhees Township, N.J., won the women’s 100, finishing in 10.74 seconds.  Tianna Bartoletta and Tori Bowie each clocked in at 10.78, securing the other two spots on the team.
Allyson Felix, 30, a six-time Olympic medalist, won the women’s 400 in 49.68, the best time in the world this year, despite battling a sore right ankle that she had sprained two months ago while working out in the gym. The injury hindered her ability to properly train heading into the trials and cast some doubt on her plan to complete a 200 and 400 double in Rio.
LaShawn Merritt won the men’s 400 by a wide margin — Gil Roberts and David Verburg were second and third — in 43.97, the fastest men’s time in the world this year.
Ashton Eaton, a local fan favorite from Portland, Ore., finished first in the decathlon, ahead of Jeremy Taiwo and Zach Ziemek, who will join him in Rio.
Chaunté Lowe, 32, finished first in the women’s high jump, ahead of Vashti Cunningham and Inika McPherson. Lowe is a mother of three kids — 8, 5 and 2 years old — and has been to the previous three Summer Games.
Cunningham, 18, became one of the most exciting figures in track and field after winning the world indoor championships this year. “I’m more thankful than disappointed,” said Cunningham, whose father is the former N.F.L. quarterback Randall Cunningham.
Jeffrey Henderson, Jarrion Lawson and Will Claye made the team in the men’s long jump.
The final event of the day, with shadows forming inside the stadium, was the men’s 100. Afterward, Gatlin was asked if he had any message for Bolt, the challenge looming in the distance.
In lieu of a verbal response, Gatlin smiled and gave a thumbs-up.
