But as the ship, called the Draken Harald Harfagre, glided into American waters this month, it collided with an unexpected foe: modern-day safety regulations.
“The struggle is not yet over,” a statement from the ship said.
Lorne Thomas, a spokesman for the Coast Guard, said the agency was bound by a 1960 law requiring that all foreign vessels, except for recreational ones, have a pilot while on the Great Lakes. It couldn’t grant a waiver even it wanted to, he said.
Representatives of the Draken have portrayed their troubles as a result of an impenetrable maze of regulations on the Great Lakes, which straddle the border between the United States and Canada, while also sharply criticizing the cost that vessels of its kind — small and nonprofit — must bear to ply its waters.
The Canadian exemption, however, has no bearing on waters where the United States Coast Guard has jurisdiction, said Robert Lemire, chief executive officer of Canada’s Great Lakes Pilotage Authority. His office was clear with the Draken about this, he said.
The binational management of the lakes can be confusing for foreign visitors. Asked to explain whose rules apply where, John Swartout, the president of the Western Great Lakes Pilot Association, talked about shared boundaries, “gray areas” and rules that vary by district.
Finally, he said: “I wish I knew how to cut and dry it for you perfectly, but it is complicated.
The Draken’s ordeal has also drawn attention to questions about the costs of pilotage, an ancient profession that exists around the world to ensure safe steering in unfamiliar waters.
This year, the Coast Guard raised the target compensation for the lakes’ pilots to about $326,000 a year, prompting a legal challenge from a group of shipping interests that said the rates were unreasonable.
Maritime officials, however, say the fees are commensurate with the skill and scarcity of qualified pilots. Mr. Lemire, the Canadian official, noted that the pilots were among the most highly trained mariners in the world. Until this year, the targeted annual pay for Great Lakes pilots was about $235,000, far below what they could earn elsewhere, Mr. Lemire said.
“It was impossible to recruit people,” he said.
Still, officials acknowledge that the costs can be onerous for smaller, historical ships like the Draken that don’t possess the resources of the big freighter companies plying the Great Lakes, where the maritime industry is estimated to pump more $30 billion yearly into the American and Canadian economies.
And unlike in Canada, the American regulations offer no exemption based on tonnage or size, said Mr. Thomas, the Coast Guard spokesman.
Sarah Blank, a spokeswoman for the Draken, said the crew was overwhelmed by the outpouring of support it has received from the public. By Thursday, a fund-raiser hosted by Sons of Norway, a charity based in Minneapolis, had raised nearly $60,000 for the vessel.
In April, just before leaving for North America, the crew held a ceremony during which a carving of a dragon’s head meant protect the ship from dangers like sea monsters and unforeseen raids was mounted on the Draken. Luckily, the vessel encountered no sea monsters.