It remains one of the greatest unsolved mysteries in the United States, a startling crime that captured the American imagination, inspiring songs, movies, TV shows and books.
In 1971, a man who called himself Dan Cooper hijacked a passenger plane from Oregon to Seattle where he freed the 36 passengers in exchange for $200,000 in cash. As the nearly empty flight took off again, flying south, he parachuted out of the airplane with the ransom, and was never seen again.
But after 45 years in which hundreds of leads were probed and discarded, the F.B.I. said this week it was no longer actively pursuing what it called one of the longest and most exhaustive investigations in its history.
Who was D.B. Cooper?
No one knows. Or someone does, but is not telling. The F.B.I. has described him as a “nondescript” man. He appeared to be in his mid-40s, which if true would make him about 90 years old by now. As the caper became widely known, he was referred to as “D.B. Cooper” in media reports.
How did he pull it off?
On Nov. 24, 1971, the man calling himself “Dan Cooper” approached the counter of Northwest Orient Airlines in Portland, Ore., dressed in a business suit and carrying a briefcase. He paid cash for a one-way ticket on Flight 305 to Seattle.
“Thus began one of the great unsolved mysteries in F.B.I. history,” the F.B.I. said.
A “quiet” man, he ordered a bourbon and soda while waiting for takeoff. In midair just after 3 p.m., from seat 18C, he handed the flight attendant a note saying he had a bomb in his briefcase and showed her a glimpse of wires and red sticks. She wrote down his demands — four parachutes and $200,000 in twenty-dollar bills — and passed them to the captain.
In Seattle, the passengers were exchanged for the money and parachutes. The flight resumed with “Mr. Cooper” and the crew en route for Mexico City, with the plane flying no higher than 10,000 feet, as he demanded.
After 8 p.m., somewhere between Seattle and Reno, he jumped out of the back of the plane into a wooded area with a parachute and the ransom, and disappeared.
How did the story affect American culture?
The high-flying exploit of the man known as D.B. Cooper infused American popular culture. The parts of his story that were known were dramatic enough to inspire writers, directors and musicians, but the unanswered questions had to be patched up with guesswork.
The 2004 movie “Without a Paddle” was about three friends who headed into the wilderness in search of the lost ransom money and ended up finding his skeleton.
In 1981, the movie “The Pursuit of D.B. Cooper” opened with Treat Williams in the lead role as a former Green Beret named J.R. Meade. The movie was based on J.D. Reed’s 1980 book, “Free Fall.” Other fictional books included “D.B.” by Elwood Reid in which “Cooper” is actually a Vietnam vet named Phil Fitch, and James M. Cain’s “Rainbow’s End” in the 1970s, which had similarities.
Artists from Todd Snider to Chuck Brodsky have written and performed songs about him.
The Ariel General Store and Tavern, an archive of Coopermania in the Washington State town of Ariel, where he is believed to have landed, has kept the story alive with an annual get-together that toasts Mr. Cooper as a hero. Its next annual D.B. Cooper festival is planned for Nov. 26, including a look-a-like contest.
What happened to the money?
In 1980, a boy found a rotting package of twenty-dollar bills along the Columbia River worth $5,800 that matched the ransom money serial numbers. Using an inflation calculator, the ransom of $200,000 in 1971 would be equivalent to demanding about $1.2 million today. It is unclear what happened to the rest of the money.
Who were some of the suspects?
The F.B.I. has said it interviewed hundreds of people, tracked leads across the nation, and scoured the aircraft for evidence. By the fifth anniversary of the hijacking, it had looked into 800 suspects. As The New York Times reported in 2011, the F.B.I. file on the case, available in an online vault, measures 40 feet long, cataloging more than 1,000 suspects, some supplied by psychics, some turned in by people suspicious of a family member, some coming in deathbed confessions.
One of the suspects interviewed was a man named Richard Floyd McCoy. He carried out a similar hijacking and escape by parachute less than five months after the Cooper flight, the F.B.I. said. But Mr. McCoy was ruled out because he did not match descriptions provided by flight attendants, and for other undisclosed reasons, the F.B.I said.
Here is the original New York Times article about the search. The agency was not sure, even by 1972, that he was alive.
Did the case influence the way the government handled hijackings?
Hijackings during the Cold War were often desperate attempts at escape from the Iron Curtain, but during the 1970s criminals used them as leverage in ransom negotiations. The D.B. Cooper case became a storied example of an era of hijacking. By the mid-1970s, at least 150 planes had been “skyjacked” in the United States alone, as The Times wrote in a report.
Geoffrey Gray, a journalist who has contributed to The Times and who wrote the 2011 book on the investigation, “Skyjack: The Hunt for D.B. Cooper,” said in an article published after the F.B.I. announcement this week that the case was legally still open.
He said it had initially been deemed a case of air piracy, a felony that carried a statute of limitations of five years. However, a grand jury indicted the hijacker in absentia for violating the Hobbs Act, another federal statute aimed to prevent extortion that carried no statute of limitations.
“In theory, if Cooper were to walk out of the woods today, he could theoretically be charged with a crime,” he wrote.
Why did the F.B.I. decide to shelve the investigation?
The F.B.I. said that the “countless items” it has examined over the years would be preserved for historical purposes at its headquarters. The agency did say people could still contact the bureau if they had specific leads.
