DALLAS — The hundreds of demonstrators were in the middle of a call and response: “Hands Up! Don’t Shoot!” Some held their hands up in solidarity, some held up colorful posters, some held children’s hands, others walked casually as if on a stroll. It was late twilight, the sky a cobalt blue and the overnight lights on in the downtown buildings.
And then the resounding pop-pop-pop of gunfire began.
It was about two blocks from the red-brick building that was the site of one of the most indelible tragedies in American history, and it was happening again.
Just down the street from what used to be the Texas School Book Depository, Lee Harvey Oswald’s perch when President John F. Kennedy was assassinated on Nov. 22, 1963, what had been a peaceful march protesting police violence Thursday turned into a scene that looked like a video from the Middle East. Gunfire echoed off downtown buildings. The air was punctuated by shouts and screams of people fleeing for their lives. Adults and children ran for cover, falling over one another.
In a nightmarish week that had already seen two fatal shootings of black men by police officers, in Baton Rouge, La., and Falcon Heights, Minn., Dallas was thrust into the heat of the moment and the darkness of the past just before 9 p.m. Thursday as a rally, the kind being held across the country, seemed to be winding down.
Many marchers had passed the intersection of Main and Lamar Streets. The protest had been so amicable that the Dallas Police had tweeted upbeat pictures of the demonstration, with some officers posing with marchers.
David Bonifay, managing editor of The Dallas Weekly, a paper covering African-American issues, was on Commerce Street, near Dallas’s Kennedy memorial and toward the back of the marching crowd, when he heard what sounded like firecrackers.
“Then there was like a full two seconds, a very eerie, weird pause, where there were people sort of looking around — and then screams from the front,” he said. The marchers at the front of the line began running back toward him.
A sniper was firing on officers with a military-style weapon, the bullets apparently raining down from an elevated position.
It was playing out in the heart of Dallas’s downtown, an area of hotels, restaurants and businesses. Soon helicopters were whirring overhead and officers with automatic rifles were patrolling the streets.
Cellphone videos recorded the chaotic scene as it unfolded with demonstrators, first stunned, then terrified, dashing for cover and police officers crouching behind vehicles or running to rescue officers who were already down as the gunshots came in rapid bursts.
People rolled up posters as they dashed from the scene. An older woman fell and was helped up by other demonstrators. Small crowds gathered at corners, where people then stopped and peered around before running on.
Five officers were killed and seven others were shot during a protest in downtown Dallas.
Another amateur video shows a solitary man holding a rifle. He appears to be shooting from around a column, a few feet from an S.U.V. with its hazard lights on.
His frantic search lasted five minutes — “or it felt like five minutes,” he said. Eventually he helped them take cover behind a car.
Tyler Lea, 28, a project manager who had been watching the march from a downtown bar, followed the noise of the pops to see what was happening. What he found was chaos, people running and trying to understand what was happening. He recalled the sound of dozens of gunshots, the arrival of a SWAT team and the sound of a helicopter overhead. But what he really remembered was the smell.
When the gunfire stopped, five officers were dead and seven others were wounded.
As protesters fled, two suspects were arrested near the parking garage of nearby El Centro College and another was cornered by the police inside the garage. After a few hours of intense negotiations with the suspect, which included exchanges of gunfire, the police sent a robot with a bomb into the garage and detonated the explosive, killing the suspect.
The attack was the deadliest against law enforcement officers in the United States since Sept. 11, 2001.
On Friday morning, the area was cordoned off and people were stunned. Outside the Donut Palace, usually busy, now almost empty, the police had placed small numbered cones marking blood spots from the carnage.
Fifty-plus years ago, the gunman in Dallas was a troubled ex-Marine with a mail order rifle. This time, the police said it was a troubled former Army reservist with more serious weaponry who was identified as Micah Johnson, 25.
Dallas is an extraordinarily different place from what it was in 1963. Then it was majority white and overwhelmingly conservative with a population of about 700,000. Today, it is majority-minority, with nearly twice as many people. More than 70 languages are spoken in the public schools.
In many ways Mohamed Elibiary, 41, exemplifies the new Dallas: He is an Egyptian-born Muslim who moved to the United States at age 8. Today he is a conservative Republican who runs a security consulting firm, Lone Star Intelligence, and is fiercely proud of his city.
Mr. Elibiary said he was “in mourning” for both the slain officers and the potential harm to Dallas’s reputation. “I feel like we do not deserve this as a city,” he said.
Others were concerned about the shooting’s effect on day-to-day life here. Tension between the police and minorities are lower in Dallas than some comparable cities. But Cintearrea Tolbert, 29, who works at Wells Fargo, said that despite some improvements, African-Americans like her were still subjects of racial profiling by officers in the various police jurisdictions in and around Dallas. Now she was wondering if the place would pull together — or come apart.
“We are scared,” she said. “Is this going to make officers react differently to us? Is it going to go back to how it used to be, or is it going to get better?
And, amid the grief, others found their own way to make sense of the tragedy. So after a prayer service Friday in Thanks-Giving Square Park downtown, people cheered the city’s police chief, David O. Brown. And then they lined up to offer long, heartfelt hugs to the officers who were there.