Luis Scola thought Argentina’s time might have passed.
The Golden Generation had grown old, the younger players had not grown up enough, and when the Argentines went out weakly two years ago in the Basketball World Cup, Scola considered walking away rather than chasing more medals.
But Argentina is back in the Olympics, and this time Scola is not just leading the basketball team.
He is leading the entire delegation.
Scola will carry the flag in the opening ceremony, capping an amazing turn of events. Two years ago he was not sure he wanted to keep playing.
It began with the national team in 1998 and would peak with Argentina’s rise to the top of world basketball. The Argentines won gold at the 2004 Olympics, bronze in 2008, a silver medal at the 2002 world championships, and were once ranked No. 1 in the world.
Manu Ginobili became the face of those teams while going on to win four N.B.A. championships with the San Antonio Spurs. But it has been Scola, 36, who kept playing with the national team, carrying it through qualifying tournaments when Ginobili could not or would not play.
That is why it became so hard for Scola when the program appeared to have crumbled.
The 2014 World Cup in Spain was supposed to be the farewell for the group known as the Golden Generation. But Ginobili got hurt, leaving Scola to try to carry an undermanned team largely alone.
He hated that Argentina did not compete for a title, but even more so that he felt the federation was not doing enough to further the sport he had done so much to grow in his country. Scola, who wants to play all year, even considered ending his international career.
But a change atop the federation, which is now led by Federico Susbielles, energized Scola, as did the return of Ginobili, 38, who thought he would be retired by now. Two other mainstays — Andres Nocioni, 36, and Carlos Delfino, 33 — are also headed to the Rio Games and will be walking in the opening ceremony behind their teammate.
“It creates better hope, better energy, so I feel refreshed,” Scola said.
Scola signed with the Nets last week after spending last season on the best team in Toronto Raptors history. He is no longer as effective in the N.B.A. as he is in international play, but he remains a popular and respected teammate.
“I’ve played with Scola five years total. I’ve never had a bad day with him. Never,” Kyle Lowry of the Raptors said.
Scola is realistic about Argentina’s Olympic chances in a difficult group that includes Spain, Lithuania and Brazil — the team that ousted Argentina two years ago. The Argentines are not good enough to duplicate what they did in Athens, but Scola hopes they will play just as hard.
