The Upshot|America Can Fix Its Student Loan Crisis. Just Ask Australia.
America Can Fix Its Student Loan Crisis. Just Ask Australia.
Americans owe $1.3 trillion in student loans. More than seven million borrowers are in default, and millions more are behind on their payments.
Borrowing for college is common across the globe. Even in Sweden, where tuition is free, most students borrow. What’s exceptional about the United States is that so many borrowers are behind on their loans.
So what do other countries do that makes their systems work better than ours?
And Swedish students borrow a lot. The typical student debt in Sweden is 172,000 kronor, or about $20,000. In the United States, undergraduate debt is less than $10,000 for those who don’t complete a B.A., and about $30,000 for those who do.
Even though their tuition is zero, Swedish students borrow to pay living expenses. In Sweden, college students are considered independent adults, with no societal expectation that their parents will support them financially. The overwhelming majority of students borrow to cover these living costs.
Yet despite this widespread borrowing, there is no student debt crisis in Sweden, because payments are spread out over 25 years. They also start out low, rising slowly over time. In the United States, the typical repayment period is just 10 years.
All the international student loan experts I have spoken with are shocked by how little time American students are given to pay their loans. In Germany, students pay their loans over 20 years; in England, it’s 30 years.
This makes sense. A core principle of finance is that the length of debt payments should align with the life of the asset. We pay for cars over five years and homes over 30 years because homes last a lot longer than cars. An education pays off over a lifetime, so it makes sense that student loans should be paid off over a long term.
The generous Swedish welfare system and low income inequality help keep borrowers out of default. With a strong social safety net, even recent graduates with low earnings can meet their small monthly loan payments.
But even in countries without Sweden’s welfare state, student loans function better than in the United States.
In Australia, income inequality is much higher than in Sweden. Yet while students borrow about as much as they do in the United States (30,000 Australian dollars, or about $22,000), the system works smoothly because borrowers pay nothing until their earnings reach about $40,000. Above that threshold, borrowers pay 4 percent of their income until the debt is paid off. Payments rise and fall automatically with earnings, just as our Social Security payments do.
But in the standard American plan, payments don’t vary over time. Borrowers face the same payments when they first get out of college as they will years later, when their earnings are higher and more stable.
Just like Social Security contributions, student loan payments in Australia are automatically withheld from pay. Some critics argue that payroll withholding gives student loans primacy over other expenses: Why should a student loan get paid before more basic needs — food, rent — are met?
But prioritizing basic needs is exactly what the Australian system does. The idea is that no one facing economic hardship should have to choose between paying student debt and paying for basic necessities. When earnings drop, loan payments drop immediately, allowing borrowers to devote their reduced budgets to essential needs. Borrowers don’t have to fill out an application, or even make a phone call, to get the payments stopped.
In the United States, student loan bills keep coming, no matter how small the paycheck. It’s up to borrowers to apply for a reprieve if their financial situation worsens. Getting on an income-based repayment plan depends on working with a loan servicer to complete a 12-page application. As shown by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, this is often a bumpy process that can take months. In the meantime, the bills keep coming — and millions of borrowers end up in default.
Payroll withholding is the only way to provide an immediate link between fluctuations in earnings and loan payments. Any other system delays the protections that low-income borrowers desperately need.
In the income-based plans available in the United States, payments do not adjust automatically; they are based on the previous year’s income and are flat for a year. If borrowers’ earnings fluctuate during the year and they want to adjust payments, they must fill out new paperwork, and that can take months. This is no way to protect borrowers — especially young, low-income workers — against shocks to their earnings. When a boss cuts hours, a borrower needs a loan payment to drop now — not a year or more later.
Staying in an income-based repayment requires filling out an annual application. Many who successfully enter an income-based plan find themselves kicked out the next year, when they (or their loan servicers) don’t complete the required paperwork on time.
While income-based repayment protects low-income borrowers, it also speeds repayment by high earners. The typical Australian graduate discharges student debt within eight to 12 years. Those with very high earnings (for example, lawyers) finish in as few as five years. That’s because payments rise automatically when earnings do. As a result, high earners pay down their debt more rapidly than they would in a system of flat repayments.
What’s special about the United States is not how much we borrow. What’s exceptional is that we have turned manageable debt into a financial disaster for millions.
The repayment system in the United States was built when students borrowed little; many did not borrow at all. Other countries have overhauled their loan systems to reflect changing times. The United States has not, and borrowers are paying the price.