Digletts are burrowing in Central Park, a Zubat is flying around the spires of St. Patrick’s Cathedral and the rare Mewtwo has reportedly been sighted in Times Square.
On nearly every New York City sidewalk, an increasing number of people have been chasing the virtual creatures since Pokémon Go came out last week. Nintendo’s wildly popular augmented reality game sends players out into the real world to catch Pokémon with their smartphones. When one appears on the screen, the user or trainer throws virtual Poké Balls at it until it is captured.
Shane Green, 18, of Queens, was in Times Square on Monday with friends scanning for exotic Pokémon. He has not taken possession of the rarer Pokémon yet, but did come across dozens of other gamers wandering the city.
At the Nintendo store in Rockefeller Center, Jane Krukosky, 12, who called herself a Pokémon fanatic, was playing the game with her stepfather, Tim Cann, 54. Jane borrowed her mother’s phone for the friendly competition.
Mr. Cann was winning with 82 captured Pokémon to Jane’s 47.
In their hometown, Newark, Del., Mr. Cann said, a trainer might find 25 Pokémon. In Manhattan, they spotted one every block, he said. Players can collect around 250 Pokémon, and that number can increase with upgrades.
Though not a trainer, Jane’s mother, Sara Duckett, especially loves one of the rules of the game. It requires users to walk around to achieve certain rewards and uses a pedometer to ensure compliance.
Trainers can also battle their Pokémon against other players at gyms, a term for locations like the St. Patrick’s Cathedral, one of the designated sites for virtual fights.
The World Trade Center is also deemed a gym, and the Sept. 11 memorial is teeming with Pokémon.
But he said he had not seen as many Pokémon trainers wielding phones as he had expected. “It hasn’t caused any trouble,” he said.
In Central Park, the Manhattan residents Derek Arfman, 27, and Jared Malamud, 32, were on their way to capture a Pokémon. They had just passed five others who were playing the game, they said.
Some stops in the game had even been educational, they said. Sculptures and fountains were places where players could pick up extra Poké Balls.
