BANGALORE, India — The last months of U. R. Ananthamurthy’s life were tumultuous. One of India’s foremost novelists and political commentators, Mr. Ananthamurthy, who died in August 2014 at 81, had threatened to leave the country if Narendra Modi, then leading the nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party, won the vote in the national election. Mr. Ananthamurthy’s remarks drew vitriol, abuse and death threats from Mr. Modi’s supporters, and he remained under round-the-clock police protection for months.
In June, a political tract Mr. Ananthamurthy wrote during the final stage of his life, the parting shot of a writer who devoted substantial time to warning of the dangers of Hindu nationalism, was published to widespread acclaim. More than two years after Mr. Modi’s election as prime minister, even as many continue to fear that India’s founding values of secularism and diversity are under threat, Mr. Ananthamurthy’s voice has served as an urgent reminder of the perils of majoritarianism and hyper-nationalism.
The tract, “Hindutva or Hind Swaraj,” an excoriating critique of Mr. Modi and Hindu nationalism in India, was completed between Mr. Modi’s election in May 2014 and Mr. Ananthamurthy’s death. A novella-length tract, in the manner of Ta-Nehisi Coates’s “Between the World and Me,” the book takes the form of a conversation with the nation.
Drawing on a formidable range of intellectual references, from Dostoyevsky to the epics of Hindu mythology, Mr. Ananthamurthy’s “Hindutva or Hind Swaraj” examines the two rival ideas that have shaped modern India: the plural nationalism originating from the struggle against British colonialism, led by Mohandas K. Gandhi; and the muscular, majoritarian nationalism favored by Mr. Modi and his supporters.
Mr. Ananthamurthy compares the key texts of these dominant political strains: Mr. Gandhi’s “Hind Swaraj,” a riposte to British colonialism completed in 10 days, during a ship journey in 1909, and published a year later; and “Hindutva,” the 1923 founding text of Hindu nationalism, written by Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, a right-wing activist imprisoned by the British for his role in India’s freedom movement.
Mr. Shanbhag, who worked as a translator on the book, said Mr. Ananthamurthy could never forgive Mr. Modi for the 2002 riots in the western Indian state of Gujarat, which killed more than a thousand, most of them Muslims. Mr. Modi was chief minister of the state at the time, and many consider him culpable. “He said a person like this cannot be the prime minister,” Mr. Shanbhag added.
Mr. Modi’s election as prime minister has been followed by, as many feared, a climate of hostility toward minorities and renewed assaults on civil society and free expression.
Last fall, a year after Mr. Ananthamurthy’s death, dozens of writers returned their awards from the National Academy of Letters, also known as the Sahitya Akademi, to protest what they considered a rising tide of intolerance and majoritarianism gripping the country.
Mr. Ananthamurthy’s death caused a wave of grief across Karnataka, a state of more than 60 million people. Tens of thousands of people lined up in Bangalore, the state capital, to pay homage.
Officially, Mr. Modi offered condolences, but right-wing groups affiliated with his Bharatiya Janata Party greeted the news of Mr. Ananthamurthy’s death with raucous celebrations, setting off fireworks at the demise of a foe.
Though Hindu nationalists hounded Mr. Ananthamurthy, especially during the last months of his life, their response to “Hindutva or Hind Swaraj” has been one of unusual silence.
