After James Schamus was fired in 2013 from his job running Focus Features, where, over the course of nearly a dozen years, he had brought to the screen such indie gems as “Brokeback Mountain,” “Lost in Translation” and “Milk,” he vowed to take it easy, and more or less failed.
Mr. Schamus is known in Hollywood for being a high-achieving, highbrow go-getter. (He is also known for routinely sporting a bow tie.) He has written and produced dozens of films, many with his longtime friend and collaborator Ang Lee. He was also probably the only Hollywood honcho to earn a Ph.D. (in English, from the University of California, Berkeley) while both running a production company and holding a professorship at an Ivy League graduate school (Columbia University).
Sarah Gadon and Logan Lerman in “Indignation.”Credit...
But adapt a Roth novel Mr. Schamus did. And, even though he had never done so for a full-length feature, he decided to direct it, too.
Inspired by Mr. Roth’s college years and set in 1951, “Indignation,” which opens Friday, July 29, follows Marcus Messner (Logan Lerman), the atheist Jewish son of a kosher butcher from Newark, as he heads to a conservative Ohio college, falls for a troubled WASPy coed (played by Sarah Gadon) and tussles with the school’s administration.
Aware that his extensive film pedigree would heighten industry scrutiny, Mr. Schamus said he girded himself and his family — he and his wife, the writer and poet Nancy Kricorian, have two grown daughters — for excoriating criticism of the film.
Becoming a director had never been part of Mr. Schamus’s life plan, and it probably happened only because of his dismissal from Focus. While he now says he could sense his tenure there coming to an end, it must have stung, especially because Focus grew out of Good Machine, the sales and production company he founded in the early ’90s with Ted Hope, who now heads motion picture production at Amazon Studios.
“To me, this really means the end of indie film as we once knew it,” Mr. Hope tweeted on Oct. 2, 2013, the day Mr. Schamus’s termination became public.
In a statement at the time, Donna Langley, the chairman of Universal Pictures, Focus Features’ parent, said the division would be putting out a greater variety of films and touted Mr. Schamus as “a passionate advocate for specialty film.” Mr. Schamus said he left deeply proud of his work, and also somewhat relieved.
Sigourney Weaver and Kevin Kline in Ang Lee’s “The Ice Storm,” another collaboration with James Schamus.
Mr. Schamus adapted the script but, he said, Mr. Roth refused to read it. (The author was also not available to comment for this article, according to his literary agency.) “I said to him, ‘You’re definitely making a healthy choice, but it’s also a gift,’” Mr. Schamus said.
Preparing to direct, Mr. Schamus reverse engineered the script: For every scene, he and his production team pulled similar scenes from other movies, studying the camera movements, the coverage and the blocking. He put together a shot list that included drawings, location photos, floor plans, stills from other movies and paintings. He had his star, Mr. Lerman, read Plath, Whitman and Bertrand Russell, and the pair spent six months poring over the character. “I’m just constantly learning from him,” Mr. Lerman said.
Wanting the film to feel authentically of its period, he used minimal hand-held shots and executed exceedingly long — at least by today’s standards — takes. The film was shot over a breakneck 24 days last summer, in Westchester, on Long Island and in Queens, and Mr. Schamus loved every minute.
