Should the United States Save Tangier Island From Oblivion?
It’s the kind of choice that climate change will be forcing over and over.
From where we stood, a few hundred feet from the shoreline, the view was postcard-perfect. White fishing boats dotted the Chesapeake Bay under a hazy March sky; the eastern shore of Maryland formed a dark, distant stripe on the horizon some 14 miles away. “Sometimes I think we were crazy to build a house out here,” Pruitt told me earlier. “But I guess there are worse places to get stuck.” The real estate market was stalled, she meant, and her family had been unable to sell the property. But it was also the case that she built the house in a place where the bay was steadily advancing on her backyard every year, usually by about a dozen feet. In bad times — when a nor’easter stormed through, say — great chunks of Tangier were torn off. But even in calmer conditions, the losses were steady and seemingly unstoppable. Week by week, wave by wave, grain by grain, Tangier was washing away.
Schulte first visited the island in 2002, when the corps asked him to look into the restoration of some nearby oyster beds. “My first impression was just how low everything on Tangier was,” he recalled. Most of the island, which consists of several long sandy ridges connected by footbridges and amounts to a little over a square mile, is about four or five feet above sea level. The low elevations and the quiet, bird-filled wetlands and tidal creeks produce a sense of living with the water, rather than beside it. Schulte has returned to Tangier several times over the past decade to track its health. Last year, when some money became available at the corps to research the impact of climate change on coastal areas, he and a couple of colleagues began a study on Tangier, believing that this tiny island might also yield insights into the vulnerability of cities and towns all along the Eastern Seaboard. They concluded that Tangier had lost two-thirds of its landmass since 1850. To scientists who study the Chesapeake, this was not surprising: Over the past four centuries, Schulte estimates, more than 500 islands have disappeared from the bay, about 40 of them once inhabited. The most striking aspect of the Tangier research, however, was how bleak the island’s future looked.
Some of its troubles are the result of the same forces behind sea-level rises everywhere. Warmer global temperatures make oceans bigger — a process known as thermal expansion — and thus increase sea levels; at the same time, land-based glaciers around the world, along with the ice caps on Greenland and Antarctica, are melting into the ocean. “But they’ve got it worse here,” Schulte said. Tangier’s location in the center of the bay, along with its friable turf of sand and silt, leaves it dangerously exposed and fragile. What’s more, the land in and around the Chesapeake is sinking, because of lingering effects from geological events dating back 20,000 years. “They’re just in a very untenable position,” Schulte said. “And they don’t have any options right now other than something big to turn them around.” A very big construction project, in short.
Schulte’s study of Tangier, published online in the journal Nature last year, concluded that the island might have 50 years left and that its residents were likely to become some of the first climate-change refugees in the continental United States. Tangier was not necessarily a lost cause: Schulte outlined a rough engineering plan, costing around $30 million, that involved break­waters, pumped-in sand and new vegetation that could preserve the island. What his paper couldn’t possibly resolve, though, were the immense economic and political obstacles involved in saving an obscure place from oblivion precisely when big East Coast cities were seeking hundreds of millions of federal dollars for storm-surge protection. Indeed, as seas rise and scientists fine-tune their projections for an era of floods — large parts of Miami Beach, according to some predictions, may be uninhabitable by around 2050 — Tangier’s situation represents an early glimpse of a problem so enormously complex, so “wicked,” in the argot of social scientists, it seems to defy resolution.
After we left Marilyn Pruitt’s yard, Schulte and I walked through town together. We dodged resi­dents driving golf carts on the narrow roadways — there are very few automobiles on Tangier — and hopped over a number of large puddles. We made our way to Lorraine’s, the only restaurant open in the colder months. “I’m thinking, from what I see today, that 50 years may be optimistic,” Schulte said. At this rate, he wondered if Tangier had even 25.
That appears to leave the island at the mercy of the state and federal governments — and in particular, the Army Corps of Engineers, which would probably shoulder the burden of any large-scale construction effort. But understanding the process by which the corps gets involved with places like Tangier also helps explain why the island probably faces some rough years ahead. Schulte works out of the corps’s district office in Norfolk, in a squat modern building where I visited him a few weeks before we met on Tangier. He and a number of his superiors made a convincing case to me that the corps is increasingly focused on climate change; the devastation caused by Hurricane Sandy, for instance, recently led the agency to make a thorough assessment of risks to the United States’ North Atlantic coast and to identify potential new flood-control projects. The district commander, Col. Jason Kelly, told me that some of the reflexive tendencies of the corps to build big dams and dikes — the old rallying cry, as he put it, of “Let’s get the concrete going!” — are now enhanced by holistic (and, often, cheaper) ways of managing floodwaters, by installing natural defenses like marshlands and dunes, say.
The corps does not have complete control over its agenda. Rather, it responds to requests from towns and cities and to the instructions of fed­eral lawmakers. Essentially, there are two routes a community can take to initiate the corps’s partici­pation, and each takes time. The first is to seek help for smaller projects, under about $10 million each, that are judged important by the corps leader­ship and can be funded out of the corps’s annual budget, provided that costs will be shared by a state, county or township. A good example is the small jetty for Tangier, which is meant to preserve a navigation channel and will be paid for by the corps and the state of Virginia. But amid so many other competing state and federal projects, that money has taken decades to secure: The jetty was first proposed in the mid-1990s.
Bigger projects are even more complicated. The week before we met, Kelly said, the corps agreed to conduct a major flood-management study on behalf of Norfolk, which is already suffering so many floods that some of the city’s arterial roads are routinely shut down after storms. Unlike Schulte’s brief scientific assessment on Tangier, major studies like the one for Norfolk need to be authorized by Congress, typically through something known as a Water Resources Development Act bill. After authorization, the study process takes several years and millions of dollars, but it is the crucial step that precedes any large Army Corps construction project. In Norfolk’s case, the eventual work — funded jointly by the city and federal governments — might take a decade or more and might involve building sea walls, breakwaters, marshlands and pumps. Judging by other big flood-management projects, it might also cost hundreds of millions of dollars. Still, that could prove a bargain for Norfolk if the results significantly reduce the city’s risk of flooding. Compared with the cost of fed­eral emergency assistance, along with the potential harm done to the city’s tax revenue, hundreds of millions for storm-surge protection isn’t so much.
Politics seems to play an outsize role in shaping the corps’s priorities. Every few years, a small number of Washington legislators privately debate a large number of potential Army Corps projects for a new WRDA bill — and a powerful member of Congress can often push a pet project to the top of the list. “Everybody jostles and gets in line,” J. David Rogers, a geological engineer at the Missouri University of Science and Technology, told me. “So if you come out on the top of the WRDA cake, your work gets done. And if it doesn’t, your work doesn’t get done.” Michael Oppenheimer, a professor at Princeton who studies the intersection of climate change and policy, told me that Beltway deals are only part of the problem. The corps exists within a larger government system that focuses more on storm repairs than on preparation and adaptation, and there seems to be no immediate prospect for creating a national organization that can proactively address the coastal problems caused by climate change. “This is all patchwork,” he says. And our safety web of policies and agencies — the corps was founded in 1779 — predates an age when rising sea levels posed existential threats.
To act quickly, wealthy cities like New York have begun to largely self-fund their waterfront defenses. But the United States has more than 88,000 miles of shoreline; roughly five million people and 2.6 million homes are situated less than four feet above high tide. Considering that the corps already strains under its present workload, it’s hard to know who or what will come to the aid of less affluent towns when sea levels are three or four feet higher than today. Tangier’s prospects seemed to dim even as I listened to Kelly explain his protocol and heard how many cities compete for the corps’s limited funds.
For any large-scale project, the corps needs to identify what Kelly calls a “legitimate national interest.” The national interest can sometimes be framed in economic and military terms — in Norfolk, preserving the city’s shipping port, which also hosts the country’s largest naval base. In other places, crucial ecosystem restoration or, in rarer instances, historical preservation, may justify the corps’s involvement. Schulte’s arguments for saving Tangier are a mix of these. “It’s the last offshore fishing community in Virginia, literally the last one standing,” he told me over dinner one evening. “We lose parts of America when we lose places like this.” The island was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2014. Tangier’s community has been there for hundreds of years, Schulte notes — the island was mainly settled by several families from Cornwall and Devon, England, in the 1700s and 1800s, and their heritage is still discernible in the residents’ unusual accent, a Colonial-era Cornwall patois wrapped inside a Virginia twang that has long drawn the attention of linguists and anthropologists. That accent would disappear if the island were lost. Schulte made the economic case too. Tangier’s sea grass (known as subaqueous vegetation beds) and wetlands have significant ecological worth. The subaqueous vegetation beds are where blue crabs reach maturity, and migrating birds rest on the wetlands. The vegetation cleanses the water and air. He has calculated the “ecosystem value” of Tangier to be millions of dollars annually.
The descendants of the island’s early English settlers continue to work on crab and oyster boats. When the town was founded, its fishermen, known here as watermen, had no idea that ecological disaster would threaten the island. “It’s not like someone who builds in a floodplain intentionally, knowing that there’s this chance,” Schulte said. “So I feel that these people should get some help.” He added that the problem was not just a few houses: “It’s the whole town.” Re-establishing them on the mainland would be expensive. “Let’s say we do nothing and let the island go away, and then move everybody. How do we deal with that? It’s not going to be a cheap undertaking, and it’s going to be well beyond what the people there can pay.” His bottom line was that bringing the island back to health could be cost-effective as well as virtuous.
Schulte did not take the challenges of fixing Tangier lightly, though. He brought up the example of Poplar Island, a spot in the Chesapeake some 60 miles north of Tangier, to explain why. Within the small community of engineers and scientists who spend their days thinking about how to save entire islands or coastal cities from vanishing during this century, Poplar looms greatly. In the late 1800s, it was home to Valliant, a small village with a post office, a school and 100 residents. Unfortunately, Valliant also had a sawmill. In cutting down the island’s trees for lumber, the islanders destroyed the root system holding their soil together. By around 1920, Valliant was abandoned. And by the 1990s, Poplar Island shrank from about 1,200 acres to five acres and was on the cusp of extinction.
I went to Poplar, which is about two miles from Maryland’s eastern shore, in late March, accompanied by Justin Callahan, a project manager for the corps’s Baltimore division. He first traveled to Poplar in 1993, when it was just a tiny sandbar. “We’re at 1,140 acres now,” he told me during the boat ride over, “and ultimately we’ll be expanding it to a total of 1,715 acres.” The island is being resurrected, and what you find on Poplar now is a public-works project on a biblical scale, rising out of the Chesapeake. In 2003, the corps began building a boomerang-shaped dike as the island’s new perimeter. This “hard” boundary was composed of sand piles covered with a strong textile material and topped with crushed stone and huge, 2,000-pound boulders. Since then, the corps has been filling the pools inside the perimeter wall with silt dredged from the channels leading into Baltimore Harbor and carted here by scow 24 hours a day during active periods of construction. The dredging of the channels would have occurred anyway — it’s necessary to keep the port deep enough for large cargo ships — but ordinarily the silt would be dumped out in the ocean. By depositing it here, the state of Maryland, which owns Poplar, gets a better harbor and a new island. When it’s finished, in 2040 or so, Poplar will be a wildlife sanctuary devoid of residents.
“A lot of what you usually see with the corps is known as ‘pump and dump,’ ” Callahan said once we reached the island. He was dressed in jeans and work boots, and he quickly borrowed a truck to give me a tour. We drove past a long line of trailers that serve as offices for the roughly 25 workers who come here daily — no one stays overnight — before turning onto a main dirt road that runs along the spine of the new island. “ ‘Pump and dump’ means you dredge it, deposit it and walk away,” he continued. “But this is different. A tremendous amount of engineering went into this.” Half the island is being sculpted into wetlands, Callahan said, pointing to low-lying areas to my right, which had already been planted with spartina grass and were starting to flourish. The other half of the island will be dry “uplands.” These were on Callahan’s left. Some of the upland hills have already been built to about 17 feet above sea level, on the way to about 25 feet, according to Callahan, a height that should fortify the island. In time, the uplands will be planted with pine trees. The corps will in effect undo the error that the residents of Poplar made 100 years ago.
As we drove along, Callahan pointed out a pipe three feet in diameter running alongside the road. It carried dredged material pumped from Poplar’s bulkhead, where ships arrived with the silt carried from Baltimore channels, to the places being “infilled” on Poplar. Callahan parked at the end of the pipe so we could see the silt pour out into a roadside pool. It was black and viscous. Over the next few weeks, as the dark soup pooled higher and higher, water would drain out, the sediment would dry and settle and the process would then be repeated until the area reached the desired elevation. Surrounded by the dust and the noise of machinery, it was hard to picture the green idyll of the future. The whole place smelled like mud.
Poplar will ultimately cost about $1.4 billion — or roughly $800,000 per acre. Earlier, Tan­gier’s town manager, Renee Tyler, told me: “What baffles me the most is that no one lives on Poplar. And they spent all this money on it. We have people who live here, as well as sea life and birds.” Yet there are a number of reasons, some of them bureaucratic and obscure, that get in the way of using Baltimore harbor’s silt to build up Tangier. This is Maryland’s mud, not Virginia’s, and Poplar (unlike Tangier) has the good fortune to lie within Maryland’s waters. Another factor that works in Poplar’s favor: the project has a defensible, cost-benefit appeal. “If you want to do ecosystem restoration on a large scale,” Callahan told me on the boat ride back, “it’s expensive, so it has to have a big economic driver.” Here, the economic driver involves the effort to preserve the port of Baltimore, “which is just a huge regional economic engine.” That’s what makes it difficult for Tangier, he added. No one would dispute that Tangier had a unique fishing culture and history, he remarked.
What is vexing for Tangierians is that their local challenges, as difficult as they seem, may pale next to their broader, long-term problems. “It will take two things to save the island,” David Schulte says. “One is to engineer and repair it now. The other is to make sure that the worst-case scenario of climate change doesn’t happen, because I’ve seen what that looks like in the computer modeling, and we don’t want to go there. A lot of Norfolk is under water. Miami is under water.” Tangier, too. For the moment, the world is on course for the worst-case impacts of sea-level rise — perhaps up to six feet by 2100, a result of carbon dioxide pushing up temperatures and the polar ice sheets pouring meltwater into the oceans. At the same time, the forces that make the Chesapeake area so vulnerable (the region currently experiences about five millimeters of relative sea-level rise annually, significantly more than the global annual average of three millimeters) will not be getting any better. “The land is likely to be sinking for many thousands of years,” says Paul Bierman, a scientist at the University of Vermont who has studied the area’s geology.
The Gulf Stream presents another problem. At present, this circulation of warm water in the Atlantic Ocean produces variations in sea level. The surface of the Atlantic is about 60 centimeters lower off the coast of New Jersey than it is off Bermuda, according to Robert Kopp, a professor at Rutgers. If the Gulf Stream weakens, Kopp says, as it is expected to do in a warmer climate, then the differences in sea level will equalize. Oceans will be even higher in the Mid-Atlantic region. This portends trouble not only for the Chesapeake, but also for Long Island and the Jersey Shore. And water will meanwhile be seeping into other urban centers. A recent study by the Union of Concerned Scientists concluded that several dozen American cities — including Boston, New Haven and Savannah, Ga. — could suffer more than 50 floods per year by about 2045 if they don’t take serious measures to mitigate the rising tides; at least a dozen other places, including Philadelphia and Wilmington, N.C., may flood more than 150 times a year. If federal lawmakers find that hard to believe, they will see proof out the window: Parts of Washington could be inundated 388 times a year.
If the residents of Tangier want to look for insights into how their world might end, they can go to the northern edge of their island, to an area known as Uppards. Though it was connected to the rest of Tangier a century ago, Uppards is now a water-soaked parcel of land separated from the inhabited, southern part of the island by a broad navigation channel used by watermen. One day on Tangier, Schulte accepted an invitation from a visitor named Ron Kesner to see Tangier and Uppards by air, in Kesner’s single-engine Cessna, and I tagged along. Kesner is a resident of the Virginia mainland who has been visiting Tangier regularly for several years with his wife, Jodi Jones Smith, a coastal scientist, to study the island’s erosion. On a crisp afternoon with breathtaking visibility, we took off from Tangier’s small airport, climbed to a thousand feet and began to circle the island.
From above, it looked like the remains of an island — a dun-colored triangle with so many small ponds and streams it seemed like a large perforated leaf floating on a glassy green sea. If you looked closely, you could also see sandbars in the shallow waters surrounding it; as recently as 50 years ago, some of these were above sea level, and home to houses and beaches. They were now under five or 10 feet of water.
“It’s really been cut to shreds, hasn’t it?” Kesner said.
As we circled the Uppards area just north of Tangier, Schulte asked me: “Do you see that line running along the center?” That was once a road, he said. It had connected a small village known as Canaan, at the northern tip of Uppards, to Tangier village.
Canaan is gone. It was abandoned around 1920, when the villagers, roughly 120 of them, left. Rather than physical deterioration, it seems to have been social erosion — not enough churchgoers and students, according to a report by the National Park Service — that hastened the town’s end. Many of the 35 houses on Uppards were moved to Tangier’s village, where some still remain. A few, however, were left behind to be taken by the sea. Only one photograph of Canaan exists, from a 1910 magazine article. Instead there are recollections, passed down to Tangier residents like Anna Pruitt-Parks, whose great-grandmother lived in Canaan.
A few hours after I saw Uppards from the air, I visited the area by boat with Schulte and Carol Moore-Pruitt, who also traces her roots to Canaan. Over the past few years, she has come to be regarded as its unofficial historian, the keeper not only of shards of information about the inhabitants — “It used to be beautiful green grass, chickens, roses, fig trees,” she told me — but also of physical fragments that wash up where the town once stood. She told me that 10 years ago she found an English whiskey bottle from the 1600s. One lingering problem with Uppards is that the remnants of the Canaan cemetery, now half underwater, have proved difficult to collect and move. Though some bodies have been relocated, bones and parts of coffins continue to wash into the tide regularly. Pruitt-Parks told me that once she was waiting for a ferry on Tangier’s dock and saw a femur on a nearby bank.
It was indeed — but also windswept, lonesome, strange. She began leading us past tidal pools and along the beach, a mix of silt and peat held together by the thin roots of marsh grasses. The lapping of the Chesapeake was ripping away the peat at the water’s edge. As Moore-Pruitt narrated, we walked by piles of oyster shells — middens, most likely, dating back to Native American settlers — and soon came upon a large scattering of red bricks, smoothed and made porous by time and weather, that had probably served as the foundation of Canaan’s homes. Not far away was a large iron ring, sunk into the mud, which marked the top of an old freshwater well. All around us were old bottles and dead bushes and gnarled stumps, including the skeleton of a large fig tree. “That died three years ago,” Moore-Pruitt said, blaming the intrusion of saltwater, which made survival for most plants difficult. Beyond the fig tree were a number of weathered marble headstones from the old Canaan graveyard, lying flat on the beach. Schulte began turning them over to read the inscriptions. The familiar Tangier names — the old families that had come here from Cornwall hundreds of years ago — still echoed: Margaret Pruitt, Polly Parks.
Moore-Pruitt led us farther eastward. Over the next few weeks, I thought of her many times — this woman who takes her small boat to Uppards almost every day, weather permitting, to walk the beach, stepping gingerly over fallen headstones while searching for bottles and buttons or taking a moment to appreciate the blooms of a dying rosebush planted by someone (an ancestor?) more than a century ago. Sometimes, she told me, especially in summer, she brings along her grandchildren to help her gather things exposed by the tide, even though, as she put it, “the sun is so hot you can barely stand it.” She had found toy marbles and old coins and coffin handles; she had also discovered arrowheads and a Native American ax head of smoothed stone that must have preceded the settlement of Canaan by many centuries. But every week, she said, there was a bit less land and brush. And every visit was an effort to gather the final, sodden artifacts of a place that would vanish, almost completely, within a few years.
“It’s like no one ever lived here,” Schulte replied. Then he turned and began walking to find the last tree.