Judging by the tenor of recent commentary, it was an understandable mistake.
There happens to be an index measuring the extent of discussion of economic policy uncertainty in American newspapers, and it has risen sharply in recent days. The level is roughly comparable to the highest levels reached over recent decades — a period that included the turmoil of Sept. 11, the uncertainty of the Iraq war, the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the ensuing financial crisis.
The Economic Policy Uncertainty index measures the share of articles in American newspapers that contain the word “economic” or “economy,” as well as either “uncertain” or “uncertainty,” in addition to at least one term relating to policy (“legislation,” “deficit,” “regulation,” “Congress,” “Federal Reserve” or “White House”).
The three economics professors who compile the data — Scott Baker, Nick Bloom and Steven Davis — have shown that a rise in their index foreshadows lower investment, output and employment. To be sure, the recent spike in policy-related uncertainty is only a few days old, and spikes in this index are common and often transitory. It would most likely take a more enduring rise in uncertainty to undermine the economic recovery.
As Menzie Chinn, a professor of economics and noted blogger, has pointed out, the rise is all the more remarkable, because it is based on American rather than European newspapers, and because it is focused on policy-related uncertainty, rather than economic uncertainty more generally.
Another commonly watched index of uncertainty — the VIX index, which is a measure of expected volatility of leading stocks in the United States over the next 30 days — has also risen, but nowhere near as drastically. It could be that recent events concern newspaper reporters more than stock traders. The difference most likely also reflects the relative myopia of the VIX, which is focused only on those uncertainties expected to be resolved over the next 30 days.
Concerns about Brexit, the changing nature of presidential politics and the success of populist movements are likely to take many years to be resolved.