Every expatriate has stories about the moments he or she feels most foreign. When I first arrived in America I could not understand the concept of a co-­payment. “I have health insurance,” I insisted, several times, to a receptionist who nonetheless expected me to fork over a 20. I had never in my life paid cash at a doctor’s office. In Canada, where I’m from, you show a card, and that’s the end of it. I thought private insurance would be like that, at least procedurally. A decade later, I’m not sure about the function of a co-payment, other than as a reminder that when it comes to health care, you will be nickel-and-dimed until you draw your last breath.
Surprises like these pile up over time when you live in a country that isn’t your own. The Finnish journalist Anu Partanen clearly had a few stories to tell. In her new book, “The Nordic Theory of Everything,” her pose is one of constant surprise. She is shocked by the health care system. She is perplexed by Americans who classify their parents as their “best friends.” She is astonished by the marriage debate. She is flabbergasted by how much the allocation of parental responsibility still goes to the mother.
Each of these jolts, Partanen tells you over the course of the book, only made her more convinced that Finland had gotten things right. She turns her experiences, and those of her friends, into an exploration of the different policy choices each country has made. She points out that Finns get 10 months of parental leave split between the mother and father, subsidized day care and subsidized health care. She presents the statistics showcasing the great results of such state support: According to a 2013 Unicef study, Finland’s child poverty rate is less than 5 percent, compared with 25 percent for American children.
Like those writers from a few years back who thought the French held the secrets to weight loss and raising children, Partanen believes Nordic culture holds the key to good governance. She also thinks that key could be passed along to Americans suffering from the depredations of capitalism.
Underpinning all these great social policies, Partanen explains, is a “Nordic theory of love.” (She derives this concept from a couple of scholars who proposed a more geographically delimited “Swedish theory of love.”) “The core idea,” Partanen writes, “is that authentic love and friendship are possible only between individuals who are independent and equal.” She acknowl­edges that Americans like the sound of independence too, but in their fixation on individualism they have created a society that paradoxically makes them even more dependent on one another: Without strong state support for education, universal health care and other benefits, Americans must rely on their partners and their employers to take care of them, in sickness and in health. In Finland and other Nordic countries, Partanen argues, that kind of dependence would be intolerable.
While she isn’t remotely rude about it, Partanen does not respect the usual etiquette that attaches to being a foreigner in the United States. She is not saving her frustrations for cocktail party conversations. She is not writing in a state of gratitude. She even tells us, early on, that she didn’t really choose to live in the United States; it chose her, by way of her husband, a writer she met at a conference. While her friends and family did have a vaguely glamorous fantasy of living in New York, fed by Finnish consumption of “Sex and the City,” becoming an American resident wasn’t something Partanen had planned for herself.
Perhaps it goes without saying that this is not the story America usually tells itself about immigrants. People like Partanen are supposed to drop to their knees and kiss the ground. A green card, once secured, is liberation from a lesser life. America may have its problems, but it’s still a boon to live here. The End.
Partanen, obviously, found something else, a land where even quite privileged professionals are frazzled and stressed out over things her Finnish friends barely think about. She is a patient person, and often pauses in the book to note she appreciates the denizens of her new home. “In many ways I love the positive thinking one finds in America,” she writes.
This feels like something of a boast — or perhaps outright bragging. (Even Canadians don’t have it that good.) ­Partanen has much to say about what the Nordic countries have to offer, but remarkably little to say about how Americans can achieve this kind of glory for themselves. She disputes most of the standard ­excuses — about the ethnic homogeneity and small population of Nordic countries, for example — but other than expressing a touching faith in American energy and self-motivation, she can’t explain how and when this country could get there. The politics of it all is left up to chance.
This exposes the problem with this sort of outsider’s book. Partanen is a careful, judicious writer and she makes a careful, judicious case. But I doubt any American not already sympathetic to her argument will be persuaded by “The Nordic Theory of Everything.” It’s useful to know what the outsider knows: There are other ways of organizing humanity. If only we could teach everyone that.