The United States Olympic Committee owes John Carlos and Tommie Smith a long-overdue apology.
I’m usually not big on apologies — what’s done is done. But there are times when public apologies are not only appropriate, but also necessary.
In 1968, Smith, 24 at the time, and Carlos, 23, were suspended from the United States Olympic team, kicked out of the Olympic Village in Mexico City and sent home.
Smith and Carlos had won the gold and bronze medals in the 200 meters and afterward had raised their fists skyward during the playing of the national anthem. Depending on your perspective, their silent gesture of protest was one of the most disturbing images in the history of American sports, or one of the most inspiring.
These times are just as volatile as those, with more and more horrible news about the shooting deaths of police officers and persistent questions about the use of deadly force by the police. Tensions over immigration and the inflammatory rhetoric of the presidential race have been framed by a rallying cry: Whose America is this?
A public apology to Smith and Carlos by the U.S.O.C. may not answer that question, but it would be a spectacular gesture of contrition.
Smith said the U.S.O.C.’s failure over the years to apologize for the treatment of the two runners, who became outcasts in the Olympic movement, was glaring.
“Right now, the U.S.O.C. is not standing up in terms of a responsibility to those who stood up for a cause,” he said.
I understand why, with another Games fast approaching, the U.S.O.C. might not want to take any action that could validate or encourage athletes, as a group or individually, to use the Olympics as a stage for protests.
It may be a little late for that.
More than at any other moment, athletes and entertainers understand that the huge platforms to which they have access provide a unique opportunity to reflect and express discontent.
On stage at the ESPYs last week, Carmelo Anthony, LeBron James, Chris Paul and Dwyane Wade called on athletes to speak out against violence and enact social change. That was a powerful statement, but only a shot across the bow — a recognition by a group of young black athletes that they are one with the community.
Over the past few years, young black athletes, removed and isolated from their communities by wealth and access, have come to realize that they and their families are vulnerable.
There have been rumblings, with no official confirmation by the U.S.O.C., that there is sentiment within the organization in favor of recognizing Smith and Carlos. What form such recognition would take is anybody’s guess.
It could include inducting the two sprinters into the United States Olympic Hall of Fame. It could be a recognition that a mistake was made.
The U.S.O.C., Smith, Carlos and the second-place finisher in that 1968 race, Peter Norman of Australia, are linked forever by that moment. We know that the lives of Smith and Carlos were terrible in the decade after the 1968 Games. Like Muhammad Ali, they have never been forgiven by some who believed they embarrassed the United States before the world.
The U.S.O.C. can make a statement of peace, harmony and conciliation.
I asked Smith and Carlos what they thought about reports that there could be demonstrations by athletes at the Rio Games.
Those activists would owe Smith and Carlos. And the U.S.O.C., nearly 50 years after the fact, would also have an opportunity to be on the right side of history.
Apologies are often empty, and this one, if it ever happens, will be a little late, for sure. On the other hand, it is never too late to do good.