ASPEN, Colo. — PRESIDENT OBAMA’S critics have seized on a report that 51 diplomats used a State Department program called the “dissent channel” to protest the White House’s Syria policy. Detractors say that the episode shows that the foreign policy establishment feels that policy is broken. That isn’t right. Rather, the protest demonstrates that the executive branch, inspired by our government’s design for checks and balances, is working as it should: The president is not surrounded by yes-people.
The Dissent Channel system was devised in 1971, during the Vietnam War, by Secretary of State William Rogers. It permitted any State Department employee who is a United States citizen, anywhere in the world, to voice criticism and have it addressed by the State Department’s elite policy planning staff. The dissenter is protected from reprisal, and there are even yearly awards for employees who dissent in the most effective way.
Critical policy changes have resulted from it. For example, a 1992 memo about genocide in Bosnia is credited with helping bring about the Dayton Accords that ended the war there. Sometimes, of course, policy is left unchanged. But at least decisions are made in full view of contrarian information.
The Dissent Channel is just one of many mechanisms for checks and balances inside an agency. Others include, notably, the “red teams” created by the C.I.A. after the Sept. 11 attacks. These teams are dedicated to arguing against the intelligence community’s conventional wisdom and spotting flaws in logic and analysis. They have forced second thoughts before a leader’s intuitions steer things in a wrong direction. The C.I.A. thanked its red teams when Osama bin Laden was killed.
Internal checks and balances like these are essential to preserving our founders’ vision of government. In dividing power among three separate branches, the framers created incentives for each to attack, criticize and educate the others. Their distrust of individuals, and desire to establish rival power centers, however, failed to anticipate two developments.
First, the rise of the party system means that the branches won’t serve as effective checks when Congress and the president are of the same party. The inverse is true, too. When government is divided, these checks become a screechy affair, and it’s hard to know when one side is crying wolf. Second, the growth of the executive branch, particularly under the New Deal, has overwhelmed the old balance.
But governments adapt. Intra-agency checks, like the Dissent Channel, help recreate some checks and balances within the executive, giving rise to more informed discussion and innovative solutions. So too do interagency checks. Agencies with differing missions — like, for example, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Commerce Department — enrich the policy debate every day.
When I was the Justice Department’s acting solicitor general, it was easy to see both types of executive branch checks at work. When our office had to choose a position in an important case, I heard from lawyers across our department, whether from the Civil Rights Division or the Criminal Division. This intra-agency debate made our decisions better. I saw the same benefits from interagency debate when considering cases that set at odds multiple agencies, each of which would try to persuade the solicitor general to take its side. A question about terrorism, for example, could generate competing positions by the State and Defense Departments.
This type of debate is a model for the rest of the executive branch. Presidents and agency heads should be surrounding themselves with people who disagree. Take drone strikes: Imagine, instead of a team of people charged largely or only with protecting the public, a standing office that argued against individual strikes. They couldn’t claim the sky was falling without losing their credibility. The same system could be employed before designating someone for electronic surveillance or for presidential pardons.
But the Syria dissent also raises a fear: The memo appears to have been leaked. Leaking, particularly by whistle-blowers, is predictable when the executive branch does not heed dissent. One thing we know about government after the New Deal is that checks and balances through whistle-blowing is terrible policy. The whistle-blower is often not in a position to gauge what harm his revelations will cause, and the government responds to whistle-blowing by compartmentalizing information even more tightly, which, in turn, makes government even more homogeneous.
Institutionalizing dissent in our agencies moves us toward a healthier democracy and helps fulfill our founders’ vision. We should see the Syria dissent for what it truly stands for: a strength to be emulated, not a weakness to be suppressed.