Lauren Fleshman was the top female collegiate distance runner in American history. Then, as a professional athlete, she transformed herself into an entrepreneur and a forceful advocate for women in sports. When she included a photo of her pregnancy-loosened belly in a blog post a year after trying out for the 2012 Olympics, it drew more attention than any race she had won.
And now, in announcing her retirement at age 34, Fleshman also carries the wrenching distinction of most likely being the best American distance runner never to make an Olympic team, her competitive career repeatedly impaired by injuries that had her on crutches at the wrong four-year intervals. Foot problems in 2004 and 2008. A knee in 2012.
In navigating that disorienting ritual undertaken by elite athletes — retirement from a primary professional pursuit in one’s early 30s — Fleshman said last week that she would keep racing, coaching and steering her companies while using her enthusiastic online following to push for reforms in track and field and for the role of women in it.
Beginning as a champion high school runner from California in the late 1990s, Fleshman explored many of those themes during her career.
At her best, Fleshman won national championships in the 5,000 meters with a trademark move of surprising her competition with early closing sprints. But she was always puzzled by the United States’ receding achievement in track and field on the international stage, and devoted herself to addressing it.
Her parents, a Hollywood prop maker and a stay-at-home mother, did not attend college, and by the time Fleshman applied to Stanford, the university’s coveted athletic scholarships were gone. She went anyway, checking IDs at the gym until 1 a.m. some nights and sweeping the cafeteria kitchens after dinner during freshman year to help pay her tuition.
As a human biology major, she scrutinized the lessons of every class through the lens of an elite athlete. When she studied primate behavior, she contemplated human competition, noting how bonobos were drawn to the teamwork she yearned for. In osteology, she considered how her bones connected so she could optimize her stride. Studying psychology, she taught herself to recognize adrenaline as false fear, and to mitigate the power of pain so that she could tolerate more.
By the time Fleshman graduated from Stanford in 2003, she was an all-American 15 times over 12 straight seasons — having finally earned the scholarship she had once been denied — and a five-time N.C.A.A. champion.
But she also realized that throughout her career, all of her athletic role models had been men. She was particularly interested in the Stanford men’s running team, at that time a legendary cohesive body known as the Machine, which regularly outperformed the similarly talented women’s team.
As Stanford’s captain, Fleshman pushed for camaraderie, and when she remained for a year after graduation to work as an assistant coach, the women finally won a national championship.
Navigating the field of professional running proved more difficult.
Sponsored by Nike, Fleshman won her first national championship in the 5,000 meters in 2006. But she was troubled by her role in the company; in Nike’s ad campaigns, she noticed, male athletes figured prominently, while the marketing materials directed at women featured fashion models. Restless one night, she emailed Nike’s chief executive, Mark Parker, asking if she could meet with him. Parker invited her to his office the next day.
But Fleshman’s new position as a public figure brought new pressure. At the national 5,000-meter championship in 2007, she found herself overwhelmed, faltering on the track with a lap to go and walking.
By the 2008 Olympic trials, she had come back to log the fastest 5,000 time in the nation, but an ankle injury limited her training and eventually cost her a place on the United States team.
Devastated, she later came to view the failure as a chance to redefine herself.
Fleshman wound up in a wheelchair, contemplating what had led her there. In college, she had devoted herself to beating Africa. But Ethiopian runners lowered the world record to 14 minutes 16 seconds in 2007, and even lower in 2008 — times Americans like her considered unreachable, even unnatural.
Fleshman took the unusual step of pursuing interests related to the sport but not integral to performance and talking about things she worried about, like athlete pay, doping and eating disorders. She worked to balance those concerns with success on the track, but not everyone was impressed.
Jesse Thomas, the triathlete and Stanford teammate Fleshman married in 2007, noticed the effects on her career.
In 2012, just before she gave birth to her son, Fleshman ended her Nike sponsorship and moved to the women’s running start-up Oiselle, where she brought many of the same feminist approaches that she had promoted at Nike.
Sally Bergesen, Oiselle’s founder and chief executive, praised Fleshman’s work.
In 2010, Fleshman and her husband used $10,000 of their own money to found Picky Bars, a company that makes energy bars; this year, they expect to exceed $4 million in revenue. (Fleshman said that she had made more money in the last two years, while injured, than she had in the years of her top performances.) Fleshman also started a blog, which made her feel as if she were back on a team again, and gave her the ability to engage with people on the issues she cares about.
The final years of her career remained volatile. A second national title in the 5,000 in 2010. Another miss at the Olympics again in 2012. Throughout it all, Fleshman has kept training while renewing her focus on her businesses, her blog and the life away from the track that she now sees as her future.
