Book Review|Libya’s Prisons Were Emptying. But Hisham Matar’s Father Was Nowhere to Be Found.
Libya’s Prisons Were Emptying. But Hisham Matar’s Father Was Nowhere to Be Found.
243 pp. Random House. $26.
It seems unfair to call Hisham Matar’s extraordinary new book a memoir, since it is so many other things besides: a reflection on exile and the consolations of art, an analysis of authoritarianism, a family history, a portrait of a country in the throes of revolution, and an impassioned work of mourning.
Matar’s father, Jaballa Matar, was a Libyan businessman who became, in the late 1970s, a prominent critic of Muammar el-Qaddafi’s dictatorship. After fleeing to Cairo, where he and his family lived for a decade, Matar was abducted by Egyptian security agents in 1990 and turned over to the Libyan regime. He was jailed in Tripoli’s Abu Salim prison, a notorious torture site, where approximately 1,270 prisoners were massacred in June 1996.
This agonized family history is refracted in Matar’s previous two books, both novels. “In the Country of Men” (2006) is a child’s-eye view of the Libyan dictatorship, the story of how a father’s doomed rebellion is experienced by his wife and only child. “Anatomy of a Disappearance” (2011), a streamlined, noirish fiction, is centered on the tale of a father’s abduction and the son’s sexually fraught relation to his young stepmother.
“The Return” is a more mature and ultimately more satisfying book than either of the novels. It moves outside the claustrophobic triangle of family romance to include the stories of brothers, uncles and cousins, some of whose stories rival Jaballa Matar’s in their dreadfulness. Whereas “In the Country of Men” is constrained by Matar’s choice of a child protagonist (who, like many fictional children, is made to know things he surely cannot), the memoir gives free rein to his articulate and adult self.
In the memoir’s most rapturous passages, which recall Albert Camus’s essays on his Algerian childhood, Matar evokes his rediscovery of the Libyan landscape, the luminous Mediterranean coast and the austerity of the interior, where the earth “stood as all the unpeopled landscapes of Libya stand, clean and witnessing.” Dazzled by the light of Benghazi, Matar and his wife, the photographer Diana Matar, fantasize about spending part of their year in that city.
By the time Matar arrived, Libya’s prisons, including Abu Salim, had been emptied. The former captives, many from Matar’s own family, were free to tell their stories for the first time. Matar’s accounts of these talks are remarkable for their emotional rawness and acute insight. In his fiction as well as his nonfiction, Matar continually thrusts himself and his characters into situations of discomfort, speechlessness and trauma, all while maintaining a coolly analytic eye.
“The Return” includes several chapters on Matar’s personal dealings with Seif al-Islam. As the progressive face of Qaddafi’s regime to the outside world — and persona grata with Britain’s political establishment — the dictator’s son promised to help Matar locate his father. These are among the most chilling pages of the memoir. The younger Qaddafi is at once violently unpredictable and coldly reptilian; he congratulates himself for his magnanimity in helping Matar, then forgets or breaks his promises. Despite his callous manipulation of Matar’s hopes, Qaddafi never gives up on the idea that he can seduce the exile back home.
Matar’s interest in authoritarian politics has less to do with its apparatus of repression, its surveillance of intellectuals or the psychology of charismatic leadership — traditional areas of scholarly and journalistic interest — and more with the way this style of politics makes itself felt in everyday life, in everything from hand gestures and ritual greetings to home décor and the relations between parents and children. In his attentions to these details, the province of realist fiction as well as memoir, Matar gives the reader an intimate sense of what living under a dictatorship feels like, rather than an account of how the system works.
“Can you become a man without becoming your father?” This question, posed by the child narrator of “In the Country of Men,” lies at the center of Matar’s work. His fiction is especially attentive to the ways in which children grow up by imitating their elders, and how Qaddafi’s dictatorship offered only violent and patriarchal models of successful masculinity. To become a man in this society meant acquiescing to a world of rigid hierarchies and coded aggression.
The portrait of Jaballa Matar that emerges over the course of his son’s memoir — pieced together from personal memory and the memory of those who shared his prison — is frightening in its purity and sense of purpose. He is an archetype of the principled dissident: uncompromising in the face of power, generous to his comrades, unbowed by adversity. “Don’t put yourselves in competition with Libya,” the son remembers his father telling the family. “You will always lose.” It is an unnerving recollection, suggesting the sacrifices that Jaballa was willing to make for his political ideals.
