It’s relatively easy to understand how the bitter grievances of the white working class drive support for Donald Trump. What’s less understandable is why a plurality of college-educated white men backs the Republican Party’s combative soon-to-be nominee.
According to a recent Pew study, white non-Hispanic male college graduates support Trump over Hillary Clinton by 49 to 42 percent, even as she holds on to her overall lead.
Pew is not alone in its findings about college men. An ABC News/Washington Post survey in June gave Trump a 49-44 lead among white men who have completed four years of college.
We often overlook the pro-Trump leanings of white men with college degrees, in part because white women with four-year degrees back Clinton 57-35 percent, and most reports combine the total. When both sexes are counted, Clinton leads by six points. The gender gap this year is historic.
While white male college-educated voters are not commonly seen as part of the Trump-led nationalist movement that rejects globalism and multiculturalism, poll data shows that a substantial percentage of them do belong in this camp.
“White Republican college graduates and white Republicans who do not have a degree generally agree on many political and policy issues,” the Pew Research Center found in a March 2016 report.
Nearly half of college-educated Republicans, men and women, believe immigrants “burden the country by taking jobs, housing and health care,” a view shared by 62 percent of non-college Republicans. A plurality of those with college educations, 38 percent, say that they would be more likely to vote for a candidate “who wants to deport all immigrants in the U.S. illegally.” Half of those without degrees agree. A striking 64 percent of college-educated white Republicans support building a “fence along the entire U.S.-Mexico border,” as do 75 percent of non-college Republicans.
I asked pollsters and political scientists why Trump appeals to educated white men.
The past 50 years have witnessed a very substantial redistribution from white males to minorities and women. I supported and now believe in the public policies that accomplished this redistribution. But redistribution it is.
The adoption of redistributive policies favoring women and minorities has, in Rosenthal’s unvarnished view, fundamentally changed the character of the political parties.
identity politics is a matter of social justice that has had limited economic benefits for white males throughout the income distribution.
There has been a large expansion of the bottom tier, with relatively more students graduating from Cal State Hayward or Cal State Dominguez Hills than from Berkeley or UCLA. And those graduating from lower tier schools may not be doing all that well in the economy.
Male college graduates who are struggling are more likely to join white working class men in the larger insurgency against globalization and free trade that is taking place here and all over Europe.
A parallel reaction, often overlooked or disregarded by the media, academia and the left, can be found on other issues, especially immigration.
On a separate front, between 1999 and 2015, the inflation-adjusted value of imported goods has grown from $1.3 trillion to $2.2 trillion. According to recent polls, majorities of Americans see the increase in imported goods as “taking away U.S. jobs.” A May 16-19 ABC News/Washington Post survey found, for example, that 53 percent of respondents believe that “trade with other countries” eliminates more jobs than it creates in the United States. Among whites, the percentage grows to 59 percent.
one must first look at the globalists, and at how their changing values may drive many of their fellow citizens to support right-wing political leaders.
“normative threat” button in the minds of those who are predisposed to authoritarianism, and these actions can drive status quo conservatives to join authoritarians in fighting back against the globalists and their universalistic projects.
Haidt’s use of the concept of “normative threat” is helpful in exploring other challenges to traditional cultural norms, including male reaction to the nomination of a woman for president.
There is a substantial body of research that suggests gender-based reasons why men — college-educated men included — lean toward Trump.
Alice Eagly, a social psychologist at Northwestern, contends that gender-based group stereotypes remain a powerful force, particularly in terms of how people gauge the ability of women to handle different tasks.
In a 2014 paper written with Anne Koenig, a social psychologist at the University of San Diego, Eagly reported that the jobs most commonly associated with men include business professional, politicians, C.E.O. and lawyer while the jobs most commonly associated with women included teacher, secretary, nurse and homemaker.
These widely held group stereotypes incline voters “to disqualify” women seeking positions stereotypically held by men.
most of the movement of women from homemaking to employment has put them in occupational roles that are perceived as not especially agentically demanding but highly communally demanding.
According to Catalyst, women currently make up 15.4 percent of C.E.O.s.
are apparent in their employment in the expanding service, educational, and health care sectors of the economy. Specifically, the six most common occupations for women in the United States are secretary and administrative assistant; registered nurse; elementary and middle school teacher; cashier; nursing, psychiatric, and home health aides; and retail salespersons.
women’s identities as aspiring political leaders continue to be problematic, and require women to negotiate a double bind: if they are too feminine, they are deemed incompetent. If they are too masculine, they are considered not likeable.
An ABC News/Washington Post poll last month found that 75 percent of white men had a negative view of Clinton and 23 percent had a favorable view. In the case of college-educated white men, the combined May and June NBC News/Wall Street Journal surveys show a decisively unfavorable iew of Clinton (62-26).
A number of pollsters pointed out to me that hostility to Clinton is more important than the appeal of Trump in the continuing support for Trump among white college men. “Her negatives are awful,” the Republican pollster Bill McInturff noted in an email.
The paradox of Trump’s support among educated white men is that even though a plurality told Pew that they will vote for Trump, NBC/WSJ poll data shows that a clear majority — 58 percent — view Trump unfavorably. That is, they plan to vote for Trump without liking him.
Bias against women in leadership roles often accompanies bias against racial and ethnic minorities and may contribute to the willingness of white men — both college and non-college — to accept flawed leadership from Trump rather than grant authority to women — or to African-Americans or Hispanics.
While politically speaking college men are keeping a relatively low profile this year and not broadcasting their views, there are hard-right conservative activists more than willing to grab center stage.
With Hillary, a kinder, gentler, let’s-bring-everyone-to-the-fold schtick is dead on arrival, because it’s so disingenuous, at least to us who don’t subscribe to the gooey social justice warrior mentality.
To Kimberly Ross and those who support her views, “gooey social justice” refers to the conjoined issues of race and gender. On these issues, Hillary Clinton and her progressive and liberal supporters have starkly different views from those of Donald Trump and his loyalists — to put it mildly.
The rage that this progressive perspective incites on the far right appears to animate, in varying degrees, the white men who support Trump. This anti-liberal rage was put on display in the extreme reaction to Hillary Clinton’s public comments in the aftermath of the slaughter of five policemen in Dallas last week.
I’m going to be talking to white people — I think we’re the ones who have to have to start listening to the legitimate cries that are coming from our African-American fellow citizens.
We do need to listen to those who say “Black Lives Matter.” Too many black Americans, especially young men, feel like their lives are disposable. And they worry every single day about what might happen. They have reason to feel that way. And it’s absolutely unacceptable.
To a Democrat, Clinton’s words sound reassuring and healing. Conservatives hear her words very differently: “Hillary Clinton Blames Whites, Cops for Deaths of Young Black Men” declared the July 8 headline on Breitbart.com.
At some point, her campaign will have to grapple with why her support has cratered so badly among men. Did the campaign’s initial plan to play up Clinton’s soft, grandmotherly persona backfire at a time of mounting global turmoil? Is it a consequence of the campaign’s unabashedly liberal turn on social issues, particularly on abortion rights, immigration, and gun control? Or is it simply a product of her overall low approval numbers, dampened by the ongoing developments about her handling of classified email at the State Department?
In fact, Clinton may not have to grapple with the cratering of white male support just as long as Trump craters even more deeply among women and minorities. Women, after all, make up 53 percent of voters. But the depth of his support among college men signals the continuing volatility and disquiet of the electorate.