When Donald J. Trump made provocative remarks on Wednesday about Russian intelligence services and Hillary Clinton’s email, readers of The New York Times responded with a record number of comments.
More than 9,220 comments on the article were approved by moderators, who review nearly every one before they are published on The Times’s digital platforms. Thousands more comments were posted on The Times’s Facebook page.
The article became the most-commented on in The Times’s history.
At his news conference, Mr. Trump said he hoped Russian intelligence services had hacked Mrs. Clinton’s email, and encouraged them to publish whatever they might have stolen, essentially urging them to commit cyberespionage.
Here are excerpts from the comments, some of which have been lightly edited for clarity.
Some readers said Mr. Trump’s comments showed he lacked self-restraint and signaled that he could not be trusted to keep the nation’s secrets safe.
— Julius in New York.
— GMS in Chicago.
— D.C. Researcher in Washington.
Some readers said Mr. Trump was committing an act of patriotism by seeking to expose Mrs. Clinton’s email and were skeptical that he intended harm with his remarks.
— Florida Len in Florida.
— Gary Taustine in New York.
— Jim in New York.
— Gary James Richards of Oak Ridge, N.J., on The Times’s Facebook page.
Several commenters accused Mr. Trump of sedition or treason and demanded that he be punished.
“That Donald Trump would encourage a tyrant like Vladimir Putin and his surrogates to meddle in our affairs is treason of the highest order.
The fact that he would encourage our adversary for his own political gain shows he would stop at nothing to get what he wants. He doesn’t care about anyone or anything other than himself.
— JG in Old North Bridge, Mass.
— Erik in Boise, Idaho.
Some readers suggested Mr. Trump was angling for the spotlight during the Democratic National Convention.
— Lib in Utah.
— Doctor Jay in New York.
Some readers compared Mrs. Clinton’s fitness to lead the country in the wake of her email scandal with Mr. Trump’s request for Russia to produce the emails. Other readers said that equivalence was false.
— John in Chevy Chase. Md.
— MDNewell in Midlothian, Va.
