A look at how some of the claims made by Donald J. Trump and other speakers hold up.
CLEVELAND — Donald J. Trump’s acceptance speech here was filled with Trump-like hyperbole and the kind of vague political rhetoric that is hard to pin down.
But there were also facts.
In describing the problems that he would seek to fix from the Oval Office, Mr. Trump offered a series of grim facts about crime, the economy, and foreign policy. “Here at our convention, there will be no lies,” Mr. Trump said.
Many of Mr. Trump’s facts appear to be true, though the Republican presidential nominee sometimes failed to offer the entire story, or provide all of the context that might help to explain his numbers.
And in some cases, the facts seemed inflated or misleading, part of a broader ideological message that Mr. Trump was hoping to convey.
Fact Check: Those statistics are based on one analysis of preliminary crime data released by the Justice Department, and they accurately reflect what officials say is a spike in murders in some big cities. It leaves out the drop in others, like New York City, which saw a 25 percent drop in homicides in the first three months of 2016.
Fact Check: Those statistics are based on an analysis performed by The Washington Post, which found no clear pattern in which cities saw increases in homicides.
Fact Check: This is largely true. The Chicago police department reports 2,242 shootings so far in 2016. And while it is unclear exactly what Mr. Trump means by “the Chicago area,” that figure appears to track with reported murders since the start of 2009.
Fact Check: In fact, the Officer Down Memorial Page, which tracks officer deaths, reports that 68 police officers have been killed so far this year, almost exactly the same as the 69 who were killed in the same period last year.
Fact Check: Those numbers come from a report by the Department of Homeland Security, which told Congress late last year that nearly 1 million undocumented immigrants have been ordered deported but remain in the country. Mr. Trump did not mention that most of those 180,000 are likely people charged with nonviolent crimes.
Donald J. Trump accepted the Republican presidential nomination with an emphatic appeal to Americans who feel that their country is spiraling out of control.
Fact Check: This is true, according to reports from the Border Patrol, which said that more than 51,000 families have been apprehended on the border in the first nine months of the fiscal year, compared to about 40,000 last fiscal year. But that is still less than 2014, when a surge of families across the border caused a political stir.
How we analyzed the last night of the Republican National Convention, which featured Ivanka Trump, Peter Thiel, Donald J. Trump and more.
Fact Check: According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the unemployment rate of African Americans ages 16-19 in June was 31.2 percent (among whites of the same age, it was 14.1 percent).
Fact Check: This is mostly true. Median household income in 2000 was $57,724; in 2014, which has the most recent available data, it was $53,657.
Fact Check: The goods deficit — more imported goods, less exported goods — was $763 billion last year. But that includes agricultural products and raw materials like coal. Moreover, the total trade deficit last year was only $500 billion because the U.S. runs a trade surplus in services.
Fact Check: The national debt was $10.6 trillion on the day Obama took office. It was $19.2 trillion in April, so not quite double, but close.
Fact Check: As of October, this figure was largely accurate, according to the United States Department of Agriculture.
Fact Check: Mr. Trump is mostly right. But Libya, Syria and Egypt were swept up in the Arab Spring, an uprising out of Mrs. Clinton’s and Mr. Obama’s control. And the sanctions on Iran were just getting ramped up at that time; they became far tougher under the Obama administration than they were during the Bush administration. That helped force Tehran to the negotiating table for last year’s deal.
Fact Check: The deal does not directly give Iran money, but by easing or terminating sanctions, it would allow Iran to have access to many billions of dollars of its own money that has been frozen in overseas accounts. And the exact value of those sanctions is debatable.
Fact Check: This is true, as Mrs. Clinton said in September she wanted to “move from what is a good start with 10,000 to 65,000.” But she also said she would improve the already extensive vetting process, especially from Syria.