His tumor had shrunk by a third.
By August, more than half of the tumor had vanished. The rash came back, however, and worsened. Steroids worked again, but in October a far more alarming side effect set in: breathing trouble.
Have You Received Immunotherapy Treatment for Cancer?
The New York Times would like to hear from doctors and patients who have experience giving or receiving immunotherapy treatment for cancer.
 Each T-cell has clawlike receptors on its surface that can recognize and lock onto antigens, foreign or abnormal protein fragments on the surface of infected or cancerous cells.
The T-cell must be activated before it can find and attack cancer cells. A specialized cell presents the T-cell with an antigen from a cancer cell, along with a co-stimulator protein. The T-cell begins to hunt down and kill any cells that are covered with the same antigen.
Cancer cells can avoid destruction by taking advantage of a switch on the T-cell called an immune checkpoint. The checkpoint can shut down the T-cell and suppress the immune response, allowing the cancer to grow undisturbed.
Drugs known as checkpoint inhibitors can physically block the checkpoint, which frees the immune system to attack the cancer. 
The drug the woman on the plane thanked him for was Yervoy, the first of the checkpoint inhibitors. It was approved for advanced melanoma in 2011. Dr. Allison — a scientist, not a physician — has won numerous research awards and is expected by many to win a Nobel Prize. 
Dr. Allison wondered if it might be possible to block the checkpoint and launch the T-cells against cancer. He and a graduate student, Matthew Krummel, developed an antibody — a molecule made by certain cells of the immune system — that would stick to the checkpoint and block it. When the researchers, including Dana Leach, a postdoctoral fellow, gave the antibody to mice with cancer, tumors vanished.
But doctors do not know how long the treatments should continue. They wonder how long the remissions will last, and whether some will even turn out to be cures, Dr. Siefker-Radtke said. Some studies were planned to last just a year or two, longer than the life expectancy of most patients with advanced disease. Researchers did not think they would have to decide whether to keep treating people for years.
