The neighborhood beyond Neptune is becoming ever more crowded, with astronomers announcing this week the discovery of another likely dwarf planet.
A survey at the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope in Hawaii has been tracking more than 600 bodies in a ring of icy debris known as the Kuiper belt. One of them turned out to be the likely dwarf planet.
“This is a big fish among a whole lot of small ones we’re working with,” said Michele Bannister, a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Victoria in British Columbia who is working on the survey.
In the year since NASA’s New Horizons spacecraft flew past Pluto, planetary astronomers continue to make new discoveries in the Kuiper belt and what it might reveal about the earliest days of the solar system. The study of these objects also offers hints about the formation and migration of the gas giant planets: Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune.
Even if the newly found world is a dwarf planet, however, it will probably be years before it might earn official designation — part of the confusion of definitions that followed the International Astronomical Union’s decision in 2006 to demote Pluto and reduce the solar system to eight planets from nine.
If dwarf planets were to be reclassified as planets, as advocates for restoring Pluto to full planethood status hope to do, forget about ever trying to devise a workable mnemonic device.
The new object, designated 2015 RR245, was first spotted in February as the astronomers looked through images taken five months earlier. Further observations a few weeks ago confirmed the object’s 700-year loping path around the sun.
The astronomers cannot directly measure the object’s size. Rather, from its brightness, how far away it is and an assumption of how reflective its surface is — most Kuiper belt objects are roughly the darkness of coal — they estimated the diameter to be 370 to 500 miles wide.
They also cannot directly tell if 2015 RR245 is round — the definition of a dwarf planet requires that the gravity is strong enough to pull the body into the shape of a ball.
Mimas, a 250-mile-wide icy moon of Saturn, is round, and it is likely that the much larger 2015 RR245 is also round.
The astronomical union has been slow to designate new dwarf planets, adding just two since 2006: Haumea and Makemake. But there is a slew of additional Kuiper belt objects larger than Mimas.
Dr. Brown’s computer keeps track of large Kuiper belt objects, and currently, 96 of them appear to be larger than Mimas and thus most likely to be round dwarf planets. Another 300 are smaller, but possibly could still be large enough to be round. Dwarf planets are “not a rare class of objects in the outer solar system,” Dr. Brown said.
Dr. Brown and a colleague, Konstantin Batygin, further upended the field this year when they proposed the existence of a new planet, somewhere between the size of Earth and Neptune, in an orbit far beyond Pluto. They made their prediction based on the orbits of distant objects that all appeared to be aligned in roughly the same direction, nudged by the gravitational force of the unseen planet, which they are calling Planet Nine.
Dr. Bannister’s dwarf planet is not distant enough to be affected by Planet Nine, but at least one of the 600 objects tracked by the survey is. She declined to give details, but has described it in talks, including one attended by Dr. Brown.
Dr. Brown said Planet Nine, if it exists, could be confirmed in two to three years.
He agrees with Dr. Brown’s assertion that many objects as small as 2015 RR245 or smaller are almost certainly dwarf planets, and he thinks they should all be planets.
