The crepe is moon-white. Folded, it looks like a beaded clutch, studded with pearls from the world’s tiniest oysters.
The pearls are hydrated tapioca flour, sifted into a dry hot pan until they stick together. The result looks brittle, but under the teeth it sinks and clings, as chewy inside as Japanese mochi.
At Beach Bistro 96, a low-slung Brazilian sea shack that opened in May a block from Rockaway Beach in Queens, the crepe may come engorged with guacamole, whole spinach leaves and relaxed, if not quite melted, mozzarella; or, for dessert, strawberries striped with condensed milk, under an anarchy of coconut flakes like a parade’s morning after.
Tapioca flour likewise lends stretch to pão de queijo, Brazilian cousins to French gougères, rich with eggs and Parmesan beaten into the dough. The ones here are among the best I’ve had, barely there puffs like held breaths, with stray volcanic fissures and an escalation of texture, from thin crispy shell to implosion.
There is an elasticity to the mood here, too. The chef, Carlos Varella, 42, grew up in the Brazilian port town Santos, where his parents ran a restaurant. He learned to surf at age 7 and turned pro in his late teens, traveling from break to break while modeling on the side.
In 2006 he settled in Manhattan with Andressa Junqueira, a fellow model and Brazilian, from Belo Horizonte; they married in Central Park and made pilgrimages to the Rockaways during hurricane swells.
Only recently did he turn to the kitchen, working the line at Panca, a Peruvian restaurant in the West Village, and studying at the International Culinary Center.
His menu thus far is modest and mostly snacks, like coxinha, a giant teardrop of a croquette (the shape is meant to evoke a drumstick) creamy with chicken and Catupiry, a brand of ricottalike Brazilian cheese.
Pasteis are empanadas by another name, flaking dough crimped around ground beef set off by mustard, green olives and paprika, or cosseting guava jam and mozzarella, the swoony pair that the Brazilians call Romeu e Julieta. Quinotto turns quinoa into risotto, the Andean grains clotted with heavy cream and Parmesan, yet somehow still fluffy.
Among the few entrees, picanha, a plain-spoken slab of beef sirloin cap rubbed with salt, arrives glowering from the grill: respectable, if unsurprising. Twice a week, the menu promises feijoada, Brazil’s national stew of disintegrating black beans and deep cuts of pork, but, sadly, there was none when I visited. Instead, I was offered chicken stroganoff, a Russian classic mysteriously beloved by Brazilians, here tinged with soy sauce and, Mr. Varella explained, “a lot of ketchup.” It may be a dish only a nostalgist could love.
Beach Bistro 96 is more address than name, marking where Rockaway Beach Boulevard meets 96th Street. The one outward hint of culinary allegiance is a sign on the burnt-orange storefront that says Terra Brasilis. Inside, banana trees crowd the wallpaper. A surfboard leans in a corner, although not one of Mr. Varella’s: Those belong to the waves.
He and Ms. Junqueira, 33, moved to the Rockaways three months ago with their two young children. She is a serene, capable presence in the ramshackle dining room, unfolding slat tables while balancing her 7-month-old son, Kalani, on her hip, and dispensing glasses of caju juice, a nutty extract from the false fruit of the cashew tree, and excellent near-caipirinhas, with seltzer a chaste stand-in for cachaça.
I couldn’t help worrying how the restaurant will last the winter, its front window just a hole with wooden shutters. (Mr. Varella said he planned to install glass.) How will they survive, this couple who have stepped away from the city’s maelstrom and staked their future on a tenuous little shanty, by a beach that, come dusk, is an aftermath of gravelly sand tagged with chip bags and candy-bar foil?
Still, it’s beautiful. Maybe they know something about how to live that I don’t.