Poached chicken, fresh tarragon and buttery pecans elevate the classic chicken salad.
The first time I was served a Southern luncheon plate, my mind froze, unable to make sense of what was in front of me. Why was a mound of chicken salad next to a mound of red Jell-O? What was their relationship to the dollop of mayonnaise and the celery sticks? How did the cheese straws fit in?
I was in the presence of a new and wonderful meal: luncheon. Today, most Americans eat lunch, if anything, at midday, and that is as likely to be a green juice or a protein bar as a meal.
Still, in certain circles at certain times — most notably, a gathering of women in the American South — nothing but a sit-down luncheon will do. And the inevitable centerpiece of a luncheon is, was and forever shall be chicken salad.
“What else could you possibly serve to ladies?” said Nathalie Dupree, the author of “Mastering the Art of Southern Cooking,” only partly joking.
Chicken salad — now most often a tired-looking deli special, best hidden between slices of bread — has a proud history when served elegantly: in an iced, lettuce-lined coupe; molded into a ring; or scooped into a thin, crisp toast cup, as it has been since 1965 at the Swan Coach House in Atlanta.
It was often the centerpiece of a special-occasion meal when Ms. Dupree was a little girl, she said, reserved for Sundays, socials and summer parties. “Summer was when the hens stopped laying and had to be killed off,” she said.
This recipe is the best of both. Whether eaten with a fork or in a sandwich, when made with care and good ingredients, chicken salad has a delicious dignity.
The base for good chicken salad is, of course, good chicken. Many recipes suggest starting with a rotisserie chicken.
I suggest that a rotisserie chicken is a recipe for disaster. Unless perfectly cooked and freshly shredded, roast chicken is almost always too dry and stringy for salad. And in any case, dark meat has no place in the dish. A whole breast left over from a really nicely roasted chicken is fine.
What lifts chicken salad up is the pure, clean texture of breast meat — one of the very few really good uses for this almost entirely flavorless cut. Poaching it is the only way to get the right texture.
But poaching is not as easy as it should be. On today’s high-B.T.U. stoves, it is often impossible to keep a pot of water at a low simmer — and if the water boils, the meat contracts and stiffens and is ruined.
To counter this, some years ago I adopted a Chinese method for poaching that is foolproof, low maintenance and ideal for summer cooking. All it requires is a heavy pot — enameled or plain cast-iron is ideal — and a bit of nerve.
Other cooks build plushiness in other ways. Ms. Dupree, and many other Southern cooks, hold that the meat should be hand-shredded from the bone, and never touched by a knife.
Kenny Shopsin of Shopsin’s on the Lower East Side, a purist who puts nothing but chicken and mayonnaise in chicken salad, says that the breast-meat chunks should be hand-massaged “until they are frayed on the edges and semisoft in the center,” the better to absorb more mayonnaise. Neat and firm cubes are not preferred; the chicken should have a natural feel.
Mayonnaise and summer were long considered incompatible because traditional homemade mayonnaise contains raw egg yolk, a hospitable environment for bacteria like salmonella and E. coli.
But commercial mayonnaise, because it lacks raw egg and is spiked with acidic ingredients like vinegar and citric acid, actually slows the growth of bacteria. (This was widely reported after a 2008 study and confirmed by the F.D.A. in 2014.) In addition to acid, if there are preservatives in the mayonnaise, so much the better for the buffet.
But preservatives and acids are not better for the taste of your chicken salad. The dish is infinitely improved with homemade mayonnaise, easy to make with a food processor and even easier to make with a hand blender. For safety, always serve chicken salad with homemade mayonnaise well chilled; it (and any other mayonnaise-bound salad) tastes better that way anyway.
Duke’s mayonnaise, which is free of sweeteners and tangier than most factory versions, is my favorite, but it is available only in stores in the Southern states. (It can also be ordered online.) I like to add crème fraîche or sour cream for chicken salad, which fluffs the texture of the dressing; mayonnaise alone can be greasy.
There is almost no ingredient that has not been stirred into chicken salad by some adventurous cook. Many people like a sweet element, like fresh grapes or dried fruit; some lean toward sour, with chopped pickles and mustard. All these variations can be spun on the basic combination of poached chicken and creamy dressing.
This chicken salad makes a very fine sandwich for lunch. But scooped into a lettuce leaf on a chilled plate on a hot summer day, with sliced tomatoes and radishes on the side, it makes a perfect luncheon. Even if it happens to be served at dinnertime.
