Snow, the popular South Korean Snapchat clone, has a dog filter for images, right, that looks very similar to Snapchat’s, left.
HONG KONG — It sends short, self-destructing messages. It has a place to share videos called stories. It has camera filters that transform a person into a koala, a fried egg, a police officer or any number of foods, animals and figures.
But this is not Snapchat. This is Snow, a popular South Korean Snapchat clone that shows how even the most popular American smartphone apps face an uphill battle in fast-growing Asian countries.
Snow focuses on Asian consumers. Like Snapchat, it offers users an array of filters that can add dog ears, glowing eyes and bulbous foreheads to selfies. But Snow also lets users add bottles of soju, the Korean liquor, or images of Korean pop stars. Another filter adds a rain of fried chicken, a favorite South Korean nosh. For Japan there are sumo wrestler and sushi filters.
A police officer filter on Snow, right, and on Snapchat, left.
As a result, a significant part of Snow’s roughly 30 million downloads have been from Asia since the app’s September introduction, according to Han Dong-keun, a spokesman for its parent, the South Korean internet company Naver. Notably, it is also gaining traction in China, where the country’s 700 million users make up the world’s largest internet market. There, Snow has a major advantage: Snapchat is blocked in China.
Snow’s popularity in Asia underscores a new reality for American app makers. Previously, popularity in the United States often led to corresponding growth overseas. Today, well-established internet firms in Japan, South Korea and China can move quickly into those niches.
The Snow stories page, right, compared with the Snapchat version, left.
For Snapchat, the biggest social network success out of America in recent years, the success of Snow shows that any original advantage it may have had in East Asia’s vast and lucrative markets is fading.
“A lot of start-ups are thinking if they build a product, they’ll be able to go global, but that’s just not the case anymore,” said Tim Chae, a partner at 500 Startups, who heads a venture capital fund focused on Korean start-ups.
Snow offers photo filters tailored to the Asian market, and a significant part of the app’s roughly 30 million downloads have been from Asia since its September introduction.
Mr. Han, the spokesman for Snow, acknowledged it was similar to Snapchat, but said Snow had unique features like video chat. Like Snapchat, its primary user demographic is teenagers and young adults.
East Asian countries have provided a ready market for new social networks centered on video, selfies, animations and entertainment. The new social networks are largely used on smartphones — a transition that established social networks like Facebook are trying to make. Japan has Line, which like Snow is owned by Naver. China has WeChat, a messaging and social media app that has become nearly ubiquitous on Chinese smartphones.
Ivy Zhou, another Chinese Snow user, attends university in Hong Kong, which does not have China’s internet censorship and where she is free to use Snapchat. Snapchat’s social network is far more vibrant than Snow’s, she said, but in China, Snow could fill a fun niche.
“In mainland China, because they can’t use Snapchat, I’m sure people will use Snow more,” she said.
Snow’s initial success could offer a road map for Asian social media networks, many of which have struggled to break out of their home markets. While South Korea boasts a mobile and tech-savvy market, its internet companies suffer from doing business in a relatively small market.
Even Line, Naver’s biggest international success, with a major presence in Japan and Thailand, has ultimately seen its success fall short of other chat apps like WeChat or Snapchat, in part because it does not have a large home market.
Naver still has plans to bring Line to United States, according to the company, but Mr. Chae, the venture capital investor, said Korean companies were now looking at China instead.
