LOS ANGELES — Last month, when the 32-year-old co-owner of Hostess Brands plunked down $100 million for the Playboy Mansion, the snickering was instant: Hugh Hefner’s pleasure palace had sold to the maker of snack cakes like Twinkies and Ho Hos.
The buyer, J. Daren Metropoulos, heir to a fortune built on Chef Boyardee meatballs, Pabst Blue Ribbon beer and Bumble Bee tuna, sure seemed to fit the playboy bill. He was the kind of guy who, judging by a quick web search, could put even Mr. Hefner to hard-partying shame. One photo showed the young tycoon posing with a P.B.R. tall boy on a private jet while wearing sunglasses and a trucker hat. Another found him whooping it up at the Playboy Mansion with Snoop Dogg and several Playmates.
Mr. Metropoulos and his family, including the patriarch, C. Dean Metropoulos, declined interview requests. So did Mr. Hefner. Two real estate agents who worked on the sale, which includes a stipulation that Mr. Hefner, 90, and his wife, Crystal Harris, 30, can continue to live in the mansion until his death, did not respond to queries, although a third agent involved, Jeff Hyland, added an interesting tidbit: The Metropouloses had tried to buy the Playboy Mansion six years earlier and failed.
“The offer then was for about $75 million,” Mr. Hyland said.
Adding to the mystery, the few people who did agree to speak on the record about Mr. Metropoulos (pictured on his company’s website in a pinstriped suit against a row of serious-looking books) described him as a saintly homebody.
But I still had unanswered questions. What are his interests? Sports? Art? Travel? Nobody seemed to know. A spokeswoman for the Metropoulos family did confirm that Mr. Metropoulos, who grew up in Greenwich, Conn., did not graduate from college, having dropped out after his sophomore year to work for his father. He had been studying business at the University of Connecticut.
If Mr. Metropoulos, who has never married and has no children, is as ordinary as family friends insist, preferring a night at home to hanging at Chateau Marmont — and yet still has an unruly public image — he may be the perfect fit for the Playboy Mansion. Purchased by Mr. Hefner in 1971 for about $1 million, the 29-room, five-acre estate (replete with a zoo license and year-round fireworks permit) now bears little resemblance in reality to its mythic reputation.
The Playboy Mansion’s history as a den of iniquity is true, but most of the more libidinous stories date from the distant past. These days, the parties are primarily of a corporate nature, and upkeep has been slight. A few years ago, for an article on Mr. Hefner, I was given a daytime tour of the house and grounds. It was gross. The famous grotto pools, linked in 2011 to an outbreak of Legionnaires’ disease, reminded me of one of those fetid animal enclosures at a low-rent marine exhibit. Don’t get me started on the bathroom off the mansion’s main hall. There is a separate house that contains arcade games and has bedrooms with carpeting I could only describe as crispy.
Whether hipster doofus or titan of industry — or a bit of both — Mr. Metropoulos may have plans for the Playboy Mansion that go beyond what has been reported. The official line is that Mr. Metropoulos, with a passion for architecture and history, wants to restore the estate and connect it to his adjacent compound. Mr. Metropoulos bought his current home from Mr. Hefner for $18 million in 2009; the previous occupants were Mr. Hefner’s former wife Kimberley Conrad and their two sons.
One reason for the trepidation: Mr. Metropoulos has been a hotelier before.
In 2003, Dean Metropoulos spent $10.9 million for the tattered Castle at Tarrytown in New York. Daren took a particular interest in the refurbishment, pouring himself into plans for a spa, the overhaul of a restaurant and minutiae like drapery selection, according to Gilbert Baeriswil, the hotel’s former general manager. “I remember him saying over and over, ‘I want to see more carpet samples,’” said Mr. Baeriswil, who now runs the Trapp Family Lodge in Stowe, Vt.
When he found out that Mr. Metropoulos was buying the Playboy Mansion, Mr. Baeriswil said he reached out to his former boss.
