WELLFLEET, Mass. — I was early for a performance here last week, so I took my sandals off and went for a barefoot stroll along the beach, on the hard, wet sand below the high-tide line. Not the sort of thing I had time to do eons ago, when I was a baby theater critic on Cape Cod, where the residents work long summer hours while the tourists play.
The high season was always busy then, with lots to review, and I did what so many young critics do. In love with the sound of my own voice, unaware of how lastingly harmful meanness could be, I was sometimes far harsher than I should have been. One furious reader whose girlfriend was in a musical I had savaged wrote a letter to the paper where I worked, calling me a dilettante and suggesting I ought to be selling shoes, not reviewing drama.
I didn’t take his career advice, though I did eventually leave the Cape. Now, when I return, seeing theater is one of my favorite indulgences. So last week I headed to Harbor Stage Company, eager to see Brenda Withers’s “The Kritik,” a mock-Chekhovian comedy about a small-town reviewer determined to stop pulling his punches.
Of all the theaters I love, the tiny space that Harbor Stage occupies is most deeply embedded in my heart, going back to the years when Wellfleet Harbor Actors Theater thrived there. Harbor Stage’s home is a squat, windswept, utterly humble little building on the harbor that I think of as a beach shack, though it’s more solid than that. The work I encountered there in the 1990s — plays like Paula Vogel’s “The Baltimore Waltz” and, years before its New York premiere, her “Hot ‘n’ Throbbing” — helped to form me as a critic.
So there was a palimpsest quality to watching “The Kritik,” the ghost of my younger self right there with me to hear the play’s exhilaratingly impassioned, many-layered challenge to critics, delivered with unusual sympathy. Ms. Withers — a founder of Harbor Stage Company who is probably best known for writing and performing the celebrity sendup “Matt & Ben,” with her friend Mindy Kaling, before Ms. Kaling became a celebrity herself — is arguing for something that could only help the theater to thrive: robust criticism that’s simultaneously more honest and more humane.
“Oh, no one remembers what a critic writes,” a sophisticated stranger named Kazmir (Robert Kropf) says to a local actress, Tatiana Bukhavitsky (Molly Kimmerling), late in “The Kritik,” set in a small-town tavern in 19th-century Russia.
Tatiana hasn’t had to worry about any such brutality since she’s moved to Abliveta, a provincial hamlet whose sole critic, Volya Vedininski (Jonathan Fielding), has always observed a policy of misguided boosterism, praising even the most dreadful dreck.
Now, though, Volya has resolved to write his first honest review, a prospect some of his readers anticipate with eager schadenfreude. But when he walks into the bar after the show at the Abliveta Playhouse, he is both troubled and stunned. The play he saw tonight was good. If he tells the truth, he’s going to have to admit that — and then how will this review differ from any other?
“The Kritik” is a satire about theater and the nature of community in a small town, so, of course, its concerns reverberate in Wellfleet, with a summertime population of about 17,000 and a mere 3,500 year-round. But every place is a small town in its way, or so I’ve always thought.
Theater critics in New York often write for an international audience, but they still breathe the same air as the actors during the show. Post-performance, just like the Abliveta Playhouse crowd, big-city artists might repair to a nearby watering hole. And when the reviews come out, a critic’s opinion may matter to them deeply.
That’s why Ms. Withers’s call for truth-telling is so striking — but then again, “The Kritik” is a post-show theater-crowd debate transformed into intelligent entertainment. Ms. Withers, clearly, has had similar fangs-bared arguments about raves and pans, about who’s talented and who’s not so secretly a hack. Theater people often extol supporting one another’s work as a virtue, but she points out that that isn’t a critic’s job.
Ms. Withers came by her heartening faith in the power of good criticism long before Harbor Stage became a favorite of Boston reviewers with its earliest productions, four years ago.
In his enthusiastic review, Mr. Weber called the play “deliciously spiteful.” In a news article, he detailed the punch. Ever since, Ms. Withers seems to have nurtured a suspicion that critics are human beings, and a belief that they matter to the theatrical ecosystem, which they have the power to injure or aid.
Aiding is so much more valuable an approach than recklessly injuring. That ancient letter from the angry reader still makes me laugh, and the production I so disliked lives in my memory as truly misbegotten. But the reader was right to be mad. There are real people on the other end of reviews. How we talk about their work matters — though that doesn’t mean painting failure as success.
In “The Kritik,” which sees a healthy theater as something deeply rooted in its community, it’s a barmaid who argues that artists need reviews to help them learn how they could do better.
Which is as good an instruction as any for helping critics learn how they could do better, too.