There’s a lot of heavy eye contact going on at this restaurant. One of the most strenuous competitors is a guy at the next table who’s staring down the woman across from him while giving her a ferocious, what-big-teeth-you-have grin. I’d call his expression carnivorous, but we’re at Nix, and there’s nothing to eat here but vegetables.
Not long ago, vegetarian restaurants in the United States were the last place you’d expect to see people who looked as if they couldn’t wait to go home and have non-tantric sex. The mood in their dining rooms could be tranquil, convalescent, earth-motherly, doctrinaire or ascetic, but rarely did it ripple with the energy of hookups in progress.
The crackle in the air at Nix and other recent meatless restaurants is what you get when you liberate vegetables from vegetarianism. Stripped of ideology, Nix is freed up for hedonic pursuits.
Sure, plants contain nutrients. But the people drinking Nix martinis probably aren’t doing it because they hope the oils left on the vodka’s surface by a thyme branch will boost their supplies of omega-3 fatty acids.
Nor are the anti-inflammatory benefits of crucifers likely to be top of mind as they eat the cauliflower tempura. More likely, they are flashing back to the last time they sat on the floor eating Chinese food out of a takeout box. The fried cauliflower has been submerged in a sauce that tastes like spicy ketchup. Poppy seeds on top make a small but real contribution when one of these orange grenades of crunch and heat is stuffed, along with a pickle slice, into the soft, white half-moon of a steamed bun.
The chefs lobbing those orange grenades at this four-month-old restaurant in Greenwich Village are Nicolas Farias and John Fraser. Mr. Fraser’s meatless menus at Dovetail, his home base on the Upper West Side, are much talked about. Stronger demonstrations of his wit and resourcefulness, his ability to treat vegetables like meat without seeming to be pulling a scam, are the spit-roasted beets and the coffee-laced carrots Wellington at Narcissa, his more casual restaurant in the Standard East Village hotel.
One of Mr. Fraser’s collaborators at Narcissa is James Truman, a partner at Nix. That’s him in the pressed suit and rumpled hair at the end of the bar. He recognizes me, too. Before he got into the restaurant business, we used to run into each other at the parties of friends we have in common.
As an editor at Condé Nast and later its editorial director, he used to worry about helping magazines see around corners. This approach informs Nix, which among other things is an attempt to locate the future of vegetable-centered dining. The white walls and other interior features, designed by the architect Elizabeth Roberts, have a low-key simplicity, and candlelight gives them a bit of mystery.
The details don’t scream to be noticed. You have to look closely to see that the lamp bases are the twisted roots of old junipers. Understatement is, of course, flattering to the observer who picks up on it, which may explain why Nix seems to draw the upper crust of the downtown creative class, people with interesting jewelry and significant haircuts.
I was hypnotized like a cobra by the patterns in the vintage dresses purchased for the hosts; the dyed cotton smocks designed by Paul Marlow for the female servers; and Mr. Marlow’s print dresses, one for each night of the week, worn by the wine director, Andrea Morris. But lavishing all this care on the women’s costumes while the male servers slink like ninjas in simple dark shirts and jeans can border on the fetishistic.
Ms. Morris’s wine list also avoids the obvious. She has an Alsatian Chasselas, an Edelzwicker from Oregon and a lithe Pelaverga from the Piedmont, which Mr. Truman sold me one night as the product of a “banished grape.” (In fact, it has D.O.C. status in the Verduno area of the region.) Staying away from name brands has another benefit: keeping the prices on almost every bottle under $100. More like this, please.
Editors occasionally follow their instincts right out the window. I think Mr. Truman has done this with the restaurant’s name. It comes from an 1893 Supreme Court decision, Nix v. Hedden, which held that tomatoes were a vegetable and thus subject to an import tax that did not apply to fruit.
Mr. Truman also liked the look of the word with its “three strong letters.” What seems not to have entered the calculations, although it will occur to parents of school-age children and to any search engine, is that these three strong letters are also used by an over-the-counter delousing treatment.
I highly recommend starting with a wheel of flatbread baked in the tandoor, and a cup of raw young vegetables or one of the dips. The red-pepper walnut spread is a wonderful take on muhammara, while the crushed avocado with mint and chai curry powder is fun because it looks like guacamole and isn’t.
In the part of the menu labeled “lighter,” I like the little carrots baked in parchment with spices and bulgur very much. Tomato water, buzzed with fresh green chile rings, is so entrancing that it even made the mung beans bobbing in it taste good, although its higher purpose is to perk up a charred half of an avocado.
In one salad, spears of Persian cucumber are splashed with a jerk sauce that’s coaxed back from the brink of too-muchness by crumbled goat cheese and, in an inspired touch, sliced kumquats. In another, jicama is shaved into what the menu calls ribbons. They’re more like seatbelts, and the dressing of blood oranges and Fresno peppers can’t quite get a grip on them.
The menu’s third section is called “bolder.” Here you will find the fried cauliflower buns and shiitake mushrooms sauced, very effectively, as if they were pasta cacio e pepe and spooned over creamy, rough-grained polenta. There’s a bowl of stir-fried brown rice that, once it’s stirred up with nori, chanterelles and a runny egg, reminds me of bibimbap.
Very occasionally, I wished the vegetables had been allowed to relax a little. Artichokes shouldn’t have to compete with broccoli rabe, tomato sauce and ricotta. Puréed sweet potato gets the right sauce, a pumpkinseed mole, but the line of reasoning that led the kitchen to pack the purée into rubbery balloons of tofu skin should be re-examined.
Servers tell you at the outset of the meal that if you want to finish with the quartered pineapple roasted for 20 minutes in the tandoor, then brushed with tamarind glaze, you should order it early. This is sound advice.
They won’t tell you that if you finish the whole thing, you may never make it to the rest of Italivi Reboreda’s dessert menu, including the dark and tender chocolate cake that is wrapped, jelly-roll-style, around chocolate mousse. But I will.