Our Tejal Rao went up to Boston to cook with a woman getting ready for Eid, Retno Pratiwi, the chef and an owner of a pop-up restaurant there called Kaki Lima, which celebrates the Indonesian flavors of Ms. Pratiwi’s childhood in Jakarta. Read Tejal’s delightful article about the visit , and then cook some of the food she ate. We have new recipes for Indonesian chicken curry and shrimp and potatoes in sambal for you to try.
Those not celebrating Eid may want to take a run at Melissa Clark’s new recipe for pork chops with brandied cherries. Or, if the notion of hot food leaves you cold this time of year, take a look at David Tanis’s new recipe for cold spicy kimchi noodles.
Heading in the other direction, have you made this recipe for a warm kale, coconut and cherry tomato salad yet? Or Melissa’s recipe for grilled eggplant salad? Back in 2013, Julia Moskin scored Yotam Ottolenghi’s recipe for hummus. You should make that sometime this summer for sure. Also: miso chicken. (“We all loved it,” a reader posted on the recipe, “even picky teens!”) And: enchiladas!
On Wednesdays in this space we encourage the use of narrative recipes: recipes that aren’t really recipes so much as descriptions of recipes, ideas for what to cook. Like, for instance, you could caramelize some onions tonight, then hit them with a splash of orange juice and let it reduce away to syrup, then hit them with a splash of bourbon and do the same, and then sauté some shrimp and put them on top of the onions and mix all of that into a bowl of fresh pasta with butter and call it dinner and it would be pretty good. Try it, but note well the teachings of Tom Scocca: caramelizing onions takes a lot of time.
Now, have you seen this cool feature from our colleagues at The Upshot, about where Americans and nutritionists disagree over what foods are healthy and what foods are not? It’s pretty cool. And did you read Ana Marie Cox’s excellent “Talk” column in The Times Magazine with Allison Janney? Slate’s oral history of “Angels in America” is also a must. And check out this bananas old soup ad starring Ann Miller.  Have a great dinner.