My wife and I have been fans of the Gretalia Group’s food ever since one of its restaurants, Osteria Procaccini in Kingston, started serving exquisite Neopolitan-style pizza in 2011. But something wasn’t quite right about Gretalia’s comfort-food-driven menu at Northend Bistro, which opened in 2013.
A reviewer for The New York Times felt the same way, as did a lot of its customers. In March, after declining sales, the owners, the brothers John and Tino Procaccini and their business partner, Zissis Pappas, decided to ditch the comfort food and go back to the Italian fare they were known for in their other Kingston restaurant, La Principessa, which had closed in 2005. After a quick rebranding, Northend Bistro became Trattoria Procaccini.
The decision to make the change couldn’t have been a better one.
The idea for the trattoria was to offer traditional favorites using organic, locally sourced ingredients, and to present them in a way that was closer to how the Procaccini brothers ate in their parents’ home village of Pettoranello del Molise, Italy.
Take, for instance, the polpette di cafone, bread dumplings in marinara sauce that were historically a peasant substitute for meatballs in the old country (the name translates to “fake meatballs”). The polpette were dense but not heavy, and would have worked better had we ordered them as an appetizer or as a side dish. Traditionally, however, they serve as a main course, so that’s how they are offered at the trattoria.
While we’re on the subject of meatballs, the restaurant’s carnivorous version, made from a family recipe that combines pork, veal and beef, tasted heavenly.
Most dishes are straightforward and made with only a handful of ingredients. The Molisano, with rigatoni, salsiccia sausage, broccoli rabe, garlic and olive oil, offered a lot of flavor within its limited components, especially when an optional pepperoncino paste was added. The Tre P consisted of wheat lily pasta topped with the P’s in the name: pesto; panna da cucina, an Italian cooking cream; and pine nuts. Sun-dried tomatoes balanced out the flavorful dish. A porchetta appetizer made the most out of a tender and fatty roast pork, and the broccoli rabe that accompanied it had just the right bite and salty provolone.
The Procaccini brothers and Mr. Pappas didn’t do much to the interior of the restaurant during its rebranding; the large windows looking out over Nassau Street are lovely and a natural fit. But some artwork and sound-deadening foam under the tables and chairs give the stark space a bit of a warmer feel. The staff during our visits was friendly and attentive, but hung back appropriately, which is what you’d expect at a casual trattoria.
Besides the polpette di cafone, another chancy but traditional dish that scored with us was the ricotta dolce, a dessert with thick, unsweetened ricotta cheese and topped with Amarena cherries in syrup. The tartness of the dark cherries, combined with the sweet syrup and creamy ricotta, made me return to the plate again and again, even though my dining companions were enjoying sweeter desserts like tiramisù.
Other dishes, like gnocchi in a pesto-tomato sauce, and a special that had baby lamb chops over polenta with cream sauce and mushrooms, were less memorable but still quite good, because of the level of detail in some of them. The polenta, for example, was mixed with mascarpone to give it a smoother consistency.
There were a couple of missteps, like a bland fettuccine Amatriciana and some overbreaded eggplant in the rollatini. But the current menu offers more than enough fine fare to keep customers coming back for more.