Instantly, shockingly, the murder of five police officers on duty at a peaceful protest in Dallas has compounded the nation’s continuing agony. The devastating attack wounded seven other officers and two civilians. In mere hours, the carnage left the country with a wrenching shift: from grieving the latest black victims of police shootings in Minnesota and Louisiana to grieving for the police officers slain so viciously in Dallas.
In the aftermath, possible motives will be ticked off for the killer and any accomplices. But the police and protesters alike could only wonder what might truly account for such a level of atrocity. The police quoted the main suspect — Micah Johnson, a black Army veteran with service in Afghanistan, who was killed after being cornered — as intent on killing white people and avenging the innocent deaths of black citizens in police encounters elsewhere. “This must stop, this divisiveness between our police and our citizens,” said Dallas’s police chief, David Brown, who is black.
A Dallas minister and organizer of the street protest, Dominique Alexander, said the demonstration was entirely about peaceful change, not revenge. It was a local protest, he noted, praising a police sergeant he saw running to assist a civilian injured in the melee. The Thursday night march, one of multiple protests across the nation, offered no early hint of violence. Police officers wore summer shirts, not the SWAT team military gear that can antagonize protesters. There was no warning that a sniper lurked nearby until shots rang out and officers fell.
The streaming videos this time caught police officers, suddenly the prime targets, instinctively heading toward the gunfire and shepherding panicked crowds toward safety.
Disgust may well summarize the nation’s reaction to such an appalling twist in what seems to be a nonstop cycle of violence. As with the lives lost in Louisiana and Minnesota, the murdered officers in Dallas now cry out to us for something better, for a fresh and far stronger resolve to repair relations in the cause of law enforcement and to stem the nation’s bleeding.
