Grim and guarded tidings, delivered with beauty, strangeness and drive: That was Radiohead at Madison Square Garden on Tuesday night, starting the North American leg of its first tour since 2012. (The band played there again on Wednesday.) The group’s latest album, “A Moon Shaped Pool,” supplied the first five songs in the two-hour set and four more later — songs that extend a two-decade catalog of disquiet.
“Stay in the shadows/Cheer at the gallows,” Thom Yorke sang to begin “Burn the Witch,” over a blunt tom-tom beat that would soon get louder; “You really messed up everything,” he charged amid gusts of noise in “Ful Stop.” With a voice that made each note seem precarious, even as he reached it precisely, Mr. Yorke was a Cassandra who had melodies to cling to and beats to send him jittering across the stage, disconsolate but adamant.
The band brought a broad vocabulary of tension and dread to its set. It had rockers that exploded from sullen observation to blaring exhortation, like “Planet Telex” and “2 + 2 = 5,” and rockers that bristled from the start, like “Bodysnatchers.” It had intricately picked ruminations, like “15 Step” and “Present Tense.” And it had walloping dance beats laced with distortion and electronic barbs, like “Myxomatosis” and “Idioteque.” And it balanced newer songs with older, more straightforward, guitar-centered anthems, like “Let Down.” Screens above the stage had strobing geometric patterns and close-ups of the band members, but the visuals always pointed back to the music itself.
The concert showed hints of topicality in this bitter election year. “The National Anthem,” a song with a bruising bass riff from Radiohead’s 2000 album, “Kid A,” that declares, “Everyone has got the fear,” was laced with sound bites from recent convention coverage. “The Numbers,” a ballad from “A Moon Shaped Pool” with chords that tentatively ascend, only to be pulled back down, insisted, “People have this power,” then warned, “The numbers don’t decide/Your system is a lie,” then drew cheers as Mr. Yorke sang, “We’ll take back what is ours” — as close to optimism as Radiohead gets.
Radiohead has long posed itself what might be called the “Sgt. Pepper” problem: how to perform songs live that were painstakingly (and surreally) constructed in studios. It builds puzzles into its songs — can an odd meter be funky? can dissonance feel like relief? where do physical sounds turn abstract? — and, again and again, solves them. The band is too conscientious to simply strip down its songs, crank up the volume and let fans’ memories fill in the missing atmospherics. Instead, a busy crew reconfigured the band’s instrumentation for each song during the applause.
The five-man Radiohead is touring with an added drummer, Clive Deamer, but with just six musicians and occasional electronic elements, it constantly pulled off textural feats. “Bloom,” a psychedelic tangle of a song from the 2011 album “The King of Limbs” — a ballad, rocker and incantation layered with polyrhythms — swelled to arena scale without losing any of its labyrinthine obsessiveness. Radiohead doesn’t offer unambivalent happy endings; its last of many encores was “Street Spirit (Fade Out),” a minor-key anthem that faces death and oblivion before finally advising, almost as a lament, “Immerse your soul in love.” Radiohead’s deep satisfactions are in pondering, detailing, voicing and facing up to all there is to fear.