It was business as usual on Saturday evening in the grand old guts of the Seagram Building in Midtown Manhattan, where Pecko Zantilaveevan, the executive chef of the Four Seasons restaurant, was overseeing the roasting of 102 ducks for dinner service.
But Mr. Zantilaveevan, who has worked at the restaurant for the last 20 years, had nearly emptied his deep walk-in refrigerator, with not a raw bird in sight, and he would not be ordering more.
After 57 years, it was the restaurant’s last night of dinner service in the building, more than a year after it became public that its lease would not be renewed.
“It’s like attending a wake,” George Nettles, a first-time visitor to the restaurant, said as he finished a whiskey sour by the host stand.
All week diners had come to say goodbye, to sip one last martini at the bar, to split huge pink pompoms of cotton candy or, maybe, to hop into the pool for which the famed Pool Room is named. Photos posted on Instagram showed a line of prominent chefs — Jean-Georges Vongerichten, Daniel Boulud, Thomas Keller, Michael White and Cesare Casella — wading in the water and kicking up their bare legs during a benefit for Citymeals on Wheels on Wednesday.
On Saturday, there was no fanfare, no grand toasts or speeches during the dinner rush. Instead, Julian Niccolini and Alex von Bidder, who took ownership of the restaurant in the late 1990s, were gliding across the restaurant, greeting regulars and posing for photos.
In the kitchen, cooks signed one another’s whites with black Sharpies while a server pocketed her second $100 bill tip of the evening. Kala Sung, a sous-chef from South Korea, prepared a meal of pork ribs, beef bulgogi and fresh kimchi for the staff to eat after the second seating.
Frank Bruni, a former restaurant critic for The New York Times, said in his 2007 review that the Four Seasons possessed “a stubborn magic,” and on Saturday it stuck like glitter to skin.
A woman and a little girl danced in the hallway, giggling and twirling between the two dining rooms. At the bar, a man held a baby in a taffeta dress in one hand and a drink in the other. Former employees bought one another rounds and eulogized alongside nostalgic New Yorkers who had come here as children to celebrate birthdays and bar mitzvahs.
“And the beauty of the materials,” Ms. Umemoto said, finishing his sentence.
Rachel Ann Reading, a graduate student in art history, came to sip a glass of champagne at the famous bar. She had arrived early, so she found a comfortable spot in the sanctum of the Four Seasons’ ladies lounge and ate the slice of pizza she had smuggled into the restaurant in her purse while she waited for the bar to open.
Mr. Niccolini and Mr. von Bidder plan to reopen a new Four Seasons soon, in a nearby space. (Mario Carbone, Rich Torrisi and Jeff Zalaznick of Major Food Group will take over the lease of the storied space in the Seagram Building.) The contents of the restaurant will be auctioned off this month. Some diners were already eyeing the branded plates and the Hans Wegner chairs in the Grill Room.
Despite the nostalgia in the air, it seemed not everyone knew it was time to say goodbye.
