DO you remember June 27, 2015? If you knew you had been on a sailboat, and that the weather was miserable, and that afterward you had a beer with the other sailors, would you expect to recall — even one year later — at least a few details?
I was on that boat, on a blustery Saturday on Long Island Sound. But every detail is missing from my memory, as if snipped out by an overzealous movie editor.
The earliest moment I recall from the day is lying in an industrial tube with a kind of upturned colander over my face, fighting waves of claustrophobia. My mind was densely fogged, but I understood that I was in an M.R.I. machine. Someone was scanning my brain.
Other hazy scenes followed: being wheeled into a hospital room. My wife, Alice, hovering in the background. A wall clock that read minutes to midnight, an astonishing piece of information. What had happened to the day?
Late that night, alone in the room, I noticed two yellow Post-its on the bedside table in Alice’s writing: “You have a condition called transient global amnesia. It will last Hours not DAYS. You’re going to be fine. Your CT scan was clear. You sailed today and drove yourself home,” the note read in part.
I had never heard of transient global amnesia, a rare condition in which you are suddenly unable to recall recent events. Its causes are unknown. Unlike other triggers of memory loss, like a stroke or epileptic seizures, the condition is considered harmless, and an episode does not last long.
Studies show that during episodes, blood decreases to the brain’s temporal lobe, which we use to understand speech, and to the hippocampus, which processes long-term memory.
Competing theories have linked the amnesia to a history of migraines, psychiatric disease and vascular diseases. I have none of these, but I am in the target-age range for an episode, 40 to 80.
It may be largely a medical curiosity. But taking a hiatus from my conscious waking life — while I was fully awake — tipped me into a bout of existential questioning. This is the strangest thing I have ever experienced, I remember thinking. Is this death?
After a restless night, I was still mentally fogged in when a doctor stopped by on morning rounds. He was unfazed, which was reassuring in a way. If I was losing my mind, or stuck in some way station of the afterlife, there would be more of a fuss, right?
I asked if he had seen “Memento,” a movie about a man unable to form short-term memories. To give viewers the same sense of disorientation, the director Christopher Nolan tells the story in reverse. Each scene ends where the previous one began. Effects precede causes.
By midday, my memory-making capacity had gradually returned. I was ready to be discharged. Dr. Leslie Saland, the neurologist on call, stopped by and told me transient global amnesia is almost always a once-in-a-lifetime condition. I didn’t have to worry about a recurrence.
“But you’ll never recover those memories of yesterday,” she said.
How could a day — a highly eventful one at that — disappear entirely? I am a reporter, and so I set out over the next few days to reconstruct what had happened Saturday, hoping that the details would spur the recovery of the missing day.
He did notice that after we returned to shore and had a beer in the clubhouse, I was confused about where I had parked. Malcolm drove me through the parking lot until I spotted my car.
ONE theory of transient global amnesia is that episodes are brought on by stress. Certainly the racing that day sounded stressful. The night before, I had flown home from Iowa after a lengthy day reporting on the early-stage presidential campaign. I had arrived home late, crawling into bed close to midnight. There was a lot on my mind.
Alice picked up where Malcolm left off. When I had not returned home by 6 p.m. — we had plans to see a Lucinda Williams concert with friends that evening — she grew impatient and called.
“On the water,” I said.
No, I was in the car, close to the water, but I did not recognize my surroundings.
Concerned, Alice asked where I was, thinking she would come get me. I could not tell her. And I had no memory of sailing.
One of the curiosities of transient global amnesia is that your memory deserts you while you are clearly conscious and able to carry out complex tasks like driving or even playing music. I knew who Alice was, but not where I lived. Showing grace under pressure, my wife searched “disorientation” in an online health guide. She talked me through entering our address into the GPS and following it home. From there, she drove me to the hospital, where doctors declared a “Code Gray” for a possible stroke.
How do we make sense of extraordinary events that are ruptures from our everyday lives? For me, the movies are one way. They make the implausible plausible, they impose coherence on seemingly random events.
Besides “Memento,” I have thought of “Inside Out,” the Pixar animated feature that takes place entirely in the head of an 11-year-old girl. The emotions of the heroine, Riley, are cartoon characters, and a fantastic “Jetsons”-esque city inside her mind is a metaphor of the human psyche.
As Riley encounters the world, her experiences are processed into small orbs of memories like snow globes. They are stored in long racks. Special short-term memories become permanent memories, which in turn are the foundation stones of Riley’s personality, represented by towering islands. When she has an 11-year-old’s life crisis, the islands begin to disintegrate.
“Inside Out” is a cartoon, not a psychology textbook. But its portrayal of memories as the bedrock of personality feels fundamentally correct. Without our memories, who are we? The ability of the mind to hold short-term recollections, and to retrieve longer-term memories and the feelings they evoke, is essential to being human. As I emerged from my amnesia, I felt grateful to have my life back. I remember it like it was yesterday.