Politics|It’s Donald Trump’s Convention. But the Inspiration? Nixon.
It’s Donald Trump’s Convention. But the Inspiration? Nixon.
[02:09 - 02:29] The choice we make in 1968 will determine not only the future of America but the future of peace and freedom in the world for the last third of the Twentieth Century. ALEX SOT: The conditions in the country are really different than they were in 1968, but where the parallels arise are you have this presidential candidate drumming home these themes about social disorder, of the United States as a country under attack, at home and abroad. [02:30 - 03:04] As we look at America, we see cities enveloped in smoke and flame. We hear sirens in the night. 9:25 David Clarke Jr. I want to talk with you about something important, indeed, a concept that five law enforcement officers were murdered and nine more were wounded for earlier this month in Dallas, and for which three more were murdered yesterday in Baton Rouge: that is the importance of Making America Safe Again We see Americans dying on distant battlefields abroad. We see Americans hating each other; fighting each other; killing each other at home. 9:16PM: MCCAUL: We need to end sanctuary cities...keep dangerous people out of our country...and SECURE our borders. And as we see and hear these things, millions of Americans cry out in anguish. Did we come all this way for this? ALEX SOT: Part of the reason this is at the forefronts of people’s minds is just what’s been in the news lately. That you have seen the killings of police officers in Dallas and Baton Rouge, that you’ve seen violence in a number of cities. What Trump identified at the very beginning of this campaign was this hunger within the Republican base for almost a strongman figure. [05:01 - 05:12] America is in trouble today not because her people have failed but because her leaders have failed. And what America needs are leaders to match the greatness of her people. 9:17PM MCCAUL: This did not happen by accident, it happened by design. It is the work of Barack Obama... and the architect of his failed foreign policy, Hillary Clinton. 9:48 TOM COTTON: Our warriors and their families don’t ask for much. But there are a few things we’d like. A commander-in-chief who speaks of winning wars and not merely ending wars, calls the enemy by its name, and draws red lines carefully, but enforces them ruthlessly. [08:49 - 09:09] For five years hardly a day has gone by when we haven’t read or heard a report of the American flag being spit on; an embassy being stoned; a library being burned; or an ambassador being insulted some place in the world. And each incident reduced respect for the United States until the ultimate insult inevitably occurred. 9:48 TOM COTTON: Our warriors and their families don’t ask for much. But there are a few things we’d like. A commander-in-chief who speaks of winning wars and not merely ending wars, calls the enemy by its name, and draws red lines carefully, but enforces them ruthlessly. ALEX SOT: Trump has said in a recent interview that he sees nixon as someone who understood some fundamental things about the country. That people were looking for order in the midst of disorder. 10:10 GUILIANI: In the last seven months, there have been five major Islamic extremist terrorists attacks on us and our allies. We must not be afraid to define our enemy; It is Islamic extremist terrorism. [13:25 - 14:00] We shall re-establish freedom from fear in America so that America can take the lead in re-establishing freedom from fear in the world. And to those who say that law and order is the code word for racism, there and here is a reply: Our goal is justice for every American. 9:26pm David Clarke Jr. I see this every day, at street level where many Americans increasingly have an uneasiness about the ability of their families to live safely in these troubling times. This transcends race, religion, ethnicity, gender, age, and lifestyle. [09:35 - 09:58] America is a great nation. And it is time we started to act like a great nation around the world. MICHAEL FLYNN And, with Donald Trump in the White House, WE...WILL...MAKE...AMERICA... GREAT... AGAIN!
CLEVELAND — Let Trump be Trump, his aides have always insisted. And let his convention serve as an unapologetic tribute to his singular, erratic, untamed persona.
But on the opening night of the Republican National Convention here on Monday, Donald J. Trump was conspicuously trying to conjure somebody else: Richard M. Nixon.
In an evening of severe speeches evoking the tone and themes of Nixon’s successful 1968 campaign, Mr. Trump’s allies and aides proudly portrayed him as the heir to the disgraced former president’s law-and-order message, his mastery of political self-reinvention and his rebukes of overreaching liberal government.
It was a remarkable embrace — open and unhesitating — of Nixon’s polarizing campaign tactics, and of his overt appeals to Americans frightened by a chaotic stew of war, mass protests and racial unrest.
And it demonstrated that, wisely or mistakenly, Mr. Trump sees the path to victory this fall as the exploitation of the country’s anxieties about race, its fears of terrorism and its mood of disaffection, especially among white, working-class Americans.
The Times’s national political correspondent Jonathan Martin examines how protests have shaped the history of national political conventions ever since Chicago in 1968.
The inaugural night of the convention deliberately evoked social cataclysm and physical danger.
In emulating Nixon, Mr. Trump has chosen an unusual and tarnished figure as a source of inspiration.
Nixon sought the presidency under starkly different circumstances, as a conventional politician in a country that was nearly 90 percent white. It will be difficult for Mr. Trump to recreate the Nixon candidacy as a political insurgent in a year when 30 percent of voters are likely to be racial minorities.
Yet for advisers to Mr. Trump, who is seen by most voters as a divisive and untrustworthy figure, the Nixon campaign seems to offer a plausible political blueprint.
Times journalists provided live analysis of the first night of the Republican National Convention as Donald J. Trump aims to unify the party.
Viewed for much of the 1960s as a devious and even nasty politician, Nixon reintroduced himself to the country during the 1968 campaign as earnest and sympathetic, and offered himself as a bulwark against forces tearing at the seams of society.
Comparisons between the toxic political brew of 1968 — racial discord, rising crime, street demonstrations, white anxiety — and the strains in United States society today are frequently exaggerated and oversimplified. The backdrop of Nixon’s election was a nation absorbing the seismic upheavals of the Vietnam War, the Voting Rights Act, the assassinations of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy, and widespread rioting in America’s cities. “We see Americans hating each other, fighting each other, killing each other at home,” Nixon said in his acceptance speech.
Today, the collision of a campaign and social turmoil appears, for now, nowhere near as combustible. But the Trump campaign has worked to seize on the parallels that do exist: the killings of police officers in Texas and Louisiana; growing street demonstrations by supporters of Black Lives Matter; and scenes of mass bloodshed overseas.
In Mr. Trump’s telling, American neighborhoods are besieged by crime, with entire cities rocked by disorder. Branding himself as “the law-and-order candidate,” Mr. Trump in recent weeks has exhorted voters to stand with the police, much as Nixon encouraged “the non-shouters, the non-demonstrators” to stand with him.
Mr. Trump has regularly embellished the facts to cast the 2016 campaign in an ominous light, with imagery more suited to the Nixon era than to a modern presidential race. He has described crime as having gone “through the roof,” even though the rate of violent crime has dropped by half since 1990.
Jeff Greenfield, a political columnist who was a campaign aide to Robert F. Kennedy in 1968, called it ludicrous to liken the current political atmosphere to that election. But Mr. Trump, he said, was tapping into a sense of wariness that for many voters has begun to override the more benign realities of 2016.
But Mr. Trump is at risk of misreading Nixon, whose calls to crack down on crime were intertwined with themes of national unity and can-do optimism.
Though his convention speech dwelled on gloomy themes, Nixon did something else, too: He spoke poignantly about his dreams as a boy growing up poor in California, and he appealed to highly educated suburban voters who have eyed Mr. Trump with deep suspicion.
Edward F. Cox, Nixon’s son-in-law and the chairman of New York’s Republican Party, said the Nixon-Agnew campaign of 1968 had been caricatured as an angry and divisive affair, with the gentler notes of the acceptance speech largely forgotten.
Mr. Cox, who attended Nixon’s speech and was in Cleveland this week to support Mr. Trump, said criminal justice would be a powerful theme in 2016. But he urged the presumptive Republican nominee to incorporate stronger notes of uplift, too.
