It was the speech that would define liberalism for a generation of Democrats, powered by paeans to the American family, lean lyricism and a sonorous voice: Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York, onstage at the Moscone Center in San Francisco, giving the keynote address during the 1984 Democratic National Convention.
But first, there was a hitch. Mr. Cuomo’s son Andrew, then 26, had wanted the lights dimmed for a six-minute biographical video before the speech, a bit of stagecraft that would signal to the fidgeting crowd that it was time to listen up. The Secret Service, fearing gunmen, objected. Stationed by the control room operator as the video played, Andrew argued the lights down.
Mario Cuomo was reaching for the rhetorical mountaintops. As ever, his son was under the hood.
These days, the younger Mr. Cuomo — the New York governor who, over nearly six years in his father’s office, has resolutely favored pragmatism over purity, PowerPoint presentations over poetry — is harking back to 1984.
As he prepares to address the Democratic National Convention on Thursday, the governor finds himself an awkward fit for a party tugged leftward by Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont: Mr. Cuomo will be trying to overcome his reputation for centrist compromise in a political moment that, in its focus on those left behind, seems lifted straight from his father’s school of liberalism.
For the governor, the challenges of the moment are myriad. He is a potential future presidential contender whose job will be to praise a current one. He is a national figure whose liberal triumphs, including legalizing same-sex marriage in New York and raising the statewide minimum wage, have dulled under the pall of two federal investigations and widespread distrust on the left at home. 
The comparison will be inescapable.
In Philadelphia, the governor has already shown a certain comfort with the significance of being a Cuomo at a Democratic convention: He narrated a video in tribute to his father that played on Monday night.
And so far in his visit, Mr. Cuomo has taken pains to cast himself in the bluest possible light.
His schedule shows a far more pronounced effort at reputation-polishing than at the 2012 convention. Then a popular first-term governor whose every trip outside his home state sent presidential speculation churning, Mr. Cuomo spoke only at a New York delegates’ breakfast, choosing not to seize the national spotlight years before he might be ready to run.
On Tuesday, he drew cheers at an event for gay rights activists as he spoke about leading the effort to make New York one of the first states to legalize same-sex marriage in 2011. As he cast the New York delegation’s votes, he worked in a reference to one of his banner accomplishments this year: raising the minimum wage to $15 in some parts of the state.
All of this from a governor who promotes his fiscal conservatism, pro-business record and cooperation with Republicans back in New York.
Speechwriting was at the core of Mario Cuomo’s political craft. Andrew Cuomo even used a story about his father’s oratory to distill his father’s character in eulogizing him after his death in January 2015.
The younger Mr. Cuomo told his father that he disliked reading speeches word for word — Mario Cuomo’s method — because he wanted the freedom to play off the audience’s reaction. Instead of writing addresses out, Mr. Cuomo usually condenses the drafts he and his speechwriters compose into a few key words on index cards, expanding on those points while speaking. He calls it, according to former speechwriters, the “accordion” method.
The elder Mr. Cuomo did not approve.
Yet the governor is no less cognizant of a speech’s power to win hearts and minds — or, more important for him, minds and then hearts.
Former Cuomo speechwriters say each man shaped speeches as if they were courtroom arguments, prosecuting one logical point after another, probing each line and metaphor to make sure it supported the conclusion.
But where Mario Cuomo evoked images to move his listeners, as when he told the 1992 Democratic convention of children “growing up familiar with the sound of gunfire before they’ve ever heard an orchestra,” his son enlists hard facts.
“It’s the difference between a racehorse and a workhorse,” said Peter Quinn, Mario Cuomo’s chief speechwriter, who drafted the 1984 address.
The younger Mr. Cuomo was deeply involved in that speech as it evolved through dozens of drafts. When his father felt it was close to ready, he and two of his father’s other top aides rounded up secretaries, mailroom workers and anyone else they could find at the governor’s office at 2 World Trade Center, put the governor at the press room lectern and turned down the lights.
They were not impressed, Mr. Quinn recalled. So the governor reworked the speech, moving the rebuke of President Ronald Reagan from the middle to the beginning.
Again the governor gave it a practice run, lights down, a patchwork audience listening.
This time, it was Andrew Cuomo who had the crucial insight: The ending was not working. So Mr. Quinn rummaged through the governor’s diaries and wove in a story about the governor watching his Italian immigrant father’s feet bleed from working long hours at the family’s Queens grocery store.
On Thursday, Andrew Cuomo will probably invoke the memory of his father. And the same oratorical skill could be on display.
