New York’s newest art gallery is hiding onstage at an Off Broadway theater.
It’s the set of “Out of the Mouths of Babes,” a new comedy by Israel Horovitz at the Cherry Lane Theater, in the West Village. And although there is no formal exhibition — do preview performances count as a vernissage? — the stage is lavishly decorated with artworks that happen to also be for sale, many by nostalgia-inducing sitcom actors.
Their arrival at the Cherry Lane Theater started with Mr. Horovitz’s lifelong love for Gertrude Stein’s Paris apartment at 27 Rue de Fleurus — famous for its high walls cluttered with paintings by titans like Picasso, Matisse and Cézanne.
That description “set off a lot of budget alarm bells,” said Neil Patel, the play’s scenic designer. Bringing the fictional collection to life would mean amassing realistic enough paintings — and having them framed.
But one of the producers, David Youse, knew Frank Bilotta, who owns Silver Screen Artists with Patrick Ganino. They lent most of the paintings on the set; the rest were provided by creative friends of the team, among them Joel Grey, who is also a photographer, and Oscar Andy Hammerstein, grandson of the lyricist Oscar Hammerstein II, who has exhibited his oils in regional shows. (Oscar Andy’s father, James Hammerstein, was a frequent director of Mr. Horovitz’s plays before his death in 1999.) Mr. Patel even included work of his own, as well as two paintings that his teenage daughter, Pia Mileaf-Patel, made last year during a summer art program at the Rhode Island School of Design.
Artworks were carefully selected to ensure that they matched the character of the play’s fictional centenarian, who never appears onstage but acts like a back-seat curator.
Ms. Louise’s abstract painting, with a silver frame that stands out among the more subdued black ones nearby, is the stage-left wall’s anchor — and a good one at that, Mr. Patel said. It’s full of bold, colorful gestures toward optimism, he added. (Ms. Louise called her paintings in the show “uplifting.”) It also fit an aesthetic of midcentury paintings that Mr. Patel thought was appropriate for the centenarian to have collected, along with his wives and lovers.
The actor, who won art scholarships in New York, has had many solo exhibitions. The set includes a few of Mr. Williams’s paintings, which Mr. Patel said were tricky to arrange. “They’re very high-contrast,” he said of the portraits. “You have to embed them in a way that they catch your eye, but you also want them to not be distracting.” “Sugar Blues” almost reads like calligraphy, he noted, adding that “there was something about jazz that seemed very Parisian to me.” The owner of the apartment, he also thought, would be interested in music.
Mr. Patel’s daughter has a stockpile of paintings, many of which she created while enrolled in an intensive summer program at the Rhode Island School of Design. He liked this one because of what he called “a very controlled palette” and composition that fit the space well. Acquiring the painting was also easy. “It’s useful to have a talented painter in the family when you are dressing sets,” he said.