Geoffrey Hill, often hailed as Britain’s finest living poet, whose dense, allusive verses ranged from dark meditations on morals, religious faith and political violence to rapturous evocations of the English landscape of his native Worcestershire, died on Thursday at his home in Cambridge. He was 84.
His death was announced on Twitter by his wife, Alice Goodman, and on the website of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he taught in the 1980s.
Mr. Hill, in a variety of poetic forms, reworked Christian symbols, memories of childhood and Britain’s violent past in a poetic language that required much of the reader. He was a devoted practitioner of the high style, committed to a loftily intellectual sense of the poetic vocation, with an encyclopedic range of historical and literary references embedded in syntactically knotty lines.
“The idea that the intellect is somehow alien to sensuousness, or vice versa, is one that I have never been able to connect with,” he told The Paris Review in an interview in 2000.
It became commonplace by the 1980s to place Mr. Hill in the top echelon of contemporary British poetry. The critic Harold Bloom called him “the strongest British poet now active.” And when “Broken Hierarchies: Poems 1952-2012” was published in 2013, it was a major event.
More than any other poet of his time, Mr. Hill engaged in a continuing dialogue with English history, usually rooted in the soil of Worcestershire. This bent, which caused some critics to brand him a conservative nationalist, although he was a lifelong Labour voter, produced the astonishing sequence of 30 prose poems that make up “Mercian Hymns” (1971), which blend the story of Offa, ruler of the kingdom of Mercia in the eighth century, with scenes from the author’s childhood.
“Mercian Hymns” won the inaugural Whitbread Prize for Poetry.
Mr. Hill burnished his growing reputation with “Tenebrae” (1978), which the poet Hayden Carruth, in Harper’s Magazine, called “the best book of devotional poetry in the modern high style since Eliot’s ‘Ash Wednesday,’” and with “The Mystery of the Charity of Charles Péguy” (1983), an extended poetic sequence about the French nationalist poet who died in World War I.
Afflicted by paralyzing depression, anxiety and obsessive-compulsive behavior, Mr. Hill wrote with agonizing difficulty until he was treated with drugs after moving to the United States in the 1990s. In rapid succession, a spate of poems ensued.
Paradoxically, the easier it was for Mr. Hill to write, the more difficult the poetry became. “The Triumph of Love” (1998), an anguished survey of the 20th century’s endless bloodshed, and “Speech! Speech!” (2000), a poem consisting of 120 12-line stanzas, created imposing obstacles to comprehension.
Geoffrey William Hill was born on June 18, 1932, in Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, where his father, like his father before him, was a village constable. After graduating from the local high school, he earned a degree in English literature at Keble College, Oxford, where his poems appeared in student publications.
The American poet Donald Hall, also at Oxford, was deeply impressed by Mr. Hill’s work and published him in the Fantasy Poets series. These poems were included in his first collection, “For the Unfallen: Poems, 1952-1958,” published in 1959.
It took Mr. Hill nearly a decade to produce enough work for his second volume, “King Log” (1968), which included one of his best-known poems, “Ovid in the Third Reich,” on art in the presence of evil.
In 1954 he had begun teaching at the University of Leeds, where he remained until 1980. He became a lecturer at Emmanuel College after spending a year at the University of Bristol on a Churchill Fellowship.
At Cambridge, the scholars Christopher Ricks and Eric Griffiths championed Mr. Hill’s poetry, helping greatly to elevate his reputation. In 1988 he was hired as a professor of literature and religion at Boston University. With Professor Ricks, who had arrived before him, he founded the Editorial Institute to train scholars in the preparation of authoritative, annotated texts and served as a director for the next decade.
He returned to Britain in 2006 and in 2010 was elected to a four-year term as professor of poetry at Oxford.
His criticism was gathered in the collections “The Lords of Limit” (1984), “The Enemy’s Country” (1991) and “Style and Faith” (2003). His “Collected Critical Writings” (2008) won the Truman Capote Award for Literary Criticism. In 2012 he was knighted for his services to literature.
Mr. Hill’s first marriage ended in divorce. In addition to his wife, an Anglican rector and the author of the librettos for the John Adams operas “Nixon in China” and “The Death of Klinghoffer,” he is survived by three sons, Julian, Andrew, and Jeremy; two daughters, Bethany Hill and Alberta Hill; and four grandchildren.
Mr. Hill had a ready answer for critics who found him difficult. “Human beings are difficult,” he told The Paris Review. “We’re difficult to ourselves, we’re difficult to each other. And we are mysteries to ourselves, we are mysteries to each other.
