Science|Two’s Company, Three’s a Lichen?
Two’s Company, Three’s a Lichen?
“Fred took a likin’ to Alison.” It was a mnemonic device a high school biology teacher taught me to remember that a fungus plus an alga made a lichen, and I never forgot it.
That phrase now seems to come with qualifications. In a study published Thursday in Science, scientists found that another fungus, called basidiomycete yeast, may be a third symbiotic partner in many lichens.
Lichens come in various sizes, shapes and color, but you can commonly find them as leafy tufts or crusty patches adorning bark and rocks. The prevailing definition of a lichen is that it arises from a symbiosis between a fungus and a photosynthesizing alga or bacteria. The alga or bacteria provides food through photosynthesis. In return, the fungus provides protective structures, which also gather moisture, nutrients and an anchor to the environment.
The story of how Dr. Spribille and his colleagues discovered previously undetected yeasts in lichens began in Montana, with a different mystery. Dr. Spribille was curious about two species of lichens that are known to consist of the same fungus and alga, but appear wildly different. One of the lichens produces a substance, called vulpinic acid, that causes it to appear yellow. The other lichen is dark brown.
He brought the riddle to John McCutcheon, a professor of biology at the University of Montana, who uses genetic sequencing to study symbiosis. They gathered lichens and looked for genetic differences in the symbiotic fungus and alga known to be shared by both species. Confirming previous studies, they found no significant variations.
They expanded their search. Instead of studying only one fungus and one alga, they looked for genetic differences in all fungi between the two lichen species. That’s when they found that the yellow lichen with vulpinic acid had a much higher number of genes belonging to a basidiomycete yeast.
These findings now yielded a more interesting question than the original one: How prevalent is the association between basidiomycete yeasts and lichens?
Once again, the researchers expanded their scope. They screened other species of lichens, and found that different species carried genetically distinct basidiomycete yeasts. Furthermore, when they took one species in Montana and compared it with the same species in Europe, they found that the basidiomycete also stayed the same — suggesting that the species of yeast was highly specific to the species of lichen, rather than just being a product of the lichen’s environment.
In the end, the scientists found that basidiomycete yeasts were a ubiquitous feature, present in lichens on six continents.
“It was a backyard experiment that turned global,” Dr. McCutcheon said.
The next task for the researchers is understanding whether basidiomycete yeasts play a role in building the lichens’ structure. Elucidating the functions of these yeasts might bring scientists closer to synthesizing lichens in the lab, a feat that would allow researchers to study lichens without having to collect them from the field.
