One by one, they shipped out for a life at sea. Then one by one, they came to Brooklyn to die.
From 1831 until 1910, when almost no room was left for another grave, as many as 2,000 sailors and Marines (and their relatives) were buried in the Naval Hospital Cemetery, on the outskirts of the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
Their bodies were exhumed in 1926. Nine hundred and eighty-seven individual remains were transferred to the Cypress Hills National Cemetery in Brooklyn. It has never been clear — and it may never be — what happened to hundreds of other burials that were known to have taken place there.
The closing of the cemetery left a wound on the eastern edge of the Navy Yard.
Now, it is beginning to heal.
Who Was Buried at the Naval Hospital Cemetery in Brooklyn?
An exhaustive 1999 study of the abandoned cemetery included a list of all known burials, from Alexander Adams to Charles Zoller (Pages 115 to 174), as well as a detailed history.
Replanted as a meadow — the lightest possible touch on the land — the 1.7-acre cemetery has reopened to the public as the Naval Cemetery Landscape, an integral part of the growing Brooklyn Waterfront Greenway, a planned 14-mile path for bicyclists and pedestrians. The landscape cost just about $2 million and was developed in partnership with the Brooklyn Navy Yard Industrial Park.
“You’re seeing a prairie in its first months,” said Thomas L. Woltz, the principal of Nelson Byrd Woltz Landscape Architects, which designed the park, in collaboration with Marvel Architects.
Mr. Woltz wanted to prepare me for the scene that greeted us when we walked through the gateway on Williamsburg Street West: not a traditional park in any sense, but a field of tall grasses sprinkled with blazing star, brown-eyed Susan, purple coneflower, butterflyweed, Queen Anne’s lace and fleabane.
Cherry trees in a sacred grove will one day reach 80 feet. Right now, they are shoulder high. Some have not even survived their first season. Mr. Woltz likened the acclimation to tough love, necessary for a meadow that will be to a large extent self-sustaining.
The path through the landscape is a gently meandering boardwalk, made of black locust planks, varying in width from 10 to 16 feet and elevated 30 inches above the meadow.
In 1997, ground-penetrating radar detected what may have been a full human skeleton. “Some burials may still remain intact in the Naval Hospital Cemetery, but their identity would be very difficult, if not impossible, to determine,” a study compiled in 1999 by TAMS Consultants and Joan H. Geismar said.
Many of those who were buried in the cemetery died in the nearby United States Naval Hospital of 1830-38. It is an official New York City landmark, as is the Surgeon’s House of 1863. The hospital was decommissioned in 1948.
The landmarks and other remaining buildings of the hospital complex are to undergo a “full-blown historical restoration,” said Douglas C. Steiner, the chairman of Steiner Studios, which abuts the old hospital campus. Work is to begin in six to 12 months. The restoration, in its entirety, may take a decade or more.
He and Mr. Woltz said the park would not have been possible without the tenacity of Milton Puryear, the director of project development at the Brooklyn Greenway Initiative, and without financing from the TKF Foundation of Annapolis, Md.
The park opened May 20.
Birds, bees and butterflies did not wait for a formal invitation to discover the place.
“There’s a family of hawks — a mom and a dad and, I believe, three babies — and a turkey vulture,” 12-year-old Josiah Shakir said as he confidently took over the tour from Mr. Woltz. Out of school for the summer and keeping his father company, Josiah has become something of a self-appointed docent.
Mr. Woltz could not have been happier than to see this landscape embraced by a boy and his furred and winged entourage.
“We thought that attracting all the life you possibly could to the site was the most appropriate memorial to the lives of the people who were interred here,” he said.