Lin-Manuel Miranda’s final bows for his farewell performance in “Hamilton” on Saturday night seemed routine, if overly humble for the departure of the show’s star and mastermind. He even shared his bows with the other cast members also exiting the show, including Phillipa Soo and the Tony winner Leslie Odom Jr.
But then the theme song to “The West Wing” kicked in from the orchestra pit.
Mr. Miranda giggled and took a couple of shy bows, only to turn around and be embraced then pushed back to the front of the stage by Christopher Jackson, who plays George Washington, for a proper bow.
Still, the curtain call lasted no more than two and a half minutes, despite fervent applause, which had been consistent throughout the night. The opening number received multiple standing ovations, as did many others. But Mr. Miranda and other performers would pause for only a minute each time before moving the show forward.
Afterward, in the pouring rain, hundreds and hundreds of fans filled West 46th Street, waiting for Mr. Miranda to emerge from the stage door at the Richard Rodgers Theater.
Instead, Mr. Miranda appeared, “Evita”-like, on a balcony atop the theater’s marquee. Holding an umbrella and waving to fans, he paced from one side of the marquee to the other, occasionally stopping to hold his left hand over his heart to show gratitude.
Despite the rain, many people were reluctant to leave, greeting other cast members at the stage door and holding out for another possible appearance by Mr. Miranda. Inside, he had gotten his hair cut, now that he no longer needed it long for the role.
Fans had begun to wait for him much earlier in the day. An hour before the 8 p.m. curtain, hundreds of people flanked the stage door to watch cast members and V.I.P.s come and go, and others stood across the street. Many didn’t even have tickets. “Hamilton” merchandise abounded: T-shirts, posters and even a woman’s clutch that read “Talk Less,” the advice Aaron Burr gives Hamilton throughout the show.
So Mr. Lafferty looked ahead at a six-month block of tickets. This weekend just happened to be the cheapest option.
Not so much for recent ticket buyers. Clara Lacey, a 17-year-old from Los Angeles, flew to New York to see Mr. Miranda’s final performance, and her family bought her a single ticket just a few hours before the show. They paid about $1,500.
Once the house opened at 7:30 p.m., winners of the “Hamilton” ticket lottery — a small number of coveted $10 seats are distributed through an online system — could claim their prizes. Among them were a young actress, Haleigh Ciel, and her friend Byron Chang. Like many of the other winners, they were excited to have finally won and gotten a chance to see Broadway’s hottest show.
But they had no idea this was Mr. Miranda’s farewell.
Others did know, and they were understandably excited for the night. Michelle Foronjy, who works at a Toyota dealership on Long Island, said she screamed when she found out that she had won the lottery and expected to be squeezing her boyfriend’s hand with excitement all night. She was still holding on to him as they left the theater.
Celebrities came through the box office doors at a steady pace. Jennifer Lopez, who recently collaborated with Mr. Miranda on a benefit song to aid those affected by the Orlando massacre, attracted attention with the flashes of paparazzi, as did John Kerry with his security detail. (Abigail, a K-9 dog, noticed them but seemed unfazed.) Spike Lee came for his eighth “Hamilton” performance. Mariska Hargitay showed up for the 10th time. No one seemed as devoted as Rosie O’Donnell, who said this was her 24th time, including performances Off Broadway at the Public Theater.
