Iranian women reported that they were being barred from attending a major volleyball tournament featuring the Olympic-bound men’s national team, reigniting a debate about whether Iran should be allowed to host international matches.
After a commitment from volleyball’s world governing body that women would be able to attend this weekend’s World League tournament at the Azadi Sport Complex in Tehran, Iranian women who have pushed to make sporting events more open say they have not been able to buy tickets online despite repeated efforts.
Female fans are traditionally barred from attending male-only sports events in Iran as a result of efforts by the authorities to enforce strict interpretations of Islamic norms, but many women are pushing to change that practice.
The international volleyball federation, known as the FIVB, an abbreviation for its French name, streamed the Argentina-Italy and Iran-Serbia matches Friday, showing a section of women in the stands. It was unclear whether the women were invited guests or members of the public. A female announcer handled substitutions during Iran’s match.
The FIVB released a statement noting that the Iranian federation had said that Friday’s matches sold out within five minutes and that 466 of the 5,000 tickets had been allotted for a section set aside for women. The area of seats, shown repeatedly on the live stream, did not appear that large.
From the moment tickets became available, the sales website said that the female allotment had been filled, according to several women who said they had tried to purchase tickets.
Tara Sepehri Far, a researcher with Human Rights Watch, has tracked the controversy.
“We’ve been following the case closely and I am disappointed to say that despite FIVB’s claims to have assurances from the Iranian Volleyball Federation, the tickets have not been available to women so far,” she said in an email to The Associated Press along with an image of the ticket website.
In 2012, the longtime ban on women from soccer matches in Iran was extended to volleyball.
The FIVB has pushed Iranian officials to make concessions for women. The sport’s profile is rising in the country, tied to the national team’s success.
Eighth-ranked Iran qualified for its first Olympic tournament as one of the 12 teams set to play in Rio de Janeiro this August.
For a February beach volleyball event at Iran’s Kish Island, women were not allowed to watch the tournament, and the FIVB said that “misunderstandings” were at the root of the issue. Women were later allowed to watch matches from a cafe overlooking the main court.
The issue first drew international attention in June 2014, when a British-Iranian student, Ghoncheh Ghavami, was detained when she tried to attend a men’s volleyball match at Azadi. She spent more than 100 days in prison, much of it in solitary confinement.
Also, in November 2014, FIVB said that in light of Ghavami’s imprisonment, Iran would not be chosen to host a boys’ under-19 world championship. Ghavami was sentenced to a year in prison for spreading propaganda, but the charges were dropped.
The U.S.A. Volleyball board chairwoman Lori Okimura has also been outspoken on the cause.
