In Ben H. Winters’s chilling new thriller, “Underground Airlines,” a bounty hunter named Victor tracks fugitives for the United States Marshals Service. But his mission, like his past, is complicated: The people he’s chasing are escaped slaves. Their main crime is rejecting a life of forced servitude. And Victor himself was once one of them.
From the moment he started writing it, Mr. Winters knew that “Underground Airlines” was creatively and professionally risky. The novel tackles the thorny subject of racial injustice in America. It takes place in a contemporary United States where the Civil War never happened, and slavery remains legal in four states, and it’s narrated by a former slave who has paid a steep moral price for his freedom.
Mr. Winters, 40, has pulled off high-wire acts before. As one of the early literary mash-up artists, he churned out zany best sellers like “Sense and Sensibility and Sea Monsters” and “Android Karenina.” His best-selling trilogy, “The Last Policeman,” is a genre-defying blend of crime writing and science fiction, starring a stoic police officer trying to solve crimes as the world braces for a catastrophic asteroid collision.
But even for someone who brazenly flouts literary conventions, taking on slavery in the context of a sci-fi thriller seemed dicey.
“Underground Airlines,” which Mulholland Books will publish on Tuesday, is already striking a nerve. Independent booksellers have rallied behind the novel, and the American Booksellers Association chose it as its top book for July. A television adaptation is underway, and Mr. Winters is writing the pilot script himself.
Mr. Winters just sold two more books to Mulholland, including “The Prisoner,” a darkly magical legal thriller that deals with mental illness.
Attica Locke, a mystery novelist and a writer for the television show “Empire,” said she was taken aback at first when she picked up the book and saw the author photo.
“The premise was just like, ‘Wait, what now?’” Ms. Locke said. “For me, as a black writer, I have to be like, ‘What’s Ben trying to do here?’” Then she got sucked into the story and was “blown away,” she said.
“There’s always this chatter about who gets to tell which stories, and I’m so grateful that he did not let his choice to have a black protagonist scare him away from the project, because this is everybody’s history,” she said.
“Underground Airlines” is landing in a thicket of fictional works about slavery and its lingering legacy in America. Last month, Alfred A. Knopf released Yaa Gyasi’s ambitious debut novel, “Homegoing,” a visceral story about the effect of slavery on two half sisters and generations of their descendants. Counterpoint recently published Natashia Deon’s debut novel, “Grace,” which is narrated by the ghost of a former slave. And this fall, Doubleday will publish Colson Whitehead’s “The Underground Railroad,” about a slave named Cora; she escapes from a Georgia plantation and flees north via an Underground Railroad that is not just a metaphorical alliance, but also a real subterranean network of tunnels and stations connected by a rickety train.
All of these novels wrestle with the ways that slavery has shaped the country. But Mr. Winters’s approach takes the theme to a shocking conclusion.
Mr. Winters, who lives in Los Angeles with his wife and three children, stumbled into fiction writing by accident. He grew up in Maryland in a middle-class Jewish family and played bass in a punk band in his youth. After college, he wrote plays and musical comedies.
To expand his modest income — “from zero to something,” he said wryly — he started writing parody books on commission for the Philadelphia publisher Quirk Books. One of his assignments was “Sense and Sensibility and Sea Monsters,” which imported giant lobsters and man-eating jellyfish into Jane Austen’s Regency romance. Though it was clearly a spoof, Mr. Winters took the job seriously, and closely studied Austen’s plotting and character development.
With the “Last Policeman” trilogy, Mr. Winters carved out an unusual niche for himself: writing intricately plotted, high-concept thrillers with heady philosophical undercurrents. The story started as a high-stakes mystery, but morphed into an existential meditation on people’s resilience in the face of certain death. The series drew both science-fiction fans and mystery readers, and books in the series won the Edgar Award from the Mystery Writers of America and the Philip K. Dick Award for distinguished science fiction.
In the fall of 2013, Mr. Winters started casting around for his next project. He kept thinking about Trayvon Martin, the black teenager who was fatally shot in Florida by George Zimmerman, and incidents of police violence against African-Americans.
Mr. Winters tried to ground the narrative in research to make the wild premise plausible. He read academic books like “The Political Economy of Slavery,” and speculative histories like Philip Roth’s “The Plot Against America” and Philip K. Dick’s “The Man in the High Castle.” He read and reread literary classics by Ralph Ellison, Toni Morrison, James Baldwin and Zora Neale Hurston.
He realized that changing a few key historical events could have a cascading effect on American culture, economics and politics. He mapped out a timeline in which Lincoln was shot in 1861, before his inauguration, and slavery was permanently enshrined in the Constitution.
The story cracked open when he came up with Victor, who seems like a classic character from hard-boiled detective fiction: a prickly, cynical loner with a dark past. Early on, it emerges that Victor used to be a “peeb,” or a Person Bound to Labor. His tenuous freedom is granted to him by Mr. Bridge, a shadowy figure with the federal marshals, who has hired him to track escaped slaves. Victor — who excels at his work and has captured more than 200 people — infiltrates an abolitionist movement called the Underground Airlines, and is forced to confront his own complicity.
Mr. Winters said writing in the first person felt most natural because it fit with the noir mystery tradition.
At least one publisher passed on the book, arguing that it might be too controversial in the context of the Black Lives Matter movement, Mr. Winters said. But Joshua Kendall, an editor at Mulholland, thought that the story’s provocative political message was its central strength and bought it based on the first 80 pages.
It remains to be seen whether most readers and critics will agree that Mr. Winters has pulled it off. But he feels that it was worth trying.
