PHILADELPHIA — Diversity is suddenly the watchword at American symphony orchestras, and it is high time. For decades, one, two, maybe three black musicians have remained the norm in major orchestras (thus 1, 2 or 3 percent of the players), and audience makeup tends to mirror that onstage.
The noblest sustained attempt to remedy such deficiencies has been the Sphinx Organization. It was founded in 1996 in Detroit by the black violinist Aaron P. Dworkin, now the dean of the school of music at the University of Michigan, to advance the careers of gifted young black and Latino string players. The League of American Orchestras finally awoke to the challenge in June, devoting much of its annual conference to the topic of diversity.
But for depth and scale of commitment to the cause, no classical music institution has rivaled Carnegie Hall in recent years. That commitment was already evident in the painstaking breadth of recruitment efforts for the first years of the splendid National Youth Orchestra of the United States of America, which it founded in 2013.
And this year, Carnegie has redoubled its efforts. The 2016 edition of NYO-USA (as Carnegie styles it) — 109 musicians, ages 16 to 19, not enrolled in music schools or conservatories — is taking shape at the State University of New York at Purchase in preparation for concerts there, at Carnegie and in Europe this month. But Carnegie already put forward a second, younger ensemble, NYO2 — 78 players, ages 14 to 17, with diversity as a stated goal — in joint enterprises with the Philadelphia Orchestra here over the weekend.
In the centerpiece, an entertaining concert at Verizon Hall on Saturday evening, the NYO2 musicians, wearing baseball jerseys, played side by side with Philadelphia counterparts, dressed informally in black, in a grand performance of Respighi’s “The Pines of Rome” and in encores by Gershwin and Copland. It was especially delightful to see the youngsters take most of the solos as the veterans looked on approvingly.
In addition, the Philadelphians — led by Giancarlo Guerrero, the music director of the Nashville Symphony and the conductor of NYO2 — performed Rachmaninoff’s “Symphonic Dances,” and the student ensemble played Tchaikovsky’s rousing “Capriccio Italien.” During two weeks of training at Purchase, NYO2 — rehearsed by Mr. Guerrero and mentored by Philadelphia players — had also played side by side with NYO-USA; in Philadelphia NYO2 took the upper hand, mentoring and playing alongside even younger musicians from local programs.
Diversity, of course, comes in many shapes and sizes. American orchestras can rightly point to their inclusiveness when it comes to Asian-born or Asian-American musicians, drawing on a huge pool of talent resulting from a wholehearted embrace of Western classical music by East Asian cultures in recent decades.
Finding the needles in the broader American haystack is a trickier proposition, and for NYO2 especially, Carnegie has applied great effort to find “talented students from communities underserved by and underrepresented in the classical orchestral field” and considerable expense to provide them with high-level training and performance opportunities.
Carnegie persisted, and it reports the results of its efforts as follows. NYO-USA this year is 43 percent white, 30 Asian, 8 black/African-American, 6 Latino/Hispanic and 13 other/mixed. NYO2 is 27 percent white, 22 Asian, 22 black/African-American, 24 Latino/Hispanic and 5 other/mixed.
Whatever the processes of recruitment and selection, Carnegie turned up a remarkable array of young talent for NYO2’s first outing, with fine string players galore and superb soloists, including Kara Poling, 14, of Reisterstown, Md., on oboe and English horn; Javier Morales-Martinez, 15, of Los Angeles, on clarinet; and Angelica Lorenzo, 14, of Chicago, on percussion. Repeatedly, during rehearsals and in the concert, Ms. Lorenzo — who started playing in second grade on a drum pad, she said in an interview, and in fourth grade on actual percussion instruments — wowed listeners by ripping off the blistering xylophone solo in the “Porgy and Bess” encore medley brilliantly.
So after all of this, might there be something of a ho-hum quality to hearing the work of the slightly older NYO-USA? After all, the lofty levels it achieved in each of its previous manifestations are now only to be expected, and about one-third of this year’s musicians are returnees, some having played in two earlier seasons, one — Soyeong Park, a 19-year-old Korean-born violinist from Princeton Junction, N.J. — in all three.
But no, you were overwhelmed here, too. In its first readings of Bruckner’s Sixth Symphony at Purchase last week — with James E. Ross, in his fourth year as orchestra director, conducting and Ms. Park as a wonderfully assured concertmaster — the NYO-USA sounded fully professional.
Its tasks have also been redoubled this year. It is preparing two full programs: the Bruckner and Mozart’s Piano Concerto No. 22, to be conducted by Christoph Eschenbach, with Emanuel Ax as piano soloist, at the Performing Arts Center in Purchase on July 13 and at Carnegie on July 14; and Debussy’s “Prélude à l’Après-Midi d’un Faune,” Rachmaninoff’s Piano Concerto No. 3 and Prokofiev’s Symphony No. 4 and “Romeo and Juliet” excerpts, to be conducted by Valery Gergiev, with Denis Matsuev as piano soloist, in Amsterdam; Montpellier, France; and Copenhagen. The concluding concert will be in Prague on July 25.
Because of this schedule and with an extra week of rehearsal already built in, corners had to be cut elsewhere. For the first time, NYO-USA will not tour with a newly composed work. But Mr. Ross pointed out that the young players were nevertheless gaining new experiences. Bruckner’s Sixth Symphony and Prokofiev’s Fourth, he added, are not often performed and “might as well be new music” to the students.
These experiences and so many more, of repertory, of places and of people: staff, faculty members and colleagues. “The people keep you coming back,” Ms. Park said. And the assembled throng grows ever more happily rich and diverse.