Less than a day after newly emboldened Democratic lawmakers announced bills that would significantly tighten tenant protections, prominent real estate developers got Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo on the phone to make a last-ditch plea to persuade him to block the measures.
The developers, including Douglas Durst, Richard LeFrak and William C. Rudin, are involved with some of the most iconic buildings on the New York City skyline, including One World Trade Center and 3 Times Square, and have long wielded major influence in Albany.
They and their counterparts in the real estate industry have donated millions of dollars in campaign contributions to Mr. Cuomo and other state politicians in recent decades.
But on Wednesday, Mr. Cuomo rebuffed the developers, telling them that “they should call their legislators if they want to do something about it,” said a person briefed on the call, which lasted about 15 minutes.
The phone call capped a humiliating moment for an industry that had long reigned in the state capital.
The bills announced on Tuesday night by the Democratic leaders of the State Senate and the Assembly would abolish rules that let building owners deregulate apartments and close loopholes that permit them to raise rents.
The legislation would directly impact almost one million rent-regulated apartments in New York City, which account for more than 40 percent of the city’s rental stock, and allow other municipalities statewide beyond New York City and its suburbs to adopt their own regulations.
Real estate industry groups said the bills would do serious damage to housing in the city by reducing incentives for landlords to renovate existing apartments and to build affordable new ones.
Existing rent laws expire on Saturday. The rent regulation package, which is expected to be approved before the end of the week, is perhaps the most resonant symbol of the change in power in Albany since Democrats took complete control in November.
Republicans had dominated the State Senate for most of the last century and formed a close alliance with the New York City real estate industry, which donated heavily to Republican senators.
The elections in November not only brought Democrats to power in the State Senate, but also saw the rise of progressive lawmakers who fiercely opposed real estate interests.
Lawmakers, government aides and lobbyists said in interviews on Wednesday that the industry had pinned its hopes on Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat who at times tried to act as a brake on his party’s left wing.
But in the last week of negotiations, Mr. Cuomo distanced himself from the debate. He dismissed requests from the real estate lobby to engage in negotiations with Democratic leaders of the Senate and Assembly, inviting the Legislature instead to pass bills on its own.
When real estate lobbyists called the governor’s office over the last week, they were told by the governor’s aides that Mr. Cuomo had stepped back and that they should speak with legislators instead.
The developers who reached Mr. Cuomo on the phone on Wednesday declined to comment.
But one person briefed on the call said the developers expressed surprise at the way the governor had handled the rent issue, and voiced concern about the impact the legislation would have on the construction of new housing.
Several people on the call raised the possibility of legal challenges. Mr. Cuomo had no reaction to that, according to the person briefed on the call.
The industry had already tried that, having met with lawmakers in Albany over the past few months, presenting them with sophisticated charts that purported to show how the proposed measures would erode the city’s housing stock.
The industry also commissioned an expensive advertising campaign featuring construction workers who were depicted warning that they could lose their jobs under the new proposals.
After the announcement on Tuesday night, industry officials scrambled to figure out what had gone wrong, blaming a combination of strategic miscalculations, resurgent activism by the progressive left and a new mood of antipathy — in New York and nationally — toward landlords and the wealthy.
And industry leaders seem to have been slow to adapt to the new environment.
From 2010 until last month, a prominent landlord group, the Rent Stabilization Association, donated more than $800,000 to the campaign committee for State Senate Republicans. In the same time period, the group spent just $25,000 on State Senate Democrats.
The Real Estate Board of New York similarly favored Republicans. Last year, it spent more than $1 million on independent campaign expenditures, mostly to back two Republican politicians running for the State Senate — one on Long Island and one in the suburbs north of New York City. Both candidates lost.
This year, as the tenant activists’ platform gained traction, landlords did not publicize their own counterproposals, fearful of losing leverage by offering compromises. Instead, industry members relied on their traditional method of private negotiations, trying to talk key lawmakers out of the more dramatic changes in one-on-one meetings.
“The industry held their cards close to the vest, thinking that the consequences of these proposals would be obvious to everyone,” Kathryn S. Wylde, the president of the Partnership for New York City, an influential business group, said.
In the hours since the deal was announced, industry officials have blitzed lawmakers with phone calls in an attempt to contain the damage. They have pored over the bill to single out the most far-reaching provisions, then relayed them to senators from moderate districts, hoping to convince them to vote against the bill.
Some of the lawmakers seemed to be receptive. Senator James Gaughran, a newly elected Democrat from Long Island, said he was reviewing the bill. “I’m just a little concerned about the unintended consequences of some of this,” he said on Wednesday.
Still, some industry leaders suggested that the governor had failed them.
For tenant activists, the shift of power was a moment years in the making.
