WASHINGTON — The agreement for Robert S. Mueller III to testify on Capitol Hill materialized after weeks of phone calls and meetings between House Democratic staff and associates of Mr. Mueller, who made clear his reluctance to enter the political war surrounding his investigation.
His intermediaries repeatedly delivered a message that Mr. Mueller, then the special counsel, conveyed last month in a rare public appearance: A prosecutor speaks through his indictments and the written word rather than the public spectacle of a congressional hearing. Mr. Mueller was so averse to being pulled into the political arena that he never spoke directly with lawmakers or their aides, according to a senior congressional official involved in the talks and others briefed on them.
His reticence mattered little in the end. Democrats were insistent that he had a responsibility to testify, though they agreed to combine questioning from two panels on one day. The protracted negotiations came to an abrupt stop late on Tuesday night when representatives for Mr. Mueller agreed that he would show up if the House Judiciary and Intelligence Committees issued subpoenas for an appearance on July 17.
House members knew that Mr. Mueller, a former federal prosecutor and a director of the F.B.I. under Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama, would not defy a subpoena.
Now Mr. Mueller, 74, is set to take the biggest stage of his long public career to answer questions on live television in back-to-back public hearings about his investigation into Russia’s 2016 election interference and President Trump’s attempts to impede the inquiry. He will face lawmakers from both parties who believe his testimony can help them drive divergent narratives.
Democrats hope that Mr. Mueller will tell a story of presidential misconduct worthy of the public’s censure. Republicans want to draw him out on allegations of misconduct by supposedly crooked F.B.I. agents bent on taking down a president.
The risk to Mr. Mueller’s self-image as a nonpartisan public servant was on display on Wednesday. Democrats expressed confidence that his words would help diminish support for Mr. Trump and clarify what they view as deliberate obfuscation by Attorney General William P. Barr to clear the president of an obstruction offense in a four-page summary of the Mueller report in March that set the public narrative about its findings.
The president was referring to a December Justice Department inspector general report that noted 19,000 texts were lost because of technical problems, not intentionally deleted by Mr. Mueller or anyone.
“It never ends,” Mr. Trump said about Democratic efforts to investigate his conduct. He repeated that Mr. Mueller’s report, released in April, found no collusion with the Russians, and he again offered a false assertion that the special counsel’s team cleared him of obstruction of justice. After reading the report and considering 10 possible instances in which Mr. Trump may have obstructed justice, Mr. Barr decided the president had not.
But Mr. Mueller emphasized that Mr. Trump has not been cleared of obstruction crimes. “If we had had confidence that the president clearly did not commit a crime, we would have said so,” Mr. Mueller said in May in his only public remarks on the investigation.
Still, it does not seem as if the president will try to block Mr. Mueller’s appearance on Capitol Hill, as his administration has done with other witnesses called by House Democrats.
Talks about his testimony had begun after Mr. Barr released a redacted version of Mr. Mueller’s report in April. They slowed after Mr. Mueller left his post as special counsel and no longer had easy access to a coterie of staff and official government channels for negotiating, people involved in the discussions said. Democrats ultimately turned to Jonathan R. Yarowsky, a partner at Mr. Mueller’s former law firm of WilmerHale who also previously worked for the Judiciary Committee, to serve as an intermediary to Mr. Mueller’s closest aides, according to the congressional official directly involved.
WilmerHale also made office space available to Mr. Mueller as he negotiated, Robert T. Novick, a managing partner, said on Wednesday.
By mid-June, the patience of Democratic activists and lawmakers on Capitol Hill was wearing thin. The White House was blocking witness after witness called to testify on Capitol Hill and threatened to go on stonewalling “illegitimate” oversight by Democrats as long as needed.
Democrats tried to impress upon Mr. Mueller’s team that they would subpoena him if he did not agree to terms and demand that he appear on two consecutive days for much longer sessions, said the senior official involved in the talks, who was not authorized to speak by name. And though Democrats understood his position, they made clear that Congress and the public disagreed with the view that a Justice Department prosecutor need never speak and that Mr. Mueller had a responsibility to clear the public record about his work.
By Tuesday evening, both sides agreed to the more limited setting under subpoena. Rather than risk letting details of the agreement leak out, Mr. Nadler and Representative Adam B. Schiff, the Intelligence Committee chairman, decided to announce the terms in a statement at 9 p.m.
“We reached the point where we believed if we issued the subpoena, he would obey it and he would testify,” Mr. Nadler said on Wednesday.
Under the terms, Mr. Mueller will appear first before the Judiciary Committee to principally discuss the second volume of his report, on possible obstruction of justice by Mr. Trump. Democrats have agreed to limit their questioning in each hearing, meaning that there will probably not be enough time for every member of the Judiciary Committee to question Mr. Mueller in public.
The remaining members are expected to question Mr. Mueller’s lieutenants in the special counsel’s office in a private transcribed interview later in the day, according to the official involved in the talks. It was not clear which of Mr. Mueller’s investigators would be questioned, and lawmakers did not agree to limit topics of discussion.
Because the Intelligence Committee is almost half the size of the judiciary panel, all of its members will have time to question Mr. Mueller and intend to focus on the first volume of his report, on Russia’s election interference. Intelligence Committee members will later have their own turn with Mr. Mueller’s team in private.
Republicans will most likely question Mr. Mueller about the origins of the Russia inquiry, and whether federal officials spied on the Trump campaign. Mr. Barr has begun his own review into the beginnings of the investigation, and Mr. Trump granted him wide authority to declassify intelligence secrets as part of the review.
Several Republicans predicted on Wednesday that the appearance would backfire on Democrats trying to damage Mr. Trump.
But the almost 80 Democrats who have already endorsed opening an impeachment inquiry into Mr. Trump were just as thrilled. “If Mueller just talks about the report, it will make more people realize the criminal behavior that he has engaged in,” said Representative Steve Cohen, Democrat of Tennessee.