Sallie Krawcheck — once a Wall Street executive, now an advocate for women investing — on how women can get their fair share.
Remember that moment in “Sex and the City” when Carrie couldn’t afford to buy her apartment because she had bought too many shoes? Worse, she’d miscalculated how much she’d spent on them by $36,000.
Sallie Krawcheck doesn’t think it’s cute — she thinks it’s a trope.
Krawcheck, a former Wall Street executive, is a founder and the C.E.O. of Ellevest, an investing platform that helps women reach their financial goals.
I caught up with Krawcheck before she went on stage. We discussed women and money, the six gender gaps that persist and what women can do to close them.
Not sure how to start? Krawcheck says the easiest way is to have even a small percentage of your paycheck deposited automatically into your employer-sponsored 401(k) or, if you don’t have one, to fund a traditional or Roth I.R.A.
The problem: Women earn 57 percent of bachelor’s degrees but hold two-thirds of student loan debt. They also pay more for mortgages, even though they’re better at paying them back. “Personal finance info aimed at women is a steady stream of condescending advice to restrain ourselves from overspending on ‘frivolous’ things like shoes or lattes,” Krawcheck said.
The problem: Even in 2019, women are responsible for more cleaning, child care and so-called emotional chores — “things like remembering and organizing birthday parties” — than men. This adds up to five years’ worth of additional unpaid labor over the course of their lives. Meanwhile, taking a career break for caregiving can curb a woman’s future salary, Krawcheck said.
What do we do about it? If you’re doing more of the work, Krawcheck advises renegotiating with your partner, like Melinda Gates did. And if you can afford it, outsource time-consuming chores: Hire someone to clean your home or pay a little extra to have groceries delivered, for instance — no guilt allowed. “We live in the golden age of outsourcing,” Krawcheck said.
She also advises advocating federally mandated, fully paid parental leave for both primary and nonprimary caregivers.
The problem: So women make less, and they also pay more for consumer goods marketed to them. “This isn’t just about Lady Doritos — one study found that women pay 42 percent more than men do on products like razors and shampoo,” Krawcheck said.
What do we do about it? Krawcheck advises voting with your wallet — say, for women-led, fairly priced companies — and making some noise when you see the pink tax in action.
The problem: Female entrepreneurs garnered only 2.2 percent of all venture capital funding last year (a stat that hasn’t budged much, even recently). They also get fewer small business loans, even though they’re more likely to be good borrowers.
What do we do about it? Get more women in venture capital, Krawcheck said, and support female entrepreneurs by investing in their businesses, either as a backer or a customer. “If you’re in the V.C. world, make deals with other women and help coach those who come after you,” she said.
The problem: Women keep 71 percent of their money in cash, compared with men’s 60 percent. Women also retire with just two-thirds of the money men do — though they live five years longer. Why? “Because all these other gaps mean women end up with less money to invest,” she said.
Overlooked is a series of obituaries about remarkable people whose deaths, beginning in 1851, went unreported in The Times. For Pride Month, we’re adding the stories of important L.G.B.T.Q. figures.
Ma Rainey, a Georgia native known as the “Mother of the Blues,” was the first entertainer to successfully bridge the divide between vaudeville and authentic black Southern folk expression.
Of the nearly 100 songs she recorded in the 1920s, many were national hits, and some have become part of the American musical canon.
With unapologetic lyrics, Rainey proudly proclaimed her bisexuality and helped to mainstream black female narratives in a musical style that later became a nationwide craze.
Went out last night with a crowd of my friends. They must’ve been women, ’cause I don’t like no men. It’s true I wear a collar and a tie, makes the wind blow all the while. Don’t you say I do it, ain’t nobody caught me. You sure got to prove it on me.
Read her full New York Times obituary here.
Read past In Her Words here.
