MEXICO CITY — The father and daughter lie face down in the muddy water along the banks of the Rio Grande, her tiny head tucked inside his T-shirt, an arm draped over his neck.
The portrait of desperation was captured on Monday by the journalist Julia Le Duc, in the hours after Óscar Alberto Martínez Ramírez died with his 23-month-old daughter, Valeria, as they tried to cross from Mexico to the United States.
The image represents a poignant distillation of the perilous journey migrants face on their passage north to the United States, and the tragic consequences that often go unseen in the loud and caustic debate over border policy.
It recalled other powerful and sometimes disturbing photos that have galvanized public attention to the horrors of war and the acute suffering of individual refugees and migrants — personal stories that are often obscured by larger events.
Like the iconic photo of a bleeding Syrian child pulled from the rubble in Aleppo after an airstrike or the 1993 shot of a starving toddler and a nearby vulture in Sudan, the image of a single father and his young child washed up on the Rio Grande’s shore had the potential to prick the public conscience.
As the photo ricocheted around social media on Tuesday, Democrats in the House were moving toward approval of an emergency $4.5 billion humanitarian aid bill to address the plight of migrants at the border.
Representative Joaquin Castro, Democrat of Texas and the chairman of the Hispanic Caucus, grew visibly emotional as he discussed the photograph in Washington. He said he hoped that it would make a difference among lawmakers and the broader American public.
The young family from El Salvador — Mr. Martínez, 25, Valeria and her mother, Tania Vanessa Ávalos — arrived last weekend in the border city of Matamoros, Mexico, hoping to apply for asylum in the United States.
But the international bridge was closed until Monday, officials told them, and as they walked along the banks of the river, the water appeared manageable.
The family set off together around mid-afternoon on Sunday. Mr. Martínez swam with Valeria on his back, tucked under his shirt. Ms. Ávalos followed behind, on the back of a family friend, she told government officials.
A rising number of families, often with young children, are crossing the Rio Grande to enter the U.S. We spoke with migrants who are making this risky decision and surrendering to Border Patrol.
These are the banks of the Rio Grande in Eagle Pass, Texas. On the other side is Mexico. And a group of people from Central America has just waded into the water to cross into the United States. Some are carrying small children. The river bed is uneven and the currents are unpredictable. Taking one wrong step could mean getting swept away. Then, U.S. Border Patrol intervenes. Scenes like this have recently become all too common, here in the Del Rio border sector. The number of migrants and asylum-seekers making these risky river crossings with children in tow has skyrocketed since last year. They’re bypassing official ports of entry. This one, just a few hundred meters away, is backlogged, as are so many along the border. But most of these families are not trying to sneak past Border Patrol. Instead, they’re seeking out agents and surrendering themselves. “I’ve been in this sector for a long time, and we have not seen this before and it’s bad. And it’s getting worse.” Bryan Kemmett has been with Border Patrol for over two decades. “This area, right here, is ground zero. This is where all the traffic comes from. We can see the floatation devices that they’re using. You know, we’ve seen as many as nine people trying to get into these little inflatable pools.” Kemmett says agents historically have seen single adults crossing the river here. Now, it’s mostly families with younger and younger children. He says Border Patrol resources are stretched thin. “There’s a lot of care that has to be taken with families — the feeding and changing the diapers and making sure that everybody that has to go to the hospital is taken to the hospital.” Tending to families has become a part of the agent’s daily routine. “We have a job to do. We enforce the laws that Congress pass. But we are also making sure that while we’re enforcing the laws, the migrants are safe, and if they become distressed, we quickly go to rescue mode.” But they can’t always get to everyone. Just a month ago, a raft crossing the river at night overturned: A 10-month-old and a 7-year-old drowned. Locals have captured images of people struggling for their lives — and bodies washing up on the river shore. Border Patrol has counted seven drownings since October. But they say there could be more that are unaccounted for. “They got a kid with them.” “They have a kid with them?” “Yeah.” “In the middle.” “How young?” “Probably like, 8?” “You think we should pick them up?” “Yes.” Carlos Reinaldo Farias is a vessel commander in the Del Rio sector. “I’m gonna get down river of them, O.K.?” If he sees migrants in distress or with children in the water, his task is to rescue them. “I’m gonna go in neutral, all right?” Since October, there have already been over 300 people rescued here, up from only 31 the year before. That’s an increase of 900 percent. “We’re not chasing after people as much. We’re helping people not succumb to the river. And I think of my children. And it kind of hurts a little bit. And I’m not gonna lie, it kind of gets me a little riled up because I understand they want to come over, but there’s right pathways to it. And I don’t think anybody should be endangering their child’s life like that.” But Angel Gabriel said he and his family had no other choice. He said they fled Honduras after being targeted by local police because of a complaint he had filed against them. Like others we spoke to, they’ve come to claim asylum in the U.S. But the current administration has restricted the number of asylum-seekers who can come through official ports of entry, and be processed daily. In some places, it can take months to get through and some people say they can’t wait that long. Angel said he and his family had been in Mexico since January before deciding to make the treacherous trek across the river. After several days at a Border Patrol holding facility, most families apprehended in the Del Rio sector are released, here, at a new volunteer-run shelter. Allan Ramon, and other locals here, addressed the families basic needs and help with the next leg of their journey: joining relatives or friends in other parts of the U.S. while they await a hearing. These are just a handful of the hundreds of families who arrive at the southern border each day, and they are likely to keep coming, despite the administration’s efforts to deter migration, as long as they feel it’s riskier to stay at home than to cross the river.
But as Mr. Martínez approached the opposite bank, carrying Valeria, Ms. Ávalos could see he was tiring in the rough water. She decided to swim back to the Mexican bank.
Back on the Mexico side, she turned and saw her husband and daughter, close to the American bank, sink into the river and get swept away.
On Monday, their bodies were recovered by Mexican authorities a few hundred yards from where they were swept downstream, fixed in the same haunting embrace.
Recent weeks have brought home the dangers along the border, though none quite as graphically as the death of Mr. Martínez and Valeria.
On Sunday, two babies, a child and woman were found dead in the Rio Grande Valley, overcome by the searing heat. A toddler from India was found dead in Arizona earlier this month.
And three children and an adult from Honduras perished when their raft overturned two months ago while crossing the Rio Grande.
Deterrence has been a favored strategy among American officials seeking to stem the tide of migration, even before President Trump took office.
In 2014, President Barack Obama pressed Mexico to do more after tens of thousands of unaccompanied children turned up along the southern border searching for loved ones in the United States.
Detentions in Mexico soared under the so-called Southern Border Plan.
But Mr. Trump, from the outset of his election campaign, has made a crackdown on illegal immigration a centerpiece of his presidency.
His administration has attempted to criminalize those entering the United States illegally, separated parents from their children and drastically slowed down the ability of migrants to apply for asylum in the United States.
More recently, his administration has imposed a plan to send thousands of asylum seekers back to Mexico to await their court proceedings.
Under sustained pressure from Mr. Trump, Mexico has been stepping up its own migration enforcement in recent months.
This effort accelerated in the past two weeks as part of a deal that the López Obrador administration struck with Washington to thwart potentially crippling tariffs.
As of Monday, the Mexican government had deployed more than 20,000 security forces to the southern and northern borders to try to impede the passage of undocumented migrants toward the United States, officials said.
But human rights experts, immigrants’ advocates and security analysts warned that the mobilization could drive migrants to resort to more dangerous routes in their effort to reach the United States.
For all the hard-line policies, hundreds of thousands of migrants continue to embark on the dangerous journey to the United States from Central America and elsewhere.
But for every migrant who chooses to take the journey, whether on foot, packed into cargo trucks or on the top of trains, the fear of what lies behind outweighs that which lies ahead.
Some are fleeing gangs that cripple the region and kill wantonly. Others are seeking an economic lifeline.
Such was the case with Mr. Martínez and his wife, who left El Salvador in early April intent on starting fresh in the United States, according to Jorge Beltran, a reporter for El Diario de Hoy in El Salvador who interviewed some of the couple’s relatives.
“They went for the American dream,” Wendy Joanna Martínez de Romero, said from her home in El Salvador.
Mr. Martínez quit his job at Papa John’s, where he had earned about $350 a month. By then, his wife had already left her job as a cashier at a Chinese restaurant to take care of their daughter.
The couple lived with Mr. Martínez’s mother in the community of Altavista, a massive housing complex of tiny concrete houses east of San Salvador, according to Mr. Beltran.
Though Altavista is under the control of gangs, the couple was not fleeing from violence, Rosa Ramírez, Mr. Martínez’s mother, told him. Rather, the grind of surviving as a family on $10 a day had become unmanageable.
Indeed, members of the family issued a plea to the public on Tuesday, seeking money to help repatriate the bodies of Mr. Martínez and Valeria. The cost was expected to be about $8,000 — an unimaginable sum for the relatives to manage.
Hours later, the Salvadoran government agreed to cover the costs.