WASHINGTON — Turmoil intensified on Tuesday inside the agency responsible for securing the country’s borders as a top official was replaced by an immigration hard-liner and former Fox News contributor who last week pushed for nationwide raids to deport undocumented families.
That hard-liner, Mark Morgan, will take over as the head of Customs and Border Protection, administration officials said Tuesday.
The move again overhauls leadership at the Department of Homeland Security, which is responsible for cybersecurity, disaster relief and the enforcement of customs, border and immigration law, just two months after a purge of officials destabilized the agency.
The White House in recent months has installed multiple officials at the department who have gone on television to support Mr. Trump’s more aggressive immigration policies, using certain officials to knock out others without any clear vision for homeland security. Each of the homeland security agencies responsible for enforcing immigration policy — Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Customs and Border Protection and United States Citizenship and Immigration Services — is led by an acting official.
In his new role, Mr. Morgan — currently the acting director of ICE who pushed for raids to deport undocumented families last week — will oversee an agency responsible for processing thousands of asylum-seeking families, including children, along the southwestern border. He is succeeding John Sanders, the acting commissioner, who will step down on July 5 as the government’s primary border enforcement executive.
The personnel changes come as public fury at Customs and Border Protection mounts over the treatment of detained migrant children.
Matthew Albence, the deputy director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, will lead that agency, officials said.
In an interview on Tuesday for a coming book about the president’s immigration policies, Mr. Trump acknowledged the tumult among his top immigration officials.
“I do burn out on people, I do. If somebody’s not really great, I do,” the president said during the interview in the Oval Office. He did not directly address the turnover at Customs and Border Protection, but said he had made “good changes” in the people who run his immigration agencies.
The White House directed Kevin McAleenan, the acting secretary of homeland security, to replace Mr. Sanders with Mr. Morgan after multiple White House officials expressed displeasure that Mr. Sanders was not being aggressive enough at the southwestern border, administration officials said. Mr. McAleenan complied, hoping to diminish friction with the White House, officials said.
Mr. McAleenan resisted an earlier push by Stephen Miller, the architect behind Mr. Trump’s immigration policy, to appoint Mr. Morgan as the head of Customs and Border Protection, according to current and former homeland security officials.
In a letter to Customs and Border Protection employees on Tuesday, Mr. Sanders confirmed his departure.
Mr. Trump told reporters on Tuesday that he was aware a change at Customs and Border Protection was coming, but that he did not ask Mr. Sanders to resign.
In the months since Mr. Trump forced out Kirstjen Nielsen as the secretary of homeland security, as well as other high-ranking officials in that department, the White House has installed officials aligned with Mr. Miller’s aggressive stance on immigration.
The administration has scrambled to address a record number of Central American families who have entered the United States seeking asylum.
More than 144,200 migrants were taken into custody in May — the highest monthly total in 13 years — filling facilities managed by border agencies that have faced a public backlash over accusations that migrant children have been left hungry and unwashed.
Customs and Border Protection officials said that the facilities were never built to house children and that the migrants should be moved to shelters managed by the Department of Health and Human Services. Those facilities are also pushed beyond capacity.
Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, the chamber’s No. 2 Democrat, expressed concern on Tuesday that Mr. McAleenan was caught in the White House’s political crossfire. He cited the issues at the border as reason to prioritize consistent leadership at the agency.
Before he named Mr. Morgan to the agency overseeing the border, Mr. McAleenan had argued with him over an operation that would send ICE agents into communities to detain and deport about 2,000 undocumented families who have been issued a deportation order or missed a court date.
After Mr. McAleenan resisted the nationwide raids this month, Mr. Morgan went around him and directly communicated with the president, saying that the raids were needed as a show of force to deter migration.
Mr. Trump’s decision last week to signal on Twitter that ICE would soon begin deporting “millions” of people — something logistically impossible — blindsided ICE agents and career officials in the Department of Homeland Security. The roughly 6,000 deportation officers in ICE do not know the exact locations of each migrant.
Mr. McAleenan, in a meeting with White House officials on Friday, again outlined the risks of the operation, saying it could lead to the separation of undocumented parents from citizen children, according to Trump administration officials. ICE officials, including Mr. Albence, were also worried that the announcement of a pending operation had jeopardized agents’ safety.
After the meeting with Mr. McAleenan, as well as a phone call from Speaker Nancy Pelosi, Mr. Trump tweeted on Saturday that he would delay the raids for two weeks. He said he would resume the operation if Democrats did not submit to changes in asylum law.
In recent months, White House officials have ousted the leaders of multiple agencies — ICE, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the Secret Service, Customs and Border Protection and the Department of Homeland Security — and appointed officials aligned with the president’s aggressive immigration policies.
“You’ve got the acting secretary of homeland security resisting what ICE is trying to do,” Mr. Homan said on Saturday.
“His actions in office have been detrimental to both border security and President Trump’s expressed mandate to end illegal immigration and the catch-and-release program,” Mr. Judd wrote.
But Mr. McAleenan, a former Obama administration official, has also carried out some of the president’s more pressing and controversial policies. As head of Customs and Border Protection, he helped enforce Mr. Trump’s “zero tolerance” policy, which led to family separations.
This month, Mr. McAleenan helped negotiate a deal with Mexican officials after Mr. Trump threatened the country for not doing enough to quell migration to the border.
After the White House meeting on Friday, Mr. Trump was impressed that Mr. McAleenan stood his ground over the operation, one White House official said. But current and former homeland security officials say he once again faces the challenge of managing an agency in upheaval.
