Toronto got its first detailed look Monday at the vision from a sibling company of Google for a high-tech remake of a run-down part of its waterfront, and critics found little to assuage their concerns.
Even before the plan was released, citizens’ groups were challenging the redevelopment proposal and privacy advocates were wringing their hands. Some asked whether Toronto was taking its embrace of technology too far by giving a tech company so much leeway to create a community.
On Monday, the debate only intensified with the release of the first detailed plan from Sidewalk Labs, a subsidiary of Google’s parent, Alphabet, a year and a half after it was asked to reshape Canada’s largest city.
The design relies on a vast range of data collection, including sensors to track things like the speed of people crossing streets and park bench usage, and features like robots to drop off parcels and pick up trash.
Daniel L. Doctoroff, the head of Sidewalk, cast the plan as a manifesto for the city of tomorrow. “It is a guidebook to a completely new approach to urbanism,” he said in an interview on Monday.
While there were some indications that the company has taken public criticism into account — the plan now emphasizes affordable housing and the use of Canadian technology partners — the agency set up to oversee the redevelopment cited several concerns about its initial phase, known as Quayside.
The agency, Waterfront Toronto, said that among other issues it was not immediately clear whether Sidewalk’s plans for collecting and using data, and for protecting privacy, conformed to Canadian laws or its own standards.
The development plan is unusual in scale.
Ultimately, it may involve upward of 800 acres, mostly in a former port immediately to the east of downtown that was largely developed in the 1950s in the largely unfulfilled expectation that the St. Lawrence Seaway would make Toronto a major shipping center.
Sidewalk has proposed developing only the first two phases of the project. It estimates the cost 3.9 billion Canadian dollars, and says it plans to invest 900 million dollars. The company has proposed offering its technology — and consulting advice — to the governments for use by other developers for the rest of the property.
The plan envisions neighborhoods made entirely from wood and prefabricated in a factory funded by Sidewalk.
To mitigate the worst of Lake Ontario’s weather, automatic awnings would shield pedestrians from rain or the summer’s sun. Sidewalks would melt snow automatically. And eventually, most vehicles would drive past traffic lights that automatically adjust their timing to accommodate cyclists and pedestrians.
The company would reject a traditional approach to zoning, favoring a mix of apartments and businesses in the same buildings built to unusually high environmental standards. Movable walls and other interior features would allow spaces to switch between residences, office spaces or even manufacturing areas.
To its supporters, Quayside promises to advance both urban design and Canada’s tech community, much of which is now based between Toronto and the twin cities of Kitchener and Waterloo to its west.
But at a time when distrust of large technology companies is growing, Sidewalk’s critics have characterized the plan as one in which Google will use its vast financial resources to expand its surveillance powers over people’s online lives into the physical world. That raises concerns about a loss of privacy and of democratic control.
Since Sidewalk Labs, which was founded four years ago, was selected by Waterfront to come up with a detailed plan for a prototype project on 12 acres of the land, its head, Mr. Doctoroff — a former New York City deputy mayor and former chief executive of Bloomberg — has become a regular visitor to Toronto.
Fully aware that many of its ideas would not be immediately embraced, the company has been in the public consultation business as much as urban development. By Mr. Doctoroff’s count, Sidewalk has heard from 21,000 people over the last year and a half as it developed the plan.
Much of the land is governmment-owned and is now mostly used for parking and storing car dealers’ inventory. In 2017, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau came to Toronto to announce the decision to ask Sidewalk for a plan, and spoke glowingly of its potential. The proposal has also been vigorously championed by, among others, the Toronto Board of Trade, a business group.
But some of its critics have been equally high-profile, and they are far from Luddites. Chief among them has been Jim Balsillie, who was the co-chairman and co-chief executive of the company now called BlackBerry when it effectively introduced the first successful smartphone.
“I am keen to see the end of this faux consultation charade, an ugly 18-month, psychological public relations game that has become the defining feature of this project,” Mr. Balsillie wrote in an email.
“Google has deliberately weaponized ambiguity, subverted democratic process, obfuscated key elements of concern such as data governance and revealed information to the public only when smoked out by aggressive criticism or through a media leak,” he wrote.
In a bid to stem that sort of criticism, Sidewalk released a proposed data privacy plan late last year.
It said that all of the data produced by sensors in the project would go to an independent body that the Board of Trade, separately, has suggested should be Toronto’s library system.
Google will not have priority access to the data, which will be open to everyone. Before any information is collected or analyzed, anyone wanting to use it will have to tell the independent data body why it is needed and detail privacy protections.
“Once we did release the plan, the vast majority of people understood how surprising and different it is, particularly compared to the kind of Wild West that exists with urban data today,” Mr. Doctoroff said.
He acknowledged that many aspects of the plan — particularly an offer to fund the construction of a light rail transit line to the site — go beyond what Waterfront Toronto can approve and will need review by various levels of government and changes, large and small, to several laws and regulations.
Whenever possible, Mr. Doctoroff said, Alphabet will rely on Canadian companies to develop and supply technologies and systems for the development. Sidewalk, he acknowledged, may have to develop some things in-house.
But for many critics, particularly Mr. Balsillie, why the company should reshape a large section of Toronto and do so by using data from citizens going about their everyday lives is the fundamental question surrounding the plan.
“The public will also need to see full protection of Canada’s democracy, economy, sovereignty and digital rights and be convinced that a foreign multinational in the business of mass surveillance is here to do just that,” he added.