Rejecting notions about how they should present themselves as female athletes, the women are turning to colorful hair and bold lips to showcase their style and enhance performance.
For her third World Cup, Francisca Ordega wanted to stand out. She had worn her hair in dreadlocks for her first and had a wavy, blonde ponytail for the second, but this time she wanted something bolder.
“I was looking for green and white,” she said about her search for hair extensions in the colors of her native Nigeria. “But then I saw the blue and purple — and I had to have them.” She expedited an order all the way from the United States and braided the colorful strands into her hair herself.
But after the team’s 3-0 loss to Norway in their opening game, Ordega logged on to Twitter to find that people were blaming the defeat on her makeup, nails and long hair — it didn’t “make her run well,” one user wrote.
Some watching the World Cup seem perplexed that athleticism and femininity could coexist — Is Alex Morgan wearing makeup? Were Sydney Leroux’s eyelashes fake? — or in Ordega’s case, they were irritated. It’s grounded in antiquated notions of how women, and specifically female athletes, should present themselves — strong but not too strong, athletic yet feminine, feminine but not so feminine that they would wear lipstick.
It’s an impossible space for female athletes to navigate, and one that many of this year’s Women’s World Cup players are outright rejecting.
For so long, the visual narrative around women in sports has been “pretty in pink,” said Kane, as the leagues and organizations in charge of women’s sports worked to portray female athletes as ladylike so as to make their athleticism more palatable. Skirted uniforms — impractical for sliding into bases or making tackles — have been part of women’s sports across eras. The All-American Girls Professional Baseball League had them in the 1940s, and in 2009, the now-defunct Women’s Professional Soccer league introduced optional wrap skirts.
South Korea’s Cho So-hyun — who told me she’s been wearing a “burgundy-orange” shade of lipstick for this World Cup — said she did so to feel more feminine. “I want to show my beauty to everyone, and that I am a woman,” she wrote via text message. Marta, the Brazilian forward who scored her 17th goal in a World Cup on Tuesday — the most of any player, male or female — did so in a dark purple lipstick.
For some players, the decision to wear makeup or dye their hair may not be about wanting to appear more or less feminine — it may be a way for them to stand out or promote their personal brand.
Just like male athletes, these women are engaging in self-packaging as a branding method. The Women’s World Cup is one of the rare moments when the world is actually paying attention, and it’s a huge opportunity for these players to land sponsorships and compete financially. Many of them are making real moves.
Megan Rapinoe, the United States forward, has rocked a bleach-blonde pixie cut for years. This World Cup, it’s pink, and so is Canadian midfielder Sophie Schmidt’s. South Africa’s Janine van Wyk opted for lime green.
Despite the progress, Krane said the choices for female athletes are still very constrained. If players choose to forgo makeup or wear their hair short, ignoring conventional notions of femininity, they’re often labeled boyish or masculine. And if they do decide to put on makeup or wear colorful ponytails, they are ridiculed for that too.
The issue of how female athletes should or should not look affects women from all over the world. In our survey of 108 Women’s World Cup players spanning 17 countries, they lamented about their muscular physiques and being mistaken for men.
On Monday night, Nigeria lost 1-0 to France. Ordega had taken out her purple braids, and instead wore her hair in two small buns. I asked if her she had switched her style because of the complaints she had received.
