Chief Edward Gallagher in a photo taken during a 2017 deployment.
In court, the prosecutor did not speak.
Though the ruling remains under seal, a Navy official who had read it said the judge ruled that the client’s constitutional right to due process demanded that the prosecutor be disqualified.
The second prosecutor on the case, Marine Capt. Connor McMahon, was not removed.
The Navy said it would obey the order. “Chief Petty Officer Edward Gallagher is entitled to a fair trial and the Navy is committed to upholding that principle,” said Brian O’Rourke, a Navy spokesman.
The removal of the prosecutor was the latest twist in a case that has become politically charged, with a number of conservative lawmakers rallying around the chief and Mr. Trump signaling that he was considering pardoning him before trial. One member of Congress who had served in combat announced that like Chief Gallagher, he had taken photos of himself with dead bodies.
He has pleaded not guilty and denies all the charges. His defenders say he is being unfairly prosecuted for doing his job.
The case has been dogged with leaks that have continued despite a judge’s gag order. Hoping to track down the source of the leaks, Commander Czaplak, working with Naval Criminal Investigative Service agents, sent emails to defense lawyers in May that had hidden monitoring software embedded in them, allowing prosectors to track who forwarded and who received the emails, court documents show.
Emails containing the tracking software were also sent to lawyers for Chief Gallagher’s commanding officer in Iraq — Lt. Jacob Portier, who is charged in a related case — and to a Navy Times journalist covering both cases.
Defense lawyers quickly discovered the tracking software and cried foul. In motions filed last week, they argued that the case against Chief Gallagher should be dismissed because the tracking attempt violated Chief Gallagher’s constitutional rights and created a conflict of interest for everyone involved in the attempt.
Prosecutors argued that the “audit device” they attached to the emails could not read the contents, and was no different from tracking routinely used by retailers in promotional emails.
The normally secretive Navy SEALs have been rocked in recent years by revelations of serious misconduct. Leaked investigative documents in the Gallagher case include detailed descriptions from SEALs in the chief's platoon of their leader indiscriminately spraying civilian neighborhoods in Iraq with rockets and heavy machine gun fire, targeting civilians with his sniper rifle, bragging about illegal killings and trying to intimidate fellow SEALs who might testify against him.
He has denied any such wrongdoing. His supporters say disgruntled SEALs in his platoon invented stories of atrocities in the hope of getting rid of him.
When Chief Gallagher was indicted in November, the Navy held him in custody to await trial, out of concern that he might try to interfere with the investigation. But this spring, conservatives in Congress who have championed his case successfully lobbied Mr. Trump to order his release from the brig to less restrictive confinement; last week, after the defense complained to the court about the tracking software and other issues, a judge ordered the chief released entirely from confinement.
In appearances on conservative media, lawmakers and Chief Gallagher’s family have argued for a presidential pardon. Mr. Trump signaled he was considering a pardon last month, when White House lawyers asked the Navy to rush pardon paperwork for him and others to the Justice Department before Memorial Day.
Pressure from military leaders behind the scenes persuaded the president to hold off, Navy officials said, but Mr. Trump told reporters he was still open to pardoning “two or three” men accused or convicted of war crimes.
