More than half of the fathers in a national poll reported being criticized about their parenting decisions.
Two years ago, a national poll of parents showed that many mothers were very aware of being criticized for the parenting decisions, small and large, that make up daily life with children. Now the same poll has turned to fathers, and it turns out that they also frequently feel judged and found wanting. In this national sample of fathers of children up to the age of 13, 52 percent of the fathers surveyed said that they had been criticized for their parenting.
Sarah Clark, the co-director of the C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health at the University of Michigan, said that ever since the poll of mothers, she had been curious about whether the same factors involved in what is known as mom-shaming also play out with fathers.
As with the mothers, much of the criticism the fathers recalled was coming from close to home: 44 percent from the child’s other parent, 24 percent from grandparents. And both mothers and fathers were most likely to be criticized around discipline (67 percent of the dads), followed by nutrition (43 percent).
People volunteer advice to parents all the time, said Dr. David L. Hill, an adjunct assistant professor of pediatrics at the University of North Carolina School of Medicine, and the author of “Dad to Dad: Parenting Like a Pro.” But unless it’s been requested, that advice is rarely welcome.
“If somebody does offer advice, our tendency is to be angry — somebody has taken something very important to us, which is how we raise our children and suggested that we’re doing it wrong, and that is immensely inflammatory,” he said. And it sometimes makes fathers feel that it’s not worth trying.
Dr. Garfield works with expectant fathers and encourages them to get closely involved with their babies right from the beginning.
Geoffrey Brown, a developmental psychologist in the department of human development and family science at the University of Georgia, who has studied fathers of young children, described the phenomenon of “maternal gatekeeping — mothers play a large role in determining fathers’ roles.” Mothers can encourage and they can discourage, he said, and sometimes both at once, with mothers asking fathers to do something and then not liking the way it gets done.
In one of his research studies, looking at fathers and 3-year-olds, the effects of the father’s involvement on the child’s attachment varied depending on whether the involvement was play or caregiving, and whether it happened on workdays or non-workdays.
Research has shown that fathers’ involvement has lots of benefits, Dr. Garfield said. “We know that fathers use different words than mothers, and that helps develop the child’s expressive vocabulary, they use different language when out and about in the world.” Fathers are more likely to engage in “rough and tumble” play, he said, and they often keep changing the rules, which can be very exciting for children and helps them learn.
Sometimes, of course, fathers (like mothers) really do have mistaken ideas about discipline, and fathers may feel their role is to deal out penalties. Dr. Hill said that he often starts conversations about spanking with the question, “What are you trying to do here?” Sometimes a parent will reflect, he said, and conclude that physical discipline is not, in fact, working very well.
There are also lessons in the poll for pediatricians — like me — and for teachers and day care providers. One in 10 fathers reported they had felt that a child’s teacher or health care provider assumed they were not very knowledgeable about their child, and about a quarter said they felt excluded from those communications.
Sending signals that fathers are somehow less qualified in their knowledge and ability to parent “can really undermine both their confidence and their level of engagement,” Ms. Clark said.
