On Tuesday, Gov. Gavin Newsom issued a formal apology to California’s Native American communities.
The possibility of reparations for slavery has animated the Democratic presidential campaign. The New York Police Department recently apologized for the 1969 raid on the Stonewall Inn, an event that became a rallying cry for the gay rights movement. And in California, Stanford has moved to erase the name of Junipero Serra, a Catholic saint and founder of California’s mission system, well known for its mistreatment of Native Americans, from a street and buildings.
In California, the academic Benjamin Madley, a historian at U.C.L.A., has been instrumental in sparking the conversation in California in recent years that led to Mr. Newsom’s apology.
Tribal leaders welcomed Mr. Newsom’s gesture, even as they said they hoped it led to more concrete actions, like improved education.
A big question is what comes next, and whether a stab at reconciliation will lead to progress on other issues.
Credit...Illustration by Delcan & Co.
It’s Theodore Payne’s birthday. No, he wasn’t a founding father you don’t remember from history class.
He was, however, the founder of something else: one of Los Angeles’s early commercial nurseries, where Mr. Payne — who would’ve been 147 years old — developed a focus on wildflowers and native plants. Today, a foundation bearing his name carries on that legacy.
Kitty Connolly, the executive director of the Theodore Payne Foundation, told me about how Mr. Payne was born in England and trained as a horticulturalist before making his way to California. One of his formative gigs was as head gardener at Modjeska Ranch, deep in an Orange County canyon.
In 1915, Ms. Connolly said, he developed what is believed to be the first public native plant garden: a five-acre plot at the corner of L.A.’s Exposition Park.
Now, when large swaths of Southern California are blanketed with colorful blooms, the foundation’s wildflower hotline is a top resource for people who want to get the best view. And the organization’s website is a wealth of advice if you want to ditch your thirsty lawn in favor of more environmentally friendly options.
Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, went to school at U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.
