Convicting rapists is a feminist goal. But so is resisting the excesses of law enforcement.
Linda Fairstein and Elizabeth Lederer have taken some punches of late.
In 1989, Ms. Fairstein was the head of the Manhattan district attorney’s sex crimes unit during the notorious case of the so-called Central Park Five — the five black and Hispanic boys who were wrongfully convicted and imprisoned for gang-raping and almost killing the jogger Trisha Meili in Central Park. Ms. Lederer was the lead prosecutor on the case.
This month Ms. Fairstein was dropped by her longtime book publisher, and last week Ms. Lederer left her teaching job at Columbia Law School after student protest. The women’s professional reputations have been on the ropes for a while, but the knockout blow was the recent Netflix mini-series about the Central Park jogger case, “When They See Us,” a wrenching piece of storytelling that clearly presents the two women’s failures in the case.
 The Manhattan district attorney’s sex crimes unit was certainly a potent expression of the feminist movement. But the feminist and civil rights interests do not in fact conflict.
Yes, convicting rapists is good for women. So too, however, is resisting and rectifying the excesses of law enforcement.
It should not need saying, but protecting women means protecting women of all races and ethnicities. The Central Park jogger case is a powerful reminder of this fact. Because the police and prosecutors were wedded to the identification of the five boys as the rapists, they did not look for the real rapist, Matias Reyes (he confessed in 2002), who went on to rape at least five more women, including Lourdes Gonzalez, whom he also killed.
Ms. Gonzalez did not die because the sex crimes unit was too zealous to find the real rapist. She died because it was not zealous enough.
The Central Park jogger case reminds us that the interests of defendants of color and the interests of female victims are also aligned in another way: The proper treatment of scientific evidence helps both. In rape cases, the police, prosecutors and juries notoriously discount the testimony of women. But with the help of DNA evidence, which became widely available in 1986, Ms. Fairstein’s sex crimes unit won many cases and successfully reopened scores of “cold” cases — an accomplishment that would have been impossible before then.
But DNA evidence can also exonerate. In the case of the Central Park jogger, the police had rounded up and obtained confessions from the five boys. If their confessions had been true, you would have expected their DNA to figure into the case, yet none of their DNA was found. (DNA evidence was found, but as the police would learn 13 years later, it belonged to Matias Reyes.) The Innocence Project, a nonprofit that seeks exonerations, reports that 28 percent of the exonerations it has obtained using DNA evidence involved defendants who made false confessions.
Had the police, prosecutors and jury members in the Central Park jogger case properly considered the absence of related DNA (and the presence of unrelated DNA), not only would the black and Hispanic defendants have benefited, but so too would have Ms. Gonzalez and the four other women Mr. Reyes raped that summer.
Ms. Fairstein and Ms. Lederer were part of a movement in which women asserted their right to be free from sexual abuse and harassment. This remains as exigent and compelling a cause as ever, if not more so. But especially when, as in 1989, there is immense public pressure to convict, the representatives of the coercive power of the state must always be mindful of their obligations to all the marginalized and oppressed people before them. And in failing people of color, they failed women of color — which is to say, they failed women.
