Dean Baquet, our executive editor, says “we were overly cautious” in our handling of a prominent writer’s allegations against the president.
After an article last week reported the advice columnist E. Jean Carroll’s rape allegations against President Trump, some readers accused The Times of downplaying the story.
Many have written to ask us why we didn’t give the allegations more attention on our website and in print. (The Times published an 800-word story on Friday evening, but did not promote the story on its home page until late Saturday morning and did not run a print story until Sunday.) Some questioned whether the lack of prominence showed too much deference to the president’s denials, or whether it even suggested misogyny or an unwillingness to believe a victim’s account.
The Reader Center took the concerns to The Times’s top editors and sat down with Dean Baquet, the executive editor.
He said the critics were right that The Times had underplayed the article, though he said it had not been because of deference to the president.
Since the Carroll story broke, editors have continued to discuss how it was handled, and Mr. Baquet said he had concluded that it should have been presented more prominently, with a headline on The Times’s home page.
In The Times’s reporting on the Weinstein and O’Reilly cases, editors developed an informal set of guidelines for when The Times would publish such allegations. Those guidelines include locating sources outside those mentioned by the accusers who not only corroborate the allegations but also are willing to go on the record.
In the case of Ms. Carroll’s allegations, which she revealed in her forthcoming memoir, “What Do We Need Men For?,” The Times did not find independent sources — people beyond the two friends Ms. Carroll cited in her book — who could verify her account at the time of the article’s publication, or any other additional corroboration.
Our reporter did speak to Ms. Carroll herself, and to the two women whom Ms. Carroll said she had told about the assault. They both confirmed that Ms. Carroll had described the incident to them, but asked for their names to be withheld.
In retrospect, Mr. Baquet said, a key consideration was that this was not a case where we were surfacing our own investigation — the allegations were already being discussed by the public.
The Times is continuing to report on Ms. Carroll’s allegations.
