A Wisconsin judge ruled that it was defamatory to publish a book that said Leonard Pozner faked his son’s death certificate.
Several years ago a small publishing house called Moon Rock Books published a 455-page volume that argued the Sandy Hook Elementary School massacre had never happened.
In a dozen chapters, the book professed, among other things, that the school in Newtown, Conn., had been abandoned years before a gunman killed 20 first graders and six staff members.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency, it claimed, had staged the event to promote gun control measures. And Leonard Pozner, the father of the youngest child to die that day, had faked his 6-year-old son’s death certificate in service of the conspiracy, it claimed.
The advocacy of the group Mr. Pozner founded, the HONR Network, has helped push corporations, like YouTube and Facebook, to remove thousands of false posts about the massacre, and to provide new ways for users to report hateful content. Other family members of victims and survivors of the attack have also been involved in recent years in taking on conspiracy theorists on a variety of fronts, including through legal action.
Judge Frank Remington of the Dane County Circuit Court in Wisconsin ruled on Monday that the editors of the book, James Fetzer and Mike Palecek, had defamed Mr. Pozner by alleging multiple times in the book that Mr. Pozner had faked his son’s death certificate to promote the conspiracy. The case will now go to a jury to determine damages.
The book’s publisher, Dave Gahary of Moon Rock Books, also agreed to stop selling the book as of June 30 in a separate settlement. He said that after meeting Mr. Pozner in May and hearing his story for himself, he now believes him.
The ongoing battle by the families of Sandy Hook victims to stop disinformation about the attack shows how persistent conspiracy theories about the massacre remain nearly seven years after one of the deadliest mass shootings in American history.
Mr. Pozner is also suing Alex Jones, the right-wing conspiracy theorist and founder of Infowars, over his assertions that the massacre was an elaborately staged ruse meant to promote gun control. That case is proceeding in Texas. Separately, another case against Mr. Jones brought by relatives of five children and three adults killed in the shooting, along with one F.B.I. agent who responded to the scene, is proceeding in Connecticut.
In 2016, a Florida woman, Lucy Richards, was sentenced to five months in prison for sending Mr. Pozner death threats. She was also banned from visiting websites run by conspiracy theorists, including Mr. Fetzer’s.
On Monday, lawyers said in court documents in the Connecticut case that Mr. Jones’s legal team had included an image of child pornography as part of his legal filings in that case. Mr. Jones denied the allegation, calling it an attempt to frame him.
The legal challenge in Wisconsin focused on Mr. Fetzer, a retired professor at the University of Minnesota Duluth, who lives in Dane County, Wis., and has been asserting for years that the Sandy Hook killings were staged. Along with his co-editor, Mr. Fetzer has also advanced conspiracy theories about the Sept. 11 attacks, John F. Kennedy’s assassination and other events. He is alleged to have zeroed in on Mr. Pozner as being involved in the conspiracy, leading Mr. Pozner to experience harassment and threats.
To prove the case, Mr. Pozner’s legal team provided a certified copy of Noah’s death certificate, as well as DNA evidence from the Connecticut medical examiner showing that he was Noah’s father, said his lawyer, Jake Zimmerman.
Judge Remington said there was no question of fact in dispute, and ruled in favor of Mr. Pozner in the libel case, allowing it to proceed to a jury to consider a penalty.
Mr. Fetzer and Mr. Palecek are representing themselves in the lawsuit. Mr. Fetzer, in an email, restated his belief that Noah’s death certificate was faked. “The American people are entitled to know the truth about their own history,” he said.
Mr. Pozner, 51, said he lives in hiding because of ongoing harassment by Sandy Hook hoaxers. Noah was also survived by his mother, Veronique De La Rosa, a twin sister, Arielle, now 13, and an older sister, Sophia, 14.
Mr. Pozner had also sued the book’s publisher, Moon Rock Books, which is part of a broader company, Wrongs Without Wremedies, LLC. But its principal officer, Mr. Gahary, said Tuesday that after listening to Mr. Pozner’s 15-hour deposition, he no longer had any doubt that Mr. Pozner had truly lost his son.
Mr. Gahary, who has published multiple conspiracy volumes, said that he has been swamped with hate mail since his change of heart became public, including from Sandy Hook deniers who have accused him of betrayal. He said he hoped to send them a message.
