In one of the largest murder cases in Ohio’s history, a doctor was charged on Wednesday with killing 25 people over four years by prescribing fatal doses of fentanyl, a powerful opioid, to critical-care patients at hospitals in and around Columbus.
The doctor, William Husel, 43, pleaded not guilty at his initial court appearance, and a magistrate set his bond at $1 million. The authorities have not described a motive in the case.
A lawyer for Dr. Husel said that his client had tried to provide comfort to dying people, not to kill them. “I can assure you there was never any attempt to euthanize anyone by Dr. Husel,” the lawyer, Richard Blake, said on Wednesday as his client turned himself in to the Columbus police.
Dr. Husel, who had worked for the Mount Carmel Health System since 2013, was fired in December; the state medical board later suspended his license to practice. A pharmacist had alerted hospital authorities that Dr. Husel was prescribing high doses of fentanyl to patients, in some cases overriding the hospital’s protocols for the drug.
Mount Carmel began an internal inquiry and found 35 cases handled by Dr. Husel that it deemed suspicious; a criminal investigation followed.
Fentanyl is one of the most powerful opioids ever developed — it is 50 to 100 times as powerful as morphine, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention — and very small doses of the drug can be fatal.
Abuse of opioid painkillers is a widespread problem with deadly consequences. From 1999 to 2017, almost 218,000 Americans died from causes related to prescription opioids. In April, federal prosecutors charged scores of medical professionals across seven states, including Ohio, with schemes to illegally distribute millions of the pain pills.
But Dr. Husel’s case is different. He is not accused of knowingly facilitating opioid abuse by patients. The people he is accused of killing were often unconscious or critically ill, and may have known nothing of what he was doing, the authorities said.
“It was all being done surreptitiously,” said Gerald Leeseberg, a Columbus lawyer who represents 17 families who are suing Mount Carmel over the patient deaths that Dr. Husel is accused of causing.
The Franklin County prosecutor, Ron O’Brien, said investigators focused on cases in which Dr. Husel had administered doses of 500 to 2,000 micrograms of fentanyl to patients — amounts that Mr. O’Brien said caused or hastened their deaths.
The amounts Dr. Husel is accused of prescribing are much larger than what hospitals typically administer to surgical patients.
“These are very high fentanyl doses for patients without significant opioid tolerance,” said Dr. Lewis S. Nelson, a professor of emergency medicine at Rutgers New Jersey Medical School and an expert on opioid prescriptions. He said 2,000 micrograms of fentanyl, or even 500 micrograms, “would generally prove consequential and most likely lethal” in most patients.
Many of the deaths happened on the overnight shift, Mr. O’Brien said. Dr. Husel, described by the hospital as an acute care doctor, had additional certification in anesthesiology, and he provided explanations for the high doses of fentanyl that satisfied the nurses at Mount Carmel, some of whom were new to the job, the prosecutor added.
Nurses, pharmacists, doctors and other employees at Mount Carmel were interviewed as witnesses, the authorities said, and no one else was expected to face criminal charges in the case.
Dozens of nurses, pharmacists and managers were put on administrative leave during the investigation. Some are no longer employees, while others could face further action from agencies like the Ohio Board of Nursing.
“It could not have happened without some complicit knowledge among nurses, pharmacists and supervisors,” said Mr. Leeseberg, the lawyer who represents families suing the hospital.
Mount Carmel’s inquiry found that while most of the 25 patients probably would have died in any case, five might have lived if given proper treatment.
The health system said that it had overhauled its medication dispensing system to ensure that the abuses Dr. Husel is accused of cannot be repeated. “There is nothing more important to Mount Carmel than the safety of our patients and their trust in us,” it said in a statement.
Dr. Husel graduated from Ohio University College of Osteopathic Medicine and completed his residency and fellowship at the Cleveland Clinic Hospital. When it was notified of the investigation of Dr. Husel, the Cleveland Clinic conducted an audit his time there; the clinic said it had not found conduct similar to what he is accused of doing at Mount Carmel.
Dr. Husel has a previous criminal record. In 1996, he pleaded guilty to improperly storing a destructive device or pipe bomb at Wheeling Jesuit College in Wheeling, W.Va. He was sentenced to six months in jail and one year of supervised release. He admitted that, after the device detonated in 1994, he attempted to falsely incriminate another person by placing a pipe and other items in the person’s car.
Mr. O’Brien, the prosecutor, said he would not seek the death penalty against Dr. Husel because he did not feel he could prove prior calculation and design on the doctor’s part. Each of the 25 murder charges against the doctor carries a possible prison sentence of 15 years to life.