The Oklahoma-born writer, a member of the Muscogee Creek Nation, is the first Native American to hold the post.
At gatherings around the Southwest, she began meeting poets, including Native American ones. Hearing them perform made her realize that poetry was available to everyone, including her. “It became a way to speak about especially Native women’s experiences at a time of great social change,” she said.
Since then Harjo, 68, has written eight books of poetry, a memoir and two books for young audiences. Now the Library of Congress has named her America’s new poet laureate. She will take over for Tracy K. Smith, who has held the position for two years, and joins the ranks of such acclaimed writers as Rita Dove, Louise Glück, Billy Collins and Juan Felipe Herrera. Harjo, a member of the Muscogee Creek Nation, is the 23rd poet and first Native person to be selected for the role.
Rob Casper, who heads the Poetry and Literature Center at the Library of Congress, which houses the laureate, praised the “great humanity” of Harjo’s poetry. “She can have a kind of great sweeping vision and still speak so directly as one human being to another in a way that I can’t help but feel completely moved by and believe in,” he said.
Harjo grew up on Native land in Tulsa, the eldest of four children. “I was told that I was the shyest kid at Indian school, and I liked painting, because I didn’t have to speak,” she said. She did not grow up around many books, but she did hear many stories, primarily about her ancestors, including tribal chiefs who were among her father’s people. She grew up seeing her grandmother’s artwork in their home.
She attended a performing-arts high school, then studied painting at the University of New Mexico. She later attended the Iowa Writers’ Workshop and has since published volumes of poetry that explore the connection between spirituality, nature and womanhood, with a focus on Native American history and experience.
“My poems are about confronting the kind of society that would diminish Native people, disappear us from the story of this country,” she said.
She has won the Ruth Lilly Poetry Prize, and her newest collection, “An American Sunrise,” will be published by W.W. Norton in August.
She is also a musician who has released four albums and said she wanted to highlight the intersectional nature of poetry with music and dance, as well as to speak to the present social and political divides.
