A day after security forces violently cleared the main protest camp in Khartoum, the leaders of Sudan’s protest movement rejected a plan by the nation’s military leaders to hold elections within nine months.
The protesters vowed instead to push ahead with an open-ended civil disobedience campaign to force the military from power.
At least 35 people were killed and over 650 were wounded in a firestorm of violence on Monday, protest organizers said, when paramilitary troops swept through central Khartoum, the capital, firing on protesters, burning tents and beating civilians.
A doctors’ group that has helped organize protests later said Wednesday that as many as 101 people had been killed, though that number could not be immediately confirmed.
 But it succeeded in clearing the demonstrators from their sprawling sit-in outside Sudan’s military’s headquarters, their main point of leverage in power-sharing talks that have now collapsed.
A spokesman for the Sudanese Professionals Association, the leading protest group, called the violence a “massacre,” but insisted that its members were already regrouping to continue their resistance against the military.
On the streets of Khartoum, though, there was little sign that the paramilitaries responsible for the violence on Monday intended to loosen their grip.
Troops from the paramilitary Rapid Support Forces paraded through the streets in long columns of military vehicles and set up checkpoints across the city. Residents reported sustained bursts of gunfire from Omdurman, a famous district on the western bank of the Nile. The internet and cellphone networks were restricted or cut off.
On social media, traumatized residents said the paramilitaries were behaving brutally. 
The crackdown has extended far beyond the capital. The protest leaders said the security forces had carried out operations against protesters in at least a half dozen towns across the country. Details of the clashes or the numbers injured were unclear because of the partial communications blackout.
Sudan’s military leader, who previously vowed never to use violence against protesters, struck an uncompromising tone in a televised address Tuesday.
The ruler, Lt. Gen. Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, blamed the protesters for failing to compromise in power-sharing negotiations. He announced that he was canceling all previous agreements and would preside over elections, under regional and international supervision, within nine months.
“Legitimacy and a mandate only comes through the ballot box,” he said.
But few Sudanese appeared to believe his professed devotion to democracy. Instead there were signs of simmering anger at the military’s ruthless tactics against a movement that, in a few short months, had stirred hopes in a region where so many popular uprisings have failed.
Many say they want to avoid the mistakes of history. A 1985 uprising was followed by elections after one year, producing a shaky government that was overthrown by Omar Hassan al-Bashir in 1989. Mr. al-Bashir dominated the country for 30 years, until he was ousted by the military after a popular uprising that went on for months.
This time, protest leaders say, they need at least three years to prepare voter rolls, but also to allow a stunted political system to re-establish itself after three decades of suffocating dictatorship.
General Burhan’s tough tone suggests the military thinks its strategy to hold onto power can work, said Aly Verjee, a Sudan expert at the United States Institute of Peace. But the generals may have underestimated the protesters, he said.
With such a heavy military presence on the streets of Khartoum, the question now is whether such adaptation will continue to work.
