WASHINGTON — The White House is directing Kellyanne Conway, the president’s counselor, to reject a request to testify before a House committee about her repeated violations of a federal ethics law that bars government officials from engaging in political activities at work, further escalating a standoff between Congress and the Trump administration over oversight requests.
In a letter sent on Monday night to Representative Elijah E. Cummings, the chairman of the House Oversight and Reform Committee, the White House counsel, Pat A. Cipollone, cited “longstanding precedent” in declining the invitation for Ms. Conway to appear before the committee.
“The precedent for members of the White House staff to decline invitations to testify before congressional committees has been consistently adhered to by administrations of both political parties,” Mr. Cipollone wrote, citing letters from former counsels to Presidents Barack Obama, Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton.
The latest instance of stonewalling from the White House came a week after Hope Hicks, the former White House communications director, declined to answer questions from the House Judiciary Committee about her time working in the administration, following directions from the White House. The White House has also instructed its former top lawyer, Donald F. McGahn II, to defy a subpoena to testify before congressional lawmakers.
Ms. Conway was found this month to be a repeat violator of the Hatch Act by the Office of Special Counsel, an independent government agency that enforces the law. That agency is not related to the office that was run by Robert S. Mueller III, the former special counsel who investigated Russia’s interference in the 2016 election.
The agency recommended that Ms. Conway be fired for her repeat offenses, citing television appearances shot on the White House grounds in which she criticized candidates seeking the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination. She accused Senator Elizabeth Warren of “lying” about her ethnicity and described Senator Bernie Sanders’s platform as “ideas that are terrible for America,” among other things.
The Office of Special Counsel only makes recommendations and has no authority to force Mr. Trump to fire one of his longest-serving aides.
The act allows government officials to express their personal views on their own time. Administration officials like Ms. Conway, for instance, would be allowed to speak at campaign fund-raisers for candidates they support, if they do not advertise their appearances using their official government titles.