A new novel from Colson Whitehead, an oral history of World War II, heart-pounding thrillers and more.
The premise of this thriller is chilling: Your daughter has been taken, and the only way to get her back is to kidnap another child. That’s what happens to Rachel, whose daughter vanishes from the school bus stop, and the parents after her. It’s a deeply unsettling story about the limits of morality, raising questions about the nature of good and evil and the depths of parental love.
Three old friends, vacationing on Martha’s Vineyard, come laden with secrets and unresolved histories. Lincoln, Teddy and Mickey met in college, where they all loved the same woman, Jacy. She vanished on the Vineyard 40 years earlier, and her disappearance still haunts the men. Russo’s hallmark themes — male friendships, one-sided love, the collision of the past with the present — are on full display in this new novel.
It’s 1960s Baltimore, and Maddie, who’s just left her husband to pursue a more independent life, has landed a job at one of the city’s newspapers. There she becomes obsessed with an unsolved case: the killing of Cleo Sherwood, whose body was discovered in the fountain of a city park fountain. Lippman, the author of “Sunburn,” has written another taut psychological thriller about a complicated, conflicted woman.
A noted historian, Alexievich is known for her book “Voices From Chernobyl,” a compilation of interviews with survivors of the nuclear reactor accident. For this book, she interviewed dozens of Soviet survivors of World War II, both witnesses and soldiers, examining the lasting effects of the war on a generation.
In these stories, the critically acclaimed writer explores the ways that even the most fleeting connections can echo through people’s lives. In the title story, the narrator remembers his onetime lover, a young cellist named Maggie Brown, and his college roommate, both of whom exited his life long ago.
Motherhood is a monstrosity in this engrossing novel, which opens with a mother clutching her children, certain she hears an intruder in the next room. She doubts herself — not only about whether she’s imagined the break-in, but about how to exist as a mother. The story is maddening, panicky and full of black humor, much like parenthood itself.
In this debut novel, Helen moves to Appalachia with her boyfriend to live off the land. When he abandons her and their plan, she invites a nearby couple, Karen and Lily — who are expecting a baby — to move in with her. The narrative shifts perspectives among the three women and, later, the child, as they navigate their self-made family and the encroachment of the outside world.
Taddeo, who set out to understand female desire in America, spent nearly a decade reporting this book. She settled on three subjects: Lina, a married homemaker having an affair with her high school boyfriend; Maggie, a teenager in a clandestine relationship with one of her teachers; and Sloane, a restaurant owner whose husband likes watching her with other men. Taddeo says she chose their stories because of their relatability, though each woman is young, white and more or less heterosexual. The resulting book offers a window into specific experiences that’s tinged with a pessimistic view of men, women and power.