We’re covering the uncertain fate of Hong Kong’s top official, Iran’s threat to ramp up nuclear production and the rise of beautiful robot influencers.
The Chinese government voiced strong support for the city’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, a day after an estimated two million people took part in the largest street protests yet against her leadership.
But after a week of mass demonstrations over her proposed extradition bill and her retreat, it was unclear whether Mrs. Lam — who has evolved into a more pro-Beijing leader since she was appointed Hong Kong’s top official two years ago — would be able to stay in power for the remaining three years of her term.
What’s next? The protesters got a boost when Joshua Wong, one of the leaders of pro-democracy demonstrations in Hong Kong in 2014, called for Mrs. Lam to resign after he was released from prison on Monday after serving half of a two-month term.
If Mrs. Lam steps down, democracy activists would demand that her successor be chosen democratically — a proposal that China is unlikely to allow in the semiautonomous city.
The Daily: In our latest episode, a Times correspondent in Hong Kong discusses the rallies.
The country announced that it would stop complying with the 2015 nuclear pact, which the U.S. withdrew from last year, opening the door to an “unlimited rise” in its stockpile of enriched uranium.
Iran’s atomic energy agency said that its stockpile would surpass the deal’s prescribed limit within days unless Britain, France, Germany and the full European Union — all of which are signatories to the 2015 deal — help Tehran circumvent U.S. sanctions. That seems unlikely, writes our national security correspondent.
The threat further strained relations between the U.S. and Iran, which were inflamed after recent attacks on oil tankers near the Strait of Hormuz.
Response: There was no immediate reaction from the Trump administration, but on Sunday, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said the U.S. might further tighten sanctions if Iran ramped up its nuclear program.
Details: The nuclear agreement limits Iran to 300 kilograms, or 660 pounds, of low-enriched uranium, suitable for power plants. But Iran has left the door open to increasing its stockpile and edging closer to weapons-grade level enrichment.
Egypt’s first democratically elected president died in a Cairo courtroom, according to state television.
Mr. Morsi, 67, was on trial on espionage charges when he collapsed — a somber moment and a reminder of Egypt’s ill-fated transition to democracy after the Arab Spring in 2011. Some members of the opposition said he had been in poor health worsened by Egypt’s prison conditions.
Reminder: Mr. Morsi won Egypt’s first free presidential election in 2012, and many Egyptians had hoped he would break from decades of the harsh autocratic and corrupt rule of President Hosni Mubarak, who was ousted in the uprising.
But Mr. Morsi ruled clumsily, and a year later, the hostile military removed him from power after popular protests in Tahrir Square.
President Xi Jinping will travel to Pyongyang this week — the first visit by a Chinese president in 14 years.
Analysts believe Mr. Xi will try to revive failed nuclear disarmament talks between President Trump and Kim Jong-un — a proposal that he could use to ease U.S.-China tensions over trade.
Timing: Mr. Xi arrives in Pyongyang on Thursday. If he wins Mr. Kim’s agreement, he could present the deal to Mr. Trump on the sidelines of the global G20 economic forum in Osaka, Japan, on June 28.
Brands from Calvin Klein to KFC are shifting their social media campaigns away from human influencers to lifelike computer-generated characters (see above) crafted to meet their creative visions.
Using virtual beings as brand ambassadors offers advantages (they never need a day off), but raises a crucial question: What happens to the idea of truth in advertising?
Huawei: The chief executive of the Chinese technology giant cut his prediction of sales for the year to about $100 billion from $125 billion, citing the Trump administration’s clampdown on the company.
India: Tensions in West Bengal between the Trinamool party, led by the state’s political powerhouse, Mamata Banerjee, and the Bharatiya Janata Party have become increasingly deadly.
Chanel: The French fashion house reported rising profits and revenue, driven primarily by customers in Asia, which has now eclipsed Europe as the brand’s most valuable region. The figures quashed talk of a buyout of the privately owned company.
Canada: The government in Quebec barred schoolteachers, police officers, judges and other public employees from wearing religious symbols in the workplace, including the Muslim head scarf, the Sikh turban, the Jewish skullcap and the Catholic cross, prompting criticism that the law threatens to undermine religious freedoms.
France: Fierce competition in the country’s multibillion-euro food delivery business has shrunk pay, prompting some couriers to exploit even more vulnerable workers by using illegal migrants and asylum seekers to deliver for their accounts on Uber Eats, Deliveroo, the local app Stuart and other services.
The Vatican: A church document includes a proposal to ordain married, elderly men in remote areas of the Amazon region as a way to respond to the dearth of priests there.
Sotheby’s: The auction house will be bought by a French-Israeli telecommunications billionaire, Patrick Drahi, in a deal worth $3.7 billion, returning the publicly traded company to private ownership.
Snapshot: Above, the Spain-China match at the Women’s World Cup, which ended in a 0-0 stalemate, advancing both teams to the round of 16. Norway also won a spot in the next round after beating South Korea.
Tragic magic: An Indian magician known as Wizard Mandrake attempted an underwater escape stunt inspired by Harry Houdini in Kolkata on Sunday. He is feared dead.
In memoriam: Gloria Vanderbilt, who turned her storied family name into a $100 million fashion empire by marketing jeans for women in the mid-1970s, died on Monday. She was 95. Her death was confirmed by her son Anderson Cooper, the CNN journalist.
Credit...Con Poulos for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Simon Andrews.
Read: Ahead of the rerelease of “Paris Is Burning,” the director Jennie Livingston discusses her acclaimed documentary and how its legacy has gone mainstream.
Watch: Marin Alsop, the first woman to lead a major American orchestra and the coming leader of the Vienna Radio Symphony Orchestra, speaks with our classical music reporter, Michael Cooper.
Go: There’s more to Oxford, England, than the university. We have recommendations for a weekend there.
Smarter Living: A wealth of research indicates that spending time in nature is good for you, reducing stress and the risk of many ailments while boosting mental health. Researchers have now quantified the amount of time to aim for: two hours a week. And you needn’t schedule too much. It doesn’t seem to matter whether you build the time up little by little, or get it in one swoop.
And our Parenting site has a guide to what most babies and kids can do at each milestone, from birth to age 5.
The U.S. Supreme Court is expected to make a decision soon about whether a citizenship question can be included in the 2020 census.
The Trump administration has argued that such questions have appeared on the census in the past, but the form sent once a decade to each household has not asked any questions about citizenship since 1950 because of improved statistical sampling techniques.
The issue of counting the population can be so politically sensitive that some countries don’t even attempt it. Lebanon, for instance.
When the country gained independence from France in 1943, its new political system was built on data from a 1932 census in which Maronite Christians were the majority. The presidency was reserved for a Maronite, while other leadership roles went to Muslims: Sunni for prime minister and Shiite for speaker of Parliament. Parliamentary seats were divided between Muslims and Christians, and then sectioned off by sect.
To maintain the status quo, the government has never conducted another census, though the overall population of Muslims is widely understood to have outstripped Christians.
Chris Stanford helped compile today’s briefing. Mark Josephson and Eleanor Stanford provided the break from the news. Will Dudding, an assistant in the standards department, wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| • We’re listening to “The Daily.” Our latest episode is about the protests in Hong Kong.
• Here’s our Mini Crossword, and a clue: One of eight in a stick of butter: Abbr. (4 letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
• Maggie Haberman, a White House reporter for The Times, is answering readers’ questions about working during such a heated political moment. Submit yours here.