Get a week’s worth of simple, science-based steps you can take to help foster a deeper connection to your partner.
Samantha Casolari for The New York TimesCredit...
Want better health? Try creating a better relationship.
While most of us know that exercise and nutrition are essential to good health, numerous studies show that’s not enough. Strong human connections are also important to living a healthy and happy life.
One well-known Harvard study tracked nearly 800 men for more than 75 years. The study found that the men who had the most satisfying relationships at the age of 50 remained the healthiest among the group when they reached 80. And it wasn’t the number of friends the men had that determined good health — it was the quality of their closest relationships that mattered. Research shows that high-conflict partnerships without much affection are bad for us, while living with a warm, loving relationship seems to protect our health.
So what can we do to improve the health of our romantic partnerships? Relationship scientists have come up with a number of suggestions, based on years of studying happy couples. We’ve taken some of those ideas and created The 7-Day Love Challenge, a week’s worth of simple steps you can take to foster a deeper connection with the one you love.
Get a week’s worth of simple, science-based steps you can take to help foster a deeper connection between you and your partner. Learn a bit more about each other and discover new ways to strengthen your bond.
Sign up with your partner on the same day, and I’ll send each of you a daily email that will link to an easy task you can complete together. Each task is based on science, and will allow you to explore new ways of connecting with each other.
The 7-Day Love Challenge is designed to be fun. You’ll do best if you keep an open mind and see where each new challenge leads you together.
While there’s no way to guarantee a couple’s long-term happiness, I can promise you that completing each challenge will spark conversation to help you learn more about your partner and hopefully remind you of the reasons that brought you together in the first place.