The leader of Germany’s Social Democrats, the junior partner in Chancellor Angela Merkel’s governing coalition, announced her resignation on Sunday, raising new questions about the government’s future, a week after the parties lost support in the elections for the European Parliament.
She said she would formally hand in her resignation on Monday.
Political observers noted that Ms. Nahles’s departure could strengthen the left-wing of the Social Democrats, spelling doom for the party’s willingness to remain in the unloved coalition government.
Ms. Merkel and Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, who took over as leader of the conservative Christian Democratic Union in December, both pledged to continue the governing coalition with the Social Democrats despite Ms. Nahles’s plans to quit.
“For the government, I would like to say that we will continue our work, with all seriousness and above all with a great sense of responsibility,” Ms. Merkel told reporters on Sunday, saying there were many pressing issues in Germany, Europe and the world that demand attention.
Ms. Nahles, 48, was elected to lead the center-left party in April 2018, after being coaxed into a third coalition government with the Christian Democrats. She is the first woman to lead the Social Democrats and had vowed to rebuild and reunite the party after it suffered its worst showing in 155 years in the 2017 general election.
But after more than a year of her leadership, the Social Democrats’ popularity plunged further, earning only 15.8 percent of support nationwide during the balloting for the European Parliament a week ago. The party also lost control of Bremen, a state that had been in Social Democratic hands for more than seven decades.
The losses last Sunday prompted a debate within the party over Ms. Nahles’s ability to lead; she had already called for an easy vote next Tuesday over her position as parliamentary whip.
Voters also punished the conservatives in the European election, where they received less than 30 percent of the vote, reflecting the deep unpopularity of the coalition between the country’s two traditional, mainstream parties. Ms. Nahles’s decision now threw into question how long that constellation could remain in office.
Ms. Merkel has repeatedly stressed that she intends to serve out her fourth term, which would normally end in the fall of 2021. Conservative leaders convened later on Sunday to discuss Ms. Nahles’ decision and their own record poor showing in the European election.
The announcement that Ms. Nahles would formally depart on Monday came after intense pressure from the left-wing section of her party, whose members view quitting Ms. Merkel’s government as the only chance to re-orientate the center-left Social Democrats. The party has bled support since first entering into the coalition with the conservatives, in 2005, losing support to both the leftist-environmentalist Greens and the far-right Alternative for Germany, or A.F.D.
A nationwide poll released on Saturday showed the Greens emerging as Germany’s most popular political party for the first time since the party’s founding, in 1993. The Social Democrats came in third, behind the conservatives and one point ahead of the A.FD.
Although another poll released on Sunday showed the conservatives in the lead, the two surveys reflected the volatility of the political landscape in Germany, Europe’s largest economy and a source of stability over the past decade.
“Three grand coalitions in a row would not do democracy in Germany any good,” Mr. Scholz said. “Nobody would like to see the current coalition continued after 2021, not the people, not the conservatives and certainly not us Social Democrats,” he added.
Ms. Nahles, who served as labor minister in the Social Democrats’ previous coalition with the conservatives, helped to form the current coalition and has been critical to the government’s survival. Her departure raises questions about who, within her party, could fill that role.
The Social Democrats have failed to reinvent a modern narrative for the party’s traditional role as a champion of social justice and workers’ rights in the era of globalization and have struggled to define themselves in the shadow of the chancellor.
Ms. Merkel, who was awarded an honorary doctorate at Harvard University last week, was praised for introducing a minimum wage and same-sex marriage — both policies introduced by the Social Democrats.