Theater|A Play Dissected White Privilege in Education. Then the College Admissions Scandal Broke.
A Play Dissected White Privilege in Education. Then the College Admissions Scandal Broke.
Issues at the heart of the scandal resonate in “Admissions,” Joshua Harmon’s comedy. How did the news affect the show?
“Of course everyone was like, ‘You’re so lucky; your show’s going to do amazing,’” Mr. Wechsler said.
And they weren’t necessarily wrong: The Chicago production will close Sunday after three extensions, which added 14 weeks to the unusually successful run for the theater. The play is also picking up speed across the country, with 13 other productions being licensed through 2020. Like Mr. Harmon’s 2013 “Bad Jews,” “Admissions” is on track to be one of the most-produced plays at regional theaters in the next year.
But if there is a correlation between the scandal buzz and the new show’s buzz, it’s a murky one. “Admissions” had already made its way to several regional theaters, including a Washington, D.C., production that saw four extensions, before anyone was charged in the investigation.
Not to mention: The idea of theatergoers throwing down their newspapers and sprinting to the box office? Not entirely plausible.
“I would sit in the lobby, and I would listen to people as they were coming out and they would be on their phones, literally calling people and saying, ‘You’ve got to come see this show,’” he said.
Post-show conversations that usually lasted 20 minutes were running twice as long. One white woman emailed Mr. Wechsler a letter recounting and renouncing her long-held resentment of colleagues of color for what she saw as their unfair advancement.
Mr. Harmon declined to comment about the way “Admissions” reverberates with recent events. And the play’s tricky, satirical tone — and its array of seemingly well-meaning liberal characters — already made it one to argue about. They include Charlie, a high school senior who embarks on a 17-minute diatribe on who really counts as a person of color, and his mother, Sherri, who ditches her diversity-oriented priorities when her own child’s success is at stake.
The 26-year-old actor Ben Edelman played Charlie at Lincoln Center as well as in a London run that concludes Saturday. In a recent interview, he compared the admissions scandal to a fun house mirror: a heightened version of the problems in education that typically manifest in less egregious ways.
As previews in Chicago began, the nature of the scandal was one of Mr. Wechsler’s biggest concerns. Would the conversation about the play be hijacked by a discussion of behavior that was easy to condemn?
But for some, the scandal added a realistic framework to “Admissions.” Kate Phillippo, a professor of cultural and educational policy studies at Loyola University Chicago who spoke on a post-show panel in May, said the admissions scheme shaped her understanding of how desperate parents can be to ensure their children get a distinguished education.
Lisa Levy, a parent and educator in Chicago who saw the play in March, said that the admissions scandal didn’t affect her perception of the show, but that the play did lead her to reflect on how she handled her own children’s college application process.
