KATHMANDU, Nepal — Nepalese officials on Friday asked for help in identifying four bodies that were recovered from Mount Everest this climbing season, one of the deadliest yet.
Mira Acharya, the director of Nepal’s department of tourism, said her office was preparing to review autopsy reports for the climbers, who were brought down from the world’s highest mountain as part of a spring trash cleanup.
Officials plan to work with embassies in Kathmandu, the capital, to get in contact with relatives of the deceased climbers. “If family members do not approach us about the bodies, we will have to cremate them,” Ms. Acharya said.
The corpses were recovered from different parts of the mountain, including near the summit, and identifying them is likely to be challenging.
Kul Bahadur Gurung, the general secretary of the Nepal Mountaineering Association, which was involved in retrieving the bodies, said some of them were unrecognizable.
“Avalanches broke their bodies,” he said, adding that they were all believed to be foreigners and that it was unclear how long they had been on the mountain.
Since expeditions started in the 1920s, more than 300 climbers have died trying to reach the summit of Everest, which straddles the border of Nepal and Tibet. This season was one of the deadliest, with at least 11 fatalities, some of them partly attributable to an excess of climbers on the mountain.
Climbers are often left where they fall. It costs tens of thousands of dollars to retrieve bodies high on the mountain, which rises 29,029 feet. Sherpas involved in these dangerous missions say they sometimes have to drill out the frozen corpses, which can weigh over 300 pounds.
As part of this spring’s cleanup effort, volunteers have collected more than 20,000 pounds of trash, including plastic bottles, ropes, tents and food tins. The exercise was also billed as an opportunity to remove bodies.
In the last few seasons, climbers say that even more bodies are emerging from the ice. Both the climbers and the Nepalese government believe this is a grim result of global warming, which is rapidly melting the mountain’s glaciers and exposing corpses and bones of people who died decades ago.
Nepal’s tourism ministry has little information about how many bodies are still on the mountain, but the figure is thought to be at least 100.