U.S.|Your Child Bullied Someone? That’ll Cost You $313.
Your Child Bullied Someone? That’ll Cost You $313.
All three of Darren O’Brien’s teenage daughters have been bullied at school. He said they had been shoved into lockers; one was surreptitiously recorded, he said, and another told to kill herself.
Mr. O’Brien, a 38-year-old paper mill employee, said he pleaded with school principals, teachers and a guidance counselor to find a way to stop the abuse, but none of it had made much difference.
Now he is hoping a proposal in Wisconsin Rapids, Wis., where his daughters go to school, will help stem harassment in the district: making parents pay up to $313 in fines and fees if their children bully others.
Craig Broeren, the superintendent of the Wisconsin Rapids Public Schools, said he asked two municipalities to assess the district’s bullying policy last fall, but the review took on more urgency in February when notes telling a seventh grader to kill herself surfaced online, thrusting classroom bullying into the open.
Mr. Broeren said he could not discuss specific students or complaints, but added that the district took any reported bullying seriously and was willing to try any measure that could help tackle the complex issue. Doing so requires parents to be aware of their children’s behavior and to be active in changing it, he said.
Wisconsin Rapids, in the central part of the state, is not alone in looking to parents to solve the vexing problem of bullying, which 20 percent of students ages 12 to 18 experience at school each year, according to the Department of Education. Several other municipalities, and at least one state legislature, have considered fining — or even jailing — parents whose children bully.
Where such legislation has passed, though, the penalties are rarely imposed. Local officials compared the ordinances to truancy laws, acting as deterrents rather than punishments. Still, some critics say the bills could backfire and unfairly punish parents for their children’s actions.
Dr. Amanda Nickerson, who directs the Alberti Center for Bullying Abuse Prevention at the University at Buffalo, said she was skeptical that being fined would suddenly motivate parents to become involved in changing their child’s behavior. She said the key to engaging parents was to set up meetings between them and teachers to discuss how to encourage good behavior, before seeking any kind of penalty.
A harsher version of the legislation pending in Wisconsin Rapids is already in place in North Tonawanda, N.Y., near Buffalo, where parents may be fined $250 and jailed up to 15 days if their child bullies someone. Luke Brown, the city attorney, said that since the law went into effect in 2017, the Police Department had sent warnings to a handful of parents but had not fined or jailed anyone.
In Pennsylvania, Frank Burns, a Democratic state representative, proposed legislation that would fine parents up to $500 if their child continued to bully others after warnings and a meeting with school officials. He said the reaction to the proposal had been mixed, and the bill has stalled in a committee.
The Wisconsin Rapids legislation is modeled on a 2015 bill passed by Plover, Wis., a village that approved one of the first bullying bills aimed at parents. Since then, Plover police have sent fewer than a dozen warning letters to parents and have never imposed the $124 fine. But Chief Dan Ault of the Plover Police Department sees that track record as a success, because officers have provided families with resources to curb the bullying.
If parents pay for an item that their child breaks in a store, then they should also be held responsible if their child is bullying other students, Chief Ault said.
“When we know bullying is a learned behavior, and the most important person in children’s lives are the parent, where’s the line?” he asked.
Mr. O’Brien, who works six or seven days most weeks, said he was tired of feeling helpless about the harassment that his daughters, ages 13, 14 and 17, have faced. He said his youngest daughter, who just finished eighth grade, did not want to go to high school in the fall, because she would be there with pupils who had continued to bully her.
“She’s such a good kid and has such a good heart,” he said.
Mr. Broeren, the school superintendent, said parents of bullied children may feel as though nothing is being done because the school district could not release information about how specific students were disciplined.
Mr. O’Brien said he was not sure how much the Wisconsin Rapids proposal would help his three daughters, but he is eager to see it pass when it goes up for a vote next week.
