The United States Olympic Committee has become the United States Olympic and Paralympic Committee. “We’ve arrived,” a four-time Paralympian said.
Jessica Long, a Paralympic swimmer, remembered feeling invisible at a large gathering with the news media in Chicago ahead of the 2008 Beijing Summer Games. She sat in a corner with two other American Paralympians, watching reporters interview their Olympic counterparts without paying any attention to the three of them.
But now, Long said in a recent telephone interview, she finally feels as though she is on a level playing field with the Olympians. The United States Olympic Committee voted last week to change its name to the United States Olympic and Paralympic Committee. Before the vote, the national Paralympic Committee had been a division of the national Olympic Committee since 2001. The United States is one of four countries that house the Paralympic and Olympic Committee within the same governing body.
Brad Snyder, one of three athletes on the U.S.O.P.C. board of directors, said he had tears in his eyes when he voted in Chicago. A Paralympic swimmer who is now training for triathlons, Snyder said he was overwhelmed to be part of the moment.
Over the past two and a half years, the committee has been involved in a series of scandals, including the revelation of years of sexual abuse by Lawrence G. Nassar, a doctor who worked for U.S.A. Gymnastics and received the equivalent of a life sentence last year.
The committee’s chief executive, Sarah Hirshland, was appointed last summer in an effort to turn things around. She has been credited as the driving force behind the merger.
Hirshland was not available for comment, a committee spokeswoman said.
The move toward the new name started last September with changes to Operation Gold, the program that pays American athletes for winning medals at the Games. Prize money for Paralympians is now the same as it is for Olympians: $37,500 for a gold medal, $22,500 for silver and $15,000 for bronze. Before the change, Paralympic medals were worth only $7,500, $5,250 and $3,750.
For many, that decision changed their lives.
The merger mirrors broader changes in the way disabilities are discussed. Major League Baseball, which had used the term disabled list for more than 100 years, switched to the phrase “injured list” this year in response to arguments that injuries are not a permanent part of someone’s identity.
Mary Hums, a sports management professor at the University of Louisville, was one of those who had urged M.L.B. to change its language.
Coverage of the Paralympics has grown as well. In 2018, NBC aired more than 250 hours of coverage, a record and nearly double the amount the network provided in 2014.
