An after-school program invites students to build small sailboats from scratch, then test them out on the water.
At Middle School 88 in Park Slope, Brooklyn, there is a security guard at the entrance, long hallways plastered with art, and students, slouching on a sofa, staring into their phones. It is a pretty typical scene.
Except for Room 128.
For most of this school year, the room has contained the makings for a handmade, full-size wooden boat. Specifically an Optimist, a vessel a bit over seven feet.
Optis, as the boats are affectionately known, are designed for small, light bodies, or for sailors 15 years old and younger. They’re wildly popular. About 850 of them compete in the annual Optimist World Championship, which will be held next month in Antigua.
In October, a group of students began the process of building the Opti in Room 128. Under the direction of Laura Botel, the program coordinator of Brooklyn Boatworks, a nonprofit after-school program, and volunteers from the organization, the students met for two hours a week. Here, they mastered new manual skills and a new vocabulary, including words like transom, daggerboard and thwart.
Schools in Crown Heights, East New York, Harlem, Washington Heights and Woodside, also built Optis this year.
Last fall at M.S. 88, the boat building process began with four unfinished sheets of marine plywood, design plans and some basic hand tools like screwdrivers, small saws and cordless drills. The idea was to build a seaworthy boat entirely by hand and then sail it in an inlet on the East River on an appointed day, rain or shine, by the end of the school year.
The boats ride very low on the water. “Every time a ferry goes by, they definitely feel it,” said Marjorie Schulman, the program’s executive director.
Brooklyn Boatworks was founded in 2005 by Carl Persak and Jeremy Wurmfeld, naval architects in the borough. “I wanted to find a way to teach boatbuilding that was 95 percent student hands, and that’s hard to do,” Mr. Persak said.
Boatbuilding also requires a singular focus. “You can’t hold a phone and hold a drill at the same time,” Ms. Schulman said.
While it costs $18,000 to build each Opti through the program, schools with a large concentration of low income students pay $8,000; Brooklyn Boatworks pays the balance. Only one private school has ever paid the full fee, Ms. Schulman said.
Students quickly learn how physical boatbuilding is — kneeling and sawing, gluing and sanding, and redoing whatever didn’t work the first time. In an era much defined by instant gratification, this workshop is very much about process.
“For most of our students, this is the longest thing they’ve ever done,” Ms. Schulman said.
Kawthar Alsahqani, an eighth-grader at M.S. 88, said she thought the project would be much harder. “But because it’s something I wanted to learn, it’s easy,” she explained, while leaning into the boat with a power drill.
The program also offers a respite from the emotional storms many middle-schoolers experience, teachers said.
Students also had the opportunity to use math and science in the workshop. “When it came to our measurements, we were always trying to get everything right and we had a lesson in the science of sailing, how to use the wind,” Dana said.
Dana, it seems, has caught the building bug. “I’d like to do a sculpture or another boat or a treehouse,” she said.
Other students felt empowered from the experience, too.
In April, the M.S. 88 students named their finished Opti “Pizza Sail.” Frank Perez Gomez, an eighth-grader, offered his hand-drawn name design for the boat. It used pizza ingredients to create the letters.
For the first time, the students saw how all the pieces of a sailboat fit together, including its crisp, white sail. While learning how to hoist the sail, they handled colored ropes of varying thicknesses — black, red, blue and black and orange, which attach the sail to the boat.
Brooklyn Boatworks then transported Pizza Sail, as well as the finished Optis from the other schools, to a workshop in Gowanus. There, Boatworks staff members coated them with epoxy (a more toxic kind that the students were not allowed to use), varnish and fiberglass tape to make the boats watertight.
The new Optis will join a fleet of those built in previous years, which are made available to former student builders and groups like the Girl Scouts, during the summer. The boats are stored in multiple locations in Brooklyn, including the Pier 5 Brooklyn Bridge Park Boathouse. The very first student-made Optis are at Derecktor Shipyards in Mamaroneck.
For some Boatworks alumni, the program’s lessons resonate years later.
Jovon Ferguson, who graduated from Wheaton College in Massachusetts last year with a degree in political science, helped build an Opti when he was in seventh grade at the Brooklyn Collaborative School. He works with Brooklyn Boatworks once a week.
Now that he is leading students in the process, Mr. Ferguson says he appreciates the bond that boatbuilding as a team can produce. “Every day it’s there, that we’re doing that rare thing together,” he said.
When asked what he remembered most about his own boatbuilding experience in middle school, Mr. Ferguson said that he loved the anticipation of what came next in the weekly process.
