Bushwick Bill, who helped inject vivid psychological horror and lightly morbid comedy into Southern hip-hop storytelling in becoming one of the genre’s most recognizable characters, died on Sunday at a Colorado hospital. He was 52.
His death was confirmed by his sister Ann-Marie White. No other details were provided. Last month, Bushwick Bill announced that he had Stage 4 pancreatic cancer.
Bushwick Bill — who was born with dwarfism and stood approximately 3 feet 8 inches tall — was a member of Geto Boys, the Houston trio whose work in the late 1980s and early- to mid-1990s on the Rap-A-Lot label was among the most formative in Southern rap. The group was known for its incendiary, sometimes grotesque lyrics, and also for songs that grappled with morality in stark terms.
The influential producer Rick Rubin signed Geto Boys to his Def American imprint and rerecorded that album as “The Geto Boys.” Rubin was forced to find a new distributor after his original one declined to release the album over its graphic content.
Bushwick Bill was born Richard Stephen Shaw in Kingston, Jamaica, on Dec. 8, 1966. He spent much of his childhood in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn. His mother worked as a hotel housekeeper, and his father was in the merchant marine. As a teenager he immersed himself in New York’s emerging hip-hop culture, writing graffiti and competing in break dancing competitions.
He moved to Houston in the 1980s and joined an early incarnation of Geto Boys as a dancer (under the name Little Billy). But he soon became a rapper, appearing on the group’s 1988 debut album, “Making Trouble.” After that LP, the group rejiggered its membership, landing on its essential lineup: Bushwick Bill, Scarface and Willie D.
The incident was immortalized on the album cover of “We Can’t Be Stopped,” which features a photo of Bushwick Bill taken in the hospital. Flanked by Willie D and Scarface, he is shown on a stretcher, his eye blood-red, the day before he had surgery to remove it. He later said that he had been so medicated, he didn’t know the photo was being taken, and that he didn’t see the album cover until after its release.
In addition to several albums with Geto Boys, Bushwick Bill released many solo records and appeared on Dr. Dre’s landmark 1992 album “The Chronic.” In the 1990s, he announced that he was renaming himself Dr. Wolfgang von Bushwickin the Barbarian Mother-Funk Stay High Dollar Billstir.
A devoted Christian in his younger days, he became born again in 2006. In the mid 2010s, he was filmed on and off for three years for documentary film about his life. It has not been released.
Complete information about survivors was not immediately available.