Weather: Calm wind and a high in the mid-80s. There is a small chance of rain tonight.
Alternate-side parking: In effect until July 4.
New York City’s celebration of Pride Month crescendos this week, just in time for the 50th anniversary on Friday of the uprising at the Stonewall Inn, a pivotal movement for the modern gay rights movement.
The milestone has brought with it the WorldPride festival, a global event that organizers expect to bring millions of people to the city in June.
WorldPride’s opening ceremony is Wednesday, and its closing events are Sunday.
The Pride March: Staring at noon on Sunday, a two-mile march with thumping music, costumed dancers, politicians and floats will commence in Manhattan. It starts on Fifth Avenue by 26th Street, goes in front of the Stonewall Inn, turns north onto Seventh Avenue and ends by 23rd Street.
A competing procession, the Queer Liberation March and Rally, is being staged in the borough by people who say the other procession is too corporate and no longer speaks to the urgent needs of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people.
Take a guided walking tour: The Times’s Pierre-Antoine Louis, a lifelong New Yorker, narrates this tour. It includes the poet Langston Hughes’s home, the Leslie-Lohman Museum for Gay and Lesbian Art, and the first home for homeless transgender youth, on East Second Street.
How to survive Pride in New York: Plan ahead when it comes to transportation. If the subways are packed, try the PATH train, which can take you from Christopher Street to 33rd Street in Manhattan. If the main events are too crowded for your liking, consider a breezy ferry ride to Staten Island to the Alice Austen House.
You’ll also notice there are a dearth of clean public restrooms in the city. Try the ones at Bryant Park. The restrooms at Starbucks are also widely available.
Pride Prom: This month in Bushwick, the dating app Hinge hosted a prom. The event was a chance to relive a possibly painful moment of self-suppression, said Hinge’s founder and chief executive, Justin McLeod. So “we felt it would be cool to create a prom where everyone feels welcome and can show up and be totally themselves,” he added.
A spokeswoman for Goldman Sachs, Maeve DuVally, recalled transitioning at the buttoned-up company. “Before I decided to come out, I don’t think I had ever hugged anyone at work,” she said.
The small donor model that helped Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez win is aiding another progressive, Tiffany Cabán.
The subway got a little faster. How did your line do?
Nik and Lijana Wallenda’s Times Square high-wire walk evoked a rich history of death-defying stunts in New York.
She joined the military, and became a citizen. But her American dream ended in violence.
“Youngsters cool off by riding the Water Flume at Astroland, Coney Island,” read the caption that was published with this photo, taken by our photographer Barton Silverman, in June 1976. Pictured, from front to back, are Fatman Ekinci, 5; her brothers, Kris, 7, and Fevzi, 9; and in the background, Lillian Pacheco, 7.
Astroland was first mentioned by The Times on Sept. 13, 1962, when the paper called it “the first major project for frivolous purposes in Coney Island in 25 years.” But in September 2008 the park closed; its owner said the landlord refused to discuss the expiring lease.
See more old photos at our archival storytelling project, Past Tense, and on Instagram: @nytarchives.
It’s Monday — enjoy the ride.
I was coming back from a book-signing at the New York Public Library and I was sitting on a bench in the subway station while waiting for the train. I was carrying a signed copy of “The Bad Beginning,” by Lemony Snicket.
A young girl sitting next to me asked me about the book. I explained what the “Series of Unfortunate Events” was. Her brother told her not to bother strangers, but I didn’t mind the questions. The girl reminded me of my younger sister, who was 800 miles away in Chicago.
The train came and the girl took a seat next to me, her brother trailing behind. She kept asking questions about the book and the series, and we had a very pleasant conversation.
As we approached my stop, I did something I hadn’t anticipated. I gave her the book. Just before getting off the train, I handed it to her and said to take good care of it.
She looked stunned. Her brother looked grateful.
