Caroline Denison Quigley and Frederick George Adler were married June 1 at the University Club of New York. Chaplain Jewelnel Davis, the Columbia University chaplain, officiated, leading the ceremony with Cantor Laura Stein.
The bride and groom, both 27, met at the University of Pennsylvania, from which they each graduated cum laude. In August, each is to begin pursuing an M.B.A. at Columbia.
Mrs. Adler is a manager of the United States consumer lending card product management team at American Express in New York, where she focuses on strategies for the cash-back card portfolios.
She is a daughter of Patricia D. Denison and Austin E. Quigley of New York. The bride’s father is the Brander Matthews professor of dramatic literature at Columbia. From 1995 to 2009 he was the dean of Columbia College. He is the author of books and essays on Harold Pinter and other modern playwrights. Her mother is a senior lecturer teaching dramatic literature in the English department at Barnard College. From 2014 to 2018 she was the associate provost there.
Mr. Adler is an associate on the corporate development and mergers and acquisitions team in the Short Hills and New York offices of KPMG, an accounting and professional services firm.
He is a son of Catherine Adler and Frederick R. Adler, both of New York. The groom’s mother is a four-time Tony Award-winning Broadway producer whose plays include “Vanya and Sonia and Masha and Spike,” “A Gentleman’s Guide to Love and Murder” and “Angels in America.” She is a producer of several current shows, including “Tootsie,” “The Ferryman,”“Network” and “Be More Chill.” His father, who is retired, was the managing director and a general partner in related investment funds at a venture capital management fund bearing his name in New York. He was also an early investor in the Israeli high-tech industry, as well as a founder of Athena Venture Partners, which was a United States-Israeli venture capital fund.
The couple met in 2012 at college just before their history of theater class began. Mr. Adler, who was watching the Tottenham Hotspur soccer match, looked over and noticed Ms. Quigley coincidentally checking her laptop for the Premier League’s latest score for Newcastle United (her father, who is from there, was a former youth player on the team). They became friendly, and during the semester they each studied in London, she invited him to his first live Premiere League game three hours away in Newcastle.