Dance performances celebrate the Ailey School’s 50th anniversary; a romantic comedy’s sixth season opens; and the National Gallery of Art becomes an animal house.
As Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater wraps up its 60th season, the company turns its attention to another milestone: the 50th anniversary of the Ailey School, where many a star in the company has been nurtured. For the Ailey Spirit Gala on June 13, students from the school join forces with dancers of the main company and its junior troupe, Ailey II, as well as former members of the nationwide AileyCamp, in a new work by Troy Powell. The piece tells a story that mirrors Powell’s own, of rising through the Ailey ranks to become a professional dancer.
The National may have played on some of the world’s biggest stages, but their anxiety-ridden songs lend themselves more to the intimacy of headphones than to mass singalongs. The group’s most recent project, an album titled “I Am Easy to Find” — with a corresponding short film directed by Mike Mills — is less internal than their previous work, cracked open by a new pool of collaborators, including a cadre of female vocalists who often sing in the frontman Matt Berninger’s stead. Still, it retains much of the group’s signature angst (in early stages of the recording process, Mills jokingly likened it to “‘Lemonade’ for depressed white people”).
In March 2018, Sergei V. Skripal, a former Russian spy, and his daughter, Yulia, were found poisoned on a park bench in Salisbury, England. Six months later, Bellingcat — a collective of hypervigilant armchair sleuths established in 2014 by Eliot Higgins, a British blogger working from home while caring for his infant daughter — began to unmask those behind the attempted assassinations.
The older I get, the crazier I am for “Younger,” especially with Liza and Charles locked in each other’s arms.
But fans of Darren Star’s romantic romp through the publishing industry know not to get too comfortable for when he invariably rips the rug out from under them.
Sure, their relationship is now an open secret, albeit one that Charles (Peter Hermann) had to forfeit his kingdom to keep. And as the sixth season begins on Wednesday, the pieces wobble into position — advancing the ever-capable Kelsey (Hilary Duff) into the corner office as publisher under the purview of the narcissistic billionaire investor, Quinn (Laura Benanti); prompting an emotionally wounded Diana (Miriam Shor) to seek a new home for her marketing expertise; and forcing a cautiously elated Liza (Sutton Foster) to navigate the early blush of love with a man who has way too much time on his hands.
Like Shakespeare’s Othello, who murders the faithful Desdemona, the jealousy-crazed Arbenin — the central character of Mikhail Lermontov’s 19th-century Russian verse drama “Masquerade” — plots to kill his innocent wife, Nina, a victim of gossip and mistaken identity.
