We’re covering the protests in Hong Kong, competing campaign rallies in Iowa and overcrowding on the Danube.
Protesters in Hong Kong, angered by the government’s refusal to back down on a contentious bill that would allow extraditions to mainland China, are preparing more actions this week as lawmakers resume debate on the legislation and accelerate the final vote.
Lawmakers are likely to vote on the bill next week, said Andrew Leung, the president of Hong Kong’s legislature, despite mass protests over the weekend.
The measure is likely to pass in the legislature, where pro-Beijing lawmakers hold 43 of 70 seats.
Catch-up: Here’s some background on the measure and the tense relationship between Hong Kong and the central government in Beijing.
Related: A New Zealand court blocked a murder suspect’s extradition to China, the latest repudiation of the Chinese legal system.
Perspective: The protests are about more than an extradition law, The Times’s Editorial Board writes.
President Trump and former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. headed for separate rallies in the key early voting state of Iowa as they covered ground on the 2020 presidential campaign trail.
Background: It is the president’s first trip to Iowa since the midterm elections last year. The state twice supported former President Barack Obama before flipping decisively for Mr. Trump in 2016.
Two weeks before China demanded broad changes to its draft trade agreement with the Trump administration, Beijing quietly added one of its savviest negotiators to its trade team.
The negotiator, Yu Jianhua, a 28-year veteran of trade talks with American officials and at the World Trade Organization, returned to Beijing from his diplomatic position in Geneva. With his appointment, the Chinese government began to address an experience gap that could be holding it back as it tries to resolve a potentially devastating trade war with the Trump administration.
Why this matters: People on both sides say that the Chinese government’s negotiating team has lacked specialized expertise in major trade issues. Unlike the American negotiating team, which has been dominated by trade lawyers, the Chinese side has been heavy on financial policy experts and economists.
It was Hungary’s worst boating accident in at least six decades: Twenty-eight people, many from South Korea, were killed last month when two boats collided on the Danube. As the wreckage of one of the vessels was pulled from the murky water on Tuesday, questions about overcrowding on the river have grown more urgent.
Watch: A floating crane lifted one of the boats involved in the fatal crash to the surface.
A fire in 2008 at Universal Studios Hollywood destroyed famous movie sets and a film and videotape archive. It was also the biggest disaster in the history of the music business — and almost nobody knew.
The Universal Music Group, the largest music company in the world, lost its entire West Coast archive. Hundreds of thousands of original recordings were destroyed, by dozens of musicians and bands including Louis Armstrong, pictured above, Joan Baez, Nirvana and Eminem. The Times Magazine tells the story of the fire.
Pakistan: A vote last year gave five million residents of the mostly Pashtun northwestern tribal belt the same constitutional rights as other Pakistanis. Now, their hopes are being dashed amid a military crackdown on protesters in the region.
Shinzo Abe: Japan’s prime minister will meet with Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, and its president, Hassan Rouhani, in Tehran this week in a bid to ease tension between the U.S. and Iran.
Botswana: The country’s High Court voted to revoke colonial-era laws that criminalized homosexuality, a move that activists hailed as a significant step for gay rights in Africa.
Canada: Prime Minister Justin Trudeau announced a plan to ban single-use plastics to reduce pollution, create jobs and protect the environment. The nation joins others phasing out the use of plastic products.
From The Times: The New York Times announced that it would no longer publish daily political cartoons in its international edition, two months after one with anti-Semitic imagery was printed.
Snapshot: Above, the island of Texel, part of the Frisian archipelago in northwestern Europe. In his latest dispatch, our 52 Places traveler finds a place of quiet charms and a meal that prompts an obsession.
In memoriam: Lee Hee-ho, a former first lady of South Korea, inspired her late husband, President Kim Dae-jung, in his campaign against the military dictatorship. She also used her influence to expand women’s rights. She died on Monday at 96.
Asian food: In American restaurants, Taiwanese cooking used to exist under a vast umbrella called “Chinese food.” A group of chefs and restaurateurs is changing that.
What we’re reading: These short essays on the international coverage of the 30th anniversary of Tiananmen Square in The Columbia Journalism Review. “These critiques from Chinese journalists, on the way the coverage dehumanized Chinese people, are brutal,” writes Alicia P.Q. Wittmeyer, an editor in the Opinion section.
Credit...Bobby Doherty for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Margaret MacMillan Jones.
Cook: Beet dip becomes a full meal with a dollop of labneh, warm pita and quartered Persian cucumbers for dipping.
Watch: The HBO series “Los Espookys” is earnest, eccentric and casually surreal. It’s also performed principally in Spanish.
Listen: Sheryl Crow’s “Prove You Wrong” is a big, gleaming bulldozer of a song, featuring Stevie Nicks and Maren Morris.
Smarter Living: More than a million women take medication while breast-feeding their babies each year, but we know little about the effect on their milk and infants. Some sedatives like Xanax or Valium should be used cautiously, and it’s a good idea to avoid over-the-counter allergy, cold and sleep medications.
And it seems that no single food regimen can work for everyone.
Former President George Bush will achieve a tiny sliver of immortality on Wednesday, when the United States Postal Service unveils his commemorative “Forever” stamp, on what would have been his 95th birthday.
But don’t cash out your retirement savings just yet: The speculative market for so-called first-day cover stamps has “all but collapsed,” according to Apfelbaum, a stamp sales and appraisal firm in Pennsylvania. Why? “There are just too many stamps to collect and not enough time or money,” the firm says.
Modern stamp collectors view the first U.S. presidential stamp to be one featuring Abraham Lincoln that was released in 1866, a year after his assassination.
But Fred Baumann of the American Philatelist writes that the stamp — the first 15-center, which was chiefly used to send letters to France — has no inscription or dates marking it as commemorative. Well-preserved examples now sell for upward of $1,000.
“Forever” stamps, by the way, will always be valued at the first-class one-ounce letter rate, currently 55 cents.
That’s it for this briefing. We hope it got your stamp of approval.
To Mark Josephson, Eleanor Stanford and Kenneth R. Rosen for the break from the news. Victoria Shannon wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| • We’re listening to “The Daily.” Our latest episode is about the Yellow Vest movement in France, part of our series about the rise of nationalism and populism in Europe.
• Here’s our Mini Crossword, and a clue: Women’s World Cup highlights (5 letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
• The Times has added Tiles, a pattern-matching game, to its lineup of daily puzzles.