Sara Gideon, the speaker of the Maine House of Representatives, said on Monday that she would challenge Senator Susan Collins, making her the most formidable opponent yet for a United States Senate seat that Democrats have identified as a target in the 2020 election.
Ms. Gideon, a Democrat, said that her decision was spurred partly by the vote that Ms. Collins, a Republican expected to seek her fifth term, cast in support for Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh’s confirmation to the Supreme Court.
Ms. Collins, 66, had gained a reputation for independence and bipartisanship during 22 years in the Senate — a fact acknowledged by Ms. Gideon in her announcement video. More recently, though, she has voted repeatedly to support President Trump’s agenda, in what has been perceived as a veer to the right. Her approval rating has also declined in some public polls.
Ms. Collins’s pivotal decision to support Justice Kavanaugh last year “put women’s control over their own health care decisions in extreme jeopardy,” the video said.
Ms. Gideon, 47, of Freeport, had sponsored legislation in Maine — signed into law this year — to expand abortion access by permitting health care professionals who are not physicians to perform the procedure. She was also behind an effort to expand benefits to families in poverty.
Ms. Gideon, the only candidate who has held major elective office, is expected to face at least two other candidates for the Democratic nomination: Betsy Sweet, an activist and former candidate for governor; and Bre Kidman, a lawyer. Derek Levasseur, a conservative blogger, has announced he will run against Ms. Collins in the Republican primary.
The Democrats have a yearlong competitive primary ahead: They will not be picking a nominee until June 2020.
Whoever wins the Democratic nomination is expected to pick up strong financial support from outside groups. Shortly after Ms. Collins’s vote to approve Mr. Kavanaugh, three organizations joined together to form a political action committee called CrowdPac aimed at defeating Ms. Collins.
The Center for Responsive Politics said on Thursday that the fund had already collected $4 million.
Indicating the seat’s importance, Ms. Collins’s campaign funds also swelled after her vote to confirm Justice Kavanaugh.
In announcing her candidacy, Ms. Gideon said she first got the idea to run for public office in 2009 when someone left a message on her family’s answering machine asking her husband to consider running for town council.
