I like to sit alone with a cocktail, but that doesn’t mean I like to be ignored.
I looked up from my book and there he stood: a gentleman a few years younger than me. He had a nice smile, crinkles around his eyes.
My first thought was, sure, I’d be delighted. But I also understood that when a stranger buys a woman a drink, it usually doesn’t come free.
I was in Hobart, Tasmania, a long way from home, having come all the way to Australia to take part in something called the Dark Mofo festival, which is about half Aspen Ideas Festival and half Burning Man. It’s run in part by the Museum of Old and New Art, which is a challenging museum indeed. One of the installations, just to pick an example at random, is a machine the curators “feed” each day, which then creates its own poop.
I didn’t know a soul in town. By my measure, the nearest person I knew with any intimacy was back in Los Angeles, some 12,000 miles away.
This was fine with me, though, because I like to travel; I’d accepted the gig at Dark Mofo in part because I’d never been to Australia, and it seemed like a good opportunity to explore a place I did not know. I hadn’t been disappointed, either; I’d ventured into the bush in the Blue Mountains in New South Wales and encountered kangaroos. A kookaburra sat in an old gum tree.
I’d had my picture taken with a koala, too, although the one I saw was so laconic it was not unlike having my photograph taken with an adorable eucalyptus-jonesing Deadhead.
I like sitting at bars when I’m on my own. My idea of heaven is a dozen oysters, a martini and a book to read. (That night I was reading “The House on Mango Street,” by Sandra Cisneros.) It’s funny how this is heaven for me, while the very same scenario, but seated at a table for one, leaves me lonely and depressed. This is probably because at the bar I can always get the bartender’s attention. Also, watching a talented bartender is a lot like watching a dancer, or a chemist. It’s a quiet kind of theater.
I replied, Wait, what? No. He was not.
Nice. It’s funny how the fact that I had long blond hair used to be my superpower. Now that I am 61, however, I have a new kind of superpower, at least as far as men are concerned: super-invisibility.
I never thought it was a particular accident that in the Fantastic Four, Sue Storm-Richards’s superpower was the ability to vanish.
I still remember the first time a construction worker whistled at me as I walked through Manhattan. As a feminist, about 90 percent of me thought, How dare he! I am not an object. And the other 10 percent of me thought, Jenny Boylan, you have got it going on.
I’m not especially proud of that 10 percent, but it’s there.
And so, when I sit solo at a bar now, in my elder days, I am mostly relieved to be left alone, to eat my oysters and read my book and quietly watch the bartender mixing up Americanos and espresso martinis. But every now and then, I admit that some small part of me rather wishes that some stranger would inquire whether my daddy was a thief.
Back in Sydney, a young man at a bar had offered to buy me a schooner (the slightly less-than-a-pint of beer that is the go-to in Australia). He asked, “Do you like Harleys?” and proceeded to describe the time he’d ridden from Sydney to Adelaide, a journey of over 800 miles. I asked him some questions. What’s more fun to drive, a panhead or a shovelhead? If he had his choice, would he opt for the Dyna Ride or the Road King?
I don’t actually know much about motorcycles, but I knew enough to keep him engaged for a while. It was a nice conversation, but as always there was an unspoken undercurrent of something else. Eventually, we went our separate ways.
“She is,” I said. “One of the best.” I felt a little bad now. I wondered how the night might have gone if I’d spent it talking about literature with this strange Australian. Maybe he wasn’t so strange after all.
But now I’d never know. I felt a twinge of regret, but not much more than that. It had been nice to be seen.
I wandered back to my hotel through the quiet streets. Couples passed me by — men and women, men and men.
Down by the water a couple was entwined, arms around each other. A sea bird flew around them, but they paid it no mind. The lovers were blind to all things, except each other.