Even if it does not foil the merger, the lawsuit could delay the deal significantly. When T-Mobile and Sprint announced in April last year that they had agreed to terms, they expressed the hope that they would be able to close the deal by July 2019. Now the courts, rather than federal regulators, are in charge of the timetable.
T-Mobile and Sprint have said that, together, they would be able to invest more deeply and quickly in fifth-generation cellular networks, or 5G, bringing high-speed internet access to rural areas neglected by cable services.
The agency’s five commissioners, three of them Republican, are expected to vote on the proposed merger soon.
The Justice Department is expected to issue a decision in the coming weeks, but its approval of the deal is not a sure thing. Makan Delrahim, the head of the agency’s antitrust division, has pushed the companies to sell parts of their businesses to maintain competition in the industry, according to two people familiar with his thinking.
Mr. Becerra, of California, said that he and his fellow attorneys general intended to seek a preliminary injunction, so that even if the Justice Department gave Sprint and T-Mobile the go-ahead to operate as a single entity, the companies would first have to resolve the lawsuit.
Scott Hemphill, a professor who teaches antitrust law at New York University, described the lawsuit as a potentially significant impediment to the deal. “If the judge decides to grant an injunction before the transaction is consummated, that would bring things to a halt,” he said.
Stock prices for T-Mobile and Sprint slumped on Tuesday. Neither company responded to a request for comment. The F.C.C. and the Justice Department declined to comment on the lawsuit.
Mr. Trump regards 5G advancement as a key political prize, arguing that China’s lead in establishing the high-speed mobile networks poses a threat to national security. The technology will be a crucial component in the development of robotics, driverless vehicles and other emerging industries. “American companies must step up their efforts, or get left behind,” Mr. Trump said on Twitter this year.
T-Mobile, led by John Legere, an executive with roughly 6.3 million Twitter followers who favors a wardrobe heavy on the bright magenta color the company uses in its advertisements, has been a top player in an aggressive lobbying effort in Washington.
In an effort to appease concerns over competition, Mr. Legere and his Sprint counterpart, the company’s executive chairman, Marcelo Claure, have offered to scale back their market share by selling Boost Mobile, a Sprint-owned prepaid wireless brand popular with lower-income customers.
Democratic lawmakers have noted that executives pushing for the deal have stayed at Trump hotels repeatedly since the proposed merger was announced. In January, Mr. Legere stayed two nights at a $2,246 suite at the Trump International Hotel in the capital.
At a news conference on Tuesday, Ms. James, the New York attorney general, said her office had been conducting an investigation into the proposed merger for roughly a year. She and the other attorneys general “have a renewed focus on mergers and competitiveness not only in the tech industry, but in other industries as well,” she said.
A combined T-Mobile and Sprint would put 30,000 jobs at risk, said Dennis Trainor, the vice president of the local chapter of the Communications Workers of America union.
Colorado, Connecticut, the District of Columbia, Maryland, Michigan, Mississippi, Virginia and Wisconsin joined California and New York in filing the lawsuit.
State officials have banded together in the past to influence policy on issues such as gun control and environmental protections. Two decades ago, the Justice Department and 20 state attorneys general simultaneously filed antitrust lawsuits against Microsoft. When it came time to negotiate a settlement, some of the state attorneys general balked and tried to hold out for tougher penalties.
Under the terms of the deal agreed to by T-Mobile and Sprint, T-Mobile would effectively be buying Sprint, and T-Mobile’s controlling shareholder, Deutsche Telekom, would own 42 percent of the combined company. Mr. Legere would lead it, and Mr. Claure, the Sprint executive, would serve on the board.
SoftBank of Japan controls Sprint. Its founder, Masayoshi Son, who has long pushed for the merger, would own 27 percent of the combined companies, with public shareholders owning the rest.
The current merger attempt by T-Mobile and Sprint is the third in the last five years. In 2017, talks fell apart after the two companies failed to agree on terms. In 2014, the courtship was scrapped after regulators in the Obama administration voiced concerns over competition.