Regulators have new rules for Wall Street brokers providing investment advice: Act in your customers’ best interest. But consumer advocates argue that the rules amount to little more than a new marketing slogan.
The Securities and Exchange Commission voted on Wednesday to pass the so-called Regulation Best Interest. The commission said the changes would help Main Street investors by tightening the standards governing brokers who sell investment products and outlining a fresh interpretation of the duties of investment advisers who provide financial guidance.
Brokers, technically known as registered representatives, have generally adhered to a suitability rule: They must recommend investments that are “suitable” based on the customer’s characteristics, including age, goals and stomach for risk. Investment advisers, in contrast, have been held to a higher standard: fiduciary duty, generally understood as always putting the client first.
“This rule-making package will bring the legal requirements and mandated disclosures for broker-dealers and investment advisers in line with reasonable investor expectations,” said Jay Clayton, the S.E.C.’s chairman.
The consumer groups that have engaged in dialogue with the S.E.C. over the rules, however, said the agency was blurring the shifting lines between brokers and advisers. They said the new rules did little more than codify the status quo while letting the brokerage industry market itself as always doing the right thing for customers, while potentially watering down the more rigorous fiduciary standard.
“When working people seek out investment advice, they expect and deserve to be able to rely on the people providing that advice to prioritize their need for a secure financial future over the financial professional’s interest in getting rich,” said Heather Slavkin Corzo, a senior fellow at Americans for Financial Reform and director of capital markets policy at the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
Advocates worry that the changes don’t define what it means for a broker to act in a customer’s best interest, and allows brokers to rely on disclosing conflicts of interest instead of trying to mitigate or eliminate them. They also fear the changes will create confusion about investment advisers’ fiduciary duty, in part because the language says they, too, can lean more on merely disclosing conflicts.
Barbara Roper, director of investor protection at the Consumer Federation of America, said the agency was taking the weakest possible interpretation of the fiduciary standard. “The underlying message is that there is nothing short of outright fraud that the investment advisers can’t address through disclosure alone,” she said.
Mr. Clayton, the agency chairman, took issue with that characterization.
The rules will require brokers to “act in the best interest of their retail customers when making a recommendation, including not placing their financial or other interests ahead of the interests of the retail customer,” he said.
It will take some time for experts to fully grasp the changes outlined, and even longer to see how they might alter the brokerage landscape in practice. The section on Regulation Best Interest alone is 771 pages, and lawyers, academics and consumer advocates are still parsing and digesting the language. Even so, industry officials were comfortable heralding the rules, which will take effect 60 days after they are published in the Federal Register.
Kenneth E. Bentsen Jr., the president and chief executive officer of the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, the trade group for large financial services firms, said the rule would impose a materially heightened standard of conduct for broker-dealers.
It can be hard for investors to figure out where the loyalties of professionals — particularly brokers — lie. That tripped up Heather Heckel, 33, an art teacher at a middle school in Port Washington, N.Y., who previously worked in Manhattan.
A broker left a notice in Ms. Heckel’s school mailbox about investments the broker was selling inside retirement plans known as 403(b)’s, which are similar to 401(k)’s. She signed on, and the broker transferred her retirement savings from a guaranteed investment that paid 7 percent — an exceedingly rare investment, available to New York City public schoolteachers — and moved it to an annuity with an annual fee of more than 2 percent. That was more than four times the fee that the average investor pays for mutual fund-type investments, according to Morningstar.
She said she had finally learned the true costs after registered investment advisers — fiduciaries who were selling a lower-priced product — visited her school. They told her that they would have kept her in the 7 percent investment.
“But they are fiduciaries,” she said. It cost her $2,500 to reclaim her money.
Whether investors like Ms. Heckel will receive the information they need in plain English is unclear. The rules call for brokers and investment advisers alike to deliver a “relationship summary” to investors at the beginning of their dealings — summarizing information about their fees, conflicts of interest and legal standard of conduct — but firms have a lot of flexibility in how that’s packaged. Advocates said that would make it difficult to compare firms.
Indeed, the S.E.C.’s investor advocate, Rick Fleming, said the summary wouldn’t provide information that helped investors decide whether the type of professional they were working with was appropriate for their situation.
“I believe it will fail to achieve its original objective of addressing the significant financial harm that results from investors being placed into accounts that poorly match their needs,” he said in a statement.
Benjamin Edwards, an associate professor of law at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, said he believed the rules would allow brokerage firms to continue to operate with conflicts of interest, such as being paid more for recommending one product over another, as long as the conflict was disclosed somehow.
The rule, he and advocates said, matches the S.E.C.’s enforcement policies in recent years. Instead of accusing firms of a violation — for charging excessive fees, for example — it has tended to charge them with failing to disclose conflicts of interest. In one high-profile case in 2015, the S.E.C. charged J. P. Morgan with the failure to disclose that it was pushing a more expensive version of its own proprietary products when cheaper versions were available.
