Opinion|The Kyle Kashuv Case: Was Harvard Right to Revoke Admission?
The Kyle Kashuv Case: Was Harvard Right to Revoke Admission?
Readers, invoking moral character and mercy, disagree about the revocation of a Parkland student’s admission.
I am a black student who will be attending Harvard next year. I’m not very different from my 16-year-old self, and doubt that Kyle Kashuv is either. Perhaps it’s not the best policy to examine what people say in private — and yet, what one reveals when nobody is watching is telling.
In my experience, people who use racial slurs don’t just become not racist, especially in two years. It’s usually part of a deeper way of viewing the world, entirely separate from “maturity” (as if racists just need to grow up). It takes a concerted effort to change that way of thinking.
In its decision, Harvard showed that it values students like me. We are going to college to learn, not to teach kids like Kyle Kashuv.
As a Harvard graduate, psychologist and lifelong political liberal, I read with dismay of Harvard’s revocation of Kyle Kashuv’s application for admission. I agree with David Brooks’s suggestion that Harvard may be misreading Mr. Kashuv’s moral character, in faulting him for racist slurs he made two years ago and for which he has apparently apologized sincerely and forthrightly.
I would carry Mr. Brooks’s argument farther, though, and suggest that Mr. Kashuv seems to be exactly the kind of applicant Harvard should be trying to admit. As Mr. Brooks points out, Harvard stresses “moral character” in its standards, and Mr. Kashuv seems to be demonstrating the highest moral character. It is primarily from our mistakes that we learn, should we choose to, and apologizing for them requires much more courage and moral character than denial or dismissal, which are all too prevalent today.
Harvard has an opportunity now to demonstrate its own moral character in learning from its mistake, apologizing for it and admitting Mr. Kashuv.
I was surprised by David Brooks’s decision to take up Kyle Kashuv’s cause. As Mr. Brooks concedes, “it’s hard to know if Kashuv has learned from his repulsive comments.” If so, why should Harvard assume that he has? Thousands of capable students who have not published racist rants online deserve a place at Harvard more than Kyle.
When Shakespeare has Portia say that “mercy seasons justice,” he was acknowledging what has been accepted by all moral societies: that justice can, and except in egregious cases should, be tempered with mercy. Kyle Kashuv has accepted without reservation that what he wrote as a 16-year-old was atrocious. The Harvard authorities have decided that Portia’s wisdom has no place in Cambridge.
Surely Mr. Kashuv can be punished appropriately and yet remain a student at Harvard. Perhaps he can be required to tutor a deserving African-American student. Perhaps he can be required to spend a few Sundays having dinner with an African-American family to let his heart get acquainted with their basic humanity. Is this beyond the ken of Harvard?
Juvenile criminal records are sealed. We don’t want their past mistakes to foreclose their future. The same should hold true for their behavior online.
