An awesome puzzle from Rich Proulx.
WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — Crossword constructors tend to reinterpret words and phrases in ways that most people don’t see until they are solving a puzzle, but it can be a hindrance as much as it can be a boon. I know puzzle makers who have driven past signs with phrases on them that are just ripe for theme development, and there is always that internal struggle whether to keep going or to pull over and scribble down the idea. Well, let’s at least hope they pulled over.
I bring this up because if someone who thought like a puzzle maker — such as, say, the constructor Rich Proulx — were to travel around the world and be inspired by certain sights, it is not at all unreasonable that he might decide to turn these sights into a puzzle theme. I don’t know if that was actually his inspiration for this puzzle, but it sounds good.
But what if, bearing what he saw in mind, Mr. Proulx were to do just the opposite? I won’t spoil what that means just yet, but let’s take a closer look at his tricky midweek theme.
5A: Did you want to drop in the abbreviation for Home Shopping Network? That was my immediate guess too, but it would be wrong, because the words “home” and “shopping” are in the clue. Repeating them is a no-no. The answer is QVC.
51A: LADY DI was called “Lady” before she was a princess, no? The clue “The People’s Princess, familiarly” seems to be a bit off in terms of its timeline, but it was easy enough to know that it was asking for some reference to Diana, Princess of Wales.
57A: Are rivers a weak spot for you in crosswords? The answer to “River of northern France” is OISE, but you can brush up on European rivers that appear frequently in the New York Times Crossword in this piece geared toward making you a better solver.
5D: We just saw an unusual finish to the Scripps National Spelling Bee, but that’s not the kind of “bee” we are supposed to be thinking about. In this puzzle, we’re thinking about a QUILTING bee.
6D: I can’t fill in the entry VALES without thinking about this Celebrity Guest Column that the humor writer Alan Zweibel graciously wrote for Wordplay in 2012.
11D: Hi, kids! The Republican nominee for president in 1936 was ALF Landon, although the incumbent, Franklin D. Roosevelt, won in a landslide.
It’s a good thing that the revealer crossed that answer. My eyes fell upon the clue at 49A, “Monuments of classical antiquity … or what literally is missing from this puzzle,” and I had enough letters at that point to figure out that the answer was SEVEN WONDERS.
There are SEVEN WONDERS missing from this puzzle. As I said, some constructors might try to put the SEVEN WONDERS into the puzzle (and Mr. Proulx did, according to his notes below), but this puzzle takes them out. That’s pretty innovative.
So that STEVIE from 38D is really STEVIE WONDER, and now that clue makes a lot more sense.
The other six WONDERS are symmetrical, which is an elegant touch.
One interesting historical side note: The phrase SEVEN WONDERS has appeared in the New York Times Crossword only once, in 1957, and then it was clued as “Global marvels.” No wordplay at all. We clearly need to start a Fresh Air Fund for our constructors.
I had been wanting to do a puzzle about the SEVEN WONDERS for quite a while. I just couldn’t figure out how to squeeze “Mausoleum at Halicarnassus” and “Hanging Gardens of Babylon” into a puzzle.
It wasn’t until I finally accepted that I couldn’t fit the wonders into a grid that this idea was born.
