Sports|Serena Williams’s Coach Says She Is Pain Free. Watch Out, Wimbledon?
Serena Williams’s Coach Says She Is Pain Free. Watch Out, Wimbledon?
If she is healthy, Williams can defeat any woman on grass, even at 37. But her health has been a persistent concern.
Serena Williams has had to deal with all manner of challenges since returning as a new mother to the sport she once ruled.
Postpartum depression. Reinvigorated rivals. Next-generation threats. Code violations. A twisted ankle. Blown match points. Aching knees. Wounded pride.
Now with Williams seriously short on tournament play, the spinning wheel of tennis fortune has put her in the toughest corner of this year’s Wimbledon draw: a quarter that includes Ashleigh Barty, the new No. 1, and three former No. 1s and Wimbledon champions — Garbiñe Muguruza, Maria Sharapova and Angelique Kerber.
“Serena’s in the group of death, no question about it,” said Rennae Stubbs, the ESPN analyst, coach and former WTA player.
But Williams has rumbled through many a nasty draw on her way to 23 Grand Slam singles titles. If she is healthy, she can pose a threat to any woman on grass, even as a 37-year-old seeking her first tournament title in two and a half years.
She is, after all, a seven-time Wimbledon singles champion who reached the final last year before losing to Kerber.
But is Williams genuinely healthy?
Her coach, Patrick Mouratoglou, insists that she is, after seeking treatment in Paris for the persistent left knee problems that forced her to withdraw from the Miami Open in March and the Italian Open in May, each after just one round. Her movement also appeared constrained in her straight-set loss to Sofia Kenin, a feisty young American unintimidated by baseline pace, in the third round of the French Open.
Mouratoglou said Williams had resolved her knee problem through therapy after consulting with the French orthopedic surgeon Gilles Daubinet, a former medical director for the French Tennis Federation who has treated Amélie Mauresmo and Yannick Noah.
Williams, so focused on recovery that she was unaware until Saturday that Barty had become No. 1, was even feeling good enough to playfully entertain the long-shot prospect of playing mixed doubles at Wimbledon with Andy Murray.
Williams has coped with knee tendinitis intermittently throughout her career, and there has been concern, at this late stage, that damage to the joint might be too significant to let her continue competing at the highest level.
After Williams’s loss to Kenin at Roland Garros on June 1, Mouratoglou said, she took two weeks off before resuming normal hitting sessions at his academy in southern France. That means she has nearly two weeks of unconstrained practice behind her, which has been rare this season and was not possible in the run-up to the French Open.
“She could play but was playing with pain and did a preparation with pain, which you never want to do,” Mouratoglou said.
That begs the question: Why play the French Open at all? Williams said in Paris that she had mulled the question daily before deciding to proceed.
Mouratoglou flashed back to 2015, when Williams won the French Open despite a spiking fever in the final rounds.
But she was on top of the tennis world at that stage. Since her return to the tour in March 2018 after the birth of her daughter, Olympia, Williams has yet to win a title at any level and has been edgy in the most significant matches she has played. She has yet to reach so much as a semifinal this season, playing in only five tournaments and retiring or withdrawing from three of them.
That is true even on grass, where Williams’s serve, perhaps the most potent weapon in the history of women’s tennis, allows her to shorten points more easily than on slower or higher-bouncing surfaces. But as Kerber proved in last year’s final, opponents are able to extend rallies on grass and force Williams into compromised court positions and errors.
Williams could run into Kerber in the fourth round this year and Barty in the quarterfinals, but women’s tennis has generally not respected the seedings of late.
Predictions are for the brave at this unsettled stage: Consider that Barty just won the French Open, her first Grand Slam singles title, without facing a top-10 player.
Barty beat Kenin in the quarterfinals and Amanda Anisimova in the semifinals. Kenin, 20, and Anisimova, 17, are leaders of an emerging group of American players with serious potential. The new wave includes the 15-year-old Cori Gauff, known as Coco, who is the youngest women’s qualifier in Wimbledon history. She will face Venus Williams in an intergenerational opening-round match at the All England Club on Monday. Williams, 39, won two of her five Wimbledon singles titles before 2004, the year Gauff was born.
Another promising American teenager, Caty McNally, 17, also has qualified for her first Wimbledon main draw.
“I’m just super excited for this new group coming up, all getting along really well and pushing each other,” said Kathy Rinaldi, the United States Fed Cup captain.
Those youngsters follow in the wake of Sloane Stephens, 26, and Madison Keys, 24, the Americans who faced off in the 2017 United States Open final, which Stephens won.
But, as Mouratoglou pointed out, the Americans in this new wave will almost certainly not have to deal with Williams in the prime of their careers.
She is still in the draw for now. And if she is indeed healthy enough to swing and move freely again on the lawns at Wimbledon, she is a contender even if it is hard to see her as a favorite with her difficult draw and lack of match play in 2019.
