Meghan Elizabeth Horstmann and Adam Valentine Klopp II were married May 29 at the department of registry general at the Ministry of Home Affairs in Hamilton, Bermuda. Aubrey Penny Kminors officiated. On June 1, Mita Corsini Bland, a friend of the couple, led them in vows incorporating Christian elements, at Mount Pleasant, a historic estate in Hamilton.
Mrs. Klopp, 34, is the director of public relations and marketing in the Manhattan office of Bonpoint, the luxury French children’s clothing label based in Paris. She graduated from Denison University.
She is the daughter of Patricia D. Horstmann and William J. Horstmann Jr. of Manhattan. The bride’s father, who is retired, worked in Manhattan as the chief executive of his family’s dairy business, Horstmann Mix & Cream, a maker of ice cream mix, which was in Long Island City, Queens. Her mother is the director of admissions at Park Children’s Day School, a private preschool in Manhattan.
Mr. Klopp, 32, is a vice president overseeing hotel projects for the Witkoff Group, a real estate developer based in Manhattan. He graduated from the University of Virginia.
He is a son of Karen K. Klopp and John R. Klopp of Manhattan. His mother is an author and founder of what2wearwhere.com, a fashion and shopping blog, based in Manhattan. She wrote “Packing for Travel” (Karen Klopp, 2015). She is also a contributor to a fashion column for the New York Social Diary, a lifestyle website in Manhattan. His father is a managing director and the global head of real assets at Morgan Stanley Investment Management in Manhattan.
The couple grew up on the Upper East Side of Manhattan and attended private schools two blocks apart — Ms. Horstmann went to the Convent of the Sacred Heart and Mr. Klopp to St. David’s School. Although they had many mutual friends, and went to many of the same events, they never met. At dinner in December 2015, Mr. Klopp sat between two of these friends, who decided it was time that the two meet. And, after the new year they met over drinks in Midtown.