23 Democrats Are Running for President. Do Any of Them Know What They’re Doing?
How do you unite a fractious base and defeat President Trump? No one seems to know, but that isn’t stopping them from giving it a try.
It was late on a Saturday night in May, and Marianne Williamson — the best-selling self-help author, spiritual sage and one of 23 souls vying to be the Democrats’ next presidential nominee — was sitting at a kitchen island in a large home on the western edge of Des Moines, nursing a generous glass of red wine. Her traveling aide, an extremely tall young woman named Tandra, was seated cross-legged on the floor a few feet away, next to a basket of fuzzy baby chickens.
Williamson was winding down after a long night of campaigning. She had just ministered to the guests at a reception held in her honor, holding forth on a back porch for an hour and a half about the “moral and spiritual awakening” she vowed to lead from the White House in order to “heal the low-level emotional civil war” underway in a broken America. Now the party was breaking up, most of the guests had left and the candidate seemed somewhat forlorn. “I’m finding this a bit confusing,” Williamson told me, looking up from the island.
She was trying to make sense of the rules determining who would qualify for a place in the Democratic presidential debates in late June. At first, she believed she had cleared the Democratic National Committee’s threshold for participation, having received the requisite donations from 65,000 people. “But now they’re saying something new about polls,” she said.
I first met Williamson, who is 66, five years ago, during her only previous foray into electoral politics. She was then one of 18 candidates running for a congressional seat in the Botox Belt of Southern California — Beverly Hills, Malibu, Bel Air — long held by the retiring Democrat Henry Waxman. Williamson was perhaps the best known among them: spiritual counselor to Oprah Winfrey, guru to Cher and even an officiant at one of Elizabeth Taylor’s (eight) weddings. She won support from Katy Perry and Alanis Morissette, and her campaign events turned up the occasional Kardashian. But this had not been enough to send Williamson to Congress. And so now Williamson was doing what every Democratic politician or candidate, successful or otherwise, seemed to be doing in 2019: running for president.
I had seen four of them in Iowa in the previous 36 hours, and Pete Buttigieg over the border in Minnesota two nights earlier: Elizabeth Warren in Ames and Iowa Falls on Friday, Amy Klobuchar in Des Moines on Saturday morning, Bernie Sanders in Ames that afternoon and Klobuchar again in Iowa City that evening before I returned to Des Moines to drop in on Williamson. When Williamson first announced her exploratory committee in November, her bid to be the Mike Gravel of 2020 — the self-assured oddball who kept the debates interesting — was a solid one: The only declared competition in the snowball’s-chance lane was John Delaney, a replacement-level Maryland congressman, and Andrew Yang, a New York businessman and universal-basic-income advocate who has said he hopes to campaign via hologram in some states.
But six months later, any aspiring Mike Gravel hoping to grab a percent or two in the polls had to compete with multiple Western governors (John Hickenlooper, Steve Bullock, Jay Inslee) and senators (Kirsten Gillibrand, Cory Booker), a Housing and Urban Development secretary (Julián Castro) and even the 89-year-old Gravel himself (who was dragooned into running again by a pair of teenage political activists). The border between curiosities and contenders had never seemed so porous, and new candidates seemed to be parachuting in every week; there was a report the day before that Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York would soon be joining the race.
Theoretically, this open season of a campaign was a boon to nontraditional aspirants like Williamson. Practically speaking, however, it posed all kinds of problems — like the question of how you even got on the debate stage, which seemed to be Williamson’s main preoccupation at this moment. “Do you know anything about how this works?” she asked me.
If there is something that unites the nearly two dozen Democrats currently in the field, it is that no one, really, knows how this works. It’s a cliché at this point to say that Trump changed politics in 2016, and that everyone — candidates, operatives and media — is still scrambling to understand the implications of his victory. No doubt, Trump humbled the experts (you’d hope) and blew up notions of how politicians should behave and what voters would allow. He also ushered in a free-for-all mentality that might account in part for the “Why not me?” stampede on the Democratic side, which now includes everyone from Obama’s goofy-uncle V.P. on down to the guy live-streaming his visit to the dentist to the spiritual guru sipping wine in front of me as tiny peeps emanated from a basket of chicks. But focusing too much on Trump misses the full degree to which uncertainty has become the overriding new norm — in American life, not just politics. Our notions have changed about what it means to be viable, familiar and authentic as public actors. Politics is just one arena in which this shift has been playing out.
Up close, the early race for the Democratic nomination can resemble a mass reconnaissance process, with the candidates as advance troops scouting an electorate that their party so badly misunderstood the last time around. How exactly do you run for president in 2019? What are the rules, and what should you say and who is even listening? At their unruly best, campaigns can be sprawling idea labs. You can learn a lot when no one knows anything.
I spent a few weeks trying to divine where exactly this has left the Democrats, both as individual campaigns and as a chaotic body of energized particles. There were big and enthusiastic crowds and campaigns trying to play nice with one another, at least in public (and at least for now). Polls have been mostly steady, with the best-known candidates (Biden, Sanders) at the top, followed by a shifting cast of risers (Warren, Buttigieg, Kamala Harris) and a trailing horde of 1-percenters and vanity candidates bringing up the crowded rear.
Candidates have alternately enjoyed media-darling status or wondered why they weren’t breaking through. They hate it when people ask if they’d want to be someone’s vice president or maybe consider (Hickenlooper, Bullock, O’Rourke) running for Senate back home (Colorado, Montana, Texas) instead of running around telling New Hampshire voters how special they and their silly primary are. But there is far less unity among the various campaigns, and sometimes within the candidates’ own heads, about how they plan to engage with voters and, ultimately, campaign against Trump. Beating him has quite obviously been a preoccupation of Democratic voters since the moment of his election, far beyond the typical level of urgency about defeating the incumbent president from the other party. “Electability” has thus become even more of a watchword than usual, leading to circular takes in which voters tend to channel the last pundit they saw yammering on TV about so-and-so’s fund-raising prowess or admirable message discipline.
Ayers, who wore a Eugene Debs T-shirt, said he would not commit himself to supporting the eventual Democratic nominee if he or she was not sufficiently progressive. He was unconvinced that Democrats needed to find the candidate the party establishment deemed mainstream enough to take on the incumbent. Recent precedent supports his argument.
Later that afternoon, I caught up with Klobuchar at a restaurant in Iowa City where she had just held her own rally. I had encountered her earlier in the day at the Des Moines farmers’ market, where she was gamely posing for photos with a macaw named Jacks perched on her arm. The bird belonged to an Iowa state representative named Ako Abdul-Samad, who was accompanying Klobuchar and feeding the bird sugar snap peas.
Debates are vital to a candidate like Klobuchar, whose appeal translates much better in formats that reward quick thinking and wit. The Minnesota senator is at her best in conversational settings — inasmuch as conversation is possible at these cattle calls — where she can tout her pragmatic reputation in the Senate and bipartisan bona fides. Klobuchar sponsored or contributed to 34 bills that became law under President Trump and has been decisively elected three times in an increasingly purple state. Given Clinton’s defeats in previously blue Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin, it has become imperative for candidates from the Midwest (Klobuchar, Buttigieg) to remind everyone that they possess this geographical fairy dust.
“I think you all know, I announced my candidacy in the middle of that snowstorm,” Klobuchar told the crowd in Iowa City. We did all know this; she loves talking about it. “Yep, I could’ve gone inside, but is that what a good Midwesterner would do?” (“Nooo!”) In a Fox News town hall a few days later, Klobuchar tried to give herself the nickname Heartland Amy, though it appears to not yet be sticking.
As voters are sounding more like TV pundits, candidates seem more willing than usual to talk like political strategists. They share their particular theories for how they are best equipped to take on Trump. You can of course spin this Rubik’s cube a million different ways and land on a million different profiles that suit any particular argument. For instance, Democrats clearly need to nominate a candidate who is not a white male and who is from the Midwest, preferably from a purple state, and someone whom enough Republicans are down with — or so says the future President Klobuchar.
J. Ann Selzer, a pollster who has been a fixture of the Iowa political landscape for three decades, said that in a March survey, likely Democratic caucus voters expressed overwhelming preference for candidates who emphasized a “positive” message. They placed a much greater importance on health care (81 percent of respondents) and climate change (80 percent) than they did impeachment (22 percent).
“Change the channel,” Pete Buttigieg was telling me a few nights earlier in Minneapolis. “That’s sort of what this is about. There has to be a different feel.” The 37-year-old mayor of South Bend, Ind., was greeting a procession of friends in a basement holding room at the Fine Line Music Café, a downtown nightclub. In about 20 minutes, he would be speaking at a small-donor fund-raiser, for which a crowd of over 400 guests were currently lined up around the block.
He was sitting on a couch and jiggling a bottle of water between his right thumb and index finger, clenching it hard enough to leave a large dent in the plastic. He was talking about authenticity, which as a political notion has become an obsession in the Trump years.
Elizabeth Warren seems especially proud of her ability to ignore the inescapable — Trump — as a hockey player with a broken leg would be loath to admit pain. “Did I even mention him at all?” the Massachusetts senator asked me following a house party where she spoke in Iowa Falls. I replied that yes, she had in fact mentioned Trump once, in response to a question she received about the special prosecutor Robert Mueller and the Russia investigation. “I got a question,” she told me, suggesting that it didn’t really count.
In the event of an emergency, as many Democrats view the prospect of a second term for Donald Trump, it’s natural to gravitate to a security blanket, no matter how itchy: Joe Biden, in other words.
In the middle of May, the former vice president was making his maiden swing through New Hampshire. His first stop was a pizza bistro in Hampton, lunchtime on a drizzly Monday. A hundred or so bodies were jammed in, seemingly half of them New Hampshire state representatives wearing name-tag pins, many saying they had known the former vice president for years. “Good to see you, man,” Biden said, patting the shoulders of a guy in a Boston Bruins cap near the entrance.
Like the Democratic field he leads, Biden’s stump speech, at the multiple rallies where I heard it, was an unruly mess. He name-drops “Barack” a lot. The rest is a familiar-for-him mishmash: several references to his family tragedies, calls for national unity and vows to not to “get down into mud wrestling” with Trump. He had the week before called him a “no-good S.O.B.” and a “clown,” among other things.
The safe candidate grabs for safe things — the parable Biden has been telling for years, for instance, which I heard again at a rally that night in Nashua, about how his father used to tell him: “Joey, a job’s about a lot more than a paycheck. It’s about your dignity. It’s about your place in the community, it’s about respect, it’s about being able to look your child in the eye and say, ‘Honey, it’s going to be O.K.’ and mean it.” That basic American promise is dead and needs to be restored, Biden says. The last guy won by promising a return to a mythical America that was once great; why should Biden not promise to make everything O.K. again?
Not long ago — five years or so — a former vice president signing on to the idea that the current president is “illegitimate” might have been a rather large deal. In 2019, barely anyone noticed — or they noticed much less than they did a few weeks later when the speaker of the House reportedly said she would like to see the president of the United States in prison.
It made me think of something that Marianne Williamson used to talk about when she was running for Congress in 2014, about how things that used to be considered exotic have now been incorporated into the political mainstream. “Today that fringe is baked into the cake,” Williamson told me. She might revile Donald Trump, but she also owed him for this much: In 2020, no candidate, and no idea, can safely be counted out. This is something Williamson could point out from the Democratic debate stage.