Style|Will Cool Clothes Make Young People Love Golf?
Will Cool Clothes Make Young People Love Golf?
An apparel brand with a streetwear sensibility wants to get teens and 20-somethings onto the green.
PEBBLE BEACH, Calif. — Last Tuesday, as men in penny loafers descended on this golfers’ paradise, Stephen Malbon surveyed the backyard of a Spanish Colonial mansion and lit up a fat blunt. A hundred or so people had come to celebrate a collaboration between his apparel brand, Malbon Golf, and Beats, the headphone maker. “There’s still a lot of people coming,” he said, exhaling a thick cloud of smoke as Kanye West boomed in the background.
He sauntered up to a makeshift putting green, where Schoolboy Q, a rapper, was demonstrating his swing for Tony Finau, the 16th-ranked player in the Professional Golfers Association.
“We say, ‘No problem,’ and turn it around for like, one hole,” said Mr. Malbon.
“And then turn it right back,” said Schoolboy Q. “Don’t try to make me be not who I am. I wear my teeth.” He flashed his grill: chrome on top, blue on the bottom.
Mr. Malbon and his crew were in town for the U.S. Open, the third of four annual major golf championships, with a lofty goal in mind: to make golf cool. Though the sport has long appealed to a certain set of white-collar professionals, and the comeback of Tiger Woods enthralled even the most ESPN-averse, the look of it hasn’t changed all that much. Meanwhile, other professional sports like basketball, soccer, tennis and even gaming have become increasingly aligned with streetwear brands.
Enter the fire starters. Mr. Malbon, 43, founded Malbon Golf with his wife, Erica, 29, in 2017. Both previously started and scaled successful businesses. In 2015, Ms. Malbon co-founded The Now, a chain of sleek, competitively priced, perpetually booked massage parlors in Los Angeles; in 1999, Mr. Malbon founded Frank151, a media company and creative agency that has lent street cred to brands like Casio, Toyota and Nike.
“Every event, activation, whatever, it was always, art, music, fashion, graffiti, skateboarding,” said Mr. Malbon, who was raised in Virginia Beach and began golfing at age 12. “When I lived in New York, I was embarrassed, almost, to be a golfer,” he said, kicked back on a linen covered armchair inside the mansion (which is owned by Mark Werts, the founder of the clothing company American Rag Cie). “Golf is the most non-punk-rock thing there is.” Things changed when he moved to L.A., where Ms. Malbon grew up and golfed as a kid.
Cheeky logos — a golf ball with lines under its eyes, presumably strung out from the night before — adorn Malbon’s sweatshirts, hats and polos, available online and at a store on Fairfax Avenue in Los Angeles, up the street from Supreme. There’s space in the back to putt and throw parties attended by casual celebrity golfers like Tyler the Creator. It’s millennial catnip, but not everyone likes cats.
Old and new ideas have informed his aesthetic sensibility. This fall, Malbon will introduce plush merino sweaters made with the Scottish heritage brand Lyle & Scott. Earlier this year, the company partnered with Nike on a line of graffiti-esque golf shoes that quickly sold out. And Beats, its co-host for the party, recently formalized endorsement deals with Mr. Finau, 29, and Justin Thomas, 26, the PGA’s seventh-ranked player.
An unbuttoned philosophy governs the Malbon Golf Club, founded in May, a collective of L.A.-area golfers who plan to compete, monthly, on a municipal course, “so you don’t have to pay $300,000 to be able to play with a good group of people and have a good time,” Ms. Malbon said. The first gathering is scheduled for late June.
“There are a lot of people like me, who, just because I want to join my dad’s country club, doesn’t mean I want to act like he did,” said Mr. Malbon.
“He needs camp,” said Mr. Malbon.
“It’s an investment in his future,” she said.