The advice columnist E. Jean Carroll accused President Trump of sexually assaulting her in the mid-1990s in her forthcoming book.
In “What Do We Need Men For?,” her account of being harassed and mistreated by a series of men, which St. Martin’s Press is expected to publish next month, Ms. Carroll, the author of “Ask E. Jean” in Elle magazine, alleges that Mr. Trump raped her in 1995 or 1996, in a Bergdorf Goodman dressing room. An excerpt that includes her account was published on New York magazine’s website earlier Friday.
Mr. Trump has been accused of sexual misconduct before and was heard boasting of sexual assault in the “Access Hollywood” tape. Ms. Carroll’s descriptions of her encounter with Mr. Trump are the most explosive allegations in the book and will likely reignite the discussion over the president’s treatment of women and the assault allegations that have been raised against him.
Reached by phone at her home in upstate New York on Friday afternoon, Ms. Carroll said she decided to write about her experience now because she felt she owed her readers transparency. “I just thought, it’s time, I owe it to my beloved readers. I can’t keep up this facade,” she said.
She initially planned a book in which she traveled the United States and spoke with women about their problems with men, but she decided on a more personal account after the allegations against Harvey Weinstein surfaced.
One of Ms. Carroll’s friends, the magazine reporter, confirmed with The Times that Carroll called her shortly after the events described in the book and told her what had happened. The friend, who asked The Times to withhold her name because she feared negative repercussions that could result from the book, said she urged Carroll to report the incident to the police and offered to go with her. Ms. Carroll seemed conflicted about what to do, the friend said, and even laughed about it.
Her other friend, the TV anchor, also confirmed with The Times that Ms. Carroll described the assault in the days afterward. She also asked The Times to withhold her name.
Ms. Carroll said that she didn’t dwell on her memories in the years after it happened. “I am one of those people who puts the past clearly behind them,” she said.
But in the book, she hints at lasting trauma, when she notes that after the encounter, she never had sex with anybody again. “Maybe all this just killed my desire for desire,” she said in the interview.
She accuses other powerful men of sexual harassment, including former CBS’s former chief executive Les Moonves, as well as her encounters and troubled history with mafia bosses, media titans, boyfriends and husbands and a serial killer.
A spokesman for Mr. Moonves didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment. In the New York excerpt, he denied that the harassment occurred.
Lawyers for St. Martin’s conducted a legal review of Ms. Carroll’s memoir, said Elisabeth Dyssegaard, executive editor at St. Martin’s.