The Massachusetts senator has emphasized her wealth tax on millionaires and defended her past stance on marijuana. Here’s a fact check.
Senator Elizabeth Warren has climbed in recent polls as she churns out a stream of ambitious policy proposals and renews calls for President Trump’s impeachment.
In public remarks, Ms. Warren weaves personal anecdotes with explanations of her many plans, interspersing statistics and critiques of wealth inequality and corruption in Washington. Her focus on her own past and broad outlines for the future have helped her avoid making factual inaccuracies, though she has, on occasion, slightly overstated both.
Ms. Warren’s plan imposes a 2 percent annual tax on fortunes over $50 million, with an additional surcharge of 1 percent on wealth over $1 billion. This would generate about $2.75 trillion over 10 years, estimated Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman, two respected economists at the University of California, Berkeley.
Analysts asked by Ms. Warren to evaluate her proposals estimated that universal child care would cost $707 billion over a decade and student debt forgiveness $640 billion. A campaign spokesman said her college plan also included $100 billion in additional Pell grants, $50 billion for historically black colleges and universities and $470 billion over 10 years for the federal government to pay two-thirds of the cost of free college tuition. That’s a total cost of just under $2 trillion, with $783 billion left unspent.
But any number of factors could throw Ms. Warren’s plan off course and into the red.
“The challenge is twofold: Measuring behavioral responses to the tax and accurately calculating the value of privately held businesses that account for much of the wealth of the very rich,” said Howard Gleckman, a senior fellow at the Tax Policy Center.
For example, multimillionaires and billionaires could conceivably give away some of their wealth before the tax lands on them, said Marc Goldwein, the senior policy director for the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget.
A separate analysis of Ms. Warren’s wealth tax found that it would generate just 40 percent of the revenue estimated by Mr. Saez and Mr. Zucman. The analysis, by Lawrence H. Summers, a Treasury secretary under President Bill Clinton, and Natasha Sarin, a law and finance professor at the University of Pennsylvania, contends that the two Berkeley economists underestimated the ways rich people could seek to minimize or avoid paying the tax.
Mr. Gleckman said that the Tax Policy Center had not yet completed its own analysis of Ms. Warren’s tax, but that he believed the estimate by Mr. Summers and Ms. Sarin was “closer to the mark” than the $2.75 trillion figure.
Mr. Goldwein agreed that Ms. Warren’s plan could potentially fall short of expected revenue targets, but praised her campaign for providing details on funding sources and noted that the tax could always be adjusted to make up for any deficits.
The other side of the ledger could be off as well. For example, the $707 billion figure for universal child care factors in economic growth generated by the plan, but under “static” scoring — without assuming any changes in growth — the cost is closer to $1.1 trillion. Similarly, the $470 billion estimate for free college tuition assumes that states would be willing to contribute the remaining one-third that the federal government does not fund.
Several polls have found that Ms. Warren’s wealth tax plan has broad support, though “huge” is a slight overstatement.
Of the respondents, 61 percent supported the proposal in a January survey commissioned by Data for Progress, a left-leaning think tank. More Republicans supported the wealth tax than opposed it, 44 percent to 37 percent, while 61 percent of independents and 76 percent of Democrats also endorsed it.
In a Morning Consult/Politico poll in February, 61 percent of all respondents were in favor of the wealth tax, including 74 percent of Democrats and 50 percent of Republicans.
Polling that month from Survey Monkey for The New York Times produced similar results: 61 percent approval among all respondents, 75 percent among Democrats, 57 percent among independents and 51 percent among Republicans.
An April poll from Quinnipiac University found similar or higher levels of support among all respondents (60 percent), Democrats (82 percent) and independents (63 percent) but notably lower approval from Republicans (32 percent in support and 60 percent in opposition).
When a student asked about her evolving position on marijuana legalization, Ms. Warren overstated her past support.
Massachusetts decriminalized possession of small amounts of marijuana in 2008. But Ms. Warren, who first ran for the Senate in 2012, vacillated on a ballot initiative to legalize medical marijuana and opposed legalization in general.
In April 2012, Ms. Warren then declined to take a position on the ballot initiative, before supporting legalized medical use in a radio interview that September. The measure ultimately passed.
A few years later, Massachusetts considered another ballot initiative to approve recreational use. Asked in 2015 about her previous opposition to legalization, Ms. Warren did not deny the premise of the question and said she was “open” to it after learning from other states that had done so. A year later, she repeated that stance, saying she was receptive, but deflected when asked whether she would vote yes on the initiative.
Activists told Marijuana Moment, a website that reports on cannabis-related news, that Ms. Warren never formally endorsed that initiative. But they said that they appreciated her evolution on the issue and leadership on the topic in Congress.
Ms. Warren often cites this statistic after recounting a story about her mother, who at 50 years old got a minimum-wage job at Sears after her father had a heart attack.
That year was most likely 1961 or 1962 — Ms. Warren’s mother was born in 1912 — when the minimum wage was $1.15 (about $9.80 today) for an annual paycheck of $2,392, assuming a 40-hour workweek. That would have been just above the official poverty line for a female-led, three-person household in 1961 or 1962 ($2,164 and $2,167).
In the early 1960s, median mortgage payments ranged from $98 to $106 per month on average, while food costs for minimum-wage workers ranged from $600 to $800 per year and utilities another $120 to $170, according to data compiled by the Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Bureau of Labor Statistics. That’s a total annual cost of just under $1,900 to about $2,200.
Today, a federal minimum wage of $7.25 equates to annual earnings of about $15,080, assuming a 40-hour workweek. That’s well below the federal poverty line for a three-person household of $20,212.