The New York Times worked with human rights groups and asylum seekers on Manus Island to examine a rash of suicide attempts and acts of self-harm since Australia’s May 18 election.
For thoughtful coverage of Australia delivered to your inbox, sign up for the Australia Letter.
SYDNEY, Australia — Human rights groups call them a violation of international law. The Australian government says they are crucial to regulating the flow of immigration.
But one thing is indisputable about Australia’s offshore detention centers on the islands of Manus and Nauru: Despair is soaring among asylum seekers being held there.
Since Australia’s national election on May 18, which returned to power a conservative government that has maintained hard-line policies intended to deter asylum seekers, there have been dozens of suicide attempts and acts of self-harm at the refugee centers.
The Australian government argues that its strict border protection policy, which bars settlement for migrants who try to reach the country by sea, has worked: Fewer boats with asylum seekers on board are trying to reach Australia compared to a decade ago.
Australia’s immigration policies received a forceful endorsement on Thursday morning from President Trump, who was scheduled to have dinner that evening with Prime Minister Scott Morrison in Osaka, Japan.
But many of the detainees on Manus and Nauru, cognizant of Australian polls that showed the opposition Labor Party leading before the May election, had hoped a change in immigration policy was on the horizon. When Labor lost, desperation intensified.
Adding to the despair, the United States has rejected resettlement applications for roughly 300 refugees on the two islands, despite a deal reached by the Obama administration to take in more than 1,000 of them.
The situation has grown especially dark on Manus, a remote island in Papua New Guinea where several hundred men from Afghanistan, Iran and other countries are being held.
It was grim when I visited nearly two years ago to write about the situation. Now, it’s worse. Every few days, it seems, a new instance emerges of people cutting themselves, setting themselves on fire or trying to harm themselves in some other way.
To better understand the problem, The New York Times worked with human rights groups and asylum seekers on Manus to compile a rough timeline of events since the May 18 election.
This is not a comprehensive list, but rather a selection of significant moments — including official responses from Papua New Guinea and Australia — that are adding pressure to an already intense debate.
Within 48 hours of the election that returned Mr. Scott Morrison to power, the details of six suicide attempts start to emerge.
Four of the men, including a Sudanese man who left a suicide note, ended up in the hospital. The two others were held by the police after they tried to set fire to themselves in their rooms.
The main hospital on Manus, an under-equipped one-story clinic, begins to turn away those arriving with injuries from self-harm.
Suicide attempts also start to emerge in Port Moresby, the capital of Papua New Guinea, where some asylum seekers have been moved.
The Refugee Action Coalition, an advocacy group, reports that one Iraqi asylum seeker tried to hang himself and was saved when he was cut down by a guard.
In several other cases, the coalition said, refugees swallowed razor blades and needles.
There are 490 asylum seekers in Papua New Guinea. To try to keep them safe, the police step up patrols near their housing.
Abdul Aziz Muhamat, 25, a refugee from Sudan who has spent six years on Manus, announces on Twitter that Switzerland has granted him asylum.
As the suicide attempts continue, the governor of Manus Province, Charlie Benjamin, calls for Australia to finally accept the men they have sent to Manus.
Peter Dutton, Australia’s home affairs minister, who oversees border protection and detention, says the government is looking at repealing the so-called Medevac law, passed this year, which makes it easier for refugees and asylum seekers on Manus and Nauru to seek medical treatment in Australia.
Mr. Dutton warns that a court decision upholding the Medevac law could lead to a surge of boat arrivals. He pledges to keeping pushing for repeal.
Later that afternoon, a man near the main transit center in Manus climbs to the top of an internet tower and threatens to jump. A few hours later, he climbs back down.
A 31-year-old asylum seeker from India lights himself and his room on fire. Refugees on Manus report that he had sought care at a hospital but did not receive it, leading him to harm himself.
“While the home affairs minister spends his time arguing to repeal the Medevac bill, the situation on Manus spins out of control,” says Ian Rintoul, spokesman for the Refugee Action Coalition.
An asylum seeker on Manus posts images of an X-ray showing a man who swallowed a nail clipper.
Papua New Guinea’s new prime minister, James Marape, demands local control of the lucrative contract to run the refugee centers on Manus.
The Australian Financial Review, a business newspaper, had revealed that a little-known security firm, Paladin, was given a contract worth 20.9 million Australian dollars ($14.6 million) a month without a competitive tender. In January, one of the firm’s local directors was arrested on charges of fraud and money laundering.
The governments of Australia and Papua New Guinea agree to extend the Paladin contract.
When a handful of the asylum seekers on Manus count up all the incidents of self-harm and attempted suicide since the election, they tell me the figure approaches 100 — with many examples kept hidden because people don’t want to shame their families.
In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline can be reached at 13 11 14. In the United States, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. Other international suicide help lines can be found at befrienders.org.
