HONG KONG — The 30,000-member Hong Kong police force was long known as “Asia’s finest.” Then with the world watching, they tear-gassed and beat largely peaceful demonstrators and fired rubber bullets at them. Some officers appeared to hide their badges to avoid identification.
Now the force is struggling to salvage a reputation blighted by its behavior in the June 12 protests over a proposed extradition law that convulsed Hong Kong, the semiautonomous Chinese territory.
Faced with public fury over their crowd-control tactics, the police retreated and watched as thousands of young demonstrators besieged their headquarters for 15 hours last week, barricading the exits, throwing eggs and spraying graffiti on the walls.
Officers ducked their heads as protesters aimed laser pointers at them, and a police spokeswoman who urged the demonstrators to leave was drowned out by jeering.
“Dirty cops are becoming like dogs,” read a large banner that protesters unfurled in front of the Police Headquarters on Friday. “They’re learning to be the People’s Liberation Army,” it continued, referring to the military that serves China’s governing Communist Party.
Were you subject to police violence during the Hong Kong protests?
We are investigating allegations that the police used excessive force. If you were seriously injured in a confrontation with officers, or know someone who was, send us a message on WhatsApp or Signal at +1 |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , or email |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Please label the message “Hong Kong.” A reporter may reach out to hear about your experience.
Senior government and police officials have defended the department’s performance, saying that it is apolitical and merely upholding the rule of law.
But pro-democracy opposition leaders have increasingly targeted the police force, accusing it of defending a government that in their view is subverting the same rule of law it claims to uphold. They are seeking to turn the police into a potent symbol of how the Hong Kong authorities are accountable not to the public, but Beijing.
At first, the protesters focused their ire on the contentious bill that would allow extraditions to mainland China — and their huge demonstrations forced the city’s leader to suspend the legislation indefinitely. But many protesters, particularly students and people in their 20s, have in recent days directed their anger at the police’s conduct during clashes on June 12.
That day, the police were responsible for maintaining order and securing access to government buildings during a huge rally. But when some protesters hurled bricks and tried to storm the grounds of the legislature, officers fired tear gas on crowds that had few places to flee to and used rubber bullets for the first time in decades. Dozens were injured.
Videos circulating online of the clashes prompted many members of the public and human rights groups to criticize the police response as excessive and the arrests as capricious. They also noted that some riot police officers did not wear badges during the episode, perhaps to evade prosecution.
Now, front-line officers routinely face verbal abuse and profanity at protests, an unusual phenomenon for members of a body that had long been highly respected. Critics of the police’s conduct have created open-source databases in which users share officers’ phone numbers and the names of their spouses and high schools on social media, with some lists referring to the police as dogs.
Lam Chi-wai, the chairman of the Junior Police Officers’ Association, a police union, said the personal data of more than 400 officers and their families had been posted online, including his own.
Public anger against the police’s tactics swelled after the police commissioner, Stephen Lo, and the city’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, described the June 12 demonstration as a riot, which suggested serious potential legal ramifications for participants.
When nearly two million Hong Kong residents, by the organizers’ count, marched on June 16 against the extradition bill, many also demanded that the authorities rescind the riot label.
That rally prompted Mr. Lo to backtrack on calling the protest a riot, saying that anyone who demonstrated peacefully then should not worry about prosecution on rioting charges.
Some experts say the rift is inevitable in the former British colony where the police force has substantial paramilitary training. Britain built up the Hong Kong police in the 1960s to help control pro-Communist riots, experts said.
The police force was plagued by corruption in the 1960s and ’70s, but an anticorruption drive helped improve the force’s image by the 1980s. After Britain handed the territory over to China in 1997, Hong Kong was relatively peaceful for the first decade; and even a mass protest against Beijing-backed national security legislation in 2003 went smoothly.
But cracks began to show during pro-democracy protests in the territory in 2014 known as the Umbrella Movement, analysts and police officers said in interviews. At the time, the use of force against protesters, including pepper spray and tear gas in the early days of the standoff, set off larger demonstrations.
Seven police officers were convicted of assault for beating a protester during the 2014 demonstrations. Some observers say this month’s heavy-handed police response to protests was motivated in part by lingering grievances within the force over those convictions.
In interviews, police officers and their supporters expressed frustration that Hong Kong officials and the local news media, as they see it, underplayed the violence on the part of the protesters.
They also said that by appearing to backtrack on calling the incident a riot, Mr. Lo, the police chief, essentially shifted the blame from the force as a whole to individual officers.
Lawrence Ho, an expert on policing and criminal justice at the Education University of Hong Kong, said he was sympathetic toward the officers who had not acted with excessive force. “They actually are scapegoats of political arguments,” he said.
Andrea Tam, an accountant who supported the police in a rally downtown on Saturday, said the riot officers had done the right thing during the clashes with protesters.
Last week, the police and a watchdog that monitors complaints against them, and whose members are appointed by the chief executive, both said they would investigate the tactics used against the protesters. But many protesters and pro-democratic lawmakers have called for a fully independent inquiry.
James To, a pro-democracy lawmaker and the vice chairman of the legislature’s security panel, predicted that any prosecutions of police officers would not come for at least nine months.
