Julia Jarcho’s new play is a squirmy, sinister meditation on female desire, with a whiff of ancient Greece.
Henry Street Settlement – Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand St.
Venus incarnates in “Pathetic,” Julia Jarcho’s squirmy, sinister meditation on female desire as weapon and a liability. An update of Racine’s “Phèdre,” a classical French drama about a woman’s uncontrollable lust for her stepson, the play replaces Racine’s stately alexandrines with lines about sex and barf and decay. Actually, a lot of those are in hexameter, too; Ms. Jarcho is no slouch.
Produced by Minor Theater at the Abrons Arts Center, the play is set kind of in the ’90s (check the fashion) and kind of in the now (check the cellphones). There’s a whiff of ancient Greece, a callback to a time when gods seemed nearer and one might take hold of a human, just for the lulz. One deadpan shout-out: “Greek,” a girl says, handing off her yogurt carton to her friends.
If you’re into etymology, you’ll know that “pathetic” has several meanings. There’s the contemporary gist: sad, pitiful, lame. But in the classical French that Racine would have used, it means arousing emotion. And in Greek — the language, not the yogurt — it denotes a person who is liable to suffer. Get it? To feel is to make ourselves vulnerable, susceptible to pain, very uncool.
“Pathetic” joins other recent plays — “The Wolves,” “Dance Nation,” “Athena” — in its insistence on female subjectivity and its emphasis on the complexities and occasional messiness of women’s lives and bodies. If not entirely legible (as in her other work, Ms. Jarcho prizes theme, emotion and language over lucidity), it’s unsettling and exciting and flick-knife sharp on the aggression underlying friendship, sex and love.
“Phèdre” ends in suicide and murder. “Pathetic” doesn’t. But to live in a body that feels and wants and doesn’t get what it wants, this play insists, is a kind of tragedy, too.
Through June 23 at Abrons Arts Center, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , abronsartscenter.org. Running time: 1 hour 15 minutes.