As roommates at the Women’s World Cup, Jodie Taylor and Beth Mead have built a connection that has helped lead England into the second round of the tournament.
Mead delivered a low cross from the left flank, and Taylor sneaked into a central location, nudging the ball into the net to earn a 1-0 victory over Argentina on Friday in Le Havre, France.
The win secured England’s place in the second round with a game to spare in Group D. Italy, France and Germany have also advanced to the round of 16.
Argentina had frustrated England for 61 minutes, and goalkeeper Vanina Correa was nearly flawless — she even stopped a penalty kick — until Taylor and Mead connected.
The goal ended a 540-day scoring drought for Taylor, the Golden Boot winner from the 2017 European championships.
“It’s not until people start bringing it up that you start thinking about it,” said Taylor, who plays for the Seattle Reign in the National Women’s Soccer League.
After edging Scotland, 2-1, on Sunday, England opened a World Cup with back-to-back wins for the first time and will play Japan in its final group game. Argentina will play Scotland.
ITALY 5, JAMAICA 0 Cristiana Girelli scored three goals to lead Italy in a rout of Jamaica in Reims that clinched a spot in the second round.
It was Italy’s second hat trick at a World Cup, as Girelli joined Carolina Morace, who did it at the inaugural 1991 tournament. Girelli had the third hat trick in this World Cup.
Italy, making its first appearance in the tournament since 1999, upset Australia by 2-1 in its opening Group C match with a goal in stoppage time.
Girelli’s first goal was on a penalty kick she got two chances at making. Jamaica goalkeeper Sydney Schneider saved Girelli’s low penalty shot to the right post, but video review determined that Schneider had left her line too soon. Girelli scored on her second attempt, getting Italy rolling.
Aurora Galli came in as a substitute for Italy and scored twice.
JAPAN 2, SCOTLAND 1 Mana Iwabuchi had an early goal and Japan then held off a late charge from Scotland for a victory in Rennes.
Iwabuchi, who was on the Japanese team that won the World Cup in 2011, scored in the 23rd minute, giving Japan its first goal of the tournament. Yuika Sugasawa converted a penalty kick in the 37th minute, padding the lead going into halftime.
Lana Clelland’s left-footed shot went into the top right corner of the net in the 87th minute as Scotland furiously worked to break through Japan’s defense.
THAI KEEPER THANKS LLOYD The goalkeeper who allowed 13 goals when the United States routed Thailand thanked the American star Carli Lloyd for offering words of encouragement after the defeat on Tuesday.
Lloyd said on Friday that she had wanted to comfort Sukanya after the game but that she was not sure if the keeper had understood what she said. Lloyd said she had told her to keep her chin up.
