Theater|Can a Kung Fu Musical Get (Way) Off the Ground?
Can a Kung Fu Musical Get (Way) Off the Ground?
“Dragon Spring Phoenix Rise,” the unlikely offspring of a Chinese-American opera impresario and the writers of “Kung Fu Panda” — with songs by Sia — aims to show just how high the Shed can fly.
Video by Mohamed Sadek for The New York TimesCredit...
Half a dozen warriors gathered at the base of a striated plateau, cracking jokes and letting off steam before the moment of truth. “You ready?” said Abdiel Jacobsen, tall and muscular, turning to Xavier Townsend, whose slight frame bloomed into a mop of dreadlocks.
“I’m ready,” Xavier said, knowing his time had come.
He raised both fists high above his shoulders and stepped toward the spotlight, where he was surrounded by a throng of technicians in black shirts and headsets. One was holding a rope that shot straight up to the ceiling, a vertical distance of more than 10 stories.
The plateau wasn’t God’s handiwork, but that of the Shed — the $500 million arts complex at Hudson Yards on Midtown Manhattan’s far west side. It was part of the custom-built, multilevel stage for a new multimillion-dollar “kung fu musical” called “Dragon Spring Phoenix Rise,” which begins previews on June 22.
The show, the unlikely fruit of an even less likely collaboration — involving Chen Shi-Zheng, the Chinese-American opera impresario; the “Kung Fu Panda” screenwriters Jonathan Aibel and Glenn Berger; the musician Sia; and the choreographer Akram Khan — pushed the star-studded creative team to its limits, taking three years to make and crisscrossing as many continents.
And cast members, consisting almost entirely of contemporary dancers who were given a crash curriculum (martial arts training, aerial choreography and singing lessons) to transform them into futuristic warriors, faced an even steeper challenge.
“Remember: If you want to come down, just say ‘Down,’” an aerial coordinator with a loose bun of gray hair said to Xavier. It was June 12, a little more than a week before audiences would be watching, and for the first time the dancer-turned-warrior was strapped into a nylon harness that would raise him 80 feet into the air. The technician with the rope fastened him in.
A month before Abdiel and Xavier arrived, Alex Poots, the CEO and artistic director of the Shed, was sitting in the same spot, clicking at his laptop. Another custom stage, this one built for Björk, occupied the space where the plateau is now, at the center of this highly flexible 1,200-seat theater, the McCourt.
Before joining the Shed, Mr. Poots, one of the contemporary art world’s most exuberant and prolific matchmakers, served as the artistic director of the Park Avenue Armory and the founder of the Manchester International Festival in England. In those roles, he commissioned an opera that paired the artist Marina Abramovic with Willem Dafoe, and a ballet, adapted from a Jonathan Safran Foer book, that featured a score by the electronic music producer Jamie xx and choreography by Wayne McGregor.
“Dragon Spring Phoenix Rise” is his most ambitious undertaking yet. It was developed as a kind of proof of concept for the new building, engineered to dazzle audiences with name-brand artists, staggering physical scale and blockbuster pyrotechnics not found anywhere else in a city well steeped in audacious spectacle.
But achieving liftoff won’t be easy. The last such high-profile, high-flying attempt was the Broadway musical “Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark,” a notoriously unwieldy enterprise that left a cautionary legacy of comic one-liners, broken hearts and sunk capital when it closed in 2014.
Getting to the rehearsal stage for “Dragon Spring,” which The New York Times observed on six occasions over four weeks, took years of meticulous planning, and a high tolerance for risk.
On his laptop in the McCourt, Mr. Poots found the video that started it all, and pressed play. It was a black-and-white clip of a young Bruce Lee in 1964, wearing a trim black suit and tie to audition for the television series “The Green Hornet.” In the audition, Lee demonstrates an array of kung fu moves with astonishing velocity and force, introducing each with the workaday nonchalance of a flight attendant giving safety instructions.
The video had arrived in Mr. Poots’s inbox in 2015, with a note from Mr. Chen expressing his desire to bring Lee’s physical dynamism to the stage.
“It was an entry point into something that was artistic, that had real rigor, but was at a juncture of art, sport and spirituality, which I thought was such a potent proposition,” said Mr. Poots, who had previously worked with Mr. Chen on the acrobatic opera “Monkey: Journey to the West,” a collaboration with the band Gorillaz.
Mr. Poots, who had been dreaming up ideas for what was then to be called the Culture Shed, asked Mr. Chen how he could help develop the show. The director said that his wife had been a big admirer of the “Kung Fu Panda” movies. Mr. Poots opened his Rolodex.
The ensemble members, each carrying a seven-foot bamboo staff to practice the show’s climactic fight scene, stood single file in a rehearsal space on 42nd Street. Cued by the score, a thunderous refrain composed by Bobby Krlic, who records as the Haxan Cloak, they snaked across the floor in a skewed figure eight before coming to rest in a semicircle that spanned the room.
The musical, which takes place in Chinatown in Flushing, Queens, in the near future, tells the story of an exiled sect of kung fu warriors that guards an underground spring infused with the power of eternal life. The fugitive daughter of the sect’s grand master, who eloped with a mysterious outsider, gives birth to twins who are separated at birth, only to reunite 18 years later to save the sect, and the world, from a powerful enemy.
Mr. Chen, 56, with boyish black hair and a gentle manner, looked on during the rehearsal from a chair on the sidelines, his chin buried deep in his palm.
The ensemble pounded the floor in unison with their staffs, creating a resounding pulse. The grand master, played by David Patrick Kelly (“Twin Peaks” on TV, “Once” on Broadway), entered the center of the semicircle with PeiJu Chien-Pott, a principal in the Martha Graham Dance Company who portrays his daughter, and two of the show’s villains. Then the fighting began — a brutal ballet complete with swords and a bullwhip.
After a few run-throughs of the scene, Mr. Chen halted the action and approached Ms. Chien-Pott. Her kicks hadn’t been landing as they should.
Though wrapped in pop packaging, the core themes of “Dragon Spring Phoenix Rise” — geographical and spiritual dislocation, hybridized identity and the weight of heritage — are deeply personal.
He spent more than a year on casting, searching for performers who could match the show’s multidisciplinary ambitions. But the musical theater actors he saw didn’t make believable fighters, and the martial artists couldn’t pull off the requisite acting and dancing.
He decided to narrow his focus to the dance world — largely hip-hop, modern, and classical — figuring he would get an actor’s stage presence and a martial artist’s core strength and agility in the bargain.
But mastering the fight choreography, even for a cast with extraordinary physical discipline, took longer than expected. That meant less time to practice other aspects of their performances. And more to worry about.
On the plateau in the Shed’s McCourt Theater, just over a week before “Dragon Spring” was scheduled to open, a technician gave Xavier final instructions.
It was the first, and only, week of full rehearsals for the show’s three aerial sequences, which, for logistical reasons, hadn’t been possible outside of the Shed. For Xavier and the rest of the ensemble, learning to fly in the harnesses was the last — and riskiest — piece of the puzzle.
Directly above him was a ring-shaped platform suspended 80 feet in the air, from which he and six other performers were to dive in a dramatic rescue scene. Below him were live fire pits capable of shooting flames, and water spouts that could flood and drain the plateau on demand.
“We thought very carefully about designing the show so that it could have a life after the Shed,” he said, adding that producers from London, Paris, Beijing and Berlin were among those expected to attend its four-week run.
On the plateau, the technician, who wore a controller around his neck the size of a 12-pack, flipped a switch and hoisted Xavier aloft: 15 feet, 30 feet, 50 feet.
“Whaat!” Xavier shouted, weightless and grinning with delight, as the rope pulled him high above the stage, above his castmates, above everything.
Whether the show would ultimately live up to its lofty ambitions remained to be seen. But, for this moment at least, none of that mattered — he could fly.
