Style|Slack Wants to Replace Email. Is That What We Want?
Slack Wants to Replace Email. Is That What We Want?
As the office chat start-up prepares to go public, some of us are still figuring out how available we want to be — and whether it’s O.K. to ping the C.E.O.
Slack is coming for your job. The workplace chat company, valued at more than $7 billion at the time of its last funding round, is going public this week. It claims to already have more than 10 million daily users and, in its listing prospectus, bills itself as the answer to bloated inboxes everywhere.
This is all very exciting, if you’re Slack. But most of us aren’t quite there yet. The company says in its prospectus that, as of Jan. 31, it had 88,000 paying corporate customers — “including more than 65 companies in the Fortune 100.” By the end of April, Slack reported, that number had grown to 95,000. While some of these accounts have thousands of users, this still reaches a sliver of the world’s desk and phone-bound office workers.
Speaking of Google, the company has a Slack alternative of its own, called Hangouts Chat, as does Facebook, in Workplace. Microsoft has Teams, which is bundled with its Office software and which the company says is being used by more than 500,000 organizations. This multi-front attack on email is just beginning, but a wartime narrative already dominates: The universally despised office culture of replies and forwards and mass CCs and “looping in” and “circling back” is on its way out, and it’s going to be replaced by chat apps. So what happens if they actually win?
A workplace does not simply start using Slack. It is not “adopted” in the manner of a new system for expenses, or a new video meeting app. Slack arrives like word of a new office space, or a coming restructuring. Slack is where and how work gets done.
I put out a call for stories from post-chat workplaces, and some replies were indistinguishable from the company’s own case studies. For the right office, it’s a huge relief to chat. “I know for the engineering team it’s a game-changer,” said Shannon Todesca, an employee at CarGurus, an automotive shopping site. “It’s used to keep track of code pushes,” she said, as well as system errors. Workers also report dentist appointments and sick days to the #ooo (out of office) channel, preventing inboxes from getting clogged, or an early heads-up from getting lost.
At Automattic, which runs Wordpress.com and a handful of smaller internet services, Slack is the glue that binds a fully remote “virtual office” of nearly 1,000 employees living in dozens of different countries and working on vastly different products.
But messaging the C.E.O. is a whole other thing — just ask Jim Bankoff, the chief executive of Vox Media, where employees were given a way to ask anonymous questions in Slack rooms. (That is no longer the case.) And while everyone whose work involves sending and receiving a lot of emails can tell you about co-workers with different email styles — efficient, obnoxious, absentee — in a workplace chat, which unfolds in real time, your style isn’t just a few of your memorable habits or linguistic tics. It’s you, represented in real time.
Is Faster Really Better?
Slack reduces email, and email is bad, and so therefore it must follow that Slack is good. Furnishing a considerable tailwind to this marketing pitch is that people really do resent their email. Don’t you?
Email, the paper suggested, had actually become an “interpretive scapegoat for the workers’ perceptions that they were expected to do more than they could reasonably accomplish in a day.” Email itself was new and required adjustment. It also provided a “culturally sanctioned rhetoric of complaint about overload as well as a tangible ritual for regaining control: to cope with overload, trim your inbox.” Complaining about work might be risky. But email? Even your manager complains about that.
But with Slack, there is no perfect equivalent to inbox zero; an instant message from your boss during the day might demand not just a quick response, but an instant one; it will be up to us, but mainly our bosses, to establish what a late-night Slack message means or demands, as compared to an email, and what noise or vibration it should cause in the phone that many of us have moved closer to our beds.
Any suggestion that Slack is purely empowering must also take into account that it is, ultimately, a tool paid for by employers, and which grants them full power within it: to set rules; to observe or surveil their employees; to set norms anew, or to change norms that have evolved in ways they don’t appreciate.
Among the small but meaningful technical features of Slack is the ability it provides, by default, to any user to create a new space for talking. An office with a vibrant email culture might spawn long casual threads, or email groups, but Slack’s tendency to produce endless breakout rooms, with varying degrees of perceived privacy, has fostered unexpected results. At The New York Times, employees have used Slack to create spaces which give rise to collaboration about, as well as internal criticism of, the company’s news coverage. Sometimes these discussions are elevated to management, while other discussions are surely observed by management.
For employees raised online, Slack looks and feels like a place to socialize. I grew up chatting with friends online and still do, sometimes in scattered Slack rooms. I have also spent the last 10 years at companies where work chat was the norm and observed the arrival of Slack with both relief and suspicion. Finally, a better work chat app. Then: Oh god, this is really how people are going to work, now?
Despite its emphasis to clients on increasing productivity and reducing waste, Slack doesn’t just blur the boundary between work and play. In some cases, it has also helped foster workplace collaboration of a particular and powerful sort.
At the online publication Slate, two decades of email culture quickly gave way to a companywide Slack in 2014, which splintered into channels for discussing everything from day-to-day business concerns to embryonic ideas. “There’s a higher bar for sending an email than there is for sending a message on Slack,” L.V. Anderson, an employee at the time of the software’s introduction, wrote in an email. Senior staffers were more comfortable starting office-wide discussions over email. “Slack felt more democratic and more welcoming,” she said.
There were dozens of rooms. Among them was #slate-millennial: a self-aware half-joke but also, in time, a space to talk openly about the concerns of younger staffers. “From the beginning, I think the channel felt like a safe space for mild grousing about management, power dynamics and subtle inequities in the workplace,” Ms. Anderson said. A Slack discussion about sharing salaries led to the creation of a shared document, which led to further conversations about inequity.
Talk of unionizing, beginning in 2016 and spurred by a new hire, Tommy Craggs, started offline. Early recruitment leaned on Google Talk. When the effort started gaining steam and fostering major internal debate, it was back to Slack.
“It was the only platform that was easily accessible to everyone in the potential bargaining unit,” Ms. Anderson said. This room would be called #comrades, and it would be private. There was a round of layoffs in 2017; remaining pro-union staffers opened a new Slack, fully separate from Slate’s. The staff — by now minus Mr. Craggs and Ms. Anderson — voted to unionize in early 2018 and spent the next year fighting for a contract.
As negotiations became tense, in late 2018, the union members voted to authorize a strike — by not working on Slack. “Today, Slate’s union is conducting an hourlong Slack strike to express our unity and commitment to what we’re asking for at the table,” the union tweeted in November. The move was met with teasing coverage. It was also followed by a vote to authorize a full strike. By January, they had a contract.