Seven people were killed and three others injured after a pickup truck collided with a group of motorcyclists on a rural two-lane highway in New Hampshire on Friday night, the New Hampshire State Police said.
“I don’t know that I’ve ever seen a crash with this much loss of life,” Capt. Chris Vetter said at a news conference on Friday night.
The motorcyclists were riding east on Route 2 in Randolph, N.H., about 100 miles northeast of Concord, when the pickup truck, a 2016 Dodge 2500, swerved over the yellow line and “jackknifed” into the motorcyclists’ lane around 6:30 p.m., said Jerry Hamanne, the owner of the Inn at Bowman Bed and Breakfast. The inn, where several of the motorcyclists were staying, was about 1,000 yards from the scene of the crash, he said.
The identities of the victims were not publicly released pending notification of their relatives.
Two of those injured were taken to Androscoggin Valley Hospital in Berlin, N.H. One person was discharged and the other was taken to a tertiary-care center, hospital officials said. Information on the condition of the third injured person was unavailable.
At a news conference on Saturday, the authorities said the driver of the pickup truck was a 23-year-old man. His identity could not be confirmed. Officials said that the driver lived in West Springfield, Mass., and that he was the only occupant of the truck. No charges had been filed as of Saturday.
Mr. Hamanne said he heard the pickup truck explode and could see smoke from his inn. He said he searched the inn to see if any of the guests were doctors. He found one and set out to the crash site.
He said he saw other drivers get out of their cars with blankets and run to the motorcyclists to help the injured.
The motorcyclists were in the area a week after they had attended the Laconia Motorcycle Week rally. Mr. Hamanne said that the motorcyclists would come once a year in June, and that the group in the crash was made up of Marine Corps veterans.
Mr. St. Clair said the motorcyclists involved in the crash were part of a group called the Jarheads.
The motorcyclists were headed to a charity event at an American Legion in Gorham, N.H., when the crash occurred, according to a GoFundMe page created by the Jarheads.