LONDON — Flying the giant Trump baby balloon once again, Britons protesting President Trump’s state visit tried to bring central London to a standstill on Tuesday with demonstrations that they hoped would draw large crowds throughout the day.
But the turnout fell below expectations and the volume of the protests during Mr. Trump’s first visit in July, suggesting that the passions that drove hundreds of thousands into the streets then have now cooled somewhat.
Though not, perhaps, among those who showed up on Tuesday.
“Stop Racism, Stop Trump,” one placard read.
“Climate change is real, your tan is not,” read another.
Ruby Lawson, a reflexologist, expressed disgust that her country would put on such a lavish affair, including a state banquet, for a figure as unpopular in Britain as Mr. Trump.
The balloon mocking President Trump was released over Parliament Square in London on Tuesday. It appeared during Mr. Trump’s last visit to Britain and has since become a symbol in similar demonstrations.
The Trump baby balloon, which made its debut during Mr. Trump’s last visit, depicts him as a scowling baby wearing a diaper and holding a smartphone.
With Prime Minister Theresa May set to step down on Friday, her party will be thrust into a leadership contest, which could create further turmoil in the government and hinder its attempts to agree on a Brexit deal with the European Union.
When asked why the turnout was much lower than the demonstration held during Mr. Trump’s last visit, some protesters blamed the weather — a steady rain — while others said people were suffering from politics fatigue.
For the protests on Tuesday, buses had delivered demonstrators to London from at least 15 other British cities. And many Britons have registered their dissatisfaction with Mr. Trump in other venues.
An online petition opposing his state visit received almost 1.9 million signatures; John Bercow, the speaker of the House of Commons, barred him from addressing Parliament; and a recent YouGov poll found that 67 percent of respondents held a negative opinion of him, while 21 percent reported approval.
To avoid the protests during his last visit, Mr. Trump largely stayed away from London. But this year, Queen Elizabeth II welcomed the president for an official state visit, which included ceremonies, government meetings and a banquet hosted at Buckingham Palace.
The main protest Tuesday, named Together Against Trump, began at Trafalgar Square. Demonstrators then marched toward the prime minister’s residence, at 10 Downing Street, where the president met with Mrs. May and held a news conference.
He hailed the crowds that gathered outside Downing Street as a “wonderful mosaic of diversity and inclusion.” Mr. Corbyn had declined to attend the state banquet with Mr. Trump on Monday night; on Tuesday his party confirmed that the president had rejected Mr. Corbyn’s request to meet.
“I am not refusing to meet anybody — I want to be able to have that dialogue to bring about the better and more peaceful world that we all want to live in,” Mr. Corbyn said.
Some demonstrators had threatened to throw milkshakes at the president, part of a recent trend in protesting right-wing politicians, but they were not able to get close enough to throw anything at Mr. Trump: He opted to travel by helicopter during his visit, and the British police set up barriers in front of all the venues he would be attending.
Organizers of the demonstrations said the main themes of the protest were Mr. Trump’s politics, climate change and the rights of migrants, women, L.G.B.T. people and unions.
“Donald Trump is an open racist and sexist, a volatile and dangerous character who seems set on taking the West into further wars,” said Maz Saleem, an activist and member of the Stand Up to Trump protest group.
Smaller protests were organized outside Buckingham Palace to coincide with the state banquet on Monday, and another demonstration has been organized for Wednesday in the southern city of Portsmouth, where Mr. Trump is scheduled to attend events commemorating the 75th anniversary of D-Day.