He was just 4 months old when he was sent to live with a foster family as his father was detained and ultimately deported.
A new TV series from The New York Times, bringing unparalleled journalism to the screen.
The youngest known child taken from his parents at the U.S.-Mexico border was a 4-month-old baby named Constantin Mutu. While he was sent to Michigan to live with a foster family, his father was sent to a detention facility and ultimately deported to Romania, uncertain when he would see his son again.
Caitlin Dickerson, an immigration correspondent for The Times, found Constantin, one of thousands of children separated under the Trump administration’s “zero-tolerance” border policy. In the latest episode of “The Weekly,” she reveals how he spent five tumultuous months away from those who loved him most.
Are you happy, happy? This is Constantin Mutu. Five months of his life were documented through these images. At just four months old, he was taken from his father at the United States border, making him the youngest child to be separated by the Trump administration. But there were thousands of children separated like him. Hi, thanks for calling back. My name is Caitlin Dickerson. I’m a national immigration reporter for The New York Times. And you need that to give credence to the report, right? Constantin’s separation took place at the same time I was reporting on family separations at the U.S. border. I’m going to tell you how my reporting helped to uncover one of the Trump administration’s most contentious policies. and how that policy altered one infant’s life.
As they watched the episode on Sunday night, Caitlin, Sweta and the episode’s associate producer Madeline Rosenberg shared their experiences reporting on Constantin’s journey, his family’s struggle in Romania and how the foster family in Michigan cared for him for five months. Send our team your questions with #TheWeeklyNYT, and join the conversation about @theweekly on Twitter and Instagram.
Constantin Mutu is 20 months old and still can’t walk on his own or talk. For weeks after he returned to Romania, he was fussy and had trouble sleeping. His mother, Florentina, asked his foster mother for advice on how to soothe Constantin, including what to feed him when he was upset.
Vasile and Florentina Mutu received medical treatment for physical and emotional harm they say they experienced as a result of their separation from Constantin. The Mutus are pursuing a claim for damages against the United States.
Constantin’s parents, Vasile and Florentina Mutu, left their home in Romania with two of their five children in early 2018 for Mexico, with plans to seek asylum in the United States.
They lost each other in Mexico. After U.S. border agents apprehended Vasile and baby Constantin in Texas, his wife and their 4-year-old son returned to Romania from Mexico.
Vasile, who had a criminal record, said he was pressed to drop his request for asylum.
Constantin was one of thousands of children separated from their families at the border under the administration’s immigration policy. As President Trump bowed to pressure and signed an executive order haltng separations, a judge acceded to a lawsuit seeking to reunite families, paving the way for Constantin’s return to Romania.
Caitlin tracked Constantin’s case for “The Weekly,” going to Michigan to visit with the family charged with caring for Constantin, and traveling to Romania to see the Mutus.
Caitlin first came across information about a 4-month-old baby in a federal court document, which indicated the baby’s age and the father’s status as deported. However, there was no name and no country of origin for the child. Caitlin began calling immigration lawyers and advocates, and finally confirmed that he was indeed the youngest child known to have been separated from his family. Several months later, she learned that he had been in Michigan, and contacted his pro bono legal representatives. This was how she found Constantin Mutu.
This is Constantin Mutu’s family in May 2019, outside of their home in Olteni, Romania. Nicolas Mutu, in the blue shirt, traveled with his father, Vasile; his mother, Florentina; and his baby brother, Constantin, to Mexico, where the family had planned to cross the U.S. border. Ultimately, Nicolas and Florentina never did.
Vasile Mutu, Constantin’s father, told us that he couldn’t sleep, refused to eat and constantly wept while he was in a detention facility. At one point, he said, an officer offered to make a video call to Constantin if Vasile ate a sandwich. That was the first time he would see Constantin after officials took the baby away from him.
Constantin’s foster family was extremely nervous to speak to us, but they felt that Constantin’s story was too important to keep quiet. When they sat down with us, the foster dad said, “I hope you have a lot of time, because we have a lot to say.” The interview lasted four hours.
Follow Caitlin’s reporting on immigration policies for The Times.
Last year, Caitlin helped to uncover one of the Trump administration’s most contentious border policies. New data reviewed by The Times showed that more than 700 migrant children had been taken from adults claiming to be their parents at the border since October. Before then, officials declined to give data on how many families were separated, but suggested that the number was relatively low.
