Technology|Would You Pay $30 a Month to Check Your Email?
One of Silicon Valley’s buzziest start-ups, Superhuman, is betting its app’s shiny features are worth a premium price.
The year is 2019, and the brainy engineers of Silicon Valley are hunkered down, working on transformative, next-generation technologies like self-driving cars, digital currencies and quantum computing.
Meanwhile, the buzziest start-up in San Francisco is … an expensive email app?
Last month, Superhuman raised a $33 million investment round, led by Mr. Andreessen’s firm, Andreessen Horowitz. That valued the company at roughly $260 million — a steep valuation for an app with fewer than 15,000 customers, but one apparently justified by the company’s trajectory and its support among fans, which borders on evangelical.
When I first heard about Superhuman, I was skeptical. Didn’t Google already solve email? How could any start-up get away with charging a premium for something that was already available free? I suspected that it might be a Veblen good, a term economists use for luxury products that primarily function as status symbols for the rich.
But I was curious, so I spent several weeks testing it out. And it turns out that the hype is mostly justified, at least if you’re the kind of person who can spend $30 a month to get your inbox in order.
Signing up for Superhuman is not easy. First, you fill out a long questionnaire about your email habits and work flow. Then, if you’re approved for access, there’s a mandatory session in which a representative gives you a videoconference tutorial. In my case, Mr. Vohra spent a full hour teaching me how to use the app’s features. Superhuman, which plugs into your existing email account, works with only Gmail and Google G Suite addresses for now, but the company plans to expand to other providers soon.
These features will appeal most to power users who spend most of their day typing on a laptop or desktop. (Superhuman has a mobile app, but much of the heavy-duty functionality requires a keyboard.) Mr. Vohra said the app was targeted at people who spend three or more hours a day checking their email.
Superhuman promises to help V.I.P.s get through their inboxes twice as fast. Partly, that’s because every command has a keyboard shortcut, so a busy power broker never has to waste precious seconds reaching for the mouse. And partly it’s because the app itself is built for speed — it stores information locally in a user’s browser rather than retrieving it from Google’s servers, which cuts down on the time required to surf between emails.
But with Superhuman, I bushwhacked through my unread emails in less than an hour, eventually reaching a kind of dissociative flow state. Invitation to a blockchain-themed happy hour? Hit ⌘-; to insert a “snippet,” a canned reply politely declining. Newsletter from a hotel I stayed at once in 2014? Hit ⌘-U to unsubscribe. It made checking my email feel less like doing work and more like speed-running a video game in which the object is to annoy as few people as possible.
It’s strange, on one level, to think about my email at all. For years, email felt like a remnant of an earlier technological era that was fading into obsolescence. Workplace chat apps like Slack sold themselves to large corporations as “email killers,” and messaging apps replaced email as many people’s primary inboxes.
Yet email lives. In fact, it’s thriving. Nearly 300 billion emails are sent and received every day, according to Radicati, a research firm that studies messaging trends. Even if half of those are spam, that’s an enormous amount of communication taking place on a decades-old system.
Part of email’s enduring appeal is that it is, at least in theory, manageable. Unlike chat apps, which interrupt you throughout the day, or social media feeds, which are sorted and ranked by algorithms, email is asynchronous and user controlled. It can be compartmentalized and scheduled. It fits into your day, rather than taking it over. And despite the spam, marketing fluff and occasional reply-all nightmare that lands in my inbox, it’s still a decent place to get work done.
Mr. Vohra, who previously founded another email start-up, Rapportive, which was sold to LinkedIn in 2012, thinks that email will dominate our lives for years to come.
“It’s the only thing that’s owned by the company, uniquely identifies you, and allows you to correspond both internally and across companies,” he said.
The 800-pound gorilla of email, of course, is Gmail. The 15-year-old service has 1.5 billion users and Google’s bottomless resources. If it wanted to, it could simply copy all of Superhuman’s features and offer them free. But Mr. Vohra doesn’t think that’s very likely.
“It’s not in Google’s DNA to build premium tooling for relatively small numbers of people,” he said.
As a journalist who gets a fair bit of email, I’m one of those people, and I liked Superhuman more than I expected to. After a few weeks of testing, the worst thing I can say about it is that the idea of giving a start-up access to my emails is unnerving. Superhuman says it does not store any user emails on its servers; still, users are required to grant the app full access to their email accounts, which may dissuade some privacy hawks.
In truth, Superhuman’s biggest obstacle may be that most people aren’t power emailers. For the average person, a super-premium email experience would be worth the cost only if it automatically read and wrote messages for you, scheduled all your meetings, ordered your lunch and filed your taxes.
But if you are the kind of ultrabusy email hound who can shell out $30 a month — or, better yet, expense it — it’s worth getting behind the velvet rope and seeing what life is like for the inbox 1 percent.
