State lawmakers should pass a bill that would cut greenhouse gas emissions and help poor communities.
Ms. McGhee is an activist for racial justice; Mr. McKibben is working to end the use of fossil fuels.
Luz Velez became a climate change activist because she almost lost her life to pollution-related illnesses. Living near a major freight trucking hub in Buffalo, she has suffered from multiple, potentially deadly respiratory ailments.
She was there with the community-based organization PUSH Buffalo to demand that the Democratic-controlled State Legislature pass the Climate and Community Protection Act, sponsored by Assemblyman Steve Englebright and Senator Todd Kaminsky, both from Long Island, before the legislative session is scheduled to end on Wednesday.
From fires to hurricanes to floods, the climate crisis is now affecting tens of millions of people in the United States — most recently striking hard at farm communities flooded on the Great Plains. But for working-class communities of color like Ms. Velez’s, fossil fuel pollution is part of daily life, day after day over decades and across generations. The result is that climate change is all the more acutely felt in these communities; the response must be to prioritize these same communities in climate policy. The proposed legislation is a bold expression of this idea, which is why we agree with many climate and social justice advocates that winning its passage is the most important climate policy fight nationally in the 2020 political cycle.
The Climate and Community Protection Act is a strong bill, arguably the strongest proposal of its kind in the country, and would set New York on a path to eliminating 100 percent of its greenhouse gas emissions, with a legally mandated 85 percent reduction economywide, by 2050. The small fraction of remaining emissions would be subject to strong regulatory approvals and environmental justice protections for the mainly urban communities that would most likely to bear the brunt of these continuing emissions. Ultimately, the state must aim to get to zero emissions on the fastest timeline possible.
Toward that end, the proposal now moving forward would require that a minimum of 35 percent of the state’s clean energy funds, which are from utility ratepayers and other sources, must be invested for the benefit of environmentally vulnerable low-income communities. In the current fiscal year, that would have amounted to about $370 million for improvements like energy-efficiency upgrades and residential solar power in poor communities.
Investments to achieve the bill’s emissions goals would create an estimated 200,000 jobs over the first decade. No other state climate policy we are aware of comes close to this proposal’s integration of climate, racial equity and job creation goals.
As the process goes forward this week, we want to underscore the organizing principle, and political lesson, of this legislation: Tackling climate change and remedying racial injustice, are, increasingly, one and the same fight. Embracing this truth in our coalition-building, advocacy and political strategy is how we can win the fight.
But it’s the details of Luz Velez’s story that bring us back to what really matters in the climate fight. Her health was affected not just by air pollution in her neighborhood but by years of living in a home that had mold, that was not insulated and that she couldn’t afford to fix. Then she connected with PUSH Buffalo’s Warm and Dry program for a comprehensive home remediation. “With the repairs made I went from four doctors down to two, and from 12 meds to four,” Ms. Velez said.
The PUSH Buffalo program reaches about 20 households a year, a fraction of the need on the West Side of Buffalo, where Ms. Velez lives and where 70 percent of its Latinx residents, 50 percent of its black residents and 14 percent of homeowners live near or below the poverty line.
This is an example of why climate policy needs the kind of equity investment that would be required by the Climate and Community Protection Act. With a budget of just $30 million, which reaches only about 9,000 housing units annually, New York’s state’s main program for low-income energy efficiency can barely begin to meet the needs of low-income people across the state. There are about 1.3 million low-income households in New York, with one-third in housing built before 1940, which tends to be the least efficient, the most unhealthy, and the most expensive to repair.
New York’s Legislature should approve passage of the strongest possible plan, and Governor Cuomo should sign it. There is so much at stake for the natural world and humanity’s place within it, but, as leaders collaborating across our respective fields of racial justice and climate advocacy, we recognize that winning on climate means fighting for equity and justice with equal force and commitment. That is exactly the opportunity now before New York’s elected leaders, and now is the time to act.
