Readers assess Minneapolis’s groundbreaking plan to end single-family zoning.
Simple, yes. But this experiment deregulating every single-family zoned parcel to allow small apartments has attracted developers, investors and speculators to snatch up the least expensive houses for demolition. This simple plan has consigned Minneapolis to gentrification on steroids.
Minneapolis has created a new market for the destruction of small houses in decent neighborhoods. The people seeking traction in the economy and climbing the ladder into the middle class understand the concept of building equity in a home and that there is no more certain form of rent control than a 30-year mortgage. Their housing choices are being demolished and replaced with investor-owned rentals.
Brilliant? This urban experiment has unintended consequences.
The writer is a land use attorney and planner.
Lifestyle improvements help tip the scales in favor of urban density. As a 32-year-old millennial and resident of the Whittier neighborhood in south Minneapolis, I am a huge proponent of Minneapolis 2040, the plan to eliminate single-family housing throughout the city. Encouraging development and reducing single-family homes makes a tangible difference in the environment, commuting, racial disparities in homeownership, transportation, sustainability, job creation, social justice, etc.
However, I think key to the proposal and its successful adoption by the larger community is that all of our lifestyles also get to improve. We can tackle discriminatory housing practices and have more cafes, grocery stores, boutiques, salons, gyms and amenities. More density means we all get more. We don’t have to pit doing the right thing against doing what helps us as individuals. We can have our cake and eat it, too.
As a longtime resident of Minneapolis and a homeowner and property tax payer for more than 55 years, forgive me if I offer a curmudgeon’s alternative assessment of our local housing issues.
Contrary to Mayor Jacob Frey’s assessment, Minneapolis has always been a vibrant and diverse community. We did not need the millennials to announce it. No one disputes the need for more affordable housing. But the current trend in my city is toward building more luxury apartments.
Families who need affordable housing and cannot find it will leave, if things do not change. This exodus may include — sadly — many of our newly arrived and hopeful neighbors.
Although your editorial speaks to the lack of affordable housing in urban areas, much the same can be said for the suburbs. My community of single-family homes on one- and two-acre lots, like many others, suffers from a lack of affordable dwelling units, which has the consequence — intended or unintended — of discouraging racial, socioeconomic and generational diversity.
While there have been some halfhearted and largely defensive attempts to address this issue, we have yet to form a consensus that a more diverse population is a benefit to be embraced and encouraged rather than shunned. The fault lies largely in the way we zone and plan (or fail to plan) for growth and development, with the primary goal of perpetuating an almost entirely white, privileged past.
Those who advocate for change are invariably met with loud and organized resistance in the guise of “preservation” and protecting property values. We all need to recognize that affordable housing is a basic need in a compassionate society, and that the barriers you identify affect smaller communities as well as urban centers.
As a builder battling daily on the front lines, I can personally attest that the nation is in the midst of a housing affordability crisis. While increasing the production of quality, affordable housing must be a top national priority, building more homes requires solving supply-side constraints.
Regulatory barriers, rising impact fees, a limited supply of land, a shortage of construction workers, strict zoning policies, and tariffs on lumber and other building materials are driving up costs and making it increasingly difficult for builders to produce homes that are affordable and meet the needs of increasingly diverse households.
There is no single answer, as neither the public nor the private sector can meet the challenge alone. Together, they must seek and implement innovative solutions that enable more families to achieve homeownership or have access to suitable rental housing.
Addressing the housing affordability crisis and supporting new residential construction will enhance the economic competitiveness of our metro markets, create inclusive communities and boost the local tax base.
The writer is chairman of the National Association of Home Builders.
Minneapolis has been allowing for it, and so far there is no evidence that increasing housing density results in affordability. In fact, recent construction appears to deliver quite the opposite. In the Uptown area where I live, monthly rents range from $1,000 for a tiny studio to $1,950 for a small one-bedroom apartment.
Key issues are not addressed in the Minneapolis plan: What will affordable housing cost (as a renter and a home buyer)? What will it look like? How is it constructed and by whom (government, developers or public-private partnerships)? For whom is it designed (singles, couples, families, seniors)? What demographic, economic and employment trends inform the plan’s direction?
These are the questions every city should be asking. The Minneapolis “plan” is sorely deficient on answers.
Zoning for greater density is a critical first step in making our communities more inclusive. But zoning reform alone is insufficient for addressing America’s affordable housing crisis.
In the last half of the 20th century, American cities encouraged greater public participation in the housing permitting process. On its face, neighborhood participation is laudable. In practice, it has empowered an unrepresentative group of older, white homeowners to dominate land use proceedings, overwhelmingly in opposition to the construction of new housing.
Policymakers interested in building more housing must also take a tough look at the public participation process that skews power to privileged landowners.
The writers are professors of political science at Boston University.
The reality is that there are not enough housing options available to meet the needs of America’s changing demographic. Today, single people living alone comprise 28 percent of all households. By 2035, there will be more people over the age of 65 than under 18. It’s time for cities to re-evaluate the needs of their residents and create the appropriate zoning to allow housing to be built that meets those needs.
The writer is director of AARP Livable Communities.