Opinion|What if We All Just Sold Non-Creepy Advertising?
The big ad-tech companies know how to sell ads without damaging privacy, but they choose not to.
Mr. Weinberg is the chief executive and founder of DuckDuckGo, a search engine and web browser company.
It’s easy to see tech companies as a monolithic villain in the battle over consumer privacy. But in fact, there are countless tech companies, like mine, that believe that people have a fundamental right to avoid being put under surveillance and that it should be easy for them to exercise that right. By contrast, it is the big ad-tech companies — especially Facebook and Google — that do not want to make it easy for consumers to avoid profiling, because their business models rely on it. They are resisting change to other proven models of advertising, even though other companies are showing that it works.
This distinction between Big Ad Tech and everyone else in tech is important to keep in mind as policymakers consider new regulations intended to protect consumers’ privacy. Executives of these big companies may individually make public statements welcoming federal regulation, but in practice they are doing everything they can to weaken existing laws and shape new ones in their own interests. This strategy is very obvious to the rest of us in the tech industry. And it’s essential to get these privacy laws right today, so that people have the opportunity to opt out of online tracking now.
Groups like the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, which has board members from several big tech companies, are lobbying in Washington for similar ad-tech exemptions federally, as The Verge has reported. They argue that strong privacy laws would hurt the digital ad market, create high costs for businesses and curb innovation.
These are all weak arguments. There is no reason to fear that sites cannot still make money with advertising. That’s because there are already two kinds of highly profitable online ads: contextual ads, based on the content being shown on screen, and behavioral ads, based on personal data collected about the person viewing the ad. Behavioral ads work by tracking your online behavior and compiling a profile about you using your internet activities (and even your offline activities in some cases) to send you targeted ads.
In fact, Google search advertising began and still largely operates this way. When you enter a search request in Google, it displays ads that are relevant to that particular search, without needing to collect information about your search, location, purchase or browsing history. However, Google still collects all this information because it also powers non-search behavioral ads across the whole internet, on more than two million websites and apps that use Google’s ad services and on Google’s non-search properties, such as YouTube. Once people are allowed to opt out of behavioral advertising, then online ads for those who do can go back to being more like non-creepy contextual search ads.
And if there is anything stifling innovation in Silicon Valley, it is the dominance of Big Ad Tech, wrought by the surveillance capitalism business model. When contextual advertising regains prominence, more companies will be able to compete against Facebook’s and Google’s ad networks because they won’t need huge troves of personal data to do so. Additionally, strong privacy laws will spur innovations to help companies use data in a privacy-respecting manner. In some fields, such as services that help businesses analyze how people use their sites, this innovation and resurgence of competition has already begun.
Gabriel Weinberg is the chief executive and founder of DuckDuckGo, a search engine and web browser company.
Like other media companies, The Times collects data on its visitors when they read stories like this one. For more detail please see our privacy policy and our publisher's description of The Times's practices and continued steps to increase transparency and protections. Follow @privacyproject on Twitter and The New York Times Opinion Section on Facebook and Instagram.
