Readers are critical of U.S. talk of retaliation after the tankers attack and discuss Iran’s threatened violation of the nuclear deal.
It is no surprise that Iran may pull out of the nuclear deal. What else can we expect? President Trump pulled the United States out of the agreement, even though all other signers continued to support it and the international community and all other evidence indicated that Iran was in full compliance.
The United States imposed greater sanctions on Iran and threatened other countries that dealt with Iran. Whether or not Iran attacked the tankers, the United States has lost all credibility: Under Mr. Trump, it does not honor its agreements. Its word cannot be trusted.
In this post-truth, post-fact, post-civility Trump world, the American public and the international community can no longer rely on anything coming from this White House, which represents America. That’s a pretty scary situation.
Bret Stephens writes that an appropriate set of consequences is called for to hold the Iranians accountable for their Gulf of Oman mischief. Who appointed us regional constable? I’m nearly 60, and we have been involved in military action somewhere in the world for nearly my entire life, and I’m sick and tired of it.
Sick and tired also of the current president popping off about annihilating adversaries and whole countries. Sick and tired of the money wasted on military spending higher than that of other major countries combined. Sick and tired of the bellicose ranting from politicians who have never worn the uniform.
Iran is no doubt a nuisance, but we instigated the problem over 60 years ago by helping to overthrow a democratically elected government and putting the shah in power. We blame other countries for meddling? We ourselves meddle often, with consequences we later regret. We are part of the problem.
Even if Iran did attack two oil tankers, which is far from proven, what has it to do with the United States? They are not American ships and they were not in American waters. It should be taken up by the United Nations, which was created to avoid conflicts like this.
I have no reason to believe either Iran’s denial or President Trump’s accusations regarding the attacks on the tankers. What I do know is that American imports of OPEC oil are at a 30-year low. European and Asian nations have far more at stake here than the United States. And if we take military action we will not be fighting for democracy or freedom but for a polluting energy source that we increasingly no longer need. This is not our fight.
