A former paratrooper died after being restrained by guards in Pennsylvania. His body showed signs of violence, and his organs have not been returned after an autopsy.
Everett Palmer Jr. died last year in a jail cell in York County, Pa., after being arrested on an old drunken driving charge.
The only certainty the family of Everett Palmer Jr. has — after months of demanding answers — is that he was alive when he was sent to York County Prison and that he was dead 48 hours later.
But what happened to Mr. Palmer during two days in solitary confinement at the Pennsylvania lockup remains a mystery.
When his body arrived at a funeral home, it showed troubling signs: Mr. Palmer’s head had been badly damaged and a ring of black and purple bruises ran around his neck, according to the funeral director, who was the first to see the remains.
“I think he was murdered,” Mr. Palmer’s mother, Rose Palmer, said as she choked back tears last week at the Maranatha Baptist Church in Queens Village, near the family’s home.
The Pennsylvania State Police and the York County district attorney will say only that the death, first reported by The York Daily Record, is still under investigation.
Adding to the Palmer family’s grief and confusion, the former soldier’s brain, heart and throat — perhaps holding clues that could shed light on how he died — still have not been returned after the autopsy.
On Monday, his mother and six siblings filed a motion in a Pennsylvania court seeking to compel testimony from the guards and others involved, as well as to gain access to evidence, including a video of Mr. Palmer’s final moments.
But how he died in custody and why the authorities seem reluctant to release their findings remain the bigger mystery.
Though the York County Coroner’s Office has said it could not say for sure how Mr. Palmer died, an independent forensic expert hired by Mr. Palmer’s family offered a different verdict: homicide, involving physical restraint under police custody.
One contributing factor in his death was methamphetamine intoxication, pathologists for the family and the coroner’s office agree, raising questions about how he obtained drugs while confined alone and stripped of his belongings.
The official autopsy report’s inconclusive findings help “law enforcement avoid the appropriate scrutiny of their actions,” Mr. Merritt said.
David Sunday, the York County district attorney, said he could not provide information about “ongoing investigations.” Ryan Tarkowski, a spokesman for the Pennsylvania State Police, also declined to comment, saying the investigation is open.
Mark Walters, a spokesman for York County, said that evidence in the case has not been made public because investigators have not completed their work.
Pamela Gay, who leads the York County Coroner’s Office, said that Mr. Palmer’s organs would be released to the family once the inquiry is over.
Mr. Palmer, a 41-year-old father of two, was a brawny paratrooper turned fitness trainer who most recently lived in Seaford, Del. He had been taking medication for post-traumatic stress disorder, his relatives said.
Mr. Palmer’s family said he was on his way to New York on April 7, 2018, to see his mother, who was about to have an operation. He had been hoping to stop in Lancaster, Pa., to resolve an outstanding warrant. A year and a half earlier, he been arrested in rural York County on charges of drunken driving.
But instead of resolving the case and continuing with his trip, he was arrested by the Lancaster police and detained on $5,000 bail, the family said.
When Mr. Palmer arrived at the York County jail, he was agitated and “rambling,” and talked about having suicidal thoughts, the autopsy report said. He was placed on suicide watch in a single-person cell and medical staff checked on him multiple times.

An officer ordered him to lie down and put his arms behind his back, the report said. When Mr. Palmer failed to comply, an officer used a Taser on him — twice. Five officers then entered his cell, and a 23-minute scuffle ensued. Mr. Palmer kicked and bit the officers who tried to pin him down.
“The officers secured the decedent by various physical control techniques including securing his midsection and lower extremities, securing his hand by applying handcuffs to his wrists,” the report read.
A hood intended to stop him from biting was placed over his head. “The officers lifted him out of the cell and into the restraint chair and applied the lap belt, leg restraints and hand restraints,” the report said.
The report confirmed the existence of security camera video of the incident. But the coroner wrote that the “video footage of events inside the decedent’s cell did not give a clear picture” of everything the officers did to restrain Mr. Palmer.
Mr. Palmer was taken first to the jail infirmary, then to York Hospital, where he was pronounced dead before 6 a.m. on April 9, the report said.
Zhongxue Hua, the forensic pathologist hired by the family, came to a similar conclusion about the cause of death, but said Mr. Palmer would not have died had he not been violently restrained.
Mrs. Palmer, the mother, said she had not slept well for over a year.
