Joe Biden is suited, floating in a black void of stage, sitting cross-legged across from a glamorous woman in a striking red jacket, speaking to an invisible crowd. “The younger generation now tells me how tough things are,” he says. “Give me a break. No, no, I have no empathy for it. Give me a break. Because here’s the deal, guys: We decided we were going to change the world. And we did.” He delivers the line in high avuncular style, stating an opinion with the tone and cadence of a meaningful story. The crowd, whoever they are, laughs. They’re not the “guys” being told what the “deal” is. Those people are somewhere else.
The clip is from 2018. Seen in context and with maximum generosity, Biden seems to be saying that there have been riskier times to agitate for change — he mentions Kent State — and that people did it anyway. But to many members of “the younger generation,” who circulate this quote whenever Biden says something they see as dismissive, this is an out-of-touch Biden caught red-handed, demeaning them in their absence. Their cohort, they point out, is quantitatively worse off than its parents were, facing down not just uncertainty about the future but, in 2019, a raging gerontocracy doing everything in its considerable power to deny them influence.
It was instantly clear, even to those who may have sympathized with Romney, that the emergence of this video, filmed by a bartender at the event, was a disaster. It aligned with a core Democratic message about Romney, which was that he was more in touch with the ultrarich than with regular people. What made that message singularly effective wasn’t Romney’s recitation of what was, at the time, Republican boilerplate — it was where he recited it and to whom. Peeking behind closed doors, millions of voters saw an anxiety dream on film: them talking to one another about us.
In the 2018 clip, however, Biden was not speaking at a rich donor’s home or flattering attendees at a fund-raiser. He was onstage, at an event open to the public, promoting a book. His quote didn’t have to be smuggled out by an angry bartender to assume an illicit quality. It only had to move from the official event video to tweets — from its intended audience to one that wouldn’t normally watch an “Ideas Exchange” talk whose tickets start at $60. In the Romney video, voters who suspected that the powerful privately disdained them had rare and valuable evidence. In the Biden video — and countless more like it, from across the political spectrum, multiplying across social media — voters see something even more crazy-making: them, talking about us behind our backs, right in front of our faces.
To engage with politics in 2019, it turns out, is to be able to access the thrill and humiliation of seeing people talk about you as if you’re not there, whenever you want. Every Twitter feed but your own is a secret room with a very thin door. Every Facebook argument can also be a show for a much larger audience. Every old-media outlet is either for you or about the problem of you. This sensation has long been imposed on those poorly served by the powerful or the media that covers them. Now it can be enjoyed by everyone, on demand.
A private conversation made public has power, and genuine snippets of eavesdropping remain common enough in politics, in ever-evolving forms: a cache of email conversations about running a campaign, a chat-room transcript revealing plans for violence at a rally, a hot-mic recording of a future presidential candidate and an “Access Hollywood” host discussing what they’re entitled to do to women. But what happens when “public” conversations are so numerous, and so undifferentiated, that they start to seem, to the people in them, almost private? We’re shown such conversations constantly now, pulled from the deafening backdrop of media and held up as shocking proof of what’s really happening just outside our awareness. Biden is a constant source of this, habitually trying to level with the audience in front of him — say, reminding people about his record of reaching across the aisle, even, long ago, to open segregationists — in ways that will be profoundly alienating anywhere else.
Two popular critiques of social media — that it sorts people into bubbles and that it fosters constant conflict — can feel as though they’re at odds with each other. But they are easily reconciled by considering this kind of eavesdropping. People may spend their time online among presorted clans, but the platforms that contain those groups also make certain that they’re constantly aware of one another, and always able to look with horror or mockery at what everyone else is up to. A nation constantly peering at itself through a peephole camera is not, strictly, a nation more divided. If social media democratized certain forms of speech, it has also made universal the anxious, helpless sensation of listening to voices that don’t represent you but seem perfectly comfortable discussing you — what you want, what you need, what must be done for you, what must be done about you.