Attacks by the United States risk escalating a digital Cold War and renew questions about whether certain targets should be off limits in cyber conflict.
Today: A Times investigation reveals that the United States is actively infiltrating Russia’s electric power grid. David Sanger on what that means for the future of cyber warfare.
It’s Tuesday, June 18.
So what happened in 2008 was the Russians did something pretty brilliant. They dropped a bunch of USB keys — you know, the kind you might get at a convention or maybe that’s given to you at a hotel — in parking lots around American bases in the Middle East. People would pick these things up, bring them into work, and, believe it or not, put them in their computers at work.
Somebody got away with the most serious breach of Defense Department computer networks ever.
And what happened was those keys essentially put some malware into computers that got the Russians inside something called SIPRNet.
The drive contained malicious coding that spread through classified files and stole information.
The official name is the Secret Internet Protocol Router Network, but the main thing to know is it’s the Pentagon’s secret network.
We didn’t think that was possible because it’s completely separate from the internet.
 It was a low-tech solution, Michael, but it worked.
So beyond supergluing the USB ports on computers inside the Defense Department, what is the response from the U.S. to this incursion?
The response was near-panic. I mean, think about what had happened just in that year or two. The Chinese had gotten inside Lockheed Martin and stolen many of the designs for the F-35, the most expensive fighter jet that you’ve ever paid for. And that’s why the Chinese today are producing what looks like an F-35, although it’s a lot cheaper than ours. The United States was launching its own big, sophisticated cyber operation against Iran’s nuclear enrichment plant at Natanz. And the Russians, of course, were coming inside the Pentagon. And everybody realized, this is now not just a big intelligence problem. This is a big military problem, and we don’t have a military unit of size and sophistication to deal with it. And that was the birth of what is now United States Cyber Command.
So what does this newly established Cyber Command do about Russia, the culprit of this really damaging attack on the Pentagon?
Initially, Michael, not much. U.S. Cyber Command was just getting organized. It didn’t have many troops. It didn’t have much expertise. It was based at Fort Meade, but it was highly dependent on its next-door neighbor, the National Security Agency, for most of its capability to look inside networks, much less attack back. So they spent years sort of watching the Russians and building their forces, building cyber sort of expeditionary teams that they could put out with American Army units and Navy units and the Air Force and others. But the big concern was what do you do in time of warfare when the Russians or the Chinese or some other adversary might do more than just get into your communications networks? They might go in to try to change data, like supposing they altered the targeting on a missile. Supposing they just got into the medical database and changed the blood type of every soldier and sailor, you can imagine the havoc that they would bring about. So the question was how would you find them, how would you counter them, and then, what’s the right retaliation? What’s the deterrent to keep them from doing that? Of course while the U.S. was having this debate, there were some real attacks happening.
The White House is considering a response to the crippling cyberattack on Sony Pictures.
Federal officials are pointing right at the source. They say the attack was launched from inside North Korea.
The North Koreans went into Sony because they didn’t like a bad movie called “The Interview,” and they took out 70 percent of Sony Pictures Entertainment’s computer systems.
It raises huge questions about vulnerability and national security.
They call this new kind of attack cyber extortion.
And suddenly the Obama administration had a debate. What do we do in retaliation? Well, the answer was they put a few sanctions on the North Koreans, and they cut off their internet access through China for a day or two, but not much. And then, of course, the Chinese came in, and they stole 22 million security files from the Office of Personnel Management. That’s the office that does security reviews for everybody applying for a clearance.
O.P.M. did not specifically say what information the hackers got their hands on, but it could include everything from names to Social Security numbers.
So suddenly the Chinese had all this information about 7 percent of the U.S. population, a very elite 7 percent.
We’ve learned the breach goes back 30 years to 1985 and affects nearly every government agency.
One of the largest thefts of U.S. government data ever.
And no one knew what to go do in response other than try to negotiate some agreement about not stealing intellectual property with the Chinese.
But all this was very frustrating inside Cyber Command and inside the N.S.A., because the number of attacks on the United States was expanding like mad. It reached its high point, really, in 2016, when the election attacks happened from Russia. And it wasn’t just the election system they were into, because at the same time that the Obama White House was beginning to understand what was happening as the Russians got into the registration systems in Illinois and Arizona and all that, they were getting this other stream of intelligence about much more aggressive attacks on nuclear power plants, on regular power plants. The Russians got into a communications system in a nuclear power plant that’s in Kansas that caused all kinds of disruption. And suddenly we were beginning to see warnings coming out of the Department of Homeland Security and the F.B.I., saying, hey, every utility in America — not just the power companies, but people who ran gas pipelines and water systems and all that, had to be on the lookout for malware, and that could cripple you. It’s not that the Russians had used that to go turn off the lights yet. They hadn’t, at least in the United States, but that they were prepared to do so.
So David, you’ve described a series of cyberattacks against the U.S. by its adversaries that are escalating in their brazenness. So why does it seem that this Cyber Command, which was created specifically to defend the U.S. against these kinds of attacks, isn’t doing very much about it?
— Lieutenant General Paul Nakasone.
He was nominated as the new head of the United States Cyber Command and the director of the N.S.A. One person holds both jobs.
That’s quite a bit of stuff there.
What do you think our adversaries think right now? If you do a cyberattack on America, what’s going to happen to them?
So what do you think our adversaries think about us right now?
They do not think that much will happen to them.
They don’t fear us.
So is that good?
And his answer was essentially not much.
It is not good, Senator.
And what did he propose to do about that?
Well, he didn’t say this in public, but what he had been proposing for years was a concept really drawn from American Special Forces, which is defend forward. Don’t wait to get attacked. You know, the Special Forces has learned in the war on terror that if you’re going to stop a terror attack in Times Square, you better go hit the living room in Pakistan where it’s being planned. And Nakasone sort of had the same concept, which is the United States has to have what he called persistent presence in foreign computer networks around the world, because if you aren’t already buried inside that network, you were never going to see an attack coming, and you wouldn’t have any way to retaliate.
In other words, you have to go on the offense to really be on the defense.
And you have to live in your adversaries’ networks. 
And he was confirmed, and that began a real new era for how Cyber Command went on the offense.
So David, you’ve spent the past few months trying to understand what it means for the Trump administration to go on the offense when it comes to cyber. What exactly have you found?
Well, the first thing I found was that the Trump administration and Congress enabled Cyber Command to go on the offense much more aggressively than they had been before. In August of 2018, President Trump signed a long-awaited executive order. It was called National Security Presidential Memorandum 13. Its contents are still classified, but essentially it allows the Cyber Command to go ahead and conduct all kinds of operations inside foreign networks without going back to the president for prior approval. Our computer networks around the country were under such a constant barrage of attacks that Cyber Command needed much more freedom to be able to get inside those foreign networks and begin to combat it and that it couldn’t be going to the White House every time it wanted to do this, just the way the Navy doesn’t go to the White House every time it wants to go run a group of destroyers down through the South China Sea or go do patrolling along the DMZ in South Korea.
In other words, it’s an acknowledgment that cyber is such an active place that the president could spend his entire day signing off on every decision that needed to be made.
That’s right, and Congress authorized Cyber Command to do even more. It basically said these kind of operations in cyberspace are part of traditional military activity, and you’re authorized to go ahead and do them the same way that you would do ordinary patrols.
And so what does this newly empowered Cyber Command do with this authority?
Well, the first thing it did was go after those units in Russia that were responsible for a lot of the election-hacking. They shut down the Internet Research Agency in St. Petersburg, which, of course, had designed many of those Facebook ads and other social media ads, for a couple of days right around the midterm elections. They went after the G.R.U., the Russian military intelligence unit that had been responsible for breaking into the D.N.C. and then making public much of that data. They sent text messages to individual Russian officers and hackers saying, we know who you are. We know where you live. We know your phone number, and if you mess with us, you’re going to pay a price. So a lot of that action to counter the election malfeasance was made public. What wasn’t made public was a parallel effort to go inside the Russian power grid, to put some code in places where the Russians would see it as a warning, but put other code in places where the Russians wouldn’t see it, in case the U.S. ever needed to act against Russia’s utilities as the Russians were putting malware in our systems.
So the U.S. now has the ability to interfere with the Russian power grid in the same way that Russia can already interfere with the U.S. power grid.
That’s right. The U.S. wanted to get deep inside the Russian systems, this time not just for surveillance but to be able to place malware there, basically ticking time bombs or what you might think of as digital landmines that they could set off if we got into a broader conflict with the Russians.
David, how significant is it that the U.S. took this step of basically infiltrating Russia’s electric grid?
Oh, I think it’s a big step, Michael, but it’s also a pretty risky one. So classic deterrence theory would tell you, do like in the nuclear age, right? If they can hit you, show them you can hit them back. But I think the Russians have some doubts that we’d really be willing to pull the plug. They know that we’re limited by all kinds of legal and ethical considerations and that unplugging a country, except in the midst of a war, would cause a lot of civilian deaths. The people who are most vulnerable if you unplug the grid are people in hospitals or nursing homes. So there’d be a great reluctance to cause civilian casualties.
But wouldn’t that presumption be true on both sides?
It might be, but one of the remarkable things about cyber is how well you can go hide the causes of a cyberattack. Most cyber is used in short-of-war conflicts, not full-scale war, but instead this quiet war of attrition where countries are trying to seek advantage or gain power by manipulating the data in your financial systems or making A.T.M.s unavailable or turning off the power in certain parts of the city, but maybe not in others. So it’s pretty subtle. And the Russians are really smart. They do not want to trigger a general military conflict between the U.S. and Russia. Most other countries don’t either. So they want to use their cyber capability in the most subtle way possible.
David, given that, as you just said, the battlefield is much more subtle when it comes to cyber than traditional warfare, but the consequences just as significant, at what point does Cyber Command, do all these officials with these new powers granted by the Trump administration, at what point do they need to seek the approval of the president and of Congress to conduct these operations, like entering the Russian electrical grid, in the way that they would for traditional warfare?
It’s a fascinating question, because if you look at the law, and from what we’ve heard about the presidential order, they have the authority to do this themselves. Now the law does require them every quarter to bring their congressional overseers up to date with what they’re doing. So they’d have to report what they’re doing in the grid maybe after the fact, but they’d have to report it. The big question that we were trying to answer is did anybody go to the president to tell them that we were conducting this traditional military activity inside the Russian grid?
What we found was a lot of people saying to us, we don’t think the president knows very much about it. He may have been told generally that of course we’re doing cyber operations, but there’s a great reluctance inside the intelligence community and certainly inside the U.S. military about what they tell the president about operations against Russia. And that’s because every time the president hears the words Russia and cyber, his mind immediately goes to the charge that the Russians put him in office or somehow were responsible for his election because of what they did in 2016, and that sets him off. So we’ve seen time and time again that people sort of avoid the topic.
So it’s quite possible that the president learned about this operation to get inside the Russian electrical grid from your reporting.
We think that’s possible. He issued two tweets the night that it came out, on Saturday night. The first suggested that publishing it was perhaps an act of treason.
He called you a traitor, basically.
Yes. And then in the second tweet he said, and it’s all wrong.
David, the treason charge seems worth asking you about. Did the people you talked to inside the U.S. military, Cyber Command, the intelligence community, did they discourage you from reporting on any of this?
They didn’t. They refused to comment on the specifics that we had found about the U.S. operation. But you know, we’ve been doing this for a long time, and we’re accustomed to going to the government and saying, here are the facts we’re going to lay out. And if you have any national security objections to our publishing this, let us know now before we print, and we’ll make some judgments about whether to hold back some details. And over the years I have held back details, including about some American cyber operations, when the government made the case that the adversary didn’t know about it. But in this case, they came back and said, we have no national security objections.
In fact, it may be that people in the Trump administration, perhaps not the president himself but those around him, may have wanted you to report this.
Or certainly they didn’t see a downside to it. There’s this great scene at the end of “Dr. Strangelove” when they’ve been building this huge nuclear gadget and they’re keeping it a deep secret, and the whole premise of the end of the movie is if you don’t tell them about the gadget, what good is it? So we have sort of the same problem in cyber.
David, from everything you’ve explained, the U.S. goal here is deterrence, and it reluctantly entered a more aggressive phase in its approach to cyber with the goal of preventing our adversaries from attacking us. But at what point does a strategy of deterrence inevitably lead to an arms race, where you have to keep up with your enemies and their approach to cyber, and on and on it goes, until eventually, we’re in a deeper phase of cyber conflict?
Michael, we’re deeply into that arms race already. We’re building up new weapons. Everybody else is building up new weapons, but there’s a lot of discussion these days about whether you should have something akin to a digital Geneva Convention. The real Geneva Conventions protect civilians from being gassed, tortured or starved. In the digital Geneva Convention, you might say there are some systems that are so critical to civilian life that we have to protect them — power grids because they power hospitals and nursing homes. You might say that election systems should be off limits. You might say that emergency communication systems, communications to ambulances or the police or the fire department, are off limits. And these all seem like pretty attractive ideas, and a lot of countries have signed on to them, although not the United States so far. And one reason, I think, is that many in the U.S., inside the government, believe we have a big advantage and that we don’t want to give that advantage up and deprive a future president of the United States of the ability to use one of these weapons that we’ve spent billions of dollars developing. They might want to be able to go to a president and say, you know, it would be better to manipulate the results in this election than end up with another Nicolás Maduro, the dictator in Venezuela, or it might be better to be able to go into the central bank of this country and drain a dictator’s bank account or keep a terrorist organization from being able to spend any money. So if we’re going to be able to do those things, we probably wouldn’t want to sign up to an agreement that prohibits them. And that’s the big argument we need to have as a country, which is what cyber capability are we willing to give up in order to begin to set some norms of behavior that we’re hoping other countries will adhere to as well?
David, thank you very much. We appreciate it.
On Monday afternoon, a spokesman for Russian president Vladimir Putin said that Russia was confident it could repel U.S. attempts to hack into its electrical grid but warned that such attacks could eventually escalate into a cyberwar with the U.S. We’ll be right back.
— Iran has announced that it plans to violate one of the central terms of the 2015 deal to limit its nuclear program by increasing its stockpile of enriched uranium beyond what the agreement permits. If Iran follows through with the plan, it would have enough fuel to produce a nuclear bomb in less than a year. The threat appears designed to pressure European countries who remain in the nuclear deal to offer Iran assistance that would offset the economic damage caused by the Trump administration, which imposed sanctions on Iran after withdrawing from the deal last year.
“They don’t fear us,” he told the Senate a year ago during his confirmation hearings.
The intent of the operations was described in different ways by several current and former national security officials. Some called it “signaling” Russia, a sort of digital shot across the bow. Others said the moves were intended to position the United States to respond if Mr. Putin became more aggressive.
So far, there is no evidence that the United States has actually turned off the power in any of the efforts to establish what American officials call a “persistent presence” inside Russian networks, just as the Russians have not turned off power in the United States. But the placement of malicious code inside both systems revives the question of whether a nation’s power grid — or other critical infrastructure that keeps homes, factories, and hospitals running — constitutes a legitimate target for online attack.
Already, such attacks figure in the military plans of many nations. In a previous post, General Nakasone had been deeply involved in designing an operation code-named Nitro Zeus that amounted to a war plan to unplug Iran if the United States entered into hostilities with the country.
How Mr. Putin’s government is reacting to the more aggressive American posture described by Mr. Bolton is still unclear.
Russian intrusion on American infrastructure has been the background noise of superpower competition for more than a decade.
A successful Russian breach of the Pentagon’s classified communications networks in 2008 prompted the creation of what has become Cyber Command. Under President Barack Obama, the attacks accelerated.
But Mr. Obama was reluctant to respond to such aggression by Russia with counterattacks, partly for fear that the United States’ infrastructure was more vulnerable than Moscow’s and partly because intelligence officials worried that by responding in kind, the Pentagon would expose some of its best weaponry.
At the end of Mr. Obama’s first term, government officials began uncovering a Russian hacking group, alternately known to private security researchers as Energetic Bear or Dragonfly. But the assumption was that the Russians were conducting surveillance, and would stop well short of actual disruption.
That assumption evaporated in 2014, two former officials said, when the same Russian hacking outfit compromised the software updates that reached into hundreds of systems that have access to the power switches.
“It was the first stage in long-term preparation for an attack,” said John Hultquist, the director of intelligence analysis at FireEye, a security company that has tracked the group.
In December 2015, a Russian intelligence unit shut off power to hundreds of thousands of people in western Ukraine. The attack lasted only a few hours, but it was enough to sound alarms at the White House.
A team of American experts was dispatched to examine the damage, and concluded that one of the same Russian intelligence units that wreaked havoc in Ukraine had made significant inroads into the United States energy grid, according to officials and a homeland security advisory that was not published until December 2016.
“That was the crossing of the Rubicon,” said David J. Weinstein, who previously served at Cyber Command and is now chief security officer at Claroty, a security company that specializes in protecting critical infrastructure.
In late 2015, just as the breaches of the Democratic National Committee began, yet another Russian hacking unit began targeting critical American infrastructure, including the electricity grid and nuclear power plants. By 2016, the hackers were scrutinizing the systems that control the power switches at the plants.
But after the election breaches and the power grid incursions, the Obama administration decided it had been too passive.
Mr. Obama secretly ordered some kind of message-sending action inside the Russian grid, the specifics of which have never become public. It is unclear whether much was accomplished.
“Offensive cyber is not this, like, magic cybernuke where you say, ‘O.K., send in the aircraft and we drop the cybernuke over Russia tomorrow,’” Mr. Rosenbach said at the conference, declining to discuss specific operations.
After Mr. Trump’s inauguration, Russian hackers kept escalating attacks.
Mr. Trump’s initial cyberteam decided to be far more public in calling out Russian activity. In early 2018, it named Russia as the country responsible for “the most destructive cyberattack in human history,” which paralyzed much of Ukraine and affected American companies including Merck and FedEx.
When General Nakasone took over both Cyber Command and the N.S.A. a year ago, his staff was assessing Russian hackings on targets that included the Wolf Creek Nuclear Operating Corporation, which runs a nuclear power plant near Burlington, Kan., as well as previously unreported attempts to infiltrate Nebraska Public Power District’s Cooper Nuclear Station, near Brownville. The hackers got into communications networks, but never took over control systems.
In August, General Nakasone used the new authority granted to Cyber Command by the secret presidential directive to overwhelm the computer systems at Russia’s Internet Research Agency — the group at the heart of the hacking during the 2016 election in the United States. It was one of four operations his so-called Russia Small Group organized around the midterm elections. Officials have talked publicly about those, though they have provided few details.
But the recent actions by the United States against the Russian power grids, whether as signals or potential offensive weapons, appear to have been conducted under the new congressional authorities.
As it games out the 2020 elections, Cyber Command has looked at the possibility that Russia might try selective power blackouts in key states, some officials said. For that, they said, they need a deterrent.
In the past few months, Cyber Command’s resolve has been tested. For the past year, energy companies in the United States and oil and gas operators across North America discovered their networks had been examined by the same Russian hackers who successfully dismantled the safety systems in 2017 at Petro Rabigh, a Saudi petrochemical plant and oil refinery.
The question now is whether placing the equivalent of land mines in a foreign power network is the right way to deter Russia. While it parallels Cold War nuclear strategy, it also enshrines power grids as a legitimate target.
