A federal agency recommended firing President Trump’s counselor, but he said he would not comply. Here’s a look at the 1939 law restricting political activity by government employees.
President Trump said on Friday that he would not comply. “No, I’m not going to fire her,” he told Fox News.
Here is what you need to know to make sense of the dispute.
The Hatch Act prohibits federal employees from engaging in political activities while they are on the job. Named for former Senator Carl A. Hatch, Democrat of New Mexico, the law has been on the books for 80 years.
The act dates to Depression-era reforms intended to prevent machine politics in which patronage jobs were handed out to people who then used their positions to help keep their patrons in power. The act has been amended several times.
“It’s about equal treatment and keeping partisan activity out of the federal government,” said Kathleen Clark, a professor of law at Washington University in St. Louis and a government ethics lawyer.
What is the Office of Special Counsel?
It is an independent agency that enforces civil service laws that govern the federal work force. The agency is currently led by Special Counsel Henry Kerner, whom President Trump appointed in 2017.
Despite its similar name, the agency has nothing to do with the former Special Counsel’s Office headed by Robert S. Mueller III, which investigated potential links between the Trump campaign and the Russian government during its covert operation to influence the 2016 presidential election.
How often is the Hatch Act invoked?
Ms. Conway, who served as a top Trump campaign surrogate in the 2016 race, is not the first presidential appointee to face criticism for violating the Hatch Act.
In 2017, the Office of Special Counsel concluded that Dan Scavino Jr., the White House director of social media, violated the law when he called for the defeat of Representative Justin Amash, Republican of Michigan, on Twitter.
In 2012, Kathleen Sebelius, then the secretary of health and human services, apologized for partisan remarks she made in North Carolina to a gay rights group in which she promoted former President Barack Obama’s re-election — a violation of the law, according to the office.
Julián Castro, the secretary of housing and urban development under the Obama administration and a candidate for the 2020 Democratic nomination, avoided punishment for a 2016 Hatch Act violation stemming from his endorsement of Hillary Clinton.
Members of Mr. Obama’s cabinet were later barred from speaking at the 2016 Democratic National Convention to avoid further violations.
The George W. Bush White House faced its own problems, with the Office of Special Counsel ruling that the Office of Political Affairs, which was overseen by Karl Rove, broke the law by coordinating appearances of cabinet members at political rallies for Republican candidates during the 2006 midterm elections.
Jonathan Turley, a law professor at George Washington University who once taught Ms. Conway, said previous administrations had griped about the Hatch Act restrictions, but generally heeded the office’s findings.
How has the law been adapted for the age of social media?
In 2018, the office developed social media guidelines for government employees in the political arena, Ms. Clark said.
“One of the areas where it gets a little gray has to do with social media accounts,” Professor Clark said, adding that Ms. Conway uses her personal Twitter account for official announcements.
“You have to segregate government activity from partisan political activity,” she said.
Legal experts seemed to agree that Ms. Conway’s Twitter feed didn’t distinguish between policy and politics.
“Kellyanne often brings up political candidates and refers to individuals in terms of their candidacy,” Professor Turley said.
Has anyone ever been fired for Hatch Act violations?
Professor Turley said he wasn’t aware of any examples in modern politics of White House officials who were dismissed because of a violation. That would be up to the president to decide.
“This is very uncommon,” he said.