VATICAN CITY — When the far-right Italian politician Matteo Salvini rose to testify that he hoped to be a better Christian despite being a divorced and first-class “sinner,” one of the ultraconservative cardinals most critical of the pope smiled and clapped on the dais behind him.
“In my own little way, with my professional activity, I try to do my best to help the 60 million Italians with what doesn’t depend on us alone,” Mr. Salvini, Italy’s anti-migrant, nationalist interior minister, said in October at a pontifical university next to the Vatican.
While the pope has emerged as a leading champion for refugees and migrants around the world, anti-immigration politicians with a populist appeal have found increasing support among once-powerful conservative Catholic figures who have been sidelined within the church by Francis.
Cardinal Burke and his fellow ultraconservative prelates are working to extend ecclesiastical cover to nationalist politicians by hailing them as champions for Western Christianity and traditional values in the face of what they suggest is a Muslim migrant invasion. In the process, the cardinals’ support has helped inoculate the populists from criticism by the pope’s allies and has facilitated their political appeal to conservative Catholic voters.
Catholic bishops in sync with Francis’ inclusive vision of the church have criticized nationalist leaders in Poland, Hungary and the United States for their hard-line views on migration, but those politicians have also enjoyed the support of a small but vocal group of conservative clerics. Perhaps nowhere is that dynamic as stark as in the pope’s own backyard.
Mr. Salvini, whose party in Italy began as secessionist and worshipful of the pagan powers of the Po River, has spent years cultivating a relationship with Cardinal Burke.
“Salvini doesn’t seek an accord with the church; he looks for an accord with those elements within the church that are favorable to him,” said Andrea Riccardi, the founder of the Sant’Egidio Community, a Catholic group close to Francis.
Francis will speak only generally about his concerns on the rise of nationalist and populist politics, and he tends to coyly avoid direct questions about Mr. Salvini in particular.
“I confess I am ignorant of this and I do not understand Italian politics,” he said on the flight back from Romania this month when asked about Mr. Salvini’s use of Catholic symbols while campaigning.
But clerics close to Francis have expressed disdain for what they consider Mr. Salvini’s exploitation of rosary beads and crucifixes, and for his prayers for electoral victory to the immaculate Mother Mary. They howl when he quotes John Paul II and Francis’ predecessor, the conservative Benedict XVI, to show that his views on Europe are in line with the church.
Mr. Salvini prompted more consternation in the Vatican when he celebrated his European election victory before a bookcase holding an icon of Jesus, a “Make America Great Again” hat and history books including “Himmler’s Crusade,” about an infamous Nazi exploration in Tibet.
But ostracized conservative cardinals came to Mr. Salvini’s defense.
“There are countries that want to de-Christianize Italy and Europe, while Salvini has gone back to the patron saints of the European Union, to its Christian roots,” Cardinal Gerhard Ludwig Müller told The Corriere della Sera this month. Francis fired Cardinal Müller in 2017 as the top doctrinal watchdog in the Roman Catholic Church, removing a powerful ideological opponent.
Cardinal Willem Eijk, the archbishop of Utrecht in the Netherlands and a conservative close to Cardinal Burke, received an award from Mr. Salvini at the university event in October. In an interview, he said he hoped the church was “inspiring” to Mr. Salvini and that Mr. Salvini would, in turn, bring its teachings into the public sphere. He had no problem with Mr. Salvini’s nationalism.
Soon after Francis’ election in 2013, the pope denounced the “globalization of indifference” during his watermark visit to the Mediterranean migrant hub of Lampedusa. Mr. Salvini wrote at the time that the pope should be concerned with the “globalization of clandestine” immigration.
By then, Mr. Salvini was already years into cultivating Cardinal Burke. In February 2017, the Italian news media reported that Mr. Salvini had met for more that an hour with the cardinal in the prelate’s apartment just outside the Vatican walls.
While he privately wooed the Vatican conservatives, Mr. Salvini delighted his base by criticizing Francis, whom the hard right ridiculed as a globalist liberal wolf in shepherd’s clothing. But Mr. Salvini also denied that he was doing any such thing, and even suggested that he and Francis had a shared vision.
He added, “You don’t have to be a rocket scientist to see what’s happened” in Europe and the United States, and characterized Muslim immigrants as belonging to a faith that sought to conquer the world.
“I say it also to Pope Francis,” he said to boos at the mention of the pope’s name, “the government is eliminating the dead in the Mediterranean with pride and a Christian spirit.
