The clashes between the police and protesters have put the government on the defensive and pushed debate over the extradition law back at least two days.
The legislature holds off debate as protesters regroup.
Video footage of the police response draws accusations of excessive force.
Protests prompt new calls for Hong Kong’s leader to resign.
‘Terrified’ students at Hong Kong University fear a police raid.
With the government on the defensive after a day of violent clashes between protesters and the police, the president of Hong Kong’s legislature on Thursday agreed to delay by at least two days consideration of a contentious bill that would allow extraditions to mainland China.
Aiming to keep the pressure on, the Civil Human Rights Front, which organized a protest against the bill that drew as many as one million people last weekend, called on residents to take to the streets again this coming Sunday. The group also called for schools, shops and workers to go on strike on Monday.
Tens of thousands of demonstrators opposed to the bill surrounded the Legislative Council building on Wednesday and prevented lawmakers from meeting as planned to move the legislation on an accelerated schedule toward a vote next week. When some protesters charged the police in an attempt to enter the building, riot control officers opened fire with rubber bullets and more than 150 canisters of tear gas.
Almost all the protesters dispersed overnight, and an uneasy and perhaps temporary calm returned to the streets of Hong Kong on Thursday. The government closed its main offices and security remained tight around the Legislative Council Complex. As thunderstorms rolled across the city, trash crews cleared away surgical masks, water bottles and other debris from the clashes.
The police arrested 11 protesters for illegal assembly, disorderly conduct, assaulting officers and other riot-related offenses, Hong Kong’s police chief, Stephen Lo, told reporters. The clashes left 22 officers injured, he added.
The authorities said that a total of 81 people were treated in hospitals for injuries from the clashes.
Claudia Mo, a pro-democracy legislator, welcomed the delay in the legislative debate, which was announced by the president of the legislature, Andrew Leung. “It’s the right thing to do” given the size of the protests, Ms. Mo said in an interview at the Legislative Council.
Mr. Leung gave no indication of when the legislature would resume deliberations on the bill. He had previously said a vote could take place next Thursday after more than 60 hours of debate.
Carrie Lam, Hong Kong’s chief executive, who has championed the legislation, did not immediately comment. On Wednesday, she compared the protesters to spoiled children and vowed to keep fighting for the extradition law.
Video recordings of Wednesday’s protests in which the police appear to be using excessive force have been circulated widely across social media, and have led human rights groups and opposition lawmakers to condemn the tactics.
One video shows an officer continuously shooting pepper spray into the face of a seemingly unarmed man, and another captures a male protester being beaten to the ground by a group of officers armed with batons.
The New York Times was unable to confirm the provenance and authenticity of every video, but the local news media vouched for some of them and many of the details were consistent with Wednesday’s events.
Officers in riot gear fired tear gas, pepper spray and projectiles known as bean bag rounds or “supersock rounds” as well as rubber bullets when a crowd of protesters tried to enter the Legislative Council on Wednesday. The protesters who arrived at the gates of the complex hurled bricks, water bottles and umbrellas at the line of armored officers.
The use of rubber bullets represented a turning point in the police response and was the first time the government acknowledged using the nonlethal rounds in Hong Kong in decades. The police response following the protesters’ push toward the Legislative Council was noticeably more aggressive as peaceful protests became more pitched throughout the day.
Hong Kong’s police chief, Stephen Lo, defended his officers’ actions on Thursday, saying they had been “restrained and tolerant” and had used an appropriate amount of force. He said the officers only responded with force after protesters attempted to storm the legislative council.
One video circulated by the Hong Kong-based newspaper Apple Daily appeared to show a protester who had already fallen to the ground being beaten by a group of helmet-clad riot police wielding batons and shields.
Perhaps the most prominent of voices to condemn the police’s use of force was Anson Chan, Hong Kong’s second-highest official during the initial years after the territory’s return to Chinese rule in 1997.
Mrs. Chan said the images broadcast around the world on Wednesday had damaged Hong Kong’s international reputation. “It is like you are firing at defenseless young people,” she said.
“The ugly scenes of police using tear gas and pepper spray against overwhelmingly peaceful protesters is a violation of international law,” Man-kei Tam, director of Amnesty International Hong Kong, said in a statement on Wednesday. “Police have a duty to maintain public order, but in doing so they may use force only when strictly necessary.
Human Rights Watch also condemned what it called the use of “unnecessary and excessive force” in a statement on Wednesday.
The clashes between the police and protesters fueled a fresh round of attacks on Hong Kong’s embattled chief executive, Carrie Lam, and new demands on Thursday that she withdraw the unpopular extradition bill.
In marches, signed petitions and candid public statements, politicians who days ago sounded resigned to the passage of the law appeared ready for a fight.
A group of about a dozen lawmakers, representing the pan-democracy camp of the Legislative Council, led a peaceful march on Thursday from the building where a day earlier protesters clashed with the police, to Mrs. Lam’s residence.
The marchers, who walked through a thunderstorm, were joined by a group of police officers who actively stopped them from reaching Mrs. Lam’s home.
“It is very far from acceptable,” Au Nok-hin, a pan-democrat, said of the officers’ effort to block them.
Mrs. Lam, who was handpicked by the central government in Beijing, has showed little interest in withdrawing the legislation and has compared the protesters to spoiled children.
After a day of protests that at times turned violent, 200 members of the Election Committee, the body that anoints the territory’s chief executive, published an open letter on Wednesday night calling on Mrs. Lam to resign.
The Election Committee is composed of 1,194 people who represent the city’s different industrial sectors. Many of those who signed the letter are known to be democrats who openly supported Mrs. Lam’s opponents in the last election.
Twenty committee members, who represent the city’s lawyers, signed a separate petition condemning the tactics of the police on Wednesday, which they characterized as excessive.
A number of former senior officials joined in the criticism of Mrs. Lam and the bill, and attacked the actions of the police.
Mrs. Lam’s decision to push ahead despite such strong opposition is “nothing short of a dictator’s act,” said Joseph Wong, a former civil service secretary who also called on an independent council to investigate the police’s use of force. In an open letter to Mrs. Lam, seven other former senior officials urged her to withdraw the bill.
Despite signs that the protests and organized political action had slowed the bill’s passage, some pan-democratic lawmakers acknowledged that it was all but inevitable because of the pro-Beijing camp’s legislative majority.
Tensions were high on the campus of Hong Kong University on Thursday night after two pro-democracy lawmakers were called to a dormitory on reports of a possible police raid.
Addressing a group of reporters who had gathered outside the Simon K.Y. Lee Hall, the warden of the dorm, Siu Man Ng, confirmed that two students from the hall had been arrested on Wednesday. He said that the police had not searched the dorm, and that the university did not know what the charges were against the students.
Max Chan, a member of the Current Affairs Committee of the H.K.U.S.U. Council, said that the student union could confirm that three Hong Kong University students had been arrested, two on charges related to loitering where tens of thousands of people were protesting on Wednesday. The third was arrested on Sunday.
In an interview, the pro-democracy lawmaker Ted Hui said his office had received unverified information on Thursday evening that the police were planning to search Simon K.Y. Lee hall.
“We cannot confirm that the information was right,” he said, adding that his office was trying to learn more. “The students are terrified,” said Mr. Hui, who spent two hours talking to them in the hall.
As students huddled in small groups behind a line of reporters, a worried professor, Sharon Hom, looked on. “This is outrageous that they are coming to the universities at night,” said Ms. Hom, a visiting professor and the executive director at Human Rights in China, a nongovernmental organization.
The authorities target a messaging app protesters use to organize.
The Hong Kong police arrested a protest organizer who coordinated thousands of demonstrators using the smartphone messaging app Telegram, just hours before the company said it was attacked in a coordinated hack.
In a Twitter post on Thursday, the company’s founder, Pavel Durov, indicated that the attack was likely initiated by China’s government. Mr. Durov said that the attack’s scale was consistent with a state actor, that much of the traffic came from within China, and that it matched a pattern of attacks on Telegram that have coincided with protests in Hong Kong.
Such an attack, which can have the effect of slowing or halting service for an app, would likely have been aimed at disrupting the protesters’ coordination.
The police confirmed a 22-year-old man was arrested on Tuesday on suspicion of conspiracy to cause public nuisance. He was later identified in the local news media as Ivan Ip, the administrator of the Parade69 chat group, which has more than 20,000 members.
‘I hope it all works out,’ Trump says of the protests.
While the leaders of democracies from around the world condemned the violence seen in the streets on Wednesday and called on the governments of Hong Kong and China to heed the will of the people, President Trump had a slightly different message.
“I hope it all works out for China and for Hong Kong,” said Mr. Trump, who has used typically less reconciliatory language in his continuing trade war with Beijing.
President Trump said Wednesday that he was hopeful the issues over an extradition bill would be worked out. Others in his party and administration condemned the bill and the response to protests in Hong Kong.
Well, they’re massive demonstrations. I looked today and that really is a million people. A lot of times people talk about they had 2,000 people, but it was really 1,000 or it was 200. I see it all the time. I see it all the time. But when you look at this demonstration, they said it was a million people. That was a million people. That was as big a demonstration as I’ve ever seen. So I hope it all works out for China and for Hong Kong. I understand the reason for the demonstration, but I’m sure they’ll be able to work it out. I hope they’re going to be able to work it out with China.
“I understand the reason for the demonstration, but I’m sure they will be able to work it out,” he added without offering specifics.
His remarks contrasted with those of other members of his party and administration, who have more forcefully condemned both the extradition law and the response to the protests. Some members of Congress suggested last month that if the law were to take effect it could upend the special status Washington accords the territory. Under a 1992 agreement, Hong Kong is the beneficiary of more liberal visa and investment regulations than the rest of China.
Also on Wednesday, Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain said her government was “concerned” about the developments in Hong Kong and said any changes to the extradition law had to be in accord with an agreement signed in 1997 between Britain and China at the time of the city’s handover.
The law that brought Hong Kong to the streets.
The measure before the legislature would allow Hong Kong to detain and transfer people wanted in countries and territories with which it has no formal extradition agreements. That includes the Chinese mainland.
But critics say the law would allow virtually anyone in the city to be picked up and put on trial in mainland China, where judges must follow the orders of the Communist Party. They fear the new law would not just target criminals but political activists as well.
The extradition plan applies to 37 crimes. That excludes political ones, but critics fear the legislation would essentially legalize the sort of abductions to the mainland that have taken place in Hong Kong in recent years. The mainland Chinese authorities are typically not permitted to operate in the semiautonomous territory.
Reporting was contributed by Mike Ives, Tiffany May, Daniel Victor, Paul Mozur, Russell Goldman, Katherine Li, Amy Qin, Gillian Wong and Rick Gladstone.