WASHINGTON — Senator Bernie Sanders, along with prominent House Democratic progressives, introduced legislation on Monday to eliminate all of the country’s student debt while transforming the nation’s higher education system, escalating the policy battle to win the support of the Democratic Party’s left flank.
The plan, which Mr. Sanders, an independent from Vermont, introduced with Representatives Ilhan Omar of Minnesota and Pramila Jayapal of Washington, both Democrats, would forgive the student debts of nearly 45 million graduates — worth about $1.6 trillion — and eliminate tuition and fees at public four-year institutions and community colleges. It would cap student loan interest rates; expand Pell grants by allowing them to cover books, housing and transportation; and cancel tuition at trade schools and apprenticeship programs. It would also channel more funding to historically black universities, tribal colleges and other minority institutions.
To pay its estimated $2.2 trillion cost, its authors would impose a “Wall Street speculation tax” on financial investment transactions. Mr. Sanders said that all debt could be eliminated within six months under his plan.
Introduced two days before the first debate of the 2020 Democratic presidential primary race, the plan offers Mr. Sanders an opportunity to distinguish himself from Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, who has been jockeying with him for the support of the party’s left flank. Ms. Warren released her own higher education plan in April.
Mr. Sanders declined on Monday to answer any questions related to the campaign, telling reporters that he wanted to focus on the legislation. But the political backdrop was unmistakable, and it was not the first time the independent senator has used the Capitol to advance his claim on the Democratic presidential nomination. Mr. Sanders began his bid for the party’s 2016 White House nod from the same patch of grass, known as the Senate Swamp, in 2015.
The new bill builds on legislation introduced during the last Congress by Ms. Jayapal and Mr. Sanders. That legislation would also scrap tuition and fees at public institutions, but it did not include the elimination of student debt. Aides said that Ms. Omar, who is still paying off her own student debt, pressed for the inclusion of debt cancellation.
Under the new bill, states seeking federal higher education aid would have to enter an annual agreement with the Education Department that would include a number of stipulations, like a prohibition on raising tuition for out-of-state students.
While Mr. Sanders is widely credited with bringing the idea of free college to national attention during his 2016 presidential run, Ms. Warren pushed the idea further in April with an additional call for the elimination of student debt. She has siphoned away parts of Mr. Sanders’s base of voters with a stream of progressive plans. Julián Castro, a former housing secretary and current presidential candidate, has also unveiled a plan to transform the student loan repayment system.
Ms. Warren’s $1 trillion plan would eliminate some or all student loan debt for about 95 percent of borrowers — about 42 million people, according to her campaign — canceling up to $50,000 for every person with a household income of less than $100,000. More than 75 percent of borrowers would see all of their student debt eliminated. She has said that she plans to introduce accompanying legislation with Representative James E. Clyburn of South Carolina, the No. 3 Democrat in the House.
But Mr. Sanders’s legislation makes no distinctions for income levels.
Some more moderate analysts were measured about the plan, asking for more detail on its funding, state involvement and a more direct antidote to the rising costs of secondary education.
Others in the education field, like Randi Weingarten, the head of the American Federation of Teachers, backed it.
Liberal lawmakers, along with activists with their own tales of crippling student debt, unveiled the proposal on a blazing hot day outside the Capitol, before a sweaty crowd of young interns, staff members and tourists eager to catch a glimpse of some of the highest-profile members of the Democratic Party’s left.
“What a beautiful day to liberate ourselves from student debt,” said Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Democrat of New York, who told her own story of carrying student debt and, as a teenager, advising another student on how many loans to take on.
