Terese Hayden, whose Players’ Guide directory of job-seeking actors helped begin, sustain and revive the careers of generations of performers, died on May 23 at her home in Manhattan. She was 98.
Her death was confirmed by her executor, Sarah Drake.
Ms. Hayden, known as Terry, spent a half-century in the theater as an actress; a teacher at Circle in the Square Theater School, where her students included Kevin Bacon, Philip Seymour Hoffman and Lady Gaga; and a director and producer who promoted the careers of James Dean, Patricia Neal, Eli Wallach and dozens of others.
She also championed Off Broadway theater — both as a founder of Equity Library Theater, a nonprofit group that organized low-cost productions for unemployed actors, and through her role in buttressing the Theater de Lys in Greenwich Village, where she staged well-received plays in the 1950s.
Her most enduring legacy, though, was probably The Players’ Guide: A Pictorial Directory for the Legitimate Theater, a listing of actors for casting directors that included their photographs, stage credits, résumés and telephone numbers. She founded the publication under the auspices of the Actors’ Equity Association.
“The haphazard world of looking for jobs became a little more organized in 1944, when a young actress named Terese Hayden started Players’ Guide,” the actor Arthur Anderson wrote in “An Actor’s Odyssey: From Orson Welles to Lucky the Leprechaun” (2010).
The guide was patterned on The Spotlight, the British actors’ directory that had been published since 1927, and the Academy Players Directory, a Hollywood version created in 1937.
It had separate categories for leading men and women, character actors, ingénues, and children. Among the newcomers it introduced were Ruby Dee, Kirk Douglas, James Earl Jones, Walter Matthau and Paul Newman.
The Players’ Guide was later taken over by Paul L. Ross, and after chronicling the careers of generations of actors for five decades, it ceased publication in 1996, overtaken by technology as performers began creating their own videotapes and websites to provide résumés and examples of their acting.
Still, even after it went out of business, the guide constituted a two-dimensional documentary of New York’s theatrical history, annotated with credits and agents and illustrated with black-and-white snapshots.
Cecile Terese Hyman was born on Feb. 25, 1921, in Nashville to Joseph and Rachel (Weinstein) Hyman, Jewish immigrants from Russia. Her father was a jeweler, her mother a homemaker.
She danced and acted and, when she decided she wanted to direct, found it was easier for her, as a woman, to enter the field as a producer.
After graduating from the conservatory program of the American Academy of Dramatic Arts in New York in 1941, she trained at the Actors Studio. She changed her name professionally in 1940 and, during World War II, organized shows in hospitals through the United Theatrical War Activities Committee.
As an assistant to the director Herman Shumlin in the 1950s, she wangled an audition for an unknown actor who had impressed her in a play titled “See the Jaguar,” which lasted only five performances at the Cort Theater in 1952.
Ms. Hayden’s marriage to William Ellsworth Clow II in 1954 ended in divorce. No immediate family members survive.