She talks about playing the leading lady in “Much Ado About Nothing,” saying goodbye to “Orange Is the New Black,” and being a role model.
Had it not been for Queen Latifah and Mo’Nique and Countess Vaughn, Danielle Brooks might never have known there was a place in entertainment for women like her.
In “Much Ado,” now at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, Leon places Beatrice and Benedick (Grantham Coleman) — Shakespeare’s bickering would-be suitors — in a slightly futuristic Atlanta. A Stacey Abrams 2020 banner is affixed to the set’s exterior, an Obama “Hope” poster hangs inside, and soldiers are taking a respite from fighting for love.
Starting in 2013, the South Carolina-raised, Juilliard-trained Brooks captivated viewers as Tasha Jefferson, the ebullient, prison reform-minded Litchfield Penitentiary inmate known as Taystee, in “Orange Is the New Black” on Netflix. But as the seventh and final season arrives on July 26, she sullenly rages after being found guilty of a murder she did not commit.
Seated on a deep-green velvet sofa in her Brooklyn home, Brooks, 29, offered a hug and refreshments — “I’m Southern,” she beamed — before speaking about representation onstage and off, and being a catalyst for change.
You’ve said you turned down a movie to play Beatrice in “Much Ado.” Why?
As great as it was, I wasn’t the lead, I wasn’t the love interest, the character had a bit of — what’s the word I want to say? — anger. (Laughs.) But being the lead in Shakespeare as Beatrice, being myself, not commenting on who I am — that I don’t know will come again. And I had to prove to myself that I could do it because I want to be a leading lady, and I know that I have that within me. So now it’s in the conversation. It’s not only Emma Thompson-like girls who can play Beatrice but Danielle Brooks-type girls can play Beatrice.
Was it important to you that the production had an all-black cast?
Kenny has always said that he didn’t necessarily want it to be an all-black cast, and when I signed on I didn’t know it was an all-black cast. It was never about color. But to allow the world to see us in more than one shade, and to see the words of Shakespeare work in our mouths without us having to force it or really trying to make sense of it, it’s been great.
What keeps running through my head is, Danielle Brooks, what are you adding to American theater? What are you adding to Hollywood? For me, it’s the simple fact that representation really, truly matters.
You grew up singing in church and held your own against Jennifer Hudson and Cynthia Erivo in “The Color Purple.” Where does that moxie come from?
I had a lot of anxiety with “The Color Purple.” I had to go to counseling during that process because I had impostor syndrome even though I trained four years at one of the top conservatories. I still felt like I had fooled the world into believing that I was better than I was.
Do you feel legit yet? 
I’m just now getting to the point that it’s really not about the notes, it’s not about how great your tone is. This is about, Can you make people feel with your words? Kenny always says, “Comparison is the thief of joy.” I can’t compare myself to the people I love — the Ledisis, the India.Aries, the Jennifer Hudsons. I gotta be Danielle Brooks.
What’s your takeaway after seven seasons of “Orange”?
“Orange” actually helped me with discovering my place in this industry. To be a part of a cast where there was more than one woman of color that was the lead and we all were able to shine, where the world will fall in love with you for you being you, not because you have this 16-inch wig on or you have the flowiest lashes or your waist is a size 24. I was like, wow, people love me for who I am and the work that I bring.
You’re a first-time executive producer on “Ain’t Too Proud — The Life and Times of the Temptations,” which earned 12 Tony nominations (and won for best choreography).
That’s one of those things you manifest. You speak it into existence, you make it happen. My friend Jeremy Pope asked me to watch them rehearse one day in the studio — no lights, no costumes, nothing — and I was amazed. It was the first time I had seen more than five black men get to show the depth of who they are. And they weren’t just up there dancing and singing, they were sharing their souls. I was like, I want to be a part of this. I wanted to learn what are the ins and outs of this world. How can we get more people of color into the theater? And how can I begin to put on stage the things that I want to see?
Now that you’re a role model in the mold of Queen Latifah and Mo’Nique, how do you hope to change the Hollywood landscape?
I am such a complex human being and I’m only one of millions of black women, so can we branch out and stop telling the same five black women-type stories? I want young people that relate to me to say, Yeah man, I can be the first plus-sized action hero or villain, or I can be in an unconventional rom-com or in a Victorian story.
So that’s my goal: to give permission to the next generation to say, I am that, I can be that, I can do that. To allow people’s dreams to be bigger than what they could ever imagine.