G20, Debate, Italy: Here’s what you need to know to start your day.
We’re covering the G20 leaders’ gathering in Osaka, Europe’s scramble to get barter-trade going with Iran and a rescue ship’s challenge to Italy.
Global leaders have begun two days of meetings at the Group of 20 summit in Osaka.
The summit is intended to foster global economic cooperation. The official themes include global economic risks, trade disputes, job growth and investment, innovation and artificial intelligence, and women in the workplace.
Some countries also hope to emphasize collective action on climate change and the environment: Japan, for instance, on the plastic choking the oceans.
We’re following the agenda of President Trump, who is meeting on the sidelines with at least nine leaders, including President Vladimir Putin of Russia today and President Xi Jinping of China on Saturday. Here’s the latest.
Related: The Russian stock market is the world’s hottest, up more than 28 percent this year. The strong performance reflects the rebounding price of crude oil — and also investors’ growing confidence that the U.S. won’t be doing anything to imperil Russia’s economy.
European signatories of the 2015 Iran nuclear deal are hoping to announce today a multimillion-euro line of credit that will finally set in motion Instex, a barter-trade system with Iran.
It will sidestep sanctions the U.S. imposed on Iran after withdrawing from the nuclear deal last year.
Iranian officials have said that without the economic gains promised in the deal, Iran will begin exceeding the negotiated limits on uranium stockpiling and enrichment.
Headline meeting: Representatives of Iran sit down in Vienna today with those of the remaining signatories: Britain, China, France, Germany, Russia and the European Union.
The Sea Watch 3, operated by a German nongovernmental organization and flying a Dutch flag, has inflamed hard-line Italian officials by entering Italian waters off the Mediterranean island of Lampedusa without authorization.
The ship’s captain, Carola Racket, is seeking to bring to safety 42 migrants rescued two weeks ago off the coast of Libya.
“I won’t allow foreign NGOs to dictate the law on national borders for a country like Italy,” said the interior minister, Matteo Salvini.
Response: Lampedusa’s parish priest and some residents, along with occasional tourists, have been sleeping in the churchyard in protest, pledging to continue until the migrants are allowed to disembark in a safe port. The archbishop of Turin, Cesare Nosiglia, has offered to take in the migrants at the Roman Catholic Church’s expense.
In the most dramatic moment of Thursday’s debate, Kamala Harris and former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. clashed over his record on race.
Ms. Harris laced into his recent remarks about working with segregationists in the Senate, as well as his active opposition to busing in the 1970s.
Of the 10 candidates at the podium, those two got the most speaking time.
Post-debate chat: Our Opinion section discussed the themes of the evening, and the high and low points.
Fact-check: Here’s how the candidates’ remarks stacked up against the truth.
Catch up: Here’s a recap of Wednesday night’s debate, and a separate consideration of what the evening revealed about the gender dynamics of butting in. Experts in both parties weighed in on who won the debate.
Eli Baden-Lasar always knew he was conceived with the help of an anonymous sperm donor.
When he was 19, he learned that he had half siblings — 32 of them, it turns out. Over 10 months, he traveled to 16 states to meet and photograph them, a journey that he describes in a moving essay for The Times Magazine.
U.S. Supreme Court: The court ruled on two cases with profound implications for American politics, declining to intervene on partisan gerrymandering and suspending the inclusion of a citizenship question on the 2020 census.
Twitter: Trying to quell inflammatory speech without appearing to take sides, the company announced that it would put a warning label that users can click through over messages from major political figures that break the company’s rules for harassment or abuse.
Ford in Europe: The automaker plans to close five plants and eliminate about 12,000 of its 65,000 jobs across the region as it struggles with weak demand for its cars.
Setback for Boeing: The Federal Aviation Administration said that it had discovered a new problem with the 737 Max jet that the company must correct before the plane returns to service.
Alabama: A black woman who was shot in the stomach while she was pregnant was charged with the death of her fetus, accused by the police of instigating a dispute and failing to get out of harm’s way. Alabama is one of 38 U.S. states that have fetal homicide laws.
Germany: For the second time in 10 days, Chancellor Angela Merkel was seen shaking and struggling to maintain control of her body. Her spokesman insisted she was well.
Snapshot: Above, first graders attending class at Rustam school in Yakawlang, Afghanistan. The school has no electricity, heat, working computers or enough books and yet almost all of its students are accepted into college, most of them girls.
World Cup: England beat Norway, 3-0. The U.S. plays France today. On Saturday, it’s Italy against the Netherlands and Sweden against Germany.
Baseball: The Yankees and the Red Sox are playing the first regular-season major league baseball games in Europe this weekend, with two games at London Stadium. Just wait for the mascots.
Apple departure: Jony Ive, a longtime executive responsible for the look and feel of the iPhone and many other iconic Apple products, is leaving this year to start his own design company, but will continue to work on a wide range of Apple products, the company said.
Cook: Roll into the weekend with plans to make a classic recipe: Julia Child’s berry clafoutis.
Go: Two adaptations of works by the writer Marguerite Duras are playing as one-woman shows in Paris.
Watch: Lila Avilés’s modest and miraculous first feature film, “The Chambermaid,” finds pathos and a hint of magic in the routines of a young hotel worker.
Read: In “Assad or We Burn the Country,” Sam Dagher draws on history, interviews and his own experience as a reporter in Syria to depict an utterly ruthless regime. It’s one of 12 books we recommend this week.
Smarter Living: A trip to a carwash might seem like a water-wasting extravagance, but it’s actually better than the driveway alternative. Carwashes use less water and help prevent pollution: At home, oil, engine fluids, phosphates and chlorides from the soap can run into storm drains and onto rivers and lakes. Many carwashes recycle their water, and they’re supposed to send it to a wastewater treatment plant when the water can no longer be used.
And readers have offered their best tips for managing the family money.
Never mind the Aperol spritz. This is Negroni Week.
Or so says Campari, the company behind marketing blitzes for both cocktails.
Negroni gets its place in the sun now because it is said to have been invented 100 years ago when Count Camillo Negroni in Florence, Italy, asked his bartender at the Cassoni Cafe to replace the soda in his Americano drink with gin.
Equal parts of Campari and sweet vermouth make up the rest of the classic recipe, though there are infinite variations, many with bitters and an orange slice.
The company is mixing a little charity into its promotion. By drinking a Negroni at a participating bar or restaurant (10,000 around the world have signed up), you can designate contributions to any of nearly 50 nonprofits. Negroni Week ends on Sunday.
That’s it for this briefing. A toast to your health, and to a good weekend.
• We’re listening to “The Daily.” Our latest episode is with E. Jean Carroll, who has accused President Trump of sexual assault, and two women she confided in at the time.
• Here’s today’s Mini Crossword puzzle, and a clue: A little drunk (5 letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
• Times Square in Manhattan was named after The New York Times, and the New Year’s Eve ball drop started as a promotion for The Times.