YOKOHAMA, Japan — Nissan’s embattled chief executive, Hiroto Saikawa, was re-elected to the company’s board on Tuesday, during an annual meeting in which shareholders vented their anger at the scandal-wracked company’s French partner, Renault.
Mr. Saikawa apologized on Tuesday to shareholders gathered at a hotel in Yokohama, where Nissan is based, for the company’s financial misconduct issues, which have rocked Nissan and led to charges against its former chairman, Carlos Ghosn. After his apology, Mr. Saikawa and other Nissan officials bowed to the assembled shareholders.
He said he would swiftly implement an overhaul of Nissan’s corporate governance structure, which shareholders approved on Tuesday. The new system — aimed at preventing a recurrence of the management problems that occurred under Mr. Ghosn’s tenure — introduces independent committees for nominations and compensation, putting the company in line with global governance standards.
“There’s a responsibility for the past, and there’s another responsibility, responsibility for the future,” Mr. Saikawa said.
Some investors were not mollified. They blamed Mr. Saikawa in part for the chaos that enveloped the company following the arrest in November of Mr. Ghosn and for the company’s lackluster financial performance. Some shareholders unsuccessfully called on investors to reject Mr. Saikawa as a board member.
Shareholders reserved most of their bile for Renault, however. With Mitsubishi Motors, the Japanese carmaker, the three companies comprise the world’s largest carmaking alliance. Renault controls over 43 percent of Nissan’s stock, giving it a major say in Nissan’s future.
The shareholders expressed anger over the French company’s move to block Nissan’s effort to overhaul its governance. One questioner accused Renault’s chairman, Jean-Dominique Senard, who attended the meeting, of trying to sell the company out to the French government. The French government, a major Renault shareholder, has pushed for the company to pursue a merger with Nissan, a move that has provoked anxiety in Japan.
“French people are very sly!” the questioner said as he dressed Mr. Senard down. The person’s identity was not immediately clear.
Mr. Senard defended his conduct as well as Renault’s unsuccessful talks in recent weeks to merge the company with Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, the Italian-American automaker. The potential combination roiled the auto world, but Nissan’s hesitance amid calls for a quick deal helped torpedo the proposed marriage. Mr. Senard said it would have brought substantial benefits to the Nissan-Renault alliance.
”Since I arrived, I have done everything I can to smooth the relationship of an alliance that I found in a much worse state than I thought,” he said.
Mr. Saikawa has been struggling to free the company from a mire of controversy following Mr. Ghosn’s arrest and eventual ouster over charges of financial wrongdoing, which he has denied.
Mr. Ghosn’s fall blew open the tensions between Nissan and Renault. It has also led to a parade of embarrassing revelations for both the company and Mr. Saikawa himself, revealing the depth of dysfunction in Nissan’s corporate governance and raising questions about the chief executive.
Mr. Saikawa was nevertheless guaranteed reappointment to Nissan’s board on Tuesday because he enjoys the support of Renault. Under their partnership, Renault has effectively agreed to a hands-off approach to Nissan’s management ranks. The full count of the shareholder votes will not be available for several days, the company said.
Though Renault has continued to support him, Mr. Saikawa has a complicated relationship with Nissan’s French partner. In addition to Nissan’s foot-dragging on the Fiat Chrysler deal, he has also batted away overtures to merge Nissan and Renault.
After the deal fell apart, Mr. Senard, Renault’s chairman, used his company’s leverage to force Nissan to add the French carmaker’s top executives to the newly established committees.
Mr. Saikawa faces other challenges in guiding Nissan. The company posted dismal financial results for fiscal year 2018, with operating profit dropping by nearly 45 percent. It has projected that its profitability will drop by more than a quarter during the fiscal year ending in March 2020.
Investors are likely to remain skeptical. In an unusual move this month, two proxy adviser firms called for a clean break with Nissan’s tainted past, recommending that the company’s shareholders vote Mr. Saikawa off the board where he has served for 14 years, asking how he could have been unaware of Mr. Ghosn’s alleged wrongdoing.
In an interview with Japanese media earlier this month, Greg Kelly, another former Nissan executive, who faces charges of hiding Mr. Ghosn’s compensation from shareholders, said Mr. Saikawa had been directly involved with discussions of the former chairman’s pay and accused him of manipulating stock-based compensation for his own financial gain. Mr. Saikawa has declined to comment on the allegations.