It was like a plot from one of her own novels: On the evening of Dec. 4, Agatha Christie, carrying nothing but an attaché case, kissed her daughter good night and sped away from the home in England that she shared with her husband, Col. Archibald Christie. (He was having an affair with a younger woman; the public did not know this, but his wife definitely did.) No one knew where Christie was for almost two weeks.
Christie was 36 at the time and had already published several detective novels, including “The Secret Adversary” and “The Murder on the Links.” Her disappearance merited banner headlines the world over, making the front page of The Times on Dec. 6.
After three days of searching for the novelist, the police called it off. They said Christie’s brother-in-law had received a letter from her, saying she was going to a Yorkshire spa “for rest and treatment.” Case closed, right? Not quite.
Detectives “are now said to be of the opinion that it is a case of suicide,” The Times reported. The search seemed to center on a pond called “the Silent Pool,” which, according to local legend, was bottomless.
A week after Christie’s disappearance, the police were flummoxed. “No reliable witness has seen her since the night she left her house in Sunningdale a week ago,” The Times reported.
But there was one important development. Christie had left three letters behind: one to her secretary, another to her brother-in-law and a third to her husband, who refused to divulge what she had written.
In the same article, her personal secretary angrily denied that the whole thing was a publicity stunt: “It is ridiculous. Mrs. Christie is quite too much a lady for that.” The secretary also handed over the note Christie had left for her, saying it contained only scheduling details.
That same day, the police speculated that Christie could possibly be in London, “disguised and probably in male attire.” And rumors began flying that she had left behind a sealed envelope that was only to be opened in the event her body was discovered.
Spiritualists even held a séance at the chalk pit.
The novelist was found at a Yorkshire spa, nine days after she disappeared.
The Times reported that Christie had checked in to the Harrogate spa under the name “Mrs. Tressa Neele.” When asked, Col. Christie insisted he had no idea what the meaning of that particular name was — nor, he added, did his wife. Years later, it was revealed that Agatha Christie had, in fact, used the name of her husband’s girlfriend.
When Col. Christie showed up in Harrogate to collect his wife, he was “welcomed by her with a stony stare.” Later, hundreds of people showed up at a London train station as the couple made their way home, hoping to catch a glimpse.
The next chapter in the saga took place about 15 months later, when Agatha Christie sued her husband for divorce.
… there came into my mind the thought of driving into it. However, as my daughter was with me in the car, I dismissed the idea at once. That night I felt terribly miserable. I felt that I could go on no longer. I left home that night in a state of high nervous strain with the intention of doing something desperate. … When I reached a point on the road which I thought was near the quarry, I turned the car off the road down the hill toward it. I left the wheel and let the car run.  I was flung against the steering wheel, and my head hit something. Up to this moment I was Mrs. Christie.
The episode continues to fascinate. In 1977 Kathleen Tynan wrote a novel, “Agatha,” about the episode; it was turned into a film starring Vanessa Redgrave. In 2008, an episode of “Dr. Who” speculated about the novelist’s disappearance. And more recently, a British made-for-TV film, “Agatha and the Truth of Murder,” offered a new theory: Christie disappeared in order to take part in a homicide investigation.
An earlier version of this article misstated the car Agatha Christie drove. It was a Morris Cowley, not a Morris Crowley.