What six years of deliberate and sustained cruelty tell us about el-Sisi’s Egypt.
Thus was power thrust onto Mr. Morsi, who rarely wore it comfortably. He always looked like a man caught up in something much bigger than him. That he died in an Egyptian courtroom inside a soundproof cage designed to silence him, almost exactly six years to the day he took office and almost completely forgotten by all but his family and human rights activists, is a reminder of the bathos that surrounded him.
Defendants in Egyptian courtrooms are kept in cages. The humiliation is intentional. The silence compounding Mr. Morsi’s humiliation was a form of emotional thuggery befitting the military regime-on-steroids that currently rules Egypt. In three separate but politically motivated trials that made no pretense at fairness, Mr. Morsi was sentenced to more than 45 years in prison. He was kept in what was effectively solitary confinement for the past six years, during which he saw his family just three times, and was denied sufficient medical attention for his diabetes, high blood pressure and liver disease, which his lawyers had long warned would lead to his death. One of his lawyers told The Associated Press that in his final comment to the court, Mr. Morsi continued to insist that he was the legitimate president of Egypt.
Almost every day since the revolution that paved the way for Mr. Morsi’s election, I have worked on a draft obituary in my head for another former president I had assumed would die first: Hosni Mubarak. And yet Mr. Morsi is dead at 67, and Mr. Mubarak, 91, is not just alive but also free. Their divergent fates tell the story of so much that ails Egypt today.
In the Egypt that gave him a narrow electoral victory, Mr. Morsi stumbled for reasons of his own doing and others that were not. Many forces were still stacked against him when he took office: Just two days before the second round of the 2012 presidential election that brought him to power, for instance, Egypt’s highest court, composed of judges appointed by Mr. Mubarak, dissolved the country’s Islamist-dominated parliament, among other maneuvers — a show of strength by the old regime that would seek to undermine Mr. Morsi over the course of his presidency.
Still, critics of Mr. Morsi — I was one of them — lamented that he was preoccupied with consolidating power for the Muslim Brotherhood movement from which he came, rather than acting as the transitional president they elected him to be. For me, the most galling of Mr. Morsi’s failures came in November 2012 when he issued a decree granting himself far-reaching powers. Ostensibly aimed at ensuring that the Islamist-dominated assembly set up to draft a new Constitution could finish its work, Mr. Morsi soon upped the authoritarianism with another decree that authorized the armed forces to protect national institutions and polling places until Egyptians voted on a draft Constitution the following month. Those of us who supported the revolution — especially its demand for the fall of the military regime, and not just one man from that regime — condemned Mr. Morsi for siding not with us but with the very military that ended up deposing him.
These tensions came to a head when millions of Egyptians took to the streets to demand Mr. Morsi’s resignation on June 30, 2013, the first anniversary of his taking office. After three days of mass protests, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, a man promoted by Mr. Morsi to head the military and to serve as defense minister, and who is now the president, overthrew the Morsi government.
By contrast, look to the cushy treatment afforded to Mr. Mubarak by a “justice system” he had spent years stacking with his men. After 30 years in office during which rigged elections, torture and corruption were systematic in Egypt, Mr. Mubarak was forced to step down by the revolution on Feb. 11, 2011.
No notorious prison for him, however. During his various trials, Mr. Mubarak was housed in a cushy military hospital, from where he would be flown to court and theatrically wheeled in on a gurney, his attorney pleading all the while that his client was close to death. Our current military rulers never forgot that Mr. Mubarak — the former head of the Air Force — was one of them. In March 2017, Mr. Mubarak was ultimately released from the military hospital where he had been confined for six years to his home in a Cairo suburb, his only standing conviction on a charge of embezzlement.
Mr. Mubarak was never held accountable for the killing of some 900 people in the 11 days of the uprising, just as Mr. el-Sisi and other senior security personnel are unlikely to ever be held accountable for the massacre, soon after Mr. Morsi’s overthrow, of at least 817 people in just one day, when soldiers and police violently broke up two sit-ins of mostly Muslim Brotherhood supporters, in Cairo on Aug. 14, 2013. To this day, Egypt has not had a reckoning with the massacre, the worst mass killing in a single day in modern Egyptian history. It is as if the powers that turned off Mr. Morsi’s microphone in his soundproof courtroom cage have turned off the national conscience. Egypt’s Western allies, too, are colluding with Mr. el-Sisi in the collective amnesia.
It speaks volumes to the continued cruelty as well as insecurity of the el-Sisi regime that it forced Mr. Morsi’s family to bury him under heavy security at a Cairo cemetery rather than at the family’s cemetery in the province of Sharqiya. If the death sentence against Mr. Morsi in 2015 was overturned because the regime did not want to make a martyr of him, its cruelty has guaranteed that is exactly what he will become.
Decimated as it is, however, the Muslim Brotherhood is unlikely to be able to pull off mass protests in Egypt, where protests became all but impossible under a draconian law passed soon after Mr. el-Sisi came to power. This, too, is what Mr. el-Sisi has achieved: From July 2013, when Mr. Morsi was overthrown, and January 2016, when the Egyptian parliament reconvened, between 16,000 and 41,000 people, most supporters of the now-banned Muslim Brotherhood, were reportedly arrested or detained. (Some were liberal or secular activists.) Since then, a spike in death sentences and executions, extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances and a determined effort to wipe out any form of dissent have all but crushed the Brotherhood, as well as most other forms of opposition. Muslim Brotherhood supporters are insisting that Mr. Morsi be eulogized as a martyr at the same time that many state-owned media are reporting on his death without even mentioning that he was once president.
So if Mr. Morsi’s death is to have an impact, he must, once again, be decentered from the story. If a man collapses and dies in a soundproof cage after six years of deliberate and sustained cruelty, what must we hear? Mr. Morsi’s death sentence was overturned, but what was his death in court yesterday but an effective slow-motion fulfillment of that sentence? Mr. el-Sisi has filled Egyptian jails with 60,000 political prisoners. Those who have not already been sentenced under the sharp spike in death sentences since he came to power are subject to illness, torture, and inefficient or denied medical care. How many of them are being slowly executed?
And when will those responsible ever contend with their cruelty from inside a courtroom cage?