CHELSEA MUSIC FESTIVAL FAMILY EVENTS at St. Paul’s German Lutheran Church (June 8 and 15, 10:30 a.m.-noon). Children attending these programs will get more than a taste of classical compositions; they’ll also enjoy classic confections. On Saturday, “I Can See Clara Now” will introduce them to Clara Schumann, whose 200th birthday the festival honors. Little listeners will hear her work and that of her husband, Robert, while picturing themselves as guests — and apprentice chefs — in the Schumanns’ Leipzig, Germany, home. The morning will include making tea sandwiches and sampling desserts like apple strudel. “The Musical Gardener Invite,” on June 15, will explore the themes of color, harmony and collaboration in sonic, horticultural and culinary contexts. Children will hear more music by the Schumanns and others, experiment with color, help make chocolate chip cookies and prepare wildflower seed bombs to take home.
FROG AND TOAD DAY at Wave Hill (June 9, noon-2:30 p.m.). Young city dwellers’ acquaintance with local amphibians may well be limited to readings of the endearing children’s classics by Arnold Lobel, the “Frog and Toad” books. On Sunday, however, Wave Hill, the 28-acre Bronx public garden, will invite visitors 6 and older to meet frogs and toads close up. At noon and 1:30 p.m., Carl Heitmuller, an environmental educator from the Hudson Highlands Nature Museum, will give presentations at Wave Hill House in which he’ll show both tadpoles and adult species. (Space is limited, and registration is strongly advised.) Attendees can also learn about the animals’ traits and adaptations and listen to their vocalizations. Visitors hoping to see specimens in the wild will have a chance as well: At 1 p.m., the educator Gabriel Willow will lead a family nature walk through the grounds.
‘MINUSCULE, VALLEY OF THE LOST ANTS’ at Monsignor McGolrick Park (June 10, 8:30 p.m.).  Here, though, the bugs of interest will be on the big screen. Part of the annual series Films on the Green from the Cultural Services of the French Embassy, this free outdoor screening will introduce young audiences to a movie that won a César Award (the French equivalent of an Oscar) for best animated feature. Directed by Hélène Giraud and Thomas Szabo and presented in English (there is little dialogue), “Minuscule” chronicles what happens when a brave ladybug intervenes in a war between rival groups of ants over a treasure that picnickers left behind: a box of sugar.
NEW PLAYS FOR YOUNG AUDIENCES: ‘POPULARITY COACH’ at the Provincetown Playhouse (June 8, 7:30 p.m.; June 9, 3 p.m.). Becoming a cool kid at school usually requires conforming, which is something Cooper and Mia, the central characters in Brian Guehring’s script, don’t do: Cooper, a third grader, doesn’t care much for athletics and superheroes, while his neighbor Mia would much rather be on the sports field than at the ballet barre. When a slick seventh grader offers them popularity lessons at a bargain rate, the two must confront the project’s real costs, which aren’t just financial. For audiences, however, the whole enterprise is free: These rehearsed readings are the first of the season in this annual series of plays in development from the educational theater program of the Steinhardt School at N.Y.U.
PRIDE CULTURAL FESTIVAL at the Children’s Museum of the Arts (June 9, 10 a.m.-5 p.m.). This event promises to be especially rewarding for young people who don’t subscribe to the conventional ideas of how girls and boys should look, dress or act. In addition to tales from the series Little Rainbows: Storytime at the Lesbian Herstory Archives and performances and singalongs with the drag artist Marti Gould Cummings, the museum will host a return appearance by Desmond Napoles, an 11-year-old self-described “drag kid” who performs as Desmond Is Amazing. The festivities will also comprise a variety of art workshops in honor of Pride Month. They will include making rainbow flags from clay, designing trophies and other works that express individual identity, and creating small wearable textile objects inspired by the art of Zoe Schlacter.
‘PULSAR’ at the Clark Studio Theater (through June 9, 10 a.m. and 12:30 p.m.). Although many theatrical troupes would shudder at the thought of 3-year-old audience members, the Argentine-Mexican Compañía Teatro al Vacío happily welcomes children as young as 6 months. Devised especially for infants and toddlers, its 30-minute “Pulsar” features two actors at opposite ends of the stage, each with a pile of short wooden planks. The performers use these objects as steppingstones, bridges, a pallet for sleeping and parts of an obstacle course, constructing playful scenes of acrobatic movement. Part of Lincoln Center’s LC Kids series, the show ultimately creates pathways that tiny theatergoers can explore, too.
TWIST & SPROUT! at the Queens Botanical Garden (June 9, noon-4 p.m.). Here you won’t even need music to shake it up, baby. Presented by the NewYork-Presbyterian Queens hospital, this free festival will encourage health and fitness with instruction in hula hooping and disc throwing, as well as break dancing. Children can also burn calories playing in a bounce house and doing exercises from the Fit Kids Queens program. The celebration will emphasize that good nutrition is fun, too: It will offer cooking demonstrations, herb plantings and fruit and vegetable crafts.
WORLD OCEANS DAY EVENTS: MARCH FOR THE OCEAN AT THE NEW YORK AQUARIUM (June 8, 10 a.m.-noon) and BEACH CLEANUP AT ROCKAWAY BEACH PARK (June 9, 9:30 a.m.-12:30 p.m.). Saving species that swim requires the commitment and action of a certain dominant species that walks. That’s why marine organizations are asking families to take steps to achieve the conservation goals of World Oceans Day (June 8). On Saturday, those steps will be literal: Supporters will meet at Steeplechase Plaza on Coney Island to march to the New York Aquarium. The day’s organizers are encouraging participants to decorate bicycles, strollers and wagons with castoff plastic and to design “trashion” costumes — as well as witty signs — for this antipollution parade. The aquarium will give prizes to the most creative projects and discounted admission to all registered marchers. (Here’s your chance to check out the shark pavilion.) On Sunday, young environmentalists can dispose of plastic directly in a cleanup of Rockaway Beach in Queens sponsored by the company 4ocean. (Gloves and bags will be provided.) An education village at Beach 94th Street and Shore Front Parkway will also have stations devoted to topics like recycling, sustainability and ocean health.
