‘¡BUENA ONDA! MUSIC FROM SOUTH AMERICA’ at Carnegie Hall (June 23, 2 p.m.). Roughly translated, the phrase in the title means “good vibes,” and you will encounter plenty of those at this Spanish-language family event. Presented by Distinguished Concerts International New York, the afternoon will feature a variety of children’s choirs in two works by the Venezuelan composer Alberto Grau: “Cinco Canciones Infantiles,” which draws on the traditional music of the vibrant June festival Parranda de San Pedro; and “Opereta Ecológica,” a salute to nature that incorporates poems for young people by Jesús Rosas Marcano. The program, recommended for listeners 10 and older, also includes the Argentine composer Martín Palmeri’s “Misa a Buenos Aires” and “Gran Misa,” pieces that infuse the ancient melodies of the Roman Catholic Mass with the high-spirited rhythms and energy of tango.
NEW PLAYS FOR YOUNG AUDIENCES: ‘RETURN TO SENDER’ at Provincetown Playhouse (June 22, 7:30 p.m.; June 23, 3 p.m.). Boundaries, both physical and psychological, are at the heart of this theatrical adaptation of Julia Alvarez’s young-adult novel of the same title. Tyler, the play’s protagonist, struggles to understand the lives of the Mexican migrants his father, who is recovering from an accident, has recently hired to work on the family’s Vermont farm. Commissioned by the Nashville Children’s Theater and written by Marisela Treviño Orta, the drama chronicles Tyler’s developing friendship with Mari, a Mexican girl, as it examines the plight of immigrants who enter the United States illegally. These free rehearsed readings will conclude this year’s New Plays for Young Audiences, an annual series of works in development presented by the educational theater program of the Steinhardt School at N.Y.U.
‘SLEEPING BEAUTY’ at the Jeffrey and Paula Gural Theater at A.R.T./New York Theaters (June 22-23, noon and 3 p.m.; through June 30). A princess needs to be awakened in this play, but little else conforms to the fairy tale’s usual plot.  Commissioned by Project Y Theater Company, Amina Henry’s feminist adaptation is recommended for young people ages 6 to 13. Presented as part of the Women in Theater Festival, it also features fire birds, a troll and some well-known storybook siblings.
SUMMER SOLSTICE WEEKEND at the New York Botanical Garden (June 22-23, 10 a.m.-6 p.m.). Despite its name, the Edible Academy isn’t like the gingerbread house in “Hansel and Gretel” — you can’t eat it.  An educational campus that is part of the Botanical Garden in the Bronx, the academy will give culinary demonstrations all weekend, offering healthy dishes young visitors can sample, like spinach pesto pasta with spring peas and spring pea panini. Children can also tour the facilities, which will have live music; enjoy games, puzzles and displays that teach about vegetables; help tend plants and pot up a sunflower seed to take home; and do solstice-inspired crafts, like decorate a harvest bag with stamps that honor the sun.
WHITNEY BIENNIAL FAMILY OPENING at the Whitney Museum of American Art (June 22, 10:30 a.m.-3 p.m.). You can always see art at a biennial, but on this occasion, you can hear it as well. Laura Ortman, a composer, musician and one of the 75 artists in the show, will perform at 11:30 a.m. and 1 p.m. in a short-term installation she built, filled with instruments like a piano, chimes and an Apache violin; sound equipment; and ephemera such as photos and drawings. She will answer children’s questions after each concert. Young visitors can also listen to raps that are delivered by houses and buildings in Meriem Bennani’s video piece “Neighborhood Goggles” and make paper puppets inspired by those structures. Additional activities will include creating landscape sculptures; participating in a scavenger hunt and sketching exercise related to Nicole Eisenman’s “Procession”; and making buttons that reflect attendees’ beliefs and passions, a nod to the political nature of many of the biennial’s works.
