WASHINGTON — Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota on Tuesday unveiled a list of well over 100 actions she would take in her first 100 days as president if she were elected, a show of policymaking force that is intended to provide a crystal-clear view of the early days of her administration.
The list of plans, addressing issues such as voting rights, prescription drugs and antitrust enforcement, is meant to demonstrate the breadth and ambition of a Klobuchar White House, regardless of the balance of power in Congress.
Ms. Klobuchar’s list contains 136 items in all, and a vast majority are ones she could pursue with executive power, her campaign said. That is a critical consideration because Republicans may well retain their Senate majority, and even in the minority would be positioned to stymie a new president’s legislative agenda.
Like most of her rivals in the Democratic primary race, Ms. Klobuchar has been unable to break out of the pack. She is polling in the low single digits and has failed to command the kind of news media attention that some of her competitors have received.
One of those competitors, Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, has established herself as the policy-minded candidate in the race with a steady stream of detailed proposals. Ms. Klobuchar is pursuing a more moderate agenda than Ms. Warren is, and her proposals for the first 100 days are described only briefly.
But with her announcement on Tuesday, Ms. Klobuchar will be able to credibly argue that she has presented an extensive blueprint for what the early days of her administration would look like — a period of time that is a blank canvas for many candidates.
Some of Ms. Klobuchar’s plans deal with high-profile issues, both foreign and domestic. She would rejoin the Paris climate accord and seek to re-enter the Iran nuclear agreement. She would also protect from deportation the young undocumented immigrants known as Dreamers.
Other plans address narrower subjects, like cracking down on illegal robocalls and investigating deceptive practices by travel-booking websites.
To come up with her agenda, Ms. Klobuchar and her team examined what steps she could take to overturn actions taken by the Trump administration, as well as to resurrect policies from the Obama administration, according to an aide.
In addition, they looked at what existing legal authority could be used by a Klobuchar administration to take actions without Congress on important issues. For example, Ms. Klobuchar would allow for the importation of prescription drugs from countries like Canada, an issue she has worked on in the Senate.
The death of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg instantly upended the nation’s politics in the middle of the presidential campaign and underscored the stakes of the contest.
