WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — On Monday we talked about some of the things we could do with words when you cock your head to the side, squint your eyes and look at them differently, and David Phillips’s Wednesday crossword continues the pun — sorry, I meant fun.
The human brain processes information in complex and wondrous ways, and nothing is a better reminder of that than when we have to parse words or phrases differently. I, for example, once emailed Will Shortz to ask him what a LARAM was, when the answer was really L. A. RAM — a member of the football team — and you have not really experienced embarrassment until you’ve made a mistake of that magnitude in front of the puzzlemaster. For the record, he was very kind about it.
The point is, things aren’t always what they seem. One person’s LARAM is another person’s football player. And nothing drives that home better than today’s puzzle.
Mr. Phillips is slicing up words in familiar phrases today with surgical precision, but the slices all follow the same pattern, so it’s not difficult to tumble to this theme.
He offers us a set of familiar, two-word phrases where the second word in each phrase begins with the letter A. That’s convenient, because it allows Mr. Phillips to slice just along the A and separate out the rest of the second word. For example, at 24A, the mysterious answer to the clue “Take a chance on a work of poetry?” is RISK AVERSE ... or is it? If you read it as RISK A VERSE, it makes a lot more sense. Similarly, the nonsensical answer to 35A’s “Cite a chap for speeding?” is TICKET AGENT, but not really. Slice along the A, push the rest of the word over, and you’ve got TICKET A GENT.
■ 7A: I knew heroin as “smack,” but TIL about the nickname SCAG.
■ 17A: I don’t know, I’m not sure I would have felt better about a theme entry like STUDY A BROAD even if it was in a puzzle by a female constructor. And yes, I noted that the clue includes the phrase, “ ... old-fashionedly?”  I knew it would be wordplay because of the question mark, so I was mentally riffing on what kind of “slice of one’s workday” we were supposed to be imagining. Pizza? Cake? Nope. It’s a PAPERCUT. Ouch.
■ 32D: Note to solvers who are not familiar with the rap or hip-hop genre: There is a totally humorous and false assumption that whenever there is a clue about rap in the crossword, the answer will invariably be NAS. But here we are.
■ 35D: Wordplay alert! Everyone, all together now: “In a right angled triangle: the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares of the other two sides.” So when you see a tricky clue like “It’s right in the Pythagorean theorem,” your focus should be on the word “right,” as in right TRIANGLE. UPDATE: Thank you all of the kind-hearted people who wrote in via email and social media to tell me that instead of defining the Pythagorean Thorem, I had accidentally quoted the Scarecrow from “The Wizard of Oz.” To be fair, I had taken the first quote I actually understood off a page from mathworld.wolfram.com , and it turned out to be incorrect. This is why I write Wordplay and never took a stab at Numberplay. The Theorem has been corrected in this post.