WASHINGTON — Senator John McCain has long had a reputation as a political maverick. But with the rise of a president who has vowed to shatter the old order, Mr. McCain has emerged as an outspoken defender of longstanding Republican verities on foreign policy and as one of his party’s most biting critics of the new commander in chief.
Newly re-elected to a six-year term and eager to wield the megaphone that comes with the chairmanship of the powerful Armed Services Committee, Mr. McCain has repeatedly pushed back on the White House’s national security policies in its first weeks.
In a star turn at a security conference in Munich on Friday, he delivered a forceful critique of President Trump’s “America First” vision before a receptive audience of experts and allied officials worried about American drift from a seven-decade-old Western alliance.
“In many respects, this administration is in disarray, and they’ve got a lot of work to do,” he said.
For a senator who supports free trade, backs NATO, remains deeply suspicious of Russian intentions and has favored an assertive foreign policy, including the war in Iraq, the differences with Mr. Trump have been profound.
“I like people that weren’t captured,” Mr. Trump said of Mr. McCain, 80, who was held for more than five years as a prisoner of war in Vietnam and was tortured while in captivity.
At the Munich Security Conference, Senator John McCain addressed “the Flynn issue” and expressed worry about the future of the West amid its citizens’ “flirting with authoritarianism.”CreditCredit...Michael Dalder/Reuters..
After Mr. Trump won the Republican nomination, Mr. McCain walked a fine line while campaigning for re-election. The senator did not attend the Republican National Convention, but said he would back his party’s nominee. He then withdrew that support in October after a recording was disclosed in which Mr. Trump made lewd comments about women.
Immediately after Mr. Trump’s election, Mr. McCain held his fire and appeared determined to let the new administration take shape. “I will not talk about Donald Trump,” he barked at a group of reporters in November.
But after weeks in which the White House has blindsided the public, and sometimes much of the government, with executive orders and sent mixed messages on major foreign policy issues, Mr. McCain has let loose.
Denouncing Russia for “interfering” in the presidential election, Mr. McCain has called for the formation of a select Senate committee to investigate the Kremlin’s cyberactivities. He has also chastised Mr. Trump for a comment in which he seemed to equate the actions of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia with those of the United States.
Along with Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, he has criticized Mr. Trump’s executive order on travel from seven predominantly Muslim countries as a “self-inflicted wound” that would alienate Muslim partners in the fight against extremists.
Mr. Trump’s decision to withdraw from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a vast trade deal, Mr. McCain said, “creates an opening for China.” He has also warned the White House against trying to use torture as an interrogation technique, pointing out that legislation he sponsored in 2015 made those techniques illegal.
And while he is a strong supporter of two retired Marine generals in the administration — Jim Mattis, the defense secretary, and John F. Kelly, the homeland security secretary — he was the lone Republican to vote against Mick Mulvaney, Mr. Trump’s pick for budget chief.
On the Senate floor, Mr. McCain complained that Mr. Mulvaney had supported military spending cuts that seriously weakened the armed forces. Mr. McCain has also complained loudly about the role of Stephen K. Bannon, the president’s chief political strategist, on the National Security Council.
All this blunt talk has not come without some pushback. This month, Mr. Trump blasted Mr. McCain for his criticism of a risky Special Operations raid in Yemen in which a Navy SEAL was killed. “He’s been losing so long he doesn’t know how to win anymore,” Mr. Trump said on Twitter.
Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, said on Sunday that Mr. McCain had a “personal dispute” with Mr. Trump and criticized what he called the senator’s eagerness to use military force.
If the opening month of the administration is any indication, there may be perpetual conflict — between senator and president.