After a White House meeting with executives from Wall Street, Mr. Trump signed a directive aimed at the Dodd-Frank Act, crafted by the Obama administration and passed by Congress in response to the 2008 meltdown. He also signed a memorandum that paves the way for reversing a policy, known as the fiduciary rule, that requires brokers to act in a client’s best interest, rather than seek the highest profits for themselves, when providing retirement advice.
The executive order affecting Dodd-Frank is vague in its wording and expansive in its reach. It never mentions the law by name, instead laying out “core principles” for regulations that include empowering American investors and enhancing the competitiveness of American companies. Even so, it gives the Treasury the authority to restructure major provisions of Dodd-Frank, and it directs the Treasury secretary to make sure existing laws align with administration goals.
Mr. Trump’s action on the fiduciary rule, which Democrats and consumer groups immediately denounced as a gift to Wall Street, could have a more concrete impact. His memorandum directs the Labor Department to review whether the rule may “adversely affect” investors’ ability to access financial advice — and if it does, it authorizes the agency to rescind and revise the rule.
Supporters of the rule describe it as a basic consumer protection to prevent brokers from taking advantage of vulnerable clients. The industry argues that the rule will expose it to a torrent of lawsuits and will increase costs that firms will pass on to consumers.
Taken together, Mr. Trump’s actions on Friday constitute an extensive effort to loosen regulations on banks and other major financial companies, even though the president campaigned as a champion of working Americans and as a critic of Wall Street elites. Mr. Trump said on Friday that his actions were intended to help both Wall Street and workers as his administration eases constraints on banks and allows them to lend more to companies, which could then hire more workers.
The 2010 act reined in mortgage practices and derivatives trading and curbed the ability of banks to trade with their own money in a measure known as the Volcker Rule. Despite the president’s concerns, banks have increased their consumer lending like credit cards and auto loans, and have generally expanded their lending to businesses.
The advertisement flashed an image of the chief executive of Goldman Sachs, which has become a virtual feeder for top Trump administration officials. Steven Mnuchin, his nominee for Treasury secretary; Gary Cohn, the chairman of his national economic council; and Stephen K. Bannon, Mr. Trump’s chief strategist, all had worked at Goldman.
The president’s actions came just hours after congressional Republicans voted to repeal an unrelated Dodd-Frank rule, a sign that Mr. Trump will have some support on Capitol Hill to challenge a law he has called “a disaster,” and promised to do “a big number” to reshape.
Now emboldened, House Republicans are also moving legislation to “repeal and replace” Dodd-Frank, though they would need 60 votes to accomplish that, which seems unlikely. And they are considering potential ways to use the budget process to defund some aspects of the law, all of which comes on top of the president’s executive actions.
While the president cannot unwind Dodd-Frank with the stroke of a pen, his orders set the tone for the regulatory agencies enforcing the rules, including the Securities and Exchange Commission. And the orders could portend even more executive actions that direct the regulators to halt financial regulation.
Wall Street is expected to lobby Mr. Trump’s financial regulators, at the S.E.C. and elsewhere, to modify rules and enforce them lightly.
White House officials had considered a far more aggressive assault on the fiduciary rule, which would have immediately halted it for six months or more while the Labor Department reviewed its effects. The final memorandum appears to leave the regulation in place, but it also goes a step further, instructing the department to undertake what could be a lengthy new process for rewriting the rule if it is found to harm investors or financial companies.
“President Trump’s action will make it harder for American savers to keep more of what they earn,” Senator Sherrod Brown, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Banking Committee, said in a statement.
Even before the president acted, congressional Republicans on Friday started to chip away at Dodd-Frank. The Republicans used an unusual parliamentary procedure to repeal a rule that stems from the law with only a majority of votes, rather than the 60 votes needed to overcome a filibuster.
The Senate voted 52 to 47 to void the rule, which requires oil companies to publicly disclose payments made to governments when developing resources around the world. The rule, which Dodd-Frank assigned to the S.E.C. to enforce, was tangential to the law’s mission of reforming Wall Street, but lawmakers included it anyway with the hope of exposing bribes and corruption.
Some of the largest American oil companies objected to the S.E.C. rule, including Exxon Mobil, arguing that it put them at a competitive disadvantage with foreign companies. Rex W. Tillerson, Mr. Trump’s secretary of state, personally lobbied against it when he was Exxon’s top executive, according to public accounts.
Republicans are not done. Under the Congressional Review Act of 1996, Congress has at least 60 days to introduce legislation repealing major new regulations.
Already this week, Republicans introduced legislation under the act to repeal a Consumer Financial Protection Bureau rule for prepaid debit cards.
The Congressional Research Service has determined that rules sent to Congress on or after June 13 last year are vulnerable to repeal. The S.E.C. rule just missed that cutoff; it became final on June 27, making it fair game for Republicans to repeal, over the objections of antipoverty groups like Oxfam and the One Campaign.
“If President Trump is serious about his promise to ‘drain the swamp’ and protect American security, he will veto this dangerous bill immediately,” Isabel Munilla, an Oxfam official, said in a statement.