More than 1,300 lives are cut short each year in the Los Angeles area because of air pollution, scientists say.
Now, after years of work, regulators are getting ready to adopt their most substantial plan in more than a decade to do something about it.
The proposal is outlined in 5,000-plus pages from the South Coast Air Quality Management District, whose jurisdiction extends across Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino Counties.
Not surprisingly, it has set off debate, as critics have called the plan too lenient on industry.
All sides recognize that industries under the agency’s regulatory power — including refineries, ports and warehouses — must adopt cleaner technologies.
The agreement breaks down over how to get there.
The draft blueprint would adopt some tougher emissions rules. But it also calls for a carrot approach: roughly $15 billion in handouts over the next 15 years to encourage polluters to clean up.
Some community leaders have portrayed the incentives — which would surely involve tax increases — as a form of corporate welfare at the expense of low-income families.
But supporters of the plan have argued that they are needed to avoid stifling business. Smaller operators, for example, may not be able to afford a new, cleaner truck.
At a public meeting last Friday, the air agency’s board was supposed to vote on a final version of the plan.
Hundreds of people showed up, filling overflow rooms. Testimony included stories of the personal toll that asthma is taking on young Californians. Business leaders warned of job losses if the plan were amended to add new rules.
In the end, the board postponed the vote, citing the unexpected absence of a member. They’ll try again next month.
• The AT&T Pebble Beach Pro-Am kicks off Thursday. Among the pros: Jordan Spieth, Dustin Johnson and the No. 1-ranked Jason Day. Bill Murray will join the celebrity field.
• On Saturday, San Francisco hosts its annual Chinese New Year parade. The nighttime celebration will usher in the Year of the Rooster with floats and firecrackers.
• The Grammy Awards are Sunday. An all-star musical tribute to Prince is expected to be among the memorable moments.
McWay Falls is among the most photographed of Big Sur’s vistas.
For obvious reason — the falls tumble 80 feet off a granite cliff into an almost impossibly beautiful cove.
Hajer Dlame, 26, a reader from the Bay Area, shared a photo she snapped at sunset while visiting with her mother last month.
Alas, the beach itself, part of a state park, is strictly off limits. Visitors are confined to a nearby trail.
The upside is McWay Cove has remained an unspoiled slice of the California coast.
Want to submit a photo for possible publication? You can do it here.
