But it wasn’t until years later, when he came across a vintage Rolex, his father’s only watch, that Mr. Al Rahmani’s tastes really came into focus.
“He picked the watch up, he shook it, and he showed it to me. And it started working again. Then he explained the concept of kinetic energy and how it works in a watch — and I found that amazing. I researched a bit more and it turns out the same things that I liked in digital watches were available in a mechanical version, and that just blew my mind.
The Rolex now is part of Mr. Al Rahmani’s collection of 30 watches; he traded timepieces with his father.
As a teenager, Mr. Al Rahmani got a Breitling with some financial help from his parents. It was several years later, when he was almost 20, that he used several years’ savings — about 200,000 dirhams, the equivalent of $55,000 now — to buy an A. Lange & Söhne watch.
“It just blew me away,” he said, bringing up a picture on his phone of the Zeitwerk model, in white gold with black dial.
And did he wear it? Yes, he said, thanks to some childhood advice from his parents.
“I remember I bought these Rollerblades, and the wheels were see-through. They were so cool, and I remember using them once and they got a bit scuffed and I just wanted to keep them perfect so I would not use them unless I was at home, inside,” he said with a laugh.
And as Mr. Al Rahmani’s collection grew, so did his desire to share his interest — his father doesn’t wear a watch regularly, neither does his brother nor his half siblings. So, in July 2014, he created the Dubai Watch Club.
Mr. Al Rahmani found the first 10 members through Instagram. The club now has 63 members, all men, and almost 68,000 followers on Instagram.
Club members represent a range of nationalities, religions — and tastes. “We have this one person who only buys field watches; we have someone else who specifically buys Grand Seiko; vintage Rolex; Patek Philippe; only rose gold watches,” he said, reeling off some of the specialties.
It is easy for Mr. Al Rahmani to remember members’ preferences: The collectors spend a lot of time together at events like dinners for 10 to 15, semiformal meetings where “everybody is invited,” and casual gatherings that, he said, take place all the time.
Club members often help one another hunt for particular models, but Mr. Al Rahmani said he preferred to buy on his own, partly to surprise the fellow members he sees almost every day (“more than my wife and kids”).
Among his most memorable purchases was another Lange watch, the Richard Lange Tourbillon Pour le Mérite. He said that he couldn’t recall the exact date but that four or five years ago he wired 600,000 or so dirhams to the seller in London, then flew there with his wife to pick up the timepiece, spending only about 30 hours in the city before coming home.
He has managed to get his wife and, now, his son, almost 6, into watches. The youngster has a Memorigin tourbillon watch with Captain America on the face, from the Hong Kong brand’s Avengers collection. The piece cost about $5,000.
But Mr. Al Rahmani said he worried about the day his son really starts taking an interest and asks those potentially expensive words: Dad, can I have a watch? “I’m not really sure what I’m going to say at that point,” he said.
So far, only his son has shown a growing interest in the hobby. His middle child, a 4-year-old daughter, has somewhat less expensive taste.
“As long as she has her ‘Frozen’ watch, she’s happy,” he said with a smile.