It’s no secret that Brixton, in the district of South London, has changed over the last decade. Once a neighborhood known for the shops, markets and food stalls of Brixton Village that reflected the cultural flavor of its multiracial residents, today in place of locally owned businesses, Brixton is increasingly populated with chain restaurants, trendy burger joints and organic wine bar pop-ups.
The stalls are largely gone in Granville Arcade, the Art Deco indoor marketplace that was described by its founders in 1961 as “London’s Largest Emporium.” With high prices and upscale concepts, the shops in and about the arcade have been criticized for not catering to the needs of Brixton’s low-income and elderly residents.
Now it’s the small businesses run and owned by locals along a short stretch of a nearby road known as Brixton Hill that are successfully eschewing the onslaught of gentrification and proving that cool doesn’t have to come with a high price tag.
David Thorpe, the owner of Alkaline Juice Factory on Brixton Hill, said he barely recognizes Brixton Village anymore. “Ten years ago, Brixton Village was useful. I’d go down for the fruit and veg market inside Granville Arcade — the whole area was for shopping and hanging out — but it’s changed,” said Mr. Thorpe, who was wearing jeans and a juice-stained shirt.
In his small corner shop, he prides himself on offering Alkaline’s raw green juices at prices geared to the incomes of born-and-bred Brixtonites.
Latanya Christie, the founder of Negril, an organic Caribbean restaurant, was also drawn to the road’s mellow vibe. She was one of the first to set up a business on the hill in 2005. The same goes for the coffee shop F. Mondays, one block down from Negril, and owned by the husband-and-wife team of Ken Nally and Ciara O’Shea, who wanted to create a relaxed hang-out space. With friendly service and reasonable prices, theirs is the least pretentious coffee shop for a mile.
With picturesque landscapes and easy access to the center of London, Brixton Hill became a prosperous suburb in the 19th century. The road’s old mansions are still accompanied by 150-foot-long gardens. You can still see the old water pump station that once served the borough of Lambeth and the windmill that gave its name to one of London’s best-known music destinations.
