Europe|Mike Pence, in Europe, Says Trump Supports Partnership With E.U.
Mike Pence, in Europe, Says Trump Supports Partnership With E.U.
BRUSSELS — Vice President Mike Pence told a rattled Europe on Monday that President Trump fully supported crucial European institutions — despite the president’s perplexing comments and occasional insults — and said he supported the firing of the national security adviser.
Asked for his response to the resignation of the national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn — whom the administration blamed for misleading Mr. Pence about the extent of his conversations with the Russian ambassador to the United States — Mr. Pence looked uncomfortable but said he supported Mr. Trump’s decision to ask for Mr. Flynn’s resignation.
The administration has not explained why Mr. Trump did not immediately tell Mr. Pence about Mr. Flynn’s conversations with the ambassador after the president learned about them from his top lawyer, and Mr. Pence did not shed light on that question on Monday.
Smiles and handshakes abounded before and after Mr. Pence delivered his reassuring words, but Europeans — taken aback by Mr. Trump’s occasional fulminations against European institutions that have long been the bedrock of American policy here — were still wary.
Last month, Mr. Trump called the European Union “basically a vehicle for Germany,” language that stunned leaders of the bloc, which has been struggling with economic malaise, migration and Britain’s intention to withdraw. Days later, Mr. Tusk, who represents the union’s 28 national leaders, described Mr. Trump’s bombastic and skeptical language as a potential threat to European unity alongside Russian aggression, Chinese assertiveness and Islamist terrorism.
Mr. Tusk said he appreciated a story that Mr. Pence had shared during the weekend at the Munich Security Conference, a gathering of foreign policy experts, about visiting Europe for the first time, as a teenager.
In his statement, Mr. Tusk also recalled President Ronald Reagan’s fight against communism.
Mr. Trump’s presidency has upended Washington, where his rambling and grievance-filled news conferences, chaotic decision-making and thin staffing levels have left much of the capital uncertain how to manage the earthquake he has wrought. The aftershocks swept across Europe, leaving those who depend on the United States for security and vital economic ties uncertain about where they stand, particularly in the face of a resurgent Russia.
A cavalcade of surrogates for Mr. Trump — Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson and now Mr. Pence — have come to Europe in recent days to try to settle nerves here. Their speeches have helped.
But nobody is quite sure whether these surrogates truly speak for Mr. Trump or whether, even if they do, Mr. Trump might soon change his mind.
Among the concerns shared by many European policy makers is the possibility that the Trump administration will impose protectionist tariffs as part of the president’s goal of bringing jobs back to the United States.
In brief remarks before his own meeting with Mr. Pence, Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European Commission, the executive arm of the European Union, warned that the United States was more dependent on Europe than was commonly believed.
“The U.S. economy is depending more than some in the U.S. would think on the exchanges, the trade volumes, including Indiana, by the way, between the U.S. and the European Union,” Mr. Juncker said, referring to the state where Mr. Pence was governor before becoming vice president.
In his own remarks, NATO’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said he had been reassured of the Trump administration’s commitment to NATO.
