DENVER — In the basement of a white stone church here on Tuesday night, Jeanette Vizguerra gathered up her three youngest children, slipped them into pajamas and asked herself perhaps the hardest question of her life.
Should she present herself to the immigration authorities Wednesday morning for a scheduled check-in, risking deportation?
Or should she stay in the church, one of the few places federal agents do not go, almost surely resigning herself to months or years trapped inside?
It has been a difficult week for Ms. Vizguerra, 45, one of millions of undocumented immigrants contending with an uncertain future in the Trump administration. After she was convicted several years ago of using fake documents, Ms. Vizguerra, who has spent 20 years working in the United States, was ordered out of the country. But she was granted at least five postponements of deportation, and in December, her lawyer, Hans Meyer, asked for another.
Nothing happened. She was due for a regular check-in at the local office of Immigration and Customs Enforcement on Wednesday, and as the day crept closer, Ms. Vizguerra realized the possibility that she could be whisked onto a plane and separated from her three American-born children: Zury, 6, Roberto, 10, and Luna, 12.
Their care would fall to her husband, Salvador, 45, who works long hours as a driver for a tile company, and an older daughter, Tania Baez, 26, a preschool teacher with three children of her own. Unlike her younger siblings, Ms. Baez is not a citizen by birth, but she has a work permit under the Obama administration’s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, which President Trump criticized during the campaign but has not moved to end.
The last week or so has thrust the family into a state of extended emergency. On Feb. 5, Ms. Vizguerra called a family meeting over dinner, banning electronics from the table to convey the seriousness of the matter. The family cats, Miranda and Zayra, meowed as she explained the plan.
Three days later, the packing began, with the children stuffing their mother’s leggings, sweaters and shampoos into suitcases and boxes. Terrified by the prospect of familial separation, Ms. Vizguerra began to consider taking refuge at the First Unitarian Society church in Denver, whose congregants previously gave sanctuary to another immigrant.
She reminded Luna which drawers belonged to which child and told her it would be her job to make sure her siblings dressed properly. She showed her where the extra soap, toothbrushes and toothpaste were kept.
Then Ms. Vizguerra stocked the refrigerator with microwave dinners, something even a 6-year-old could make.
Ms. Vizguerra came to the United States from Mexico in 1997. She worked as a janitor and a union organizer, and she later owned a moving and cleaning business. In 2009, she was caught with fake identification that her lawyer said she had acquired in order to work. She pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor, setting off a chain of events that led to the deportation order. In the Denver area, she is a well-known advocate for immigration overhaul.
Ms. Vizguerra’s situation — first the government ordered her to leave, then it allowed her to stay — is reflective of Obama-era immigration policies that his critics called muddled and inconsistent. And even as Mr. Obama allowed some people to stay here, he deported millions of others.
Mr. Trump has done away with the Obama administration’s policy of prioritizing the most serious criminals for deportation, making anyone with a record a candidate for quick removal. Now Ms. Vizguerra and others like her are worried that immigration officials will no longer give them a pass.
On Tuesday night, she slept in the church basement with her three youngest children, to avoid the risk of arrest at home. At that point, she still had not decided whether to show up at her I.C.E. meeting.
When the time came on Wednesday, she decided not to go. Then Mr. Meyer, her lawyer, learned that Ms. Vizguerra’s request for another “stay” of her deportation had been rejected.
As of Wednesday evening, she was still at the church, staying in a room she helped prepare three years ago, when she and other immigrant advocates thought it would be a good idea to create a safe space for people facing deportation. She chose the yellow paint for the walls.
The room holds two beds, a lamp propped on a cardboard box, and a Valentine from her youngest daughter. “I could be here days, months, maybe even years,” she said.
Under federal policy, immigration officers are supposed to avoid entering churches and other “sensitive locations,” unless they have advance approval from a supervisor or face “exigent circumstances” that require immediate action.
There was no sign of I.C.E. agents Wednesday evening outside the church. Shawn Neudauer, a spokesman for I.C.E., would not say what the agency planned to do next.