To create it, he welcomed artists who work in eye-popping genres that once exasperated the establishment. Only a few are old enough to remember the 1970s, when street art and graffiti exploded in New York City. Since then street art, in particular, has moved away from its renegade roots. Now it claims mainstream respectability; galleries represent the artists and exhibitions put their work before the public.
And it was a gallery that pointed the artists to Mr. Marcucci. The idea for doing street art on the 69th floor started when Dara McQuillan, the chief marketing officer for Silverstein Properties, took some photographs to a nearby framing shop, the World Trade Gallery, which doubles as an exhibition space. Mr. McQuillan was intrigued by what he saw and struck up a conversation with the owner, Doug Smith.
A bigger space, in this case, meant wide. “A lot of artists are accustomed to 30 inches, 40 inches,” Mr. Smith said. “Street artists, they can do 30 feet.” Ron English’s “No Brain No Pain” is one inch wider than that. David Hollier’s “$10 Bill” is 23 feet 11 inches wide by 11 feet 8 inches high.
One work — “In Bloom,” by David Uda, who is known as Duda — is a tribute to Sept. 11, Mr. Marcucci said.
For some artists, the 69th floor was a departure from their previous work spaces. Mr. English once wandered the streets with a bucket of glue, plastering paintings on billboards, and once he barely escaped an angry mob in Jersey City (which later gave him keys to the city). The 69th floor was quiet, and the artists had as much time as they wanted.
Another artist on the 69th floor, Sean Sullivan, said his street name, Layer Cake, came from his fascination with the way street art was made — layered over what was there before. For one of the Trade Center works on which he collaborated, Mr. Sullivan used images of people who had come before: the face of his grandfather, who, he said, “beat federal indictments, like, for running numbers.” Not pictured is his father, who he says is a detective on the New York Police Department’s bomb squad.
Angela China, known as Gumshoe, did three panels titled “Stripes and Stilettos.” Ms. China said she had wanted to do an image of a Campbell’s soup can with legs, similar to a mural she had created in Bushwick, Brooklyn. But she said it had not proved suitable for the 69th floor. “I heard through the grapevine, ‘Keep it very PG,’” she said.
Street art is often temporary, painted over fairly quickly. The 69th floor may be different.
Last week, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo announced that the music-streaming service Spotify was leasing space at 4 World Trade Center and would move its American headquarters there. The 378,000 square feet that it will occupy will include the 69th floor.
