Ending months of anticipation and speculation, Mayor Bill de Blasio will meet on Friday with federal prosecutors and F.B.I. agents who have been investigating the mayor’s campaign fund-raising for nearly a year, according to people with knowledge of the matter.
The session is expected to take place at the offices of Mr. de Blasio’s lawyer, Barry H. Berke of Kramer Levin Naftalis & Frankel, familiar ground to the mayor, who has held fund-raisers and meetings there, several of the people said. The meeting had originally been scheduled for two weeks ago, but prosecutors postponed it for reasons that remain unclear.
In recent weeks, investigators appear to have focused on a relatively new area in the inquiry, looking into the mayor’s relationship with a Brooklyn businessman who hosted a fund-raiser for him in October 2013, after the Democratic primary but before the general election, according to two of the people. Like others interviewed for this article, they declined to comment because they were not authorized to discuss the continuing investigation.
The businessman, Moishe Indig, is a prominent rabbi and leader in the Satmar Hasidic community in Williamsburg who was on the Village Voice’s 10 Worst Landlords list in 2010. Mr. Indig’s lawyer, Susan R. Necheles of Hafetz & Necheles, declined to comment.
Mayor de Blasio has repeatedly defended his fund-raising practices and his conduct over all, along with that of his aides and his campaign staff. Although he has declined to answer specific questions from reporters about the investigation and the particular matters under scrutiny, he has said that he and his administration have been cooperating with the prosecutors, who are from the office of the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, Preet Bharara.
“We are absolutely confident that the mayor and our City Hall staff have acted appropriately and well within the law at all times,” Eric F. Phillips, a spokesman for the mayor, said Thursday.
A spokesman for Mr. Bharara’s office declined to comment about the meeting or the investigation, as did a spokeswoman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Mr. de Blasio confirmed last month that he had been interviewed by prosecutors from the office of the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., as part of a separate state investigation into his fund-raising. Days later, he acknowledged that he would be questioned by agents from the New York F.B.I. office and Mr. Bharara’s prosecutors in the federal inquiry.
The mayor is expected to be questioned on Friday morning in a conference room at Kramer Levin’s offices in Midtown Manhattan, according to the people with knowledge of the planned session, which they said is expected to last about four hours. The prosecutors and agents want to question the mayor about more than a dozen topics.
In addition to investigating whether the city took any action on behalf of Mr. Indig as a result of his support for the mayor, the prosecutors and agents are also likely to focus on a number of other donors who have come under scrutiny, including two who have been of intense interest to prosecutors. They are Harendra Singh and Gina Argento.
Mr. Singh is the former owner of the Water’s Edge, a popular restaurant and wedding venue on waterfront property in Long Island City, Queens, that is owned by the city. In 2014 and 2015, Mr. Singh, who was having financial difficulties, was negotiating a new lease with the Department of Citywide Administrative Services, which handles such matters.
A person briefed on the matter said that emails from 2014 and 2015, including several between officials in City Hall and the agency’s commissioner at the time, Stacy Cumberbatch, and her senior staff, suggest that the mayor took a keen interest in the process. The person said city officials eventually took over the negotiations because they were unhappy with how Ms. Cumberbatch handled the talks.
In one email with the subject line, “Heads Up re: Harendra Singh,” according to the person, an aide to the mayor told the commissioner in June 2014 that “the mayor would like you to meet with Harendra asap since it is a time sensitive issue that he has,” apparently referring to the lease negotiations.
Before the negotiations were completed, Mr. Singh was arrested on unrelated federal fraud and bribery charges brought by prosecutors in Brooklyn in September 2015. He is now cooperating in the fund-raising inquiry.
After the interview, Mr. de Blasio is expected to fly to Atlanta to attend the Democratic National Committee winter meeting, where a new chairman is to be elected on Saturday.