In Unhitched, couples tell the stories of their relationships, from romance to vows to divorce to life afterward. If you are divorced and both you and your ex are willing to be interviewed for this series, please fill out our submission form.
For Christine Langlois, 64, and Terry Langlois, 69, a midlife marriage hit roadblocks as optimism was crushed beneath old behaviors. For him, it was a fifth marriage, for her, a second. Still, as each recovered, they continued to mine their behavior for clues about future relationships while valuing a deep friendship, which endures.
Terry grew up in Michigan, part of a blended family that he says didn’t blend. He worked in factories to put himself through college.
It was 2004, and they lived on the same street in Grand Rapids. One day while cycling she saw him with a friend on his porch. She stopped to say hello and a friendship blossomed, then a romance. He was dating someone else at the time, but soon stopped to have a relationship with her. They had a two-year courtship during which they broke up several times.
What did they like about the other?
“Terry is really smart, extremely funny, very giving, and the sweetest man you could ever meet,” she said. She also said “everyone in his presence feels better for being around him.” They laughed a lot, and were very attracted to each other. “Christine is classy, very intelligent and a life learner,” he said, noting that he admired her curiosity especially.
“My history showed I wasn’t very good at marriage, but for Christine, living together wasn’t an option,” he said.
Where did they live after marrying?
Initially in Michigan. They moved to Sarasota, Fla., after he retired in 2009.
Both agreed: fun. They were devoted to each other. They made dinners together and danced in the kitchen to romantic music.
Yes, they did many nice things for each other and both had the ability to apologize for small things. “Terry was incredibly thoughtful,” she said.
What caused the trouble?
“She was right about my drinking,” he said in retrospect. But being estranged physically bothered him.
Did they try to work on things? Try therapy?
She tried hormones to boost her libido, but they didn’t help. “We didn’t talk enough,” she said. “Drinking kept us separate.” She wonders if they should have gone to marriage or sex counseling. He stopped drinking again in 2012, but it was too late for her.
The final break?
Who asked for the split?
She did, though both felt that things had run their course. Despite hurt feelings on both sides, they kept talking throughout the process.
He found solace with his dog, Jack. “He gave me unconditional love,” he said. He kept active with activities and political groups.
She rekindled previous friendships back in Michigan, where she had a support network, and moved back within the year. He stayed in Florida.
Not Christine. “As far as being divorced, I’m in that big boat with lots of people,” she said. However, she does question her fitness for marriage after two failures.
Yes, he said. With some women he had recently met, five divorces made dating him a nonstarter. “But I tell everything, I’d rather have everything known out front,” he said.
Both say having a strong prenuptial agreement helped them remain friends. “We had a strong sense of fairness,” she said, and he agreed.
How did their children react?
Because they were adults, everyone was accepting. “Neither of us felt rancor toward each other; many divorcees put down their spouses, but we didn’t believe in that,” she said.
Should they have divorced sooner?
What did they do to start over?
The first man she dated afterward drank too much, and she withdrew. She is now dating an old friend, but they have no thoughts of marriage. Both keep their own homes. “I don’t want to ruin what we have with marriage,” she said.
He has dated several women, but is currently single and enjoying life. After a serious health scare in 2015, he stopped drinking again. They talk on the phone several times a month and both value their deep friendship.
She is more at peace. “My life might look boring to others, but I am satisfied and my friend and I care deeply for each other,” she said.
Christine was the one to insist on the pre-nup, and he had balked at first. “It was hard to talk about breaking up before we’d even married, but I was just being realistic,” she said.
Christine is still working and enjoying her new relationship.
Both say they are much the same, but he says being sober has helped him to feel comfortable in his own skin.
Advice for others divorcing at their age?
