Let’s start with a spoiler, the ultimate spoiler: Everybody dies.
That’s right, the title character of Branden Jacobs-Jenkins’s new play, “Everybody,” dies at the end. Of course, this is to be expected since Everybody is everybody, and everybody — as you surely know, whether you’ve come to terms with the idea or not — is mortal.
Am I sounding self-consciously whimsical and repetitive? I may have been infected by the prevailing tone of this latest offering from the seriously talented Mr. Jacobs-Jenkins, who seems to be running (and writhing) in place in the production that opened on Tuesday night at the Pershing Square Signature Center.
A scene from the new Branden Jacobs-Jenkins play at the Pershing Square Signature Center.
For self-evident reasons, it has not been staged often in the commercial theater, though there have been recent inklings of a mini-renaissance. Two years ago, the National Theater in London presented Carol Ann Duffy’s contemporary adaptation, which turned the title figure into a coke-snorting, big-spending hedonist played by Chiwetel Ejiofor.
Mr. Jacobs-Jenkins’s more democratic version has no place for stars. I can’t even tell you who will be playing the lead if and when you see the show. As life is determined by chance, so is the casting of this production’s ensemble. Five of the parts — which, in addition to Everybody, include such allegorical figures as Friendship, Kinship and Stuff (or material goods) — are newly reassigned at each performance by lottery (via balls in a bingo cage).
This team is made up of Brooke Bloom, Michael Braun, Louis Cancelmi (the Everybody of the performance I saw), David Patrick Kelly and Lakisha Michelle May. They have all had to memorize most of the play, and we are told that what we are about to see is one of 120 possible cast combinations.
It is Death who summons the cast members from the audience (yes, you may be right next to Everybody) to begin the play. They then take their places on a set that has been designed (by Laura Jellinek) as an exact image of a row of seats in the house. Yep, we too are Everybody.
Much painstaking rehearsal and synchronization of cues, for the tech crew as well as the performers, has gone into “Everybody.” Yet it still feels like a work in progress, waiting to be sharpened into focus. Perhaps this is appropriate to the idea of life itself as a perpetual work in progress.
Here, though, such self-consciousness curdles, despite some amusing “who’s on first”-style circular dialogue on weighty subjects like the existence of God. And each of Everybody’s individual encounters with the figures of Kinship, Friendship and Stuff (whom he individually begs to accompany him in death) feels oppressively the same.
The entertainment value of “Everybody” as an acting exercise would probably be enhanced if you could see, well, everybody playing Everybody. But that would require buying many tickets and sitting through many, many hours of people translating medieval ontology into arch latter-day vernacular, saying what is essentially the same thing again and again and again.