Your Money|Who Will Listen to a Billionaire’s Troubles?
Who Will Listen to a Billionaire’s Troubles?
Who doesn’t want to be a billionaire? A millionaire, even? Think of all the troubles that would simply melt away.
Of course, we know deep down that money won’t solve all of life’s problems. And billionaires, it seems, have problems, too. One difference is, no one is likely to feel sorry for them.
“When you have a billion dollars, of course you’re happy about that,” said Brad Klontz, a psychologist and certified financial planner who works with the uber-wealthy.
In an effort to gain a deeper understanding of the wealthy, Mr. Klontz was the lead investigator in a study of wealthy individuals (conducted with three others, including Paul Sullivan, a financial columnist for The New York Times), published in 2015. The study found the ultrarich to be deeply conflicted.
But like everyone else, billionaires do have bad days, and some turn to Mr. Klontz for help.
Mr. Klontz’s interest in helping billionaires and others in their income bracket comes from an unlikely place: his own low-income past. “I came from generations of poverty,” said Mr. Klontz, 46.
The entire field of financial therapy is still in its infancy, said Megan Ford, a marriage and family therapist pursuing a doctorate in financial planning. She is also president of the Financial Therapy Association.
The association was created by financial and mental health professionals who recognized that each group could benefit from the other’s skill set. The association’s members are trying to figure out how to combine those skill sets — financial and mental health — while protecting consumers. “Like any other blossoming discipline, there is a lot of groundwork that needs to be done,” Ms. Ford said.
Becoming a counselor for the ultrarich was a long journey for Mr. Klontz, who grew up outside Detroit. His parents divorced when he was 2, and his mother, a part-time kindergarten teacher pregnant with his sister at the time, was granted full custody. Although she remarried a few years later to a high school teacher, their economic situation barely improved. Mr. Klontz said they went from being under “tremendous financial strain” to straddling the lower- to middle-class line during the rest of his childhood.
Despite earning a doctorate in psychology, he remained financially strapped, graduating with $100,000 in accumulated student loan debt and a lot of anxiety about it.
After his stock market gamble, it took him three years of living extremely close to the bone to pull himself out of debt. The desire to understand the financial beliefs and behaviors of his own, lower-income family led him to dissect the behaviors and beliefs of high-net-worth individuals. And now he works with some of the wealthiest people in the world, many of whom came to him after reading his books or being referred by other clients.
Mr. Klontz and his father also repaired their relationship.
When Mr. Klontz was 19, his father bought Onsite Workshops, a treatment center in South Dakota, and Mr. Klontz lived with him while getting his master’s degree in counseling; he also worked in his father’s treatment program.
And now, after all these years, what, if anything, does Mr. Klontz think psychologically separates the super rich from everyone else — understanding, of course, that generalizations by nature don’t give a full picture.
“In many ways, I would say they are just like you and I, if we had a billion dollars,” he said. “Different problems, but not a lack of problems.
