In an event with black supporters billed as an “African-American History Month listening session,” President Trump on Wednesday veered into some of his preferred topics, including crime and media bias.
Kicking off the session in the White House’s Roosevelt Room, Mr. Trump promised to “honor the tremendous history of the African-Americans throughout our country.” A full transcript of the president’s remarks was provided by the White House.
Last month, we celebrated the life of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., whose incredible example is unique in American history. You read all about Dr. Martin Luther King a week ago when somebody said I took the statue out of my office, and it turned out that that was fake news. (Laughter.) It was fake news. The statue is cherished. It’s one of the favorite things in the — and we have some good ones. We have Lincoln and we have Jefferson and we have Dr. Martin Luther King, and we have — but they said the statue, the bust of Dr. Martin Luther King was taken out of the office. And it was never even touched. So I think it was a disgrace, but that’s the way the press is. Very unfortunate.
I am very proud now that we have a museum on the National Mall where people can learn about Rev. King, so many other things. Frederick Douglass is an example of somebody who’s done an amazing job and is being recognized more and more, I notice — Harriet Tubman, Rosa Parks and millions more black Americans who made America what it is today. Big impact.
We need safer communities, and we’re going to do that with law enforcement. We’re going to make it safe. We’re going to make it much better than it is right now. Right now it’s terrible.
Mr. Trump also took the opportunity to call the news media “the opposition party,” something his chief strategist, Stephen K. Bannon, had said in an interview with The Times.
I mean, a lot of the media is actually the opposition party. They’re so biased and really is a disgrace. Some of you are fantastic and fair, but so much of the media is opposition party and knowingly saying incorrect things. So it’s a very sad situation. But we seem to be doing well. It’s almost like, in the meantime, we won. So maybe they don’t have the influence they think, but they really are — they really have to straighten out their act. They’re very dishonest people.
The group included more than a dozen people who introduced themselves briefly. They included a pastor and his wife, a former Capitol police officer, a defense employee, and an official with the Thurgood Marshall College Fund, among others. Also on hand were members of Mr. Trump’s staff, including Omarosa Manigault, a contestant from his programs “The Apprentice” and “Celebrity Apprentice.” She has been named director of communications for his Office of Public Liaison.
Social media reactions to the president’s comments were swift, with many questioning his commitment to celebrating Black History Month.
More broadly, critics pointed out that Mr. Trump has a checkered history in the area of race relations, from his comments about the five black and Latino teenagers who were falsely accused and later exonerated of raping a white woman in Central Park in 1989, to his recent Twitter spat with Representative John Lewis, the Georgia Democrat and civil rights leader.
Last month, after Mr. Lewis called Mr. Trump an “illegitimate president,” Mr. Trump criticized the civil rights leader as being “all talk, talk, talk – no actions or results. Sad!” He later tried to defuse the angry reaction by meeting with Dr. King’s eldest son.