The critically acclaimed movie “Hidden Figures,” about three African-American women who were instrumental in the success of the Apollo 11 space mission, hit close to home for me. Since its release, I have frequently been asked why there aren’t more people like me in my field.
 The combination of these factors is a rarity that isn’t lost on the students I teach in the classroom or in my laboratory.
But when I think about it, I’ve spent my life around scientists, mathematicians and engineers, even though they would never call themselves that.
My father is a diesel mechanic who showed me the value of using your hands to rebuild an engine or repair a transmission. My mother is a blackjack dealer who taught me that mathematics and statistics were necessary to excel in a job that was crucial to feeding her family.
And my grandfather was a farmer and director of irrigation in a farming community. I was able to learn firsthand from him that understanding basic principles of fluid dynamics and mechanics could mean the difference between seeing water flooding a street because of a burst pipe or enjoying the fruits of a well-irrigated farm field.
While none of these experts in my family had a college education, each of them showed me that hard work, math and science are simply a part of life, and can be used in a job to feed a family, contribute to society and accomplish work to be proud of.
And yet, when I went to graduate school in the early 2000s, one of my professors told me I was unlikely to succeed in science because I had a poor work ethic. I thought about all the outings I had missed with friends and all the nights I had stayed up late studying, and I knew that wasn’t true. So why did my professor think this about me?
Slowly I came to understand why. I had been unaware that in contrast to my undergraduate experience, I was expected as a graduate student to come up with research questions, investigate them in the laboratory and publish my findings in scientific papers. In my professor’s eyes, this was so obvious that it didn’t need to be stated, so he saw my failure to do these things as laziness.
Because my professors and some of my peers hadn’t seen someone like me succeed, they were unlikely to believe that I could. As a student with less experience than they had, I was inclined to believe them. It is basic differences and misunderstandings like these that contribute to the low numbers of women and minorities in the sciences.
Data shows that women and minorities are selectively sorted out of engineering, math and science careers. Talented women enroll in challenging science courses with the goal of learning all they can to excel in a technical career and yet the institutional support they need is unavailable.
When women are infrequently, rarely or never exposed to someone like themselves in the classroom, as a peer or as a professor, it is difficult to imagine themselves succeeding in that environment.
Additionally, when they do speak up and exhibit their skills, young women are often overlooked or blatantly dismissed. I’ve seen the same dismissive attitudes toward women and their contributions in meetings and grant review panels.
Studies have evaluated whether hard work is rewarded in a fair manner, and determined that cultural norms and implicit biases in many cases prevent equal reward for equal efforts. The perceived challenges that prevent many people from pursuing careers in technical fields are not a figment of their imagination, but real barriers to success.
Numerous efforts have been made to encourage women to thrive in the sciences. Programs like Imagine STEM (short for science, technology, engineering and mathematics) and Black Girls Code are preparing young women for careers in technical fields by encouraging their love of science, building confidence in their abilities, and giving them solid technical training that will move them through education and into technical careers.
These programs are valuable, but they are not enough. We also need to teach professors, peers and others to be better mentors and advocates. My career shows how important it is to have that kind of support, and I have tried to be such an advocate, in turn. Were it not for people who were willing to step up at critical points and vouch for my abilities and potential as a student, scientist and teacher, my expertise and experience would not be applied as they are today.
My advocates have acknowledged the obstacles I have faced. They recognize that networking and specific privileges have benefited the majority of successful white men in science and engineering careers, and that without those connections, the achievements of people who are not part of that group are easily overlooked.
As a scientist, my experience has made me an expert in the small vessels that feed the organs of our bodies. In the way my grandfather focused on water flow to support farms, I have helped engineer artificial blood vessels that deliver blood and oxygen to vital organs.
The influence of my father’s mechanics and my mother’s mathematical acumen gave me early exposure to math and engineering concepts that I now use on a daily basis.
My advocates have appreciated that — like the women featured in “Hidden Figures’” — my particular background contributes unique insights into questions that are important to advancing science.