In 2006, the pianist Piotr Anderszewski took his first sabbatical. He had no clear purpose in scheduling a break from concertizing and recording — no special project in mind, like learning new repertory. He just wanted time to think and relax, to “cook a beautiful meal and share it with good friends,” as he explained in an interview last month in New York.
Mr. Anderszewski, 47, remains deeply connected to Warsaw, though he lives in Paris. He has been haunted by growing up in a city that had, he said, “ceased existing” not that long before his childhood, given the horrors inflicted on the Jewish ghetto under Nazi rule and the almost total annihilation of the city in 1944. Mr. Anderszewski’s mother is of Hungarian Jewish heritage. His father is Polish. And though he said it is difficult for him to talk about something so personal and painful, his paternal grandfather, who was not Jewish, died in Auschwitz.
“I have a trauma related to Warsaw,” he said.
He had picked up some filmmaking techniques when he was the subject of several documentaries by Bruno Monsaingeon. So during his sabbatical, with a camera in hand and a filmmaker friend to assist him, Mr. Anderszewski walked Warsaw, a city he said he knows “like my pocket.” He filmed buildings, squares, a cemetery on a hillside dotted with wooden crosses — whatever inspired him. He didn’t want a scenario or spoken narration — just images and music, using pieces from his own recordings.
With no specific narrative, the 36-minute film, “Je M’Appelle Varsovie” (“Warsaw Is My Name”), unfolds in lingering shots of contrasting places and people: swirling traffic, dingy stonewalled buildings with peeling paint, commercial signs in downtown areas, a rumpled street musician with a long white beard playing the accordion, an old solitary woman sitting on a street bench. There are slow pans across the gray walls of Soviet-style housing units and lovely images of fall foliage in almost empty parks.
For the score, Mr. Anderszewski chose several works by Chopin, that greatest of Polish composers: some pensive late mazurkas and part of the well-known Polonaise in A flat. A champion of the Polish composer Karol Szymanowski, Mr. Anderszewski also included the restless, dark “Schéhérazade” from that composer’s “Masques” suite and a turbulent movement from his Third Sonata. Some forlorn scenes are accompanied by Webern’s Variations for Piano, Op. 27, an austerely captivating, rigorously 12-tone score, played here with articulate elegance.
The film will be included as a bonus DVD with Mr. Anderszewski’s latest Warner Classics recording, due out this month, called “Fantasies.” (He will eventually make the film available for streaming.) The album offers probing, intense performances of Mozart’s Fantasia in C minor and Sonata in C minor, paired with Schumann’s great Fantasie in C and that composer’s seldom-heard “Ghost” Variations. Mr. Anderszewski will perform the Mozart pieces in his Carnegie Hall recital this month, a program that also includes works by Chopin and Bach.
The film is personal and impressionistic, the quality of the cinematography excellent and the blend of imagery and music powerful. Mr. Anderszewski said he has no expectations for how audiences will react. But he added that making “Warsaw Is My Name” has helped him come to terms with his conflicted feelings about his homeland.
Mr. Anderszewski came to international attention in 2002, when he received the prestigious Gilmore Artist Award, a kind of noncompetition competition in which a jury secretly follows the work of an artist, then announces the prize. He has since received wide acclaim for his thoughtful, intensely dramatic performances, especially of Bach. His Carnegie program concludes with Bach’s English Suite No. 6 in D minor.
That Bach’s keyboard music is so texturally exposed presents a difficult yet irresistible challenge, he said. Every note matters so much in contrapuntal music: “A two-part gigue of an English suite has just two lines. You have to make it have sense.” And yet the implications of those two lines can be vast. “There are so many possibilities,” Mr. Anderszewski said. “You have to reduce, find form, set limits.” He compared it to making a swimming pool out of an ocean.
Mr. Anderszewski combines his insightful musicianship with consummate technique. Yet he emphasized that the element of struggle in many of the pieces he plays must come through in performance. He cited the daunting fugue of Beethoven’s late “Hammerklavier” Sonata.
On his new recording, Mr. Anderszewski plays the march movement of Schumann’s Fantasie at a measured tempo, slower than you typically hear, and with uncommon lightness and clarity, until the famously difficult coda, with its keyboard-spanning leaps. During this breathless conclusion, an intentional sense of manic wrestling comes through in Mr. Anderszewski’s performance. “You have to give the impression that you cannot play it,” he said.
For a recital program for next season, he is returning to Beethoven’s “Diabelli” Variations, a piece that brought him early acclaim. He played it in 1990, when he was 21, at the Leeds Competition, and kept reworking it over the years. (During the semifinals of that competition, in a much reported incident, he walked off the stage during his performance of Webern’s Op. 27 Variations because he thought he wasn’t playing well enough.) In 2000, he recorded the “Diabelli” in sessions that were also filmed by Mr. Monsaingeon for a penetrating documentary.
He will place Beethoven’s epic set of variations alongside Webern’s and, if all goes well, a new work (by an as yet unchosen composer) written in reaction to the Beethoven, and to the overall concept of variation form. It will be, at least partly, a way of Mr. Anderszewski addressing a gap in his career to date: He has played few works by living composers.
Creative energy — and personal energy. He now lives, he said, “pretty much on my own” in Paris.
He added that he had never managed to find time for a long-term relationship.
