Human Rights Watch, which has worked in Israel for three decades, denied the accusation, calling the visa rejection “part of a pattern” of actions by the right-wing government in the country to hinder the work of rights groups.
“This Israeli government has been narrowing the space for democratic activity and is closing Israel off to those who dare to criticize its activities,” said Sari Bashi, the group’s Israel and Palestine advocacy director.
Human Rights Watch, which shared a Nobel Peace Prize in 1997 for being part of an international anti-landmine campaign, works in 90 nations and has official offices in 24 of them. On Feb. 20, the group received a notice that its application for a work visa for its investigator, Omar Shakir, had been turned down because, a letter said, the group had a pro-Palestinian bias.
After initial news media reports of the rejection, Mr. Nahshon said later on Friday that the government had decided that Mr. Shakir, an American citizen, would be granted a tourist visa and that it would consider an appeal to its denial of a work visa. Ms. Bashi said Human Rights Watch would appeal.
Mr. Nahshon would not comment on a report from Ha’aretz that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who also serves as the foreign minister, had allowed for the appeal. The prime minister’s office did not respond to requests for comment.
Ms. Bashi said Human Rights Watch relied on foreigners because most Israelis, like her, are not permitted into Palestinian areas, including Gaza.
Calling the charge of pro-Palestinian bias “outrageous,” Ms. Bashi pointed to several recent reports criticizing the leadership of Hamas and the Palestinian Authority.
“If we are engaging in Palestinian propaganda, we are doing a lousy job,” she said. The only other countries that have denied the group such access, she said, are Cuba, North Korea, Sudan, Uzbekistan and Venezuela.
Rights groups have complained that the Israeli government of Mr. Netanyahu has been increasingly hostile, with groups like B’Tselem and Peace Now, which monitor Israeli settlements and the conditions of Palestinians, coming under particular criticism.
Last year, Israel passed a law imposing reporting requirements on groups that receive more than half their funding from foreign governments. Advocacy groups said the legislation amounted to intimidation, while supporters of the move said it was meant to prevent foreign meddling in Israeli affairs.
Also on Friday, the United Nations criticized as too lenient the 18-month prison sentence given on Tuesday to Sgt. Elor Azaria, who was convicted of manslaughter for shooting an immobilized Palestinian attacker in the head in March 2016. The soldier had faced a maximum term of 20 years.
Sergeant Azaria is the only member of the Israeli security forces to have been brought to trial on charges of killing a Palestinian, although more than 200 Palestinians have been killed since a surge of violence began in September 2015, according to the office of the United Nations high commissioner for human rights.
“While the prosecution and conviction are very welcome steps towards accountability, the punishment — which is excessively lenient — is difficult to reconcile with the intentional killing of an unarmed and prone individual,” Ravina Shamdasani, a spokeswoman for the commissioner, said in a statement.
