Good morning on this splendid Monday.
When Luis Mancheno was 14 and living in Quito, Ecuador, he knew he had to learn English, and fast.
It was around that age that he realized he would eventually need to leave his evangelical family, his all-boys Catholic school and his country: He feared they would reject him for being gay.
So he holed up with the “Harry Potter” books, and he studied the movies’ English subtitles.
“I was able to identify with Harry, being different in a world where no one understands you,” Mr. Mancheno said.
Over the years, Mr. Mancheno grew from a teenager with a secret into a young adult facing violent persecution. He became an immigrant from Latin America, a refugee and eventually an American citizen. Now a lawyer in New York City, Mr. Mancheno, 30, is supporting others on that journey.
Mr. Mancheno was one of more than 100 names submitted by readers as being a model New Yorker who has made a difference in the community and put others first in challenging situations.
His experiences in Ecuador were harrowing, and the breaking point came in 2007, when he and a gay friend were drugged at a bar. He woke up with his pants down, in his car, on the edge of a cliff. The car had been crushed beneath a light post.
Soon after, he inquired about an international exchange program, and, with limited English and $200 in the bank, he left Ecuador on a student visa, bound for college in Oregon. There, he learned about refugee law and decided to apply for asylum. By 2009, it had been granted.
During a graduate program at Roger Williams University School of Law in Rhode Island, Mr. Mancheno began guiding low-income people through deportation proceedings and representing them in immigration court. He spent time at the United Nations’ refugee agency in Washington, D.C., and he helped detainees in Arizona.
In New York, he joined the inaugural class of the Immigrant Justice Corps, a group of young lawyers providing legal services for people facing deportation. And through his work with The Bronx Defenders, he became part of the New York Immigrant Family Unity Project, which provides free legal representation to disenfranchised people detained in immigration court.
Mr. Mancheno — now a teaching fellow at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law in Manhattan — became a United States citizen less than a year ago.
Since then, the climate for refugees and immigrants coming to America has changed dramatically.
Last month, when a federal judge in Brooklyn blocked a travel ban under President Trump’s executive order on migration, Mr. Mancheno stood — in the same courthouse where he had been declared a citizen — among a group of immigration lawyers representing several people who had been detained at Kennedy Airport and who were facing imminent deportation. Among those people was a Syrian woman, one of Mr. Mancheno’s clients. Her story was presented to the judge minutes before she was to have been flown back to Syria. It was this woman’s story, Mr. Mancheno said, that helped the judge to decide to halt the order as quickly as she did.
Do you know of a New Yorker who has made a difference in his or her community? Email |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| with the person’s name and why you are nominating him or her.
Our February springtime will stick around until Friday.
Today is looking grand: nippy in the morning, and then a high of 53.
• Taste of the Dining Concourse offers free bites from several restaurants in Grand Central Terminal. 11 a.m. to noon, and 4 p.m. to 5 p.m., through Friday.
• “Kanye Confidential”, a comedy show about Kanye West, at the Creek and the Cave in Long Island City, Queens. 10 p.m.
• Yankees at Orioles, 1:05 p.m. Mets host Astros, 1:10 p.m. (SNY). Devils host Canadiens, 7 p.m. (MSG+). Knicks host Raptors, 7 p.m. (MSG).
• Alternate-side parking: in effect until Wednesday.
For many Christians of New York, Lent begins this week, on Ash Wednesday.
During Lent, which lasts about six weeks, observers may give up everyday habits or luxuries as a way to commemorate the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ.
For those observing Lent, we’d love to know: What are you giving up this year, and why?
We encourage you to share your responses in the comments, or to send us an email at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| for possible inclusion in a New York Today column — and we may contact you in the coming days.
