The only thing on tap these days at 33 Ten Eyck Street in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, is memories. The beer has been gone so long that it took an archaeologist to figure out that four underground caverns were once a brewer’s vaults.
The question came up in 2015 when construction was starting on a low-income apartment building. A backhoe struck the top of one vault. The backhoe operator got a ladder and climbed down. The archaeologist, Celia J. Bergoffen, was called in a few days later.
As she did some research, that question gave way to a different one: Who was the brewer?
The answer was Sebastian Schnaderbeck.
Where the hipsters now roam, suds makers like Schnaderbeck once reigned. He was not the largest brewer in Brooklyn in the days before slogans like “my beer is Rheingold, the dry beer” were on people’s lips. But Williamsburg and Bushwick became a home to foam in the mid-19th century, and eventually Brooklyn became the beer capital of the nation, producing one-fifth of the nation’s beer as recently as 1960.
The Rheingold and Schaefer breweries shut down their Brooklyn plants in the 1970s, leaving Brooklyn without beer makers until Brooklyn Brewery set up shop in 1988.
Dr. Bergoffen, an adjunct associate professor at the Fashion Institute of Technology who also takes on projects for architects and developers, says Schnaderbeck’s beer vaults now have the distinction of being the only ones in Brooklyn to have been mapped and photographed by archaeologists — even though Schnaderbeck remains a mystery.
“His career,” she said, “seems to have been respectable but not particularly distinguished.” His brewery did not last into the 20th century. If he drowned his sorrows or drowned in debt — a lager laggard in a time when brewing was prosperous — she turned up no clues.
The most dramatic stories about him, taken mostly from newspaper accounts, have nothing to do with beer. Once a servant in Schnaderbeck’s house mistook arsenic for baking soda. The pudding she made poisoned Schnaderbeck’s family. “Luckily, the doctor arrived in time to save the family,” Dr. Bergoffen said.
Another time, a man who had been staying in Schnaderbeck’s house died in bed. The Brooklyn Daily Eagle said the coroner attributed the death to natural causes until a packet of strychnine was found “in the bed he had lain on.” The cause of death was changed to suicide.
Schnaderbeck had immigrated in 1848 from Germany and was originally in the wine business in Manhattan, but lived in Williamsburg. By the Civil War, Brooklyn had 30 breweries, and in 1870, The Eagle said some brewers had cellars that reached depths of 80 feet. They had “as much or more space below the surface as above,” The Eagle said, and cellars were “attached to every brewery” — including Schnaderbeck’s, on Ten Eyck Street.
Dr. Bergoffen found that he also built a distinctive red brick building around the corner on Maujer Street, long since converted to apartments, that was his brewery.
The vaults were discovered when a construction crew began clearing the site for an 18-unit apartment building, part of a $23.8 million project covering five buildings in the neighborhood, including one next door at 37 Ten Eyck Street.
“They never expected to find anything,” said Dr. Bergoffen, who was called in by the developer, Yuco Real Estate Company, after the backhoe hit the top of one of the vaults.
“I’d never seen one,” she said, “and as far as I know, there’s only one other that has been preserved in Williamsburg.” There are not many other purposes for a cool, dark space. Aging artisanal cheese is one, and a part of the other vault is used for that these days, she said.
A lack of refrigeration meant beer was intensely local. Brewers catered to their immediate neighborhoods. “If you wanted to drink Schnaderbeck’s beer, you came to Schnaderbeck’s,” she said. “They must have had a nice place in there because they had a ‘congress hall’ in there for political meetings” after the brewery closed. Later still, she said, there was talk of turning the building into a theater.
Schnaderbeck’s brewery went out of business in the late 1870s, and Dr. Bergoffen found a mysterious notation in tax records that said the Ten Eyck Street building was “in ruins 1880.” There were no indications as to why.
The low-income housing project was proposed 10 years ago and won city approval, Dr. Bergoffen said there were no indications that anything of historical interest was on the site. Old city maps said nothing about underground beer vaults, she said.
Once the vaults were discovered, the project was delayed for a year while discussions were held on what to do about them. Dr. Bergoffen said she argued for preserving them.
But she wrote that the developer rejected the idea because the renovations would have been too expensive.
Three of the vaults have been filled with concrete. A fourth was left alone, but is no longer accessible. A call to Yuco’s office in Manhattan was not returned.
