Wendy Whelan’s dancing is all lines in space. The choreographer Brian Brooks’s is rooted in a sense of weight and mass.
Ms. Whelan was, until 2014, one of the most distinctive principal dancers at New York City Ballet. Her combination of mystery and forthrightness attracted the attention of choreographers like Christopher Wheeldon and Alexei Ratmansky. Now 49, she’s still hungry for new challenges.
Mr. Brooks, 42, came late to dance, and had an eclectic training; he performed for three years with Elizabeth Streb, a choreographer obsessed with the dramatic possibilities of gravity and momentum. With his ensemble, Brian Brooks Moving Company, he continues to explore the building blocks of movement: speed, stillness and the organization of bodies in space. He recently won a Guggenheim fellowship, and is in the second year of a residency at the Harris Theater in Chicago.
Ms. Whelan and Mr. Brooks met at the Fire Island Dance Festival in 2011, and immediately clicked. The next summer, they were set up on a kind of choreographic blind date by the former City Ballet dancer Damian Woetzel, who runs the Vail Dance Festival. They have been working together intermittently ever since, with each new collaboration expanding on the last.
On paper, Mr. Brooks is the choreographer, and Ms. Whelan the dancer and his partner onstage. But, as a recent conversation revealed, the lines between creation and interpretation have become increasingly blurred.
For the past year, they’ve been working on a full evening of solos and duets, “Some of a Thousand Words,” with the new-music ensemble Brooklyn Rider. It had its premiere last June, but this interconnected suite of dances has continued to morph and grow. The newest iteration comes to the Joyce Theater on Feb. 28.
I caught up with them last week via Skype as they were putting the final touches on the program at the Glorya Kaufman School of Dance at the University of Southern California. They have a teasing intimacy; Ms. Whelan is the big sister, Mr. Brooks the introspective younger sibling. “I would have babysat you!” she reminded him at one point, with a poke in the ribs. Here are edited excerpts from that conversation.
How would you describe your relationship at this point?
WENDY WHELAN We get in the studio, we do our things, we play our music, we move around, we laugh.
BRIAN BROOKS We’re struggling through this and finding our way and finding new life in the studio and in life and on the stage. I’m confused about where the line between our friendship and our work together is drawn.
How does it work between you, as dancer and choreographer?
WHELAN I trust Brian’s instincts. I think Brian is looking at me for who I am. And I feel free to say stuff along the way.
BROOKS I come in with a conceptual idea, with music, movement material, research questions and phrases and sequences. But I’m definitely sensitive to who’s in the studio. I pay attention to what comes back at me from the dancers. I teach a phrase and then Wendy bends it and pulls it.
WHELAN I do it differently.
BROOKS It’s call and response. Like, how do you translate this? She draws attention to aspects of my own work that I’m blind to. Her sense of suspension of time through the gaze and gesture is fundamental to the work. I’m more of a manic choreographer by choice — the idea of moving as fast as you can until something stops you has been elemental for me.
Do you use that opposition in the piece?
BROOKS We’re trying to find an equilibrium between us as we go through the same set of tasks. To have us walk forward side by side down to center-stage, even that simple arrival is a way to get information about these two people.
What intrigues you about Brian’s work?
WHELAN The intricacy of his folding and unfolding and winding and twisting. I love the arm work. I have these really long arms, and I have to say my arms are sometimes my favorite body part, so I like what he gives me to do with them. And I like the mental challenge of what he gives me to do. There are so many tiny details, and it’s so three-dimensional for a ballet dancer.
What’s it like to perform alongside a dancer like Wendy?
BROOKS It’s intimidating being onstage with Wendy Whelan! I’m picturing watching her onstage for years — she can transcend the theater and transport you to some place somewhere between your head and your memory and history and that line she’s holding. To be onstage working beside her influences me and challenges me and scares the hell out of me.
I noticed in a rehearsal that there is a section that contains these gliding, almost balletic lifts. Is that new?
BROOKS It’s a new section of “First Fall,” to Philip Glass. It’s all about falling and descent. I thought, in this second-to-last movement, just for a moment, let’s emphasize the lift. I’m more comfortable now doing things that aren’t necessarily brand new for her.
WHELAN It’s like putting on old clothes again. I love that moment of, ‘Remember when?’ I love to waft. There isn’t too much wafting in this world I’m in now. But my first instinct is to float, always. It’s very sweet that Brian went to the gym all those days to lift me.