MILAN — If you looked closely at the procession of tops, branded T-shirts and parasols that came down the Gucci runway on Wednesday, many were emblazoned with scrawled handwritten slogans designed to stop and make one think.
The words, misspellings included, were the fruits of a working partnership between Alessandro Michele, Gucci’s creative director, and the Spanish artist Coco Capitán. Born in Seville, she moved to London when she was 17 and attended Central St. Martins and then the Royal College of Art.
The diminutive 24-year-old is one of the most popular collaborators in fashion now, working for publications such as Dazed and Confused, Garage and a raft of Vogues, as well as brands like Miu Miu, Paco Rabanne and Mulberry.
After the show, Ms. Capitán shed more light on the project with Mr. Michele — and what she plans to do next.
How did you and Alessandro first start working together?
I think that Alessando first saw my work two or three years ago when he arrived at Gucci. He showed his creative teams, and everyone liked what they saw. So then we did an initial collaboration for his New York show, which was a great experience. As time went on, the house kept seeing the work that I have been producing since and decided to include it in the AW/17 collection.
Tell me a little bit about the collaborative process for the fall 2017 show.
It was very easy and hassle-free to be honest. I work so regularly with Gucci that anything we do just feels like part of an ongoing conversation between our studios. I know all of the creative team pretty well. I understand the way they think, and I think they would say the same about me.
Why did you choose the slogans that you picked for the collection?
Alessandro and I went through them together and then ultimately he had the final say. I guess we wanted to use text that felt very current to the state of the world today. For me, that main sentence — “What are we going to do with all this future?” — just feels so relevant to this moment we are all in right now, where no one knows what is going to happen and especially with these major shifts in political power.
So the writing is about politics?
I don’t think the work is directly linked to politics, necessarily, but it is definitely about wondering about what will come next. What a future is even really about. Is it just a term we like to fantasize about? Fashion is always trying to be reflective of or a reaction to the world around us. But it doesn’t have to be a specific event. It can be a broader feeling, too.
Where do you live and work at the moment?
I live in Haggerston and my studio is in Hackney Wick; both are in East London. But I travel a lot. Its really important for me to move around. It keeps my imagination fresh and gives me breathing space to do my writing and painting. At the moment I have a lot of projects in the pipeline: a new book, which is going to be launched very soon. And I am working on a major show in London that will open in early summer. But I can’t tell you much about it — it is all still very secret and under wraps.