“We know that he’ll dismantle Clean Power Plan and the Waters of the U.S. rule, but he’s not going to go in there and start firing people,” said Mr. Holmstead, referring to Obama regulations on climate change and water pollution.
Mr. Pruitt, the attorney general of Oklahoma, has sued the E.P.A. at least 14 times, often in concert with the nation’s largest fossil fuel companies, to block major environmental regulations. He has questioned human-caused global warming and is a key architect of the national legal effort to dismantle former President Barack Obama’s climate change policies.
Trump Has Choices to Make on Climate Policy. What Would You Do?
Donald Trump and his cabinet have sent mixed signals on some big environmental decisions they face. Take this quiz and see where the different possible choices lead.
Within days of Mr. Pruitt’s swearing-in, Mr. Trump is expected to sign one or more executive orders aimed at undoing Mr. Obama’s climate change regulations, and possibly to begin dismantling some E.P.A. offices and programs, people familiar with the White House’s plans said.
While it will be impossible to undo most major rules or programs that quickly, the presidential signatures would authorize Mr. Pruitt to cut existing environmental regulations — and, eventually, the jobs of many of the people who enforce them.
Ms. Cantello said most of her career at the E.P.A. had been focused on water protection, particularly on cleaning pollution in the Great Lakes. “I’m afraid all the work I’ve done will be abandoned,” she said.
Ms. Cantello and other longtime agency employees said that while they sometimes chafed under the administration of George W. Bush, who sought to loosen some environmental rules, they did not openly rebel against it — nor, they said, did they fear that Mr. Bush and his appointees wanted to eliminate the agency.
The White House and E.P.A. did not respond to emailed questions about the employees’ campaign.
The E.P.A. emerged as a Republican political target during the Obama administration, after Mr. Obama turned to the agency to muscle through an environmental agenda that could not get through Congress.
While Mr. Trump campaigned on slashing Obama-era rules on climate change and waterways, his efforts might also be thwarted by Congress. But the E.P.A. is likely to be at the center of his antiregulatory agenda.
Experts say it is not surprising that liberal and environmental groups like the Sierra Club have campaigned against Mr. Pruitt. Over 700 former E.P.A. employees have signed a letter to senators opposing his confirmation.
The Center for Media and Democracy, a left-leaning group, successfully sued the Oklahoma attorney general’s office to release about 3,000 of Mr. Pruitt’s emails, which they say could reveal more about his ties to fossil fuel companies. An Oklahoma judge ruled Thursday that the emails must be released but gave the attorney general’s office until Tuesday to comply, long enough to avoid roiling the confirmation vote unless Democrats can persuade Senate Republicans to hold off.
But former E.P.A. officials said the open rebellion by current employees was extraordinary, especially considering that their resistance could backfire once Mr. Pruitt arrives on the job.
Senator Rob Portman, Republican of Ohio, said on Wednesday that his office had received dozens of calls from people both opposing and supporting Mr. Pruitt’s nomination, including E.P.A. employees, and that he had not yet decided whether to vote for him. “I do have concerns about the Great Lakes,” he said.
