BOBIGNY, France — After the shantytown he was living in burned to the ground, Slavi and his siblings slept in the trunk of a car for several weeks one winter. When police officers confiscated the car and moved them on, they did not allow the children to even retrieve their shoes.
Today, however, Slavi is lucky enough to have something that most Roma children do not: a classroom that allows him to imagine a future beyond the shacks and the frigid train station halls in which he has spent most of his 11 years.
On that, most agree. But while there is consensus that public education could help integrate a Roma population that has long faced systematic discrimination, the obstacles remain formidable.
In France, schooling is mandatory between the ages of 6 and 16, but about 67 percent of Roma children do not regularly attend.
The reasons often have to do with a lack of stable housing or bureaucratic obstacles that advocates for the Roma, also known as Gypsies, say are deliberately heightened to keep the Roma out, perpetuating a vicious cycle of poverty and marginalization.
In the case of Slavi, whose surname name is being withheld because he is a minor, the director of Marie Curie, Véronique Decker, and the school’s teachers stepped in to help after his shantytown burned down in 2014.
They found housing for the children and their families. And they demanded that the municipal government allow the Roma children who had begun their education in Bobigny to continue studying here.
The city obliged, but provided no support. So Ms. Decker and her colleagues sought funding from a foundation to subsidize the children’s daily transportation costs. With the help of government grants and charitable organizations, the teachers provided the children with school supplies and clothes.
But such compassionate intervention is exceptional — and would be unnecessary, Roma advocates say, if the state and local authorities lowered the barriers to public education for the Roma.
Ms. Decker, for one, said the problem stemmed partly from the refusal of local governments to respect the law. Educators, she said, should act as a bulwark against discrimination.
“If all the school directors had registered the children in their district, without asking the mayor for permission, saying ‘Excuse me, they are in my school district, I am taking them,’ we wouldn’t have this problem,” she said.
François Loret, an administrator for the National Human Rights Collective Romeurope, also attributed much of the failure of Roma integration to discrimination and a lack of political will.
Since 2012, Mr. Loret has worked with the Roma in the Val Maubée, an agglomeration of six towns about 25 miles east of Paris.
“That’s when we discovered there were four to five hundred people in the area” of thick forests, Mr. Loret said, referring to the Roma.
About 250 remain today after years of trying to help them get jobs, medical care and schooling. The obstacles have been sometimes overt, sometimes subtle, but always persistent and numerous.
When Mr. Loret and his associates — a network of concerned citizens, political activists and union members — began efforts to register children for school in the town of Champs-sur-Marne, the children were denied access.
The town hall cited a lack of identity papers. Only in mid-November 2012, after obtaining birth certificates, identity cards and soliciting a visit from the state inspector of schools, were the children able to go to school.
This victory proved short-lived.
Champs-sur-Marne refused to include Roma children during its annual distribution of sweets and dictionaries to local children. Town hall employees also took down an exhibit on Roma life featuring pictures taken by Roma children.
The following school year, Champs-sur-Marne required Roma children to pay roughly $13 a meal for access to the school cafeteria, a price high above the $1.20 ordinarily charged to children from low-income families.
The town also assigned Roma children to schools far from the shantytowns and camps where they lived. Local bus drivers often refused to drive the Roma.
So the children walked the two miles to school. For the mothers, who accompanied the children to and from school and brought them food at noon, this meant walking more than 10 miles a day.
Maud Tallet, the mayor of Champs-sur-Marne, defended her town’s actions, saying that it reserves reduced cafeteria tariffs for the children of taxpayers. Moreover, she said, the town assigns children to schools with the space to accommodate them.
Alexandre Le Cleve, a legal expert who specializes in the rights of foreigners, said families and the state bore equal responsibility for ensuring a child’s education.
“Today, a child — whether French or foreign, whether they were born in the township or have only been present for a few days — must be registered by the township,” he said.
Sylvain Mathieu, a delegate for the illicit encampment and shantytown division of the Interministerial Delegation for Accommodation and Access to Housing, pointed out that while French authorities were allowed to evict the Roma from camps for safety and sanitary reasons, they were obliged to offer solutions for housing, schooling, employment and health.
There is little doubt that the never-ending cycle of eviction and relocation of Roma families poses a significant obstacle to schooling.
With a safe place to live, young people stand a chance of overcoming poverty and marginalization. That is the lesson offered by Anina Ciuciu.
“I was only able to study when I had access to stable housing,” said Ms. Ciuciu, who arrived in France in 1997.
After escaping homelessness thanks to the support of a schoolteacher and her parents’ tireless efforts to secure housing, she went on to finish high school and university before earning a law degree at the Sorbonne.
Today, Ms. Ciuciu works as legal support coordinator for a nongovernmental organization that promotes Roma rights, while preparing to begin her career in human rights law.
