BEIJING — You are a young Chinese man whose father tells you the most important skill his future daughter-in-law must have is caring for her home and family. 
This is not prerevolutionary China, but a new TV dating show.
Since “Chinese Dating” made its debut in late December, it has drawn viewers and generated lively discussions on China’s social networks. A Weibo page for the show has been visited 177 million times, and the first three episodes had more than 200 million views online.
Dating shows are not new in China.  What’s different about “Chinese Dating” is that it gives parents power over their children’s choices, a power many viewers say reflects Chinese society today.
Ms. Zhou said the weekly show evoked China’s tradition of arranged marriages, in which family elders hired matchmakers to find spouses for their children. Although arranged marriages were discouraged after the fall of the last imperial dynasty in 1911 and banned by the Republican government in the 1930s, Chinese millennials, often portrayed as the excessively indulged and protected products of the one-child family policy, now find themselves yielding to parents who are ready to provide them with everything, even a spouse.
Zhang Tianshu, a 25-year-old woman from Shenyang who appeared on the show in January, said none of her previous boyfriends had satisfied her mother.
Ms. Zhang’s parents introduced her to several men, but none of the meetings sparked romance. Fortunately, she found someone she liked on the show, and her parents liked him, too.
The show’s hostess is one of China’s most popular entertainment personalities: Jin Xing, a transgender woman. If that challenges Confucian traditions, the show’s format hews more closely to them. The basic structure lines up several young men or women against five sets of parents. The parents’ children are in another room, where they can watch the proceedings through a monitor and communicate with their parents by phone. Only candidates approved by the parents are allowed to meet their children.
For male candidates, the parents’ biggest concern appears to be their finances. For women, it helps to be young, pretty and innocent seeming. In one episode, when a potential groom asked the parents how many relationships their daughters had had, all of the parents said their daughters either had never dated or had never brought a man home.
Zhang Tianshu, 25, who appeared on “Chinese Dating” last month, said it was the first time she met a young man both she and her mother liked.
In an interview with the Jiefang Daily newspaper, the show’s director, Yao Yao, said she was struck by how anxious the parents on the show were about their children’s marriages.
Ms. Zhou said one reason Chinese parents had so much say over their child’s marriage was that many of the parents were paying for it. According to a 2015 report by the All-China Women’s Federation, the average age at marriage is 26. But the expenses of marriage exceed what most Chinese that age can afford. According to one industry report, in 2016, the average cost of a wedding in Shanghai was 200,000 renminbi, about $30,000. That does not include the costs of an apartment and a car, which are widely considered prerequisites for an engagement and are typically bought by the young man’s parents.
Lu Pin, a feminist and cultural critic, said that patriarchal values had never been entirely eliminated from Chinese culture, and that there were signs they were making a comeback.
“Many Chinese families have entered the middle class now, and they want to solidify their status by marrying people from a similar background,” Ms. Lu said.
Without parents’ help, she said, many young Chinese cannot afford to marry, and even afterward, they still need help from their parents for things like child care.
“Too much protection and support from parents has given rise to a generation that has never really grown up,” Ms. Zhou said.
Some commenters on Weibo agreed. “China is a country full of grown-up babies,” one user wrote.
But others say the show is only acknowledging the practicalities of finding a mate.
“It’s better than breaking up after you’ve dated a while and found you don’t get along well with each other’s parents,” wrote another.