The New York Police Department has agreed to curtail stop-and-frisk tactics in thousands of private apartment buildings under a settlement announced Thursday, ending the last in a series of stop-and-frisk lawsuits that fundamentally changed the city’s approach to fighting street crime.
The settlement addressed police stops in and around buildings whose landlords had asked the police to conduct patrols and arrest trespassers under a city-run program. The agreement prohibits officers from approaching, questioning or detaining people merely because they are inside or around those buildings, and forces officers to apply the same constitutional protections there that they are supposed to apply anywhere in the city.
Some civil rights lawyers have said the practice, under the Trespass Affidavit Program, was an especially poisonous element of the city’s stop-and-frisk efforts because people were questioned or detained steps from their own apartments or those of friends or relatives. The lawyers say officers often stopped and searched people who were hanging out in the lobbies of enrolled buildings, and questioned them about trespassing simply for having walked out of a building.
A federal judge in 2013 ruled one element of this practice unconstitutional, focusing specifically on stops in front of enrolled buildings in the Bronx, where the program was known as Clean Halls. The judge, Shira A. Scheindlin of Federal District Court in Manhattan, said the Police Department had “systematically crossed” the line between constitutional and unconstitutional activity by stopping people without reasonable suspicion that they were trespassing.
The settlement announced Thursday addresses the broader program of stops inside and outside buildings in the Bronx and other boroughs, with the police agreeing to new training and supervisory methods and at least five years of court jurisdiction over the changes.
“A person’s mere presence in or near, entry into, or exit out of a TAP Building does not constitute an objective credible reason to approach,” the settlement says.
Walking through an apartment-building door that is broken or propped ajar also should not be reason enough for someone to be detained, the settlement says. Revisions to the Police Department’s Patrol Guide also instruct officers to avoid making people feel as if they are not free to leave when there is not reasonable suspicion that they were trespassing, and advise officers that under appropriate circumstances they can ask someone to leave rather than arrest the person. Officers will also be forced to document such encounters more thoroughly. The Police Department agreed to pay $235,000 to the 13 plaintiffs.
Stops across New York City have plummeted since this lawsuit and others related to stop-and-frisk tactics were litigated, and overall crime has continued to decline. Civil rights organizations say it is hard to say precisely how many stops officers still make in buildings enrolled in the trespass program. The program largely affected low-income black and Latino tenants and was especially widespread in some Bronx neighborhoods.
The settlement will need to be approved by the Federal District Court in Manhattan. It mandates at least three years of oversight by a court-appointed monitor and at least two additional years by the plaintiffs’ lawyers.
“We’re talking about stops and frisks and arrests in the sanctity of people’s homes that have had an incredible human toll on the relationship between the community and the police,” said Johanna Steinberg, director of the Impact Litigation Practice at the Bronx Defenders, which was also part of the lawsuit.
