Jamie Fox, who never sought elective office but wielded political power as chief of staff or adviser to several New Jersey governors and senators and as the transportation commissioner in Democratic and Republican state administrations, died on Monday in Camden, N.J. He was 62.
His death, at a hospital, was caused by heart failure after complications of kidney disease, his brother, Tom, said.
Mr. Fox, a well-regarded fixture in state politics for decades, resigned from Gov. Chris Christie’s cabinet in October 2015 after he was implicated in a conspiracy involving his earlier role as a lobbyist for United Airlines.
Mr. Fox was charged with conspiracy to commit bribery after the airline reinstated flights to a South Carolina airport near the weekend home of David Samson, the chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey at the time, in exchange for concessions United had sought from the agency, which runs the metropolitan area’s airports.
Mr. Fox was accused of advising Mr. Samson to pressure United into restoring the unprofitable flights by blocking a lease for a maintenance hangar that the airline was seeking to build. The hangar was approved and United resumed the weekend flights, which Mr. Samson took 27 times. In July 2016, Mr. Samson pleaded guilty to bribery.
The charges against Mr. Fox were still pending when he died. He had denied any wrongdoing.
The issue with United had been exposed during a federal investigation into what prosecutors said was a plot by Mr. Christie’s allies at the Port Authority in 2013 to jam access lanes to the George Washington Bridge, to retaliate against a mayor who had declined to endorse the governor for re-election.
Trusted by politicians from both parties and adept at forging coalitions in the Legislature, Mr. Fox was credited with helping to enact the state’s ban on assault weapons, overhauls of the E-ZPass system and the Motor Vehicles Department, the preservation of the New Jersey Highlands and the groundwork for the first gasoline tax increase since 1988 to pay for improvements in roads, bridges and mass transit.
He was the chief of staff or adviser to four Democratic governors — Jim Florio, Jim McGreevey, Richard J. Codey and Jon S. Corzine — and Senator Robert G. Torricelli, also a Democrat. He also directed the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee from 1999 to 2001; worked as deputy director of the Port Authority from 2004 to 2007; directed Barack Obama’s successful presidential campaign in Florida in 2008; and served as transportation commissioner under Mr. McGreevey and later under Mr. Christie, a Republican.
James Patrick Fox was born on Oct. 30, 1954, in Elizabeth, N.J. His father, Edward, was personnel manager for the Burry Biscuit Company and a high school basketball coach. His mother was the former Peggy O’Connor.
In addition to his brother, he is survived by his sisters, Judy Higgins, Jane Fox and Meg Koscheka.
Mr. Fox’s political fire was kindled when he witnessed Robert F. Kennedy’s funeral train in 1968, his brother said. He graduated from Villanova University with a bachelor’s degree in political science, volunteered in several campaigns and chauffeured Mr. Torricelli at night in a Volkswagen Rabbit when he first ran for Congress in 1982.
After Mr. Fox left his Port Authority job, he and Eric Shuffler, his former colleague in government, worked together in River Crossing Strategy Group, a lobbying firm in Trenton and New York. Mr. Fox lived in Lambertville, N.J.