About 45 million Americans lack traditional credit files, and the federal government is looking into whether alternative credit scoring models could bring more of these consumers into the financial mainstream.
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau opened an inquiry this month into the pros and cons of using “alternative” data, like rent and cellphone payments, to formulate credit scores. It is seeking feedback from the public and the credit industry.
Credit scores — many of which are also known as FICO scores, because they were created by the company Fair Isaac — are used by lenders to determine whether you can borrow their money, and what interest rate you will pay. The three-digit scores are created by applying a mathematical formula to information compiled by the three major credit bureaus.
Those bureaus — Equifax, Experian and TransUnion — generate credit scores and track your larger credit report, which includes information about your mortgage, car loans and credit cards, and whether you make payments on time.
However, many consumers do not have credit histories, or have files that are too spotty to create a traditional score. These consumers may have never had a credit card. Or, they may have had financial difficulties and stopped using credit. That puts them in a bind: Lenders are reluctant to do business with borrowers who lack a credit score, because they are unsure if they will pay back the loan.
“People with little or no credit history, or who lack a credit score, have fewer opportunities to borrow money in order to build a future, and any credit that is available usually costs more,” Richard Cordray, the director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, said in prepared remarks delivered last week in West Virginia.
Some credit companies have already begun using alternative data to help evaluate a consumer’s creditworthiness.
TransUnion, too, began offering a scoring model in 2015 that incorporates alternative data. The model, called CreditVision Link, combines a more detailed analysis of traditional credit scoring data over time with less conventional data, like consumers’ checking account histories and how often they change home addresses.
About 100 companies — primarily automobile lenders and online lenders, but increasingly credit card companies — are using or testing the new model in credit decisions, said Mike Mondelli, TransUnion’s senior vice president for alternative data services. In most cases, he said, the model lets lenders approve 20 percent more applicants than they would have otherwise. “There’s a lot more data out there that consumers don’t get credit for,” he said.
You can obtain a free copy of your credit report once a year from the three major credit bureaus at annualcreditreport.com.
Can I get a free copy of my credit score?
Consumers actually have multiple credit scores, depending on factors like the type of loan applied for and the credit bureau supplying the score’s underlying data. Many credit card companies and lenders now offer monthly access to scores free.
Where can I submit a comment about alternative credit scores to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau?
You can submit a comment online at regulations.gov.
The deadline for commenting is May 19. A detailed explanation of the bureau’s request is available online.