OSSINING, N.Y. — The music industry usually rolls out new albums with in-store performances at record shops, high-profile media appearances or buzzworthy kickoff concerts. But when Nonesuch Records released “Freedom Highway,” the new album by the folk singer Rhiannon Giddens, on Feb. 24, the occasion was marked by Ms. Giddens and her backing band’s spending a day in a far more sobering environment: the Sing Sing Correctional Facility.
Yes, Sing Sing, the maximum-security prison made infamous as the home of fictional Hollywood inmates played by James Cagney and Humphrey Bogart and actual criminals like the bank robber Willie Sutton and the serial killer Albert Fish (as well as the 614 executions, including Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, in its electric chair, a.k.a. Old Sparky). With its 30-foot-high concrete walls, green-turreted guard towers and endless acres of razor-wire-topped fences, the so-called Castle on the Hudson seemed a long way from Carnegie Hall.
Now 40, Ms. Giddens, a North Carolina native and founding member of the Grammy-winning African-American string band the Carolina Chocolate Drops, had a tumultuous 2016. In the fall she won the Steve Martin Prize for Excellence in Banjo and Bluegrass — the first female winner, as well as the first minority recipient — and joined the cast of the CMT drama “Nashville.” Most of her new album was recorded a few months earlier, during a brief break from rehearsals for what was supposed to be Ms. Giddens’s Broadway musical debut, taking over the starring role of Lottie Gee in “Shuffle Along” from Audra McDonald.
That lack of agency also resonated with the men she encountered at Sing Sing, the first date on what will be a year of touring. (Ms. Giddens will play a more conventional New York City concert on May 13 at Alice Tully Hall.) During the workshop in the prison’s Roman Catholic chapel, Ms. Giddens taught a group of 20 residents an a cappella rendition of the gospel staple “I Know I’ve Been Changed.” Under her direction, in just 15 minutes, the disparate assortment of gruff male voices was transformed into a heavenly chorale.
