BEIJING — President Trump’s combative phone call with Australia’s prime minister over a refugee agreement has set off a political storm in that country, one that threatens to weaken support for a seven-decade alliance with the United States just as many Australians say they want closer ties with China.
His administration’s confrontational stance on Iran has undermined liberal voices in that country; his restrictions on immigration from some predominantly Muslim countries have been widely criticized by allies; and his rejection of the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal threatens to push countries in the Asia-Pacific region, including Australia, closer to China.
Late Wednesday, hours after details of the call were reported, Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter that the agreement was “dumb.” He said he would need to “study” it, leaving the door open to renege or to accept fewer refugees.
Mr. Turnbull’s Liberal Party is the more conservative of Australia’s two major parties, and it has been a stalwart supporter of close ties with the United States.
The Labor Party has leaned slightly more toward China, but as the debate over relations with Washington has intensified in recent months, former leaders of the party have become outspoken critics of the United States and have argued for shifting toward Beijing.
Australian attitudes toward relations with the United States, which have historically been favorable, are now under pressure from China and its trading weight, according to polls. That is largely because the enormous Chinese demand for Australia’s resources — particularly iron ore, natural gas and coal — has bolstered Australia’s economy for more than a decade.
Chinese students also contribute substantially to Australian universities and schools, so much so that many of the institutions are dependent on the fees for survival. And under a new trade agreement, Australia is exporting large quantities of wine and meat to China.
After Mr. Trump, in office just a few days, scrapped the Trans-Pacific Partnership — a regional trade pact that the Obama administration had hoped would be an economic counterweight to China — Mr. Turnbull announced that he would seek to reconstitute the deal without the United States, but possibly including China, another indication of Beijing’s clout.
A 2016 survey conducted by the public policy group Lowy Institute asked respondents to identify the country that was more important to Australia; 43 percent chose the United States, and 43 percent China. In 2014, 48 percent had answered the United States, and only 37 percent had chosen China, said Sam Roggeveen, a senior fellow at the institute.
According to the 2016 survey, 45 percent said that Australia should distance itself from the United States if Mr. Trump became president, Mr. Roggeveen said.
The United States operates signals intelligence and radar facilities in remote corners of Australia that are becoming more important as North Korea’s nuclear threat expands, said Peter Jennings, executive director of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute.
The Five Eyes countries are Australia, Britain, Canada, New Zealand and the United States.
Mr. Trump visited Australia in 2011, expressing a great liking for the country and entering the fray with China. On Twitter, he called it a “beautiful country with terrific people who love America.” Then he added that Australia should “screw” China by raising its commodity prices.
James Goldrick, a former rear admiral in the Australian Navy who served in Afghanistan, said that if Mr. Trump’s current abrasive attitude continued, it would probably make Australia a less publicly cooperative partner of the United States.
“If the Trump administration pursues a less consultative approach, Australia will need to become more public in expressing its opinion on American initiatives that it does not wholly support,” Mr. Goldrick said.
China’s role in Asia and North Korea’s nuclear efforts are far more important to the United States-Australia alliance than any one telephone call, said Peter Hayes, an Australian who is the director of the Nautilus Institute, a California-based research institute on security issues. But Mr. Trump’s “ability to create chaos” has placed those important strategic questions under a “dark cloud,” he said.
“The United States has invested five decades in creating that system of alliances, and it is evident Trump is pretty ignorant of it and doesn’t care about it, to the extent he knows about it,” Mr. Hayes said.