The six-bedroom, single-story property, tucked among trees in a leafy suburban street, is notable for having been designed in 1962 by the Danish architect Jorn Utzon. At that time, Utzon was working on what was to become his most famous commission, the Sydney Opera House.
The Harpenden house was originally designed in modern Danish style for the family of a local businessman Povl Ahm, a friend of Utzon. It remained in their possession until 2008, when it was sold to the current seller, John Shayer and his wife, Tracey.
The property was constructed with a visible frame of thick concrete beams and a copper-edged roof. Inside, the walls are of exposed Aylesbury buff brick and concrete, with the windows framed by original wood beams and a wood-clad ceiling. The floors throughout are in the same white Hoganas tiles that Utzon used on the exterior of the Sydney Opera House.
The original house, which measures approximately 190 square meters, or 2,000 square feet, stood alone on its plot of one acre but, in 1975, an annex of about the same size was added when the Ahm family required more space. The new section was never physically joined to the original structure, possibly to protect the building’s aesthetic.
Mr. Shayer wanted to connect the two sections of the house, but the building’s protected status meant there could be no alterations to its appearance. He got around this by creating a subterranean space, invisible above ground and linked to each section of the house by steps.
The main house contains the lounge, dining room and kitchen, as well as four bedrooms and a separate bathroom and shower. The annex houses a fifth bedroom and the master suite with bedroom, bathroom and large dressing room, along with utility area. Doors from the bedroom open directly onto the garden.
The focus of the property is the open-plan lounge and dining room, which runs the length of the house with floor-to-ceiling windows overlooking the garden.
The Hoganas-tiled floor continues from the lounge onto the terrace and creates a visual connection between the interior and the exterior.
The L-shaped grounds have been kept mainly as lawn, bordered with mature trees, in a clean, simple style to complement the property. Hidden from the main house is a skateboard area and tree house that Mr. Shayer built for his son, Hal.
Though they still love the property, the Shayers feel it is time to move on and have listed it with the specialist London agency The Modern House for 3.5 million pounds, or $4.38 million.
Mr. Shayer believes the house would best suit someone who appreciates the importance of its Modern architectural style.
“It would be a shame if it went to someone who didn’t understand and love it,” he said.