• “Moonlight” is best picture. In a bewildering end to the show, “La La Land” was first announced as the winner before its jubilant cast and crew were interrupted with a scarcely believable correction.
• “La La Land” won six Oscars, including best director, best original score and best song (denying Lin-Manuel Miranda an EGOT in the process). The film had 14 nominations, tied for the most ever.
• Jimmy Kimmel hosted the show.
• Here’s a red carpet slide show and a fashion review.
LOS ANGELES — In an epic flub that drew gasps of horror — and joy — at the Dolby Theater here, Faye Dunaway mistakenly named “La La Land” best picture at the 89th Academy Awards on Sunday night, but in reality “Moonlight” won the top prize.
The producers of “La La Land” were still thanking their families and fellow artists when the interjection came that “Moonlight” had in fact won, as everyone wondered if that was a joke. But it wasn’t, and the “La La Land” people quickly exited the stage as producers and stars of “Moonlight,” just as stunned as everyone else, walked on.
Warren Beatty and Ms. Dunaway had presented the best picture award. When Mr. Beatty opened the envelope, he took an extended pause before showing the card to Ms. Dunaway, who then announced “La La Land” as the winner.
“Moonlight,” the story of a young, gay, black man, won three statuettes in total, including best adapted screenplay and best supporting actor.
Held up as an escapist, believe-in-yourself antidote for the times, the neo-musical “La La Land” won six Oscars, including statuettes for Damien Chazelle’s directing and Ms. Stone’s acting, during a jaunty ceremony that swung between self-celebration and political acrimony — before its wild ending.
After the show, Ms. Stone said on ABC that she had held onto the envelope with the card bearing her name after she won best actress.
In a blog post published on Medium this month, Brian Cullinan and Martha Ruiz of the firm PricewaterhouseCoopers, explained the process of handling the envelopes for the Oscars. Mr. Cullinan wrote that he and Ms. Ruiz each had a full set of envelopes and stood on opposite sides of the stage, where they handed envelopes to presenters.
“Hacksaw Ridge,” the true story of a heroic World War II medic, won Oscars for sound mixing and film editing, a category that is often predictive of the best picture winner. Kenneth Lonergan won the best screenplay statuette for his “Manchester by the Sea,” the story of a grieving New England handyman. Casey Affleck, who played the lead role in Mr. Lonergan’s film, beat Denzel Washington (“Fences”) for best actor.
“I’m just dumbfound I’m included,” Mr. Affleck said.
The supporting acting prizes went to Viola Davis for her work in “Fences,” about a Pittsburgh family in the 1950s, and Mr. Ali for his portrayal of a sympathetic drug dealer in “Moonlight,” which also collected the adapted screenplay Oscar, for Mr. Jenkins and Tarell Alvin McCraney.

Among the nominees leaving with nothing: “Lion,” an adoption tear-jerker with six nominations, and the box office hit “Hidden Figures,” which had three nods.
The night’s first award went to Mr. Ali, who tearfully thanked the cast and crew of “Moonlight” and his own family. “Peace and blessings,” he said, avoiding a repeat of the pointed comments he made at previous awards shows about the Trump administration’s travel ban.
After two years when the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences was criticized as racist for overlooking black actors and films about African-American experiences, this year’s nominee list was remarkably diverse. Six black actors received nominations, a record.
The foreign film and documentary races were notably relevant this year.
Among foreign films, the German satire “Toni Erdmann” initially had the momentum. But Mr. Trump’s travel ban put the spotlight on Iran’s entry, “The Salesman,” whose director, Asghar Farhadi, said that he would boycott the ceremony in protest — a decision that may have ultimately helped his film win.
Anousheh Ansari, an American-Iranian businesswoman, accepted the award for “The Salesman” and read a message from Mr. Farhadi. The note said that he was not attending in solidarity with immigrants “who have been disrespected by the inhumane law,” referring to the Trump administration’s travel ban.
As the ceremony went on, organizers played up Hollywood glamour and paid homage to Academy Awards history. Music interludes were taken from the scores of “Top Gun” and “Tootsie.” Shirley MacLaine appeared as a presenter, joking that the standing ovation was “the nicest reception I’ve had in 250,000 years.” At one point, Mr. Kimmel trotted out a tour bus full of unsuspecting tourists, to mixed results.
Left to bridge the gap between people watching from their sofas in Kansas City and the theater filled with coastal elites was Mr. Kimmel.
In a moment that certainly checked the populist box, the busload of unsuspecting Hollywood tourists, selfie sticks aloft, found themselves ushered into the Dolby Theater, and shuffled before Hollywood A-listers and the world. The bit, which went on at some length, drew a polarizing response on social media, with some viewers criticizing Mr. Kimmel for exploiting the tourists and mocking an Asian woman’s name.
