PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — The Mets’ success this season will hinge, in large part, on the health of several key players, particularly in the team’s starting rotation. In managing the return of pitchers Jacob deGrom, Matt Harvey, Steve Matz and Zack Wheeler from arm ailments, the Mets will undoubtedly rely on starter Noah Syndergaard, who had only minor problems last season and became the team’s workhorse.
On Sunday, when pitchers and catchers were scheduled to report to the Mets’ spring training complex, Syndergaard arrived with more bulk and lofty goals, including perhaps an unnerving one: adding more fire to his fastball, which is already one of the hardest for a starter in the major leagues.
Listed at 6 feet 6 inches and 240 pounds last season, Syndergaard also looks capable of playing tight end for the Jets. In his breakout 2016 season, he was 14-9, with 218 strikeouts and a 2.60 E.R.A. (third best in the majors) in 183 ⅔ innings (a career high). He also earned his first selection to the All-Star Game.
Along with his harsh breaking ball, Syndergaard’s fastball averaged a major-league-best 98 miles per hour among qualified starters — nearly two miles per hour faster than the next best.
Some studies have indicated a link between such velocity and arm injuries. Additionally, there is a philosophy that pitching can be improved by reducing velocity, focusing on command and preserving energy. In July, Syndergaard suffered from arm fatigue that forced him to skip the All-Star Game.
Regardless, Syndergaard, 24, said he believed that he had more power in his arm. He has gained about 17 pounds of muscle, he said, while working out during the off-season in Frisco, Tex., about 30 minutes north of Dallas.
Syndergaard said last summer that he believed his command was best when he threw hard. Dan Warthen, the Mets’ pitching coach, made no effort to persuade Syndergaard to ease off the gas.
Syndergaard said Sunday that his added bulk could help him withstand the rigors of the season.
“I feel like guys with a little bit of mass are a little bit more durable throughout the season and throughout their careers,” he said.
Syndergaard said he had been eating a lot of protein, specifically the Bowl of Doom, a Dallas restaurant’s meal containing sweet-potato hash, avocado, eggs, bacon, buffalo and venison sausage.
“That’s primarily what my diet consisted of this off-season,” Syndergaard said with a grin.
Syndergaard said he hoped that the experience from his first full season in the major leagues, and the accompanying growing pains, would better prepare him for this season. He learned to deal with a minor bone spur in his throwing elbow that affected him early in the season, but not during the final two months. After the season ended, he said, his arm was re-examined, and he was told the bone spur did not require an operation.
Syndergaard said his arm felt better at this point in the preseason than in previous years.
The effects of the expected added velocity, however, remain to be seen.