We are seeing something of that dynamic in the prosecution of Martin Shkreli, once described by the BBC as the “most hated man in America” because of how his company increased the price of a drug used to treat a rare disease by 5,000 percent, and a former corporate lawyer, Evan Greebel, who advised Mr. Shkreli’s company.
The two men were charged with conspiracy and securities fraud, and they have asked a federal district judge to give them separate trials because they intend to blame one another for any violations. The two argue that their defenses will be mutually antagonistic when each points the finger at the other as the one responsible for any violations, so the same jury cannot decide the case fairly because the acquittal of one may mean the conviction of the other.
Mr. Shkreli is accused of defrauding investors in two hedge funds he managed by misleading them about losses suffered on its investments, and then shifting money from a biopharmaceutical company, Retrophin, when he was its chief executive, to pay off the investor claims.
Unlike many defendants who stay out of the spotlight while awaiting trial, Mr. Shkreli has embraced a public role to proclaim his innocence. He recently spoke to Harvard University undergraduates, an event that drew protesters and was disrupted by a false fire alarm. A program in January at the University of California, Davis, at which he was to appear with Milo Yiannopoulos, the right-wing commentator, was canceled when large protests occurred.
Mr. Greebel was largely unknown to the public until the charges last year linked him to his notorious client. Mr. Greebel, who was a partner at the law firm Katten Muchin Rosenman until moving to another firm in 2015, had been the lead outside counsel and corporate secretary for Retrophin when Mr. Shkreli was its chief executive.
Mr. Greebel is accused only of participating in the last phase of Mr. Shkreli’s conduct related to the use of Retrophin’s assets, and does not face charges of making misstatements to the hedge fund investors.
Where the case devolves into finger-pointing is Mr. Shkreli’s claim that he only followed the advice of Retrophin’s corporate lawyers, and therefore did not have any intent to defraud. His motion for a separate trial argues that Mr. Shkreli paid $10 million in legal fees to Katten Muchin — although that claim overlooks the point that it was the company actually paying the lawyers — and he “followed faithfully” the legal advice given by Mr. Greebel and other lawyers.
This is a classic “advice of counsel” defense, which requires showing that the client provided the lawyer with complete information and adhered to the directions provided for how to act. It is a difficult defense to establish because lawyers are usually unwilling to concede they provided faulty advice that led a client into wrongdoing.
The challenge for the two defendants will be persuading the judge to separate them so that there are two trials, especially since the evidence against the defendants substantially overlaps with regard to Retrophin. Under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 14, a court can sever the trials if a joint prosecution “appears to prejudice a defendant,” but the trial judge has broad discretion whether to do so.
A court can, for example, impanel two juries for a single trial, or give instructions that allow each defendant to advance a particular claim without that evidence being considered against the other.
Both Mr. Shkreli and Mr. Greebel have a stake in painting as stark a contrast between their positions as possible to obtain a severance. Thus, each asserts that accepting one’s claim about his innocence will necessarily result in a conviction of the other.
Mr. Greebel offers another argument for a separate trial by pointing to the potential prejudice of having to sit next to Mr. Shkreli at a joint proceeding. “It is a near certainty that Mr. Shkreli will take actions and make statements to destroy the integrity of the court proceedings,” according to Mr. Greebel’s brief, so that there will be a “tornado of chaos swirling around Mr. Shkreli” — a storm no one wants to be near.
The government is usually quite happy to have defendants point fingers at one another in a joint trial because then it can simply argue that everyone is guilty, with one perhaps more responsible than the other. Prosecutors are sure to oppose the severance motions because of the threat that the “empty chair” in the courtroom could result in both defendants being acquitted. At separate trials, each will claim the missing party was the real culprit, hoping to persuade a jury that the lone defendant is not responsible for any violations, thus allowing each to avoid a conviction.
Judges are also not eager to preside over two trials, especially when they involve complex securities fraud charges that most likely will take weeks to present to a jury. The standard rationale for requiring a joint trial is the need for “judicial economy,” an argument that presenting the same evidence twice is a waste of the court’s resources.
Whether the defenses of Mr. Shkreli and Mr. Greebel truly are antagonistic to the degree they claim will have to be sorted out by the judge. There are thousands of emails and other communications between the two men, so prosecutors are expected to argue that each played a role in a scheme to defraud Retrophin. The jury will then sort out whether one might be less culpable than the other.
Making things even more complicated is the issue of the attorney-client privilege, which prevents a lawyer from disclosing confidential communications without the client’s permission. Although the case portrayed Mr. Greebel as Mr. Shkreli’s personal lawyer, Retrophin was in fact the client and has control over the privilege. So the court will also have to figure out how much confidential information can be revealed by the defendants.
It is uncommon for defendants to attack one another in advance of trial, each proclaiming innocence by heaping blame on the other. The challenge will be figuring out whether that antagonism is enough to warrant two trials, a prospect no judge faces happily.