It seemed harmless enough.
In a tweet celebrating the Feb. 12 birthday of Abraham Lincoln, the Republican National Committee attributed a short quote to the 16th U.S. president. It was an uncontroversial maxim, if ever there was one.
There is no documentation of Lincoln uttering these words, according to James Cornelius, curator of the Lincoln Collection at the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum.
The committee’s tweet was taken down on Monday morning. But in a political atmosphere buzzing with acrimonious debates over fake news and alternative facts, the error caused a ruckus. Blowback was swift on social media and in news reports.
Even historians were wringing their hands.
“People search for relevance, but they look to the wrong sources,” said Harold Holzer, a Lincoln scholar and author who now serves as the Jonathan F. Fanton director at the Roosevelt House Public Policy Institute at Hunter College in Manhattan.
To err, as someone said, is human — especially on social media. Verification often falls by the wayside when quotations are neatly packaged into inspirational memes or shareable image files. Mistaken attributions can be copied and reposted with the click of a button.
And mistakes spread like wildfire. The false Lincoln quote was immediately picked up by President Trump, who posted the image to his Instagram account.
The R.N.C. did not respond immediately to requests for comment.
So who actually made the first comment about years in one’s life versus life in one’s years, if it wasn’t President Lincoln? It’s hard to say for sure.
The important thing to you is not how many years in your life, but how much life in your years!
That was back in 1947. Since then, those words have been borrowed by, and attributed to, a variety of sources, including the American politician Adlai Stevenson II, the actress and singer Mae West, and now, Honest Abe, Mr. O’Toole found.
You cannot strengthen the weak by weakening the strong. You cannot help the wage earner by pulling down the wage payer. You cannot help the poor by destroying the rich. You cannot help men permanently by doing for them what they could and should do for themselves.
In fact, those words came from Rev. William John Henry Boetcker, a religious leader in the early 1900s whose conservative, individualist philosophies were in line with Reagan’s worldview.
The Department of Education also came under fire for misspelling the name of W.E.B. Du Bois in tweet on Sunday, just days after the fiercely fought confirmation of Mr. Trump’s pick for education secretary, Betsy DeVos.
