Last year, Fred Klein spent a lot of time in group exercise classes in Manhattan, although replacing his love handles with rock-hard obliques was not his objective. Mr. Klein is the chief content officer for Peloton Cycle, a boutique fitness studio. He was seeking instructors to poach and hire.
For months Mr. Klein burned calories but came up empty in his talent search. No instructor had the qualities he was looking for. Then, at a rival studio, Flywheel Sports, he discovered Alex Toussaint.
The fitness industry has been a cult of personality since the days of Jack Lalanne, and there is no shortage of models and performers within the instructor ranks at places like Equinox and SoulCycle. But perhaps no brand is trying harder to make the connection between working out and glossy entertainment more explicit than Peloton.
The physical studio, with cameras and lights placed amid the stationary bikes, is really the set where the company films classes, creating sleek videos that can be seen via live stream or downloaded on-demand by Peloton bike-owners for $39 a month. The instructors are encouraged to break the fourth wall by looking directly into the camera and talking to the at-home riders, whose names and hometowns appear on a computer tablet affixed to their bikes and everyone else’s.
There is Ally Love, 28, the Afro-sporting model-dancer and Brooklyn Nets host who used fitness to overcome a childhood car accident. There is Matt Wilpers, 33, the aw-shucks Georgia guy who ran Division I college track and might throw a country tune into his ride. The Peloton executives want star power, but not just that. “It’s also about relatability and authenticity,” Mr. Klein said.
If the Peloton cast has a leading woman, it’s Robin Arzón, 35. She is the studio’s head instructor and the company’s vice president for fitness programming. She has, not incidentally, 86,000 followers on Instagram.
One evening last month, Ms. Arzón arrived at the studio to lead a 6:30 class. As women and men changed into cycling shoes, Ms. Arzón swept by them and descended to a small basement dressing room.
Sitting before a mirrored vanity like a Broadway actress, she sipped green juice from the gym’s cafe and prepared her workout music. At the sound of a Lil Wayne remix by the D.J. Haterade, Ms. Arzón jumped up and started energetically dancing.
“This drop is so sick! I just lose my mind,” she said, overcome.
A former lawyer, Ms. Arzón quit office life in 2012 to take a teaching job at a group fitness studio and build a coaching business as RobinNYC. None of that compares with what she is doing now for Peloton. “It’s the difference between standing with a megaphone in Union Square and getting on the soundstage at the ‘Today’ show,” she said.
Ms. Arzón was dressed in a black spandex catsuit with maroon piping that she had worn to teach her afternoon class that day. It was part of her five-piece capsule collection, which she helped design. The catsuit was carried in Peloton’s boutique, before selling out.
To not repeat outfits, she changed for her evening class into orange leggings, a black Peloton-branded sports bra and an orange hat worn backward so it wouldn’t cast a shadow across her face.
Ms. Arzón runs 50- and 100-mile ultramarathons, and last year she published a motivational guide, “Shut Up and Run.” After her afternoon class, she did a 10-mile sprint around the city. The evening class would be her third workout of the day. Though instructors care about their on-camera appearance, fitness comes first. “It’s not a dog and pony show,” she said.
When it was time to teach her 6:30 class, Ms. Arzón went upstairs to the studio to greet the live riders, then was cued in by a producer — 3, 2, 1. The show began, and she gave an over-the-top performance, pounding her hand against the bike frame, cursing as she climbed imaginary mountains, barking out “20 more seconds!” to slackers, giving shout-outs to home riders (“HP, I see you, baby, stay at the top”), dancing in the saddle to Kanye songs.
Fame for instructors at studio franchises like SoulCycle is intense but tends to be hyperlocal. But Peloton’s small cadre of instructors is reaching thousands of people across the world every week.
For Peloton riders who live outside New York, of which there are tens of thousands, traveling to the city to take classes with favorite instructors is a special rite.
Emma Stern of Ames, Iowa, bought a bike last fall. She used to live in Dallas and had enjoyed indoor cycling classes at Flywheel. Absent any similar boutique cycling studios in Ames, she went the Peloton route and says she loves it.
Jessica King, 31, another Peloton instructor and trained dancer, also saw a gig with Peloton as a different shot at fame, which is just what Mr. Foley, the chief executive, promised when recruiting her.
