Book Review|Why Is a Poet’s First Collection So Important?
Why Is a Poet’s First Collection So Important?
If you’re an author who specializes in, say, writing about science for general readers, then your first book will be regarded by most people as . . . the book you wrote first. That it was your inaugural effort will have no special significance; your work will be judged the way books are typically judged: as interesting or dull.
But if your goal is to write about the imaginary lives of imaginary people or — particularly — to write poems, then your first book may be another matter entirely. Because now it’s not merely the book of yours that happened to have the earliest publication date. Now it is the start of your career.
“Career” is a fraught word where literature is concerned. On one hand, literary artists are expected to develop (or at least to change), and “career” is generally the word we associate with that process. On the other hand, we don’t like to think of writers as advancing within their occupation the way most people do — filling out forms, going to conferences, interviewing, politicking, buffing a résumé and so forth. We prefer artistic careers to seem more like the blossoming of a chestnut tree than the expansion of a LinkedIn profile.
This is especially true for poets. As the scholar Jesse Zuba sharply observes in his study “The First Book: Twentieth-Century Poetic Careers in America,” for poets “success both corroborates and corrodes artistic legitimacy,” such that the career of a poet is often enhanced by looking as if one has tried to avoid a career in the first place (although that, in turn, may be viewed as a careerist maneuver). This twisty state of affairs emerges, as Zuba puts it, from “the conflicting imperatives of professionalism and romanticism.” Essentially, modern poets are caught between the historical image of the poet as “untutored genius” and the contemporary reality of the poet as faculty lounge aspirant. First books are therefore particularly significant and delicate projects, since they need to suggest the writer has potential to develop along established lines (“have a career . . .”) while also possibly calling those very standards into question (“ . . . that isn’t a career”). It calls for an acrobat’s balance and occasionally a diplomat’s patience.
But the framing of a book isn’t the book itself, nor is the launching of a career merely a matter of being paraded across the stage. There are also the poems, those balky players, which remain what they are (or aren’t) regardless of the scenery that encompasses them. Kelly’s writing in “Bestiary,” fortunately, is striking enough to weather the spotlight. Kelly is a descendant of Sylvia Plath by way of the wintry Louise Glück — her poems are animated by roiling, mostly dark emotion, but they’re spare, composed and often quite short (of the more than 40 poems here, only three stretch to a second page). The tone ranges from guardedly tender (“I play a little song in the key / of your name”) to self-critical (“My ashen body / and untrimmed nails”) to almost clinically brutal (in a poem about Pegasus: “Foaled, fully grown, from my mother’s neck, / her severed head, the silenced snakes”). Her diction is just formal enough to give her lines an appealing unnaturalness: Words like “cur,” “apportioned” and “perpendicularity” buttress conventionally poetic mainstays like “body,” “love” and “light.” There aren’t many jokes here (notwithstanding the wink in a title like “Sonnet in Which Only One Bird Appears”), there are relatively few nods to popular culture, and there’s not a single reference to philosophy or theory.
the sweet marrow, fields of grass and bone.
And there, the bowerbird.
But the bowerbird will keep building, just as Kelly will return to him only two pages later in another poem with the same title. The fantastical creatures in “Bestiary” are almost all hybrids — mermaids, minotaurs, griffins — as opposed to mere monsters, and their in-betweenness calls attention equally to the danger of dissolution and the possibility of unity. Kelly is drawn to both outcomes, and her uncertainty gives her writing its peculiar magnetism. If a few poems here seem slight, or too willfully autobiographical, that is a small price to pay for the possibilities her work suggests. Because possibility, perhaps even more than accomplishment, is what we want from first books; it is the foundation from which a career begins its brick-by-brick rise.
into this autobiographical moment.
I must take full responsibility. Quite right. I will move on.
This is very fine, and if it acquires a sheen of sentiment because of what it suggests will never emerge — that is, more poems from Ritvo — this doesn’t change the fact that a reader knowing nothing of poetry or this author might find it worth rereading. This is the life poetry leads beyond the confines of the poetic career; the life in which lines exist for what they are, not for future lines they might suggest. The life in which an early poem is also a poem, and a first book is also a book.