Growing up in Mississippi in the 1960s, Prof. Valerie Grim was only too familiar with racism. So when she discovered flyers from a white nationalist group posted outside her office at Indiana University Bloomington, she wasn’t intimidated.
Instead, she was curious about what had led someone to post flyers depicting Michelangelo’s David along with the phrase “Let’s become great again” and the name of Identity Evropa, a white nationalist group, outside offices in the university’s department of African-American and African diaspora studies. The group’s name, symbol and Twitter handle were also written on the whiteboard on Prof. Grim’s door.
Identity Evropa is one of several groups that appeared last year, seemingly in response to President Trump’s candidacy, according to the Southern Poverty Law Center. The number of hate groups operating in the United States rose from 892 in 2015 to 917 in 2016, the center reported on Wednesday.
Identity Evropa has ties to other white nationalist groups in the United States and abroad. The founder of the group, Nathan Damigo, attended the summit of the National Policy Institute, the white nationalist group run by Richard Spencer, in Washington in November. Identity Evropa has ideological similarities to anti-Muslim “identitarian” movements in Europe, and links to identitarian literature on its website.
The main activity of the group is posting flyers on college campuses. The flyers have appeared on more than two dozen campuses in 2017, including the University of Chicago and the University of California, Los Angeles.
Other white nationalist groups have also posted flyers around the country recently. Last week, flyers reading “Make America White Again” and including the web address of The Right Stuff, a white nationalist group, were discovered in mailboxes and on driveways in Norwalk, Conn. And printers at Stanford, Vanderbilt and the University of California, Berkeley, printed anti-Semitic flyers last month, probably as the result of hacking.
When white supremacist flyers show up on campus, university officials should not respond by cracking down on student speech or by ignoring the incident, says Heidi Beirich, director of the intelligence project at the Southern Poverty Law Center. Instead, they should clearly and forcefully denounce the views expressed on the flyers. “The way you defeat bad speech is with good speech,” Ms. Beirich says.
After the flyers appeared at Indiana, the provost released a statement saying that “our campus unequivocally rejects the cowardice and ugliness that this group’s action represents.” University police are investigating the incident.
