On Sunday night, a cadre of exquisitely dressed actors will wave and smile their way along the Dolby Theater’s red carpet for the 89th Academy Awards. When the women stop, their dresses will almost certainly get mentioned. But so, too, might the jewels around their necks and dangling from their ears.
While their ensembles have most likely been borrowed from designers eager to dress Oscar-worthy stars — and to reap the publicity from doing so — those gowns cost a pittance compared with the jewelry on loan to them.
At last year’s Oscars, Charlize Theron wore a Harry Winston necklace with nearly 50 carats of diamonds, worth $3.7 million. Just a few weeks ago, at the Grammys, Beyoncé topped that with a long diamond necklace that reportedly had 400 carats of stones and a price tag of $12 million.
Needless to say, these celebrities get to wear things that other women can only dream about. But the actors and entertainers who parade such gems for the cameras do share one thing with mere mortals: They need to protect them.
Whether borrowing or buying jewelry, protecting it requires thought — and can be costly.
Christy Scott Cashman, an actress and producer whose credits include “American Hustle” and “The Kids Are All Right,” said she had borrowed many ensembles, for entertainment galas, but also for soirees around Boston, where she lives.
Her own jewelry, she said, is too nice to wear around town — even nicer than what her stylist proffers, so when she travels with it, she protects it as best she can.
For instance, on a trip to Los Angeles to attend a lifetime achievement celebration for the actress Shirley MacLaine, she wore her impressive emerald-and-diamond necklace on the plane.
“I took great pains to wear it and not pack it,” said Mrs. Cashman, who said that her husband, who owns a large construction company, had given it to her.
Yet, Mrs. Cashman’s thinking belies a fear many jewelry lovers have of traveling with their valuables. What might happen when they are apart from it?
Michelle-Marie Heinemann, a socialite and publisher of a magazine called Old Fashioned Mom, attended the Oscars 10 years ago with 12 pieces of jewelry that together were worth more than $1 million.
Such extreme steps show the fear people with the finest jewels have. It may be misplaced.
Mark Galante, president of the Northeast zone and strategic alliances at Pure Insurance, said that most jewelry claims were for pieces that were lost or damaged — say, a stone fell out — not stolen in some brazen heist.
“As an industry, we get very few jewelry claims, period,” he said.
But when they do get one, he said the average claim was $18,000.
Separate policies for jewelry and other valuables take care of that. The most valuable pieces can be listed separately, while the other pieces can be lumped together under a policy that offers blanket coverage.
The cost for this coverage is 1 to 2 percent of the collection’s value, though insuring 10 $10,000 rings will cost less than one $100,000 ring since that could be more easily lost or stolen.
And there are tips to avoid having jewelry stolen — or hiding it so well that you can’t find it.
For one, insurers tell people that if they are staying in a hotel, it is best to put their jewelry in the hotel’s main safe, never in the room safe.
Safes in the home are not as safe as they might seem. For one thing, people often forget to lock up their jewels. And if they were robbed, the thief could compel the homeowner to open the safe and hand over the contents.
In the case of Beth Zuckerman, whose father worked in the jewelry business, the thieves simply picked up the safe in her Miami home and walked out the door last Memorial Day weekend.
She said that Pure Insurance paid the claim and the thieves were caught. But she recovered only a dozen of about 150 pieces.
In another unusual claim that Ms. White said she handled, the thieves were drilling a safe for so long that heat and dust set off a fire alarm. She said the thieves stopped drilling, waited for the fire engines to leave and then finished the job.
Episodes like this show why people who have truly exquisite and valuable pieces can get a discount on their insurance by getting vault insurance – as in, putting the jewelry in a bank vault. The rates for this type of insurance are a small fraction of the rates charged for keeping such jewelry in a home. Mr. Galante said the cost dropped to 0.2 percent of the piece’s value.
But vault insurance has its drawbacks. Diane Schoeman, 70, was given a nearly 20-carat diamond ring on her 20th wedding anniversary. That was 15 years ago and she wore it every day for over five years.
Then her husband, Michael, who worked in the clothing business, wanted to cut insurance costs in retirement. The ring now resides in a bank vault. The insurance is about $3,000 a year for that one ring.
Mrs. Schoeman said she was allowed to take it out only three times a year. Any more and the insurance company charges her more. She misses wearing it all the time.
Therein lies the trade off between security and happiness.