Politics|‘Resist’ Is a Battle Cry, but What Does It Mean?
‘Resist’ Is a Battle Cry, but What Does It Mean?
‘Resist’ has become a one-word battle cry for the anti-Trump forces. But what does it mean?
Charlene Carruthers, 31, the national director of Black Youth Project 100.
Bayard Rustin’s call for civil disobedience and direct action tells us that “the only weapon we have is our bodies and we have to tuck them in places so wheels don’t turn.” Even if it that’s not your jam, everyone has a role in creating a society where we divest from things that punish and invest in real community-based measures that keep us safe. It will take community organizers, cultural workers, farmers, caretakers and builders. Now is the time to go big; we have everything to gain.
Enrique Morones, 60, of San Diego, executive director and founder of Border Angels.
On Nov. 9, 2016, thousands came to our doors and website saying: “Que paso? What do we do now?” Resist, we told them. Be informed about your rights, join the masses, register to vote or get others to vote. This April, for the fourth time, Border Angels will open the door of hope, and children will hug deported parents and grandparents at the wall.
Bob Bland, fashion designer in New York, co-chairwoman of the Women’s March on Washington.
It’s a daily mental practice to galvanize yourself and to remind yourself to not become acclimated to this barrage of executive orders and then people being stripped of their rights because that is not what this country was founded on, and we should be moving forward not backwards. And that is why we all have to get out onto the streets and act.
Tamika D. Mallory, 36, gun control activist and co-chairwoman of the Women’s March on Washington.
Aisha Dew, political and arts consultant living in Charlotte, N.C.
“Resist” means to stand for the people who already make America great. The United States is diverse because we are a country of immigrants who came to America for freedom and a better way of life. Although I am the descendant of slaves, I recognize that there are many who came here to escape starvation, death, persecution and war. And as a descendant of slaves, I know that America has been challenged throughout history to deliver on its promise of freedom for all, but has also been slowly moving toward justice for all.
Symone D. Sanders, 27, of Washington, former national press secretary for the Bernie Sanders campaign.
We have to resist the urge to roll over and go with the flow. We have to resist the want to normalize what has happened over the last year and resist the tendency to take our eye off of the ball of the issues. It is so easy to just subscribe to the notion that “this is the world we live in,” but the resistance demands we challenge that. The resistance demands that we stand up for what we know is right and true, not because it is popular, but because it is necessary.
Dusty Klass, 30, a rabbi in Charlotte, N.C., who has been protesting police killings.
For me, to resist means resisting the temptation to assume, to decide who a person is before spending time with him or her. Resist writing other people’s stories for them. Resist the urge to hide, to click over to something else when that difficult truth pops up on your screen. Resist the opportunity to just keep walking, to avoid eye contact. And more than anything, resist the ease of just being angry — dig down past that anger, toward the pain.
Jimmy Dahman, 25, former organizer for Hillary Clinton who runs Town Hall Project 2018, which created a Google spreadsheet listing the public appearances of members of Congress.
Kristin Rowe-Finkbeiner, 47, of Seattle, executive director of MomsRising.
One of the things that resistance means to me is not buying into Donald Trump’s ridiculous and wrong vision of America as only a place of carnage and understanding that we need to resist his description of what we are and know that it is the diversity of our country that has made us a strong and prosperous nation and not the opposite.