To anyone aware of his back story, however, the reason behind his shakiness was understandable: Until arriving at the competition this week, Solano, a Venezuelan, had never set foot on, nor even seen, snow. Until his debut, Solano, 22, carried out all his training for the championships on wheels under the blazing South American sun.
In his opening event, the cross-country 10-kilometer in a qualifying round on Wednesday, Solano wore Bib No. 1 and was first out of the gate. He lost his balance almost immediately, proceeding to fall on the descents and to perform variations of the splits on the inclines, persistently losing his footing.
After completing the first 3.5 kilometers in 39 minutes 37 seconds — roughly the same amount of time it took the other competitors to complete the entire 10-kilometer course — Solano decided to call it a day, retiring from the event altogether.
Simply getting to the championships was a struggle for Solano, who works as a cook in Maracay, Venezuela. He decided to take up roller skiing about a year ago, basing his decision on simply being someone who likes “trying difficult things.” Under the guidance of César Baena, a Venezuelan cross-country skier who was able to provide him with equipment, he practiced for five hours a day on weekends in hopes of one day representing Venezuela on actual powder, and perhaps at the Olympics.
In preparation for the conditions in Finland, Solano planned to spend a month training in Sweden to familiarize himself with snow. When he arrived in Paris on Jan. 19, however, airport officials reportedly doubted Solano’s story of being a professional skier and delayed his entry. With only 28 euros in cash and having faced questioning for five days, Solano said, he decided to return to Venezuela.
“My expectations were to train and finish in a good place at the competition,” Solano said. “But that got broken the minute I didn’t get to Sweden.” This week, Venezuela’s foreign minister, Delcy Rodríguez, wrote on Twitter that the country would issue a strong statement to the French government over Solano’s experience.
As the skier’s troubles received news media attention in the Nordic countries, one reader, Aleksi Valavuori, a sports and television personality in Finland, saw Solano’s story and decided to contact Baena, the coach, through event organizers and offer his support.
Valavuori and Baena first spoke on Monday and figured out that if they could raise enough money for Solano’s airfare and accommodation, the skier could still take one of the latest possible flights out of Venezuela and make his first event on Wednesday afternoon.
Having failed to finish the first event, Solano set a goal of simply completing his second and final race, the 1.6-kilometer cross-country sprint. He placed 156th — last — but was all smiles.
On Friday, Solano announced his intention to raise money for Finnish junior skiing as a thank you to those who helped finance his trip to Lahti. He also said he planned to continue skiing in Venezuela and hoped to practice more frequently on snow. His long-term goal is to compete in the 2022 Winter Olympics.
