Permits to hunt bighorn sheep are auctioned for hundreds of thousands of dollars — and that money has helped revive wild sheep populations and expand their territory.
Globally, there are dozens of species and subspecies of wild sheep, many in Central Asia. The Wild Sheep Foundation, based in Bozeman, Mont., considers there to be four primary wild sheep in North America: the Rocky Mountain bighorn; the desert bighorn (in the American Southwest and Mexico); Dall’s sheep (commonly called Dall sheep, in Alaska, British Columbia, the Northwest Territories and the Yukon); Stone’s sheep (or Stone sheep, in British Columbia and the Yukon).
The United States Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that there are more than 10 million big-game hunters in the United States. But only about 2,500 wild sheep are hunted each year across North America, a fraction compared with nearly every other animal.
Brendan Burns sat in a padded stackable chair in the Tuscany Ballroom of the Peppermill Resort Spa Casino in Reno, Nev. It was a Friday night in January, and there were about 1,000 people sitting at 100 round tables, having just eaten the one entree offered: steak. A convention of hunters was no place for a vegetarian option.
A dinnerware set at the Sheep Show.
Donations come in other forms, too. Liautaud recently spent about $3 million for a three-mile fence near the Taos Pueblo reservation in New Mexico, according to reservation officials, along a stretch where sheep from a growing herd were getting hit on a highway.
Ray Alt, a slight 76-year-old with his shirt tucked into his Wranglers, opened the door to his stone house in Livingston, Mont., where he was born and raised. The heads and horns of three sheep were mounted high on the living room wall. Around a corner and down some stairs was a trophy room, which used to be the garage, its walls filled with animals that Alt shot, with a bow or rifle, over a lifetime of hunting. The first animal he got as a boy, with a bow, was a porcupine. His favorites, though, are the sheep. He has eight of them.
Despite his fascination, it took Alt 46 years to get one of each kind in North America, the last a desert bighorn in 2014. The first ram he got was in 1968, snowshoeing through the nearby Beartooth Mountains, a vast and wickedly rugged landscape just north of Yellowstone National Park. The Beartooth Mountains are the only place where hunters in the lower 48 states can buy a permit over the counter, for $125, and try their luck at sheep hunting. But it’s a daunting exercise, one of the toughest hunts possible. The area is nearly a million acres, with perhaps just 10 rams of legal age and size.
But in 1968, Alt shot one with a bow, a ram so big that it held up as the record for 12 years. It hung unblinking in his trophy room. The fat horns were ringed, one for each year, which is how hunters determine a ram’s age, and the tips were battle-worn and ragged, or “broomed” in hunting parlance.
Burns grew up in Livingston and considers Alt a mentor. Like Alt and other guides, Burns has assisted on many hunts but could not afford to buy a tag at auction. For years, he applied for tags through the lottery system, to no avail. He said he spent about $4,500 a year to enter drawings.
In 2012, a friend sent Burns a photograph of a magnificent ram he had seen during a deer hunt in the Bob Marshall Wilderness, more than a million acres of forest and granite straddling the Continental Divide south of Glacier National Park. Burns made the photo his screen saver and the ram his quest. He repeatedly applied for one of that area’s two annual tags, and had about a 1-in-30 chance of getting it.
His name was drawn in 2015.
“The big question was if he was still alive,” Burns said.
That fall, Burns spent 22 days wandering the Bob, as it is called, carrying a bow and searching for his sheep. He figures he walked about 150 miles.
“I equate finding a big ram with walking into a big gravel pit, looking for a diamond,” Burns said.
He found 36 rams in his first 18 days, but not the one he was looking for. He made mental notes, thinking which one would be his second choice or his third. But the three-year-old photo he carried also showed two younger rams in the frame. To Burns and other sheep hunters, each ram looks different than others, the way identical twins are easily distinguished by family and friends. He had not seen any of those in the photo.
He found them on Day 23, after he heard the clash of butting heads over a ridge. He saw the ram he wanted. Using a satellite phone, he called the friend who first spotted the ram three years before and asked him to come. The friend hiked 10 hours overnight to be there for the kill.
He managed to get closer, but the herd smelled him before he could get an open shot. The sheep shuffled away and settled again. Burns positioned himself within about 80 yards. Back home, Burns practices from that distance daily with his bow, shooting into a life-size Dall’s sheep made of foam. The arrow travels about 300 feet a second, and Burns rarely misses.
The arrow pierced the ram behind the front shoulder. It ran about 100 yards, dropped and died. Burns and his friend skinned and cleaned the animal. They packed out nearly 100 pounds of meat, 50 pounds of the skull and horns, and the sheep’s full cape. They left behind just bones and guts, sure to be cleaned quickly to nothing but a white skeleton by wolves or coyotes.
The ram was 13½ years old, the oldest of the more than 100 rams killed in Montana in 2015.  At the Wild Sheep Foundation’s show in Reno, Burns won the award for “top archery bighorn,” proclaimed on a big belt buckle presented in a wooden case.
A few months after the hunt, several pounds of the ram’s meat sizzled on the backyard barbecue, and the skull and massive horns sat on a garage workbench. The skull was still red and unbleached. Burns figured he would someday get it mounted, but said that the prize was the memory, not the trophy.
Brendan Burns, in a photo he provided, with the 13-year-old ram he killed in the Bob Marshall Wilderness in Montana on a 24-day hunt. 