White House misconduct. Sensational leaks. Battling broadsheets.
The swirling story around President Trump’s dealings with Russia is being compared in journalism circles to past blockbusters like Watergate and the Monica Lewinsky scandal — with a 21st-century twist.
News organizations like The Washington Post, The New York Times and CNN are jousting for scoops, but instead of sending clerks to grab the early editions from newsstands, editors watch the news unfold on Twitter in real time. Anonymous sources are driving bombshell stories, but leaks are springing from encrypted iPhone messaging apps rather than from meetings in underground parking garages.
The news cycle begins at sunrise, as groggy reporters hear the ping of a presidential tweet, and ends sometime in the overnight hours, as newspaper editors tear up front pages scrambled by the latest revelation from Washington. In consequence and velocity, the political developments of the past four weeks — has it been only four weeks? — are jogging memories of momentous journalistic times.
“There is this sense that every day is going to bring something startling, if not calamitous,” he added.
If the routine is energizing, it is also relentless. On Wednesday afternoon, the Atlantic staff writer Rosie Gray tweeted, “only 9 hours or so till the next massive newsbreak that will prevent us from having lives again.” Hallie Jackson, White House correspondent for NBC News, replied jokingly a minute later — “wuts a life” — to which Ms. Gray replied: “I remember vaguely there was a time when i had one.” By evening, Ms. Gray’s original message had been “liked” more than 850 times.
Even people paid to satirize politics find themselves agog. On the Los Angeles set of “Veep,” the HBO parody series with Julia Louis-Dreyfus, writers and cast members rush to learn the latest news between takes. “Everyone’s on their phone,” said Frank Rich, the liberal columnist, who is an executive producer of the series.
The accelerated metabolism is nonpartisan. Many right-leaning news sites are covering every twist of the White House developments and resisting the notion that the administration is embroiled in a major scandal.
Apropos for a president enraptured by reality television, the White House drama has begun to resemble a kind of O. J. Simpson trial for politics, gripping the nation and minting a menagerie of unlikely celebrities.
The Simpson circus had Lance Ito, Robert Shapiro and Kato Kaelin. The Trump administration has Sean Spicer, the press secretary, whose afternoon news briefings now beat “General Hospital” in the Nielsen ratings. For the past two weekends, Mr. Spicer has been featured on “Saturday Night Live” in the form of a Melissa McCarthy impression that is already generating Emmy chatter.
