“A Bold Plan to Prevent Homelessness” (editorial, Jan. 23) made two important points about homelessness in New York City: It’s a crisis, and it requires big, bold solutions.
We at Care for the Homeless, the city’s oldest and largest provider of health care exclusively to people of all ages experiencing homelessness, agree with your endorsement of Assemblyman Andrew Hevesi’s Home Stability Support legislation modernizing rent subsidies for people on assistance to support them in getting and maintaining stable housing.
Two other bold and necessary pieces to fighting homelessness are pledges made by the city and the state to each create 15,000 units of supportive housing in New York City, and the city’s innovative HomeStat program, intended to develop relationships with homeless people, assign caseworkers to them and create individual plans leading to housing for every person experiencing homelessness on the streets.
We can start to end homelessness right now. If we start now, we can end the crisis in years, not decades. And we can end homelessness for not more than we’re spending on homelessness now.
Yes, it’s certainly important to expand our safety net with increased rent support so that those New Yorkers relying on public assistance may finally find a way out of shelter. But calling this a bold plan? Only if we’re willing to accept a permanent underclass and insidiously shore up the status quo.
Rather, Assemblyman Andrew Hevesi’s rent assistance plan needs to be tied to a bolder set of initiatives, one that appreciates the problem through the frame of the larger antipoverty struggle. Surely, creating opportunities to live in affordable and decent housing is an important start.
But there are other critical issues at stake — inadequate access to health care, enervated neighborhood schools, stagnant local economies and few economic opportunities — that must be incorporated into any response if we’re truly to address the underlying issues that drive so many into homelessness.
New York City is confronting a homelessness emergency. In November, a record of almost 63,000 men, women and children slept in shelters on average every night.
Your editorial sensibly shows how a proposed statewide rental supplement is the right program for this urgent moment. The Home Stability Support program addresses the most serious drivers of homelessness: the divide between shelter allowances and staggering housing costs, as well as the lack of financial support for families fleeing domestic violence.
In the city, a three-person household with children can receive a $400 allowance. Yet by federal calculations, the fair-market rent of a two-bedroom unit in the city is $1,637. This gap puts too many New Yorkers on razor-thin budgets, so that any contingency, like a sickness or a lost job, can lead to evictions, homelessness and immeasurable distress from a disrupted life.
By covering the subsidy gap, the program will keep families in their homes and neighborhoods intact.
The program is already supported by a wide range of city and state officials. Legislators must pass the Home Stability Support program, and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo should sign it into law.
SEYMOUR W. JAMES Jr.
