Not everyone can run on a treadmill for more than an hour, and it’s unusual to see somebody do it in a blue dress. But the woman running in place from the beginning to the end of Ohad Naharin’s “Last Work” isn’t the extraordinary part. What happens around her is.
“Last Work,” which was received with wild cheering after its New York premiere at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Wednesday, is urgent and intense and curiously less than satisfying. Those are qualities it shares with many other works Mr. Naharin has made for Batsheva Dance Company, the Israeli troupe that he has transformed in the past few decades into one of the world’s greatest. In this work, though, the mechanisms of that intensity are set into relief by the runner.
Her pace is as moderate and steady as a ticking clock, whereas Mr. Naharin loves extreme slowness, a resistance to the flow of time that he follows with acceleration and sudden stillness. The runner’s action is upright and pedestrian, but Mr. Naharin prefers more radical positions. His dancers waddle like storks, skim the ground squatting, bend deeply in every direction.
The runner is alone, apart. Mr. Naharin’s dancers are seldom free from one another. There are many solos and duets, but they are brief. In their quick profusion, these individual moments ratify the greater power of the group from which they emerge and into which they are absorbed.
Such apparent contradictions are a potent source of fascination. In “Mr. Gaga,” the revelatory new documentary about Mr. Naharin, he repeatedly mentions physical pleasure, and yet Gaga, the movement language he created, while plainly springing from physical sensation, rarely seems pleasurable, exactly, for the dancer or the viewer. Mr. Naharin also stresses (accurately) how his movement is delicate, “the opposite of macho,” and yet it is implacably assertive. It doesn’t seduce so much as assume rapt attention. Its uncommon specificity is severe, ruling out apologies and explanations.
Which isn’t to say that it avoids meaningful images. To the contrary, “Last Work” abounds in them. The dancers float on their backs like fetuses in the womb. They act like machines. They cover their faces in mesh; they seem to daven in religious-looking robes; they ride one another with suggestions of kinky sex. One waves a white flag of surrender, not in capitulation but demandingly. Another cleans a rifle as if masturbating. Another binds everyone else (even the runner) in a web of tape.
Is that binding benevolent or sinister? How does it fit together with everything else? Mr. Naharin doesn’t want that to be too clear. “I like that I can create drama without giving anything away” is how the testily cryptic Mr. Naharin recently explained the title of “Last Work,” which he doesn’t intend to be his final opus.
The aim seems less to express meaning than to maintain intensity. Pursuing that single aim, “Last Work” sags in the middle, as the successive contrasts cancel out. It doesn’t run in place, but neither does it bring you along from beginning to end.