After graduating with degrees in accounting and finance from a university in Finland, Ville Markus Kieloniemi thought he would at least find an entry-level job in his field. He studied potential employers, tailoring his applications accordingly.
He wound up churning through eight temporary jobs over the next three years. He worked variously as a hotel receptionist and as a salesman in men’s clothing stores, peddling tailored suits and sportswear.
Meet the new generation of permatemps in Europe.
While the region’s economy is finally recovering, more than half of all new jobs created in the European Union since 2010 have been through temporary contracts. This is the legacy of a painful financial crisis that has left employers wary of hiring permanent workers in a tenuous economy where growth is still weak. Under European labor laws, permanent workers are usually more difficult to lay off and require more costly benefit packages, making temporary contracts appealing for all manner of industries, from low-wage warehouse workers to professional white-collar jobs.
For those stuck in this employment netherworld, life is a cycle of constant job searches. Confidence can give way to doubt as career prospects seem to fade. Young people talk of delaying marriage and families indefinitely. And though many were grateful for any workplace experience, they were also cynical about companies that treated them like disposable labor.
What follows is a selection of experiences from this growing group of permatemps: an Italian oncologist who spent almost as much time trying to find her next three-month contract as she did helping cancer patients; a French human-resources expert grappling with the psychological toll of temporary work; and, among others, a German tourism specialist who gave up his passion for a stable job in an unrelated field.
The search for temporary employment can be a full-time job.
Alessandra Sisco, a doctor who specializes in treating cancer patients, never dreamed she would have to leave her home in Italy to find steady work. But in a stagnant economy, she was trapped in a web of short-term contracts.
Since finishing her five-year oncology residency in 2012, she has only been able to get three- to five-month temporary contracts that Italy’s public and private hospitals largely rely on to manage staffing. The full-time jobs often went to people from well-connected families, or those with ties to senior hospital officials.
She became stuck in a loop, trying to divine whether her jobs might be extended, and struggling to land another position since they usually weren’t. “I’d fix up my résumé all the time, and that’s your life,” Mrs. Sisco, 35, said.
Temporary employees are paid an average of 19 percent less than their permanent counterparts, according to Eurofound, the research arm of the European Union.
In November, she interviewed for hospital internships in New York. ‘‘At least there would be hope for the future,” she said.
Temporary work has become widespread in the United States, too, where the explosion of the so-called gig economy has made job-hopping the new norm for a growing pool of young workers. But the situation is verging on the extreme in Europe, giving the perniciousness of the problem the potential to play on an entire generation. Millions of people across Europe are searching for work amid jobless rates that are still nearly twice as high as in the United States.
Relocating would mean having to do a new five-year residency on top of her extensive training and experience. But the prospect of spending her career as a doctor doing temporary work was more than she could bear.
“When I started thinking of moving, I stopped thinking about what I was not getting,” said Mrs. Sisco, who hopes to be able to move her family and start a new life in the coming months.
Starting a family or getting a mortgage can be a major challenge.
At 36, Sam Mee thought his life would have been settled by now. A career in research and social policy. A family. A home. At the very least a cellphone.
But even the basics can be unachievable, as Mr. Mee finds himself on a treadmill of temporary contracts.
“I had this idea that I would study hard, work hard, get the job I studied for, then ask my girlfriend to marry me,” Mr. Mee said.
He moved to Amsterdam before the financial crisis to be with his girlfriend and to start his career. Yet in a country where more than 20 percent of job contracts are temporary, he was never able to find permanent work in his area of expertise. He now has a temporary contract with a firm that does business-to-business collections, including calling airlines to settle outstanding invoices.
The temporary-work trend is accelerating around Europe, as employers seek more flexibility to fire and hire workers, and shun permanent contracts with expensive costs and labor protections. In Spain alone, the government reported that 18 million temporary contracts were handed out last year, compared with 1.7 million long-term jobs.
Temporary contracts blocked more than just his career. Real estate agents were reluctant to deal with Mr. Mee, and it was impossible to get a mortgage at the bank. Nor could he obtain a credit card, lacking steady income. Even mobile-phone companies would not give him a contract; he had to get one through his girlfriend, who has a full-time job as a midwife.
Mr. Mee put his personal life on pause. He initially delayed proposing to his girlfriend and avoided discussing children, mindful that it would be difficult to support a family without a regular job. Uncertain unemployment prospects have made the decision to become parents harder for both men and women, fueling a sharp rise in childlessness, especially in southern Europe.
Recently, he asked his girlfriend to marry him. She accepted; the wedding is planned for this year.
A revolving door of work exerts a psychological toll.
Charles Terraz never used to live with chronic stress, health scares or recurring anxiety. But these days, they have become close companions as he bounces through a series of temporary contracts as a recruiter at industrial and pharmaceutical companies, each of which leaves him a little more drained and racked by uncertainty about his career.
Armed with a master’s degree in human resources and economics and business degrees, Mr. Terraz, a native of Lyon, France, was confident of finding work at a large company. Yet in the country’s struggling economy, where more than 80 percent of all new hires are temporary, that proved virtually impossible.
That precariousness fueled sleepless nights and nagging self-doubts. He sustained severe stress and recurring migraines, spending two weeks recovering in a hospital. “It was a horrible experience,” he said.
Perhaps no group has felt the sting of the economic fallout more sharply than millennials. More than 40 percent of Europe’s young people are now stuck in a revolving door of low-paid, temporary work.
Treating employees like disposable labor is bad for companies, too.
Joost Minnaar, an industrious Dutchman, had a dream job in Barcelona, Spain, as a nanotechnologist at a German company with 30 other scientists, working on new developments for television, tablet and computer displays. Each held one-year renewable contracts, with the promise of potentially going full time after two years.
The company was hiring groups of 30 scientists at a time on temporary contracts, which management would let expire to avoid the cost of hiring people full time. Mr. Minnaar and his colleagues discovered that they were the third such group in four years.
It is an increasing reality across Europe. Since 2012, just 20 percent of temporary workers have made the leap to full-time work, according to Eurofound.
“Productivity became really bad, and people started to become really disengaged from work, which was strange because we were doing interesting stuff,” he recalled.
Employees dragged their feet on projects and openly looked for jobs. Others grew wary of colleagues, whom they viewed as competitors for any permanent jobs that might arise elsewhere at the firm.
Mr. Minnaar eventually quit. He began a start-up, Corporate Rebels, with a friend who had also struggled on a cycle of temporary contracts. They now consult with banks, retailers and the likes of Google and Patagonia on what makes employees happy and productive in the workplace.
Taking any job just to survive means dealing with trade-offs.
Cristian Meiler had always worked in tourism and hospitality in Spain, following a passion that had grabbed him as a teenager. He served as a hotel bellhop in his hometown, Barcelona, manned reception desks, and waited tables at restaurants. He is fluent in five languages and has a degree in hotel management.
Despite decades of experience, he never managed to land a prized full-time job. When a permanent offer did come, however, he hesitated.
Mr. Meiler had been working a temporary job at a sports equipment company’s call center in Barcelona to help supplement his income from short-term contracts at hotels and cruise ships, where he welcomed and checked in guests. Accepting a full-time gig as a service representative at the sports company in Munich would mean abandoning his career path.
“There’s a sense that you’ve given in, that you’ve surrendered,” said Mr. Meiler, 35, who remembers accompanying his mother, a tour guide, as a youth around Spain. “You want to stay on the path you’ve been working on for so long.
Mr. Meiler has adapted quickly to his new role in Germany, and he feels lucky to be working in a collegial atmosphere.
A sense of relief accompanies a permanent job.
In a typical week, Laura Hickey, 26, was spending three days working at a theater in Edinburgh under a contract with no guaranteed income. The rest of the week was devoted to sending out résumés and angling for interviews in a bid to nail an elusive permanent job. She worked at three companies, including a youth orchestra and an arts foundation, just in the past year.
After struggling for nearly two years, Ms. Hickey, who studied art history, finally got lucky: Last month, she landed a full-time job at the Scottish Rugby Association as a ticket sales representative.
She now has steady hours at an office every day, a regular paycheck with overtime, and a sense that she can settle down and start forging some kind of a career path. Her passion is still the arts, but her new job may present opportunities that she had never dreamed of. And in a dicey job market, she figures it is better to start working her way up the ladder where she is rather than risk starting all over again.
