The Consumer Finance Protection Bureau and the New York attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, have sued a New Jersey-based finance company, accusing it of deceiving retired N.F.L. football players who hoped to receive money in the league’s landmark concussion settlement.
The suit, filed Tuesday in United States District Court in Manhattan, alleges that RD Legal Funding L.L.C. and Roni Dersovitz, the company’s founder, lent money to N.F.L. retirees at high interest rates that was to be repaid with settlement money they may receive from the N.F.L. The league has agreed to pay up to $5 million to former players with diagnoses of severe neurological disorders. The company is accused of “luring them into costly advances on settlement payouts with lies about the terms of the deals,” the suit said.
RD Legal Funding, the suit said, also took advantage of Sept. 11 emergency medical workers who have cancer and other illnesses.
“We allege that this company and its owner lined their pockets with funds intended to cover medical care and other critical expenses for people who are sick and sidelined,” Richard Cordray, the director of the Consumer Finance Protection Bureau, said in a statement.
David Willingham, a lawyer representing RD Legal Funding, which is based in Cresskill, N.J., called the allegations against his client “outrageous and without merit.” The claims, he said, “misunderstand and falsely characterize clear documents with those parties as ‘loans’ and falsely state that RDLF is ‘scamming’ the affected parties when it did nothing more than provide immediate liquidity” to people who voluntarily sought loans.
RD Legal is one of a handful of lenders who provide advances to people awaiting payouts from settlements in class-action suits and other instances. The loans often come with interest rates of 40 percent or higher and are repaid with the money received in the settlements.
This type of lending against a settlement payout is part of a legal but largely unregulated business focused mostly on victims in personal injury cases. The loans, though, have potentially devastating trapdoors, most notably the high interest rates that kick in immediately after money is advanced, and can cut deeply into the sum a player might ultimately receive in a settlement.
Some financial watchdogs accuse the lenders of preying on people who are sick or who, in the case of the N.F.L. retirees, have memory problems or other cognitive ailments that could mean they cannot fully grasp the terms of the loans, which often require the players’ lawyers to provide consent.
Some former N.F.L. players have been borrowing money from these lenders for more than a year, having started well before the settlement with the league was finalized in January. Often, these players were in financial straits and did not want to wait for the settlement to be finalized.
