“Unlocking the Cage” examines the legal rights of animals, while Daveed Diggs narrates a tale about young creatures navigating the wild. And “The Breaks” chronicles hip-hop’s ascension in early ’90s New York.
THE BREAKS 9 p.m. on VH1. Picking up where last year’s vaunted movie pilot left off, this new series extends that tale of three friends (Afton Williamson, David Call and Mack Wilds) plotting hip-hop success during the genre’s golden age in early ’90s New York. The stakes are high for the budding industry, with its drug-dealing talent, skeptical mothers and piles of cash, and so are tensions. “The only color that matters is green,” says Juggy, the big-time music executive played by Evan Handler. Based on the Dan Charnas book “The Big Payback: The History of the Business of Hip-Hop,” the show also stars Wood Harris, Teyana Taylor and Method Man.
BATES MOTEL 10 p.m. on A&E, Lifetime and LMN. Freddie Highmore and Vera Farmiga return in their final season as Norman Bates and his deceased mother, still very much alive in her son’s twisted mind. The motel also gets a visit from the singer and superfan Rihanna.
GROWING UP WILD (2016) on Netflix. Daveed Diggs, formerly of “Hamilton,” narrates this documentary that follows five young animals as they navigate the wildernesses into which they’ve been born. “Growing Up Wild” is a compilation of sorts, weaving footage from the Disneynature films “African Cats” (2011), “Chimpanzee” (2012), “Bears” (2014) and “Monkey Kingdom” (2015) into a tale of acclimation and survival.
AUTHOR: THE JT LEROY STORY (2016) on Amazon Prime. With his waifish persona and tales of teenage prostitution, abuse, heroin addiction and H.I.V., J T LeRoy became a literary darling whose books earned their author critical acclaim and the attention of Courtney Love and Winona Ryder. But eventually LeRoy’s story began to fall apart, revealing a fraud perpetrated by Laura Albert, an obscure novelist who had been writing under LeRoy’s name, and Savannah Knoop, who had been portraying LeRoy in public. Jeff Feuerzeig’s film, which tries to unravel the hoax, is “less a documentary than an infomercial, a prelude to an attempted second act” for Ms. Albert, A. O. Scott wrote in The Times.