The Republican-dominated Kansas Legislature, confronted on Wednesday by both a budget crisis and a governor resolute on preserving his record on tax policy, handed a narrow victory to Gov. Sam Brownback, whose veto of a plan to raise more than $1 billion over two years barely survived an override attempt.
Although the House agreed by a single vote to defy Mr. Brownback’s veto, the Senate balked, effectively maintaining Mr. Brownback’s conservative vision for government in Kansas, including the largest income tax cuts in state history, which his allies hope will be replicated across the country.
The plan that Mr. Brownback moved to block sharply divided lawmakers in Kansas, where Republicans hold about 70 percent of the Legislature’s seats and where state officials have projected a budget shortfall of nearly $346 million for the fiscal year that ends in June. The proposal called for increased income tax rates, as well as the elimination of a controversial tax exemption that benefited business owners.
Eighty-five of the 125 representatives — one more than was necessary to override a veto — voted on Wednesday to enact the plan over Mr. Brownback’s objections. But later Wednesday, the Senate voted 24 to 16 and sustained Mr. Brownback’s veto, falling three votes short of the minimum for an override.
“There’s a lot of things wrong with this, and I’ve been waiting until the last minute to find an alternative, a possibility I could latch onto, a fig leaf of some kind, but I have yet not seen it,” State Representative Clay Aurand, a Republican who supported the override, said, according to The Associated Press.
“This bill is to take from the people of Kansas to make our decision-making on spending easier,” he said shortly before the Senate voted.
Tax policy has long been central to Mr. Brownback’s ambitions in Kansas, which he represented in the United States Senate before his election as governor in 2010. But Mr. Brownback and his supporters also viewed their policy prescriptions, including the tax cuts that passed in 2012 and 2013, as a model that could be imitated elsewhere.
Yet Kansas has struggled in the aftermath of the tax reductions, and the state has been rattled by debates about paying for public education and social services. This month, S&P Global Ratings issued a “negative” outlook for its credit rating for Kansas, where the economic growth that Mr. Brownback thought the tax cuts would produce has not materialized. Last summer, S&P downgraded Kansas’ credit rating, to AA-.
But the reality that Mr. Brownback had to reckon with a pair of veto override votes on Wednesday reflected his diminished standing in the state and the power of a coalition of centrist Republicans and right-leaning Democrats. The results of last year’s election, when conservatives saw their ranks slip in the Legislature in a round of balloting that sometimes seemed like a referendum on Mr. Brownback’s tenure, loomed over the debate.
Other Republican governors have struggled this year with intraparty clashes over taxation. Last week in Oklahoma, where Gov. Mary Fallin has proposed new levies on more than 150 services, the lieutenant governor resigned from the cabinet.
And Gov. Rick Snyder of Michigan and Republican lawmakers battled over a proposal that would have eliminated the state’s income tax by 2057. House Republicans abandoned that proposal this week.