Every Sunday in February, we will feature and explore previously unpublished photographs from The New York Times’s archives, with a special focus on the 1960s. Revisit last year’s Unpublished Black History project, sign up for our Race/Related newsletter and share your own experiences with black history in the comments.
In fact, there’s a third performance that Times reporters and photographers often witnessed: the scene backstage. Check out Tommy Hunt here, gesticulating, arguing, singing — it’s hard to tell exactly what he was doing, but he’d probably done it before. Mr. Hunt was an Apollo regular in the ’60s, alongside Marvin Gaye, Ray Charles, Diana Ross, the Shirelles, the Supremes and many others.
In this clip from 1959, he’s the one in the dark sweater walking down the snowy hill.
In the archival image at the top, it’s September 1967. Don Hogan Charles photographed Mr. Hunt for an article about Harlem and its struggle to draw large crowds to its nightspots at a time of rising crime and racial tension. It was the first and only mention of Mr. Hunt in The Times, whether by oversight or ignorance, but it fit a 1960s pattern in which many news outlets tended to show blacks primarily through a lens of crime and its impact on whites.
The Times did, nonetheless, allow for some nuance. The Apollo was held up as an exception, with nightly variety shows and full houses on weekends, and the photographs with the article showed Mr. Hunt onstage as members of the audience danced and pulled at him.
The backstage image is being published here for the first time. While it never ran in The Times (probably because of the unidentified man with the closed eyes), it seemed to capture Mr. Hunt, who was 34 at the time, in prime form. Though he was not a household name, he was clearly a talented performer.
Two years later, Mr. Hunt said, he left New York and the Apollo in search of new audiences. He made his way to England, where he scored several more hit singles (including “Loving on the Losing Side” in 1976) as part of a music and dance movement called Northern Soul. He went on to take his music all over the world, as far away as “Australia, Africa, Iceland,” he said.
More recently, Mr. Hunt said, he’s been sticking closer to home, a village in England called Knottingley, where, he said, it is often so cold that he is forced to wear “17 jackets.” Discussing the photo of his younger self in New York, he noted that he was quite a good-looking man back in the ’60s.
