Nineteen years ago, when the actress Barbara Barrie moved from her enormous apartment on West End Avenue to a far more modest place near Central Park West, she endured some grief from her two adult children. They have yet to fully forgive her for selling the family home. But never mind, Mom got the sun in the morning and the moon at night.
“This apartment is a gem of light,” said Ms. Barrie, 85, a star of the comedy “Significant Other,” which opens on Broadway March 2.
Actually, it took her a while to see the light. She told her real estate broker that she wanted “a loft in the sky,” Ms. Barrie said. “She showed me 50 apartments. 
The owner of the apartment, who had been renting it out for 30 years, lived in the building. She came upstairs, and the deal was made that very afternoon — but not before Ms. Barrie called an architect friend to hurry over and let her know if she could take down the wall between the living room and one of the two bedrooms to create one big space. Yes, she could. Yes, she did.
Ultimately, Ms. Barrie and her husband, Jay Harnick, a founder of the children’s theater company Theatreworks USA, who died in 2007, took the apartment down to the brick. They installed pocket doors between the living room and den/guest room to give overnight guests privacy, built wall units to hold books and family photos, turned a closet into a tiny office and updated an avocado green kitchen.
Of course, moving to smaller quarters meant jettisoning furniture and possessions of long standing. But you would need a really powerful microscope to see the distress this caused Ms. Barrie.
The week she and Mr. Harnick came back from their honeymoon in the summer of 1964, the mother of an old friend invited the couple to visit her antiques shop in Woodstock, N.Y., and choose anything that struck their fancy. “Whatever we picked, she charged us $25,” Ms. Barrie said. A Victorian settee that was part of the haul is in the living room. So is a mahogany armoire that Ms. Barrie found in an antiques store on Broadway while she was on the way to buy groceries, as well as a tiger-striped bamboo rocker and a lamp with Tiffany pretensions that were both bought at a junk shop in Milwaukee.
On a wall in the foyer is a large oil painting of girls in a field; Ms. Barrie bought it on an installment plan. Nearby hang photos of her children and an inscribed watercolor by Harvey Schmidt, the composer of “The Fantasticks”; it was a wedding present.
Show posters? Only one, and it is tucked away in the bedroom. Awards? Just the parchment from Cannes, placed discreetly in the hall.
When she first moved in, she said, she awoke every morning expressing some variation of, “I can’t believe we live here.” Nearly 20 years later, she is still delightedly incredulous.
“I’m alone now, so this is a really good place for me,” she said. “I don’t feel separated from the world here. I can see every element of the West Side out the window, the clouds, the sky, planes flying in and out of Newark.
