The recent box-office success of “Hidden Figures,” an inspirational movie based on a true story about three African-American female mathematicians who played crucial roles at NASA in the 1960s, again has people talking about Hollywood’s relative neglect of black audiences. The newly started streaming service Brown Sugar, created by Bounce TV, which bills itself as “the first African-American broadcast network,” is an ostensibly nostalgic window into the so-called blaxploitation genre.
It was through cheaply made, sex-and-violence laden genre films that Hollywood, or at least a group of mini-studios therein, opted to attract an audience. These movies were frequently conceived and executed by white filmmakers; the black artists were on the screen and on the soundtrack, but not, with some notable exceptions, behind the cameras. So their connection to a genuine black culture in America was compromised, at best. For all that, they put black heroes on the screen.
The first movie I watched on the site isn’t even American. “The Harder They Come” is a 1972 Jamaican film (co-written and directed by Perry Henzell), a semi-underground classic that remains one of the most potent pop outlaw movies ever made: Its hero, played by the reggae singer Jimmy Cliff, simultaneously becomes Jamaica’s most wanted criminal and its record chart topper. Tough, funny and fueled by a spectacular reggae soundtrack, it was one of the first movies in English that included subtitles for American audiences (because of the Jamaican patois spoken by the characters), and it holds up quite well.
That’s not the case with either “Black Caesar” or “Hell Up in Harlem,” two ’70s films written and directed by Larry Cohen, who was then a veteran TV writer whose directorial debut, “Bone” (not on the service), was a shockingly funny and corrosive look at intimate race relations in Los Angeles.
Like many blaxploitation films, these are, in some ways, exercises in speculative metafiction. A good number of blaxploitation movies took narrative outlines and antihero trappings from classic crime films and changed the ethnicity. “Black Caesar,” in particular, is a remake of the 1931 gangster picture “The Public Enemy” transposed to Harlem of the 1970s. Despite the sardonic way Mr. Cohen’s films equate gangsterism with all-American capitalism, there’s not much in the way of effective subversion, subtextual or otherwise.
Similarly, the films that the actress Pam Grier made with the director Jack Hill, “Coffy” (1973) and “Foxy Brown” (1974), flip the script on grimy sadistic low-budget revenge films by making the avenger a strong black woman, but that’s pretty much it. And in some respects, that’s sufficient for satisfyingly offbeat, lurid entertainment.
More than a couple of the films don’t quite fit the “badass” honorific the site bestows on its own library. The screen beauty Jacqueline Bisset had an early lead role in “The Grasshopper” (1970), a grim cautionary tale of a dreamer turned call girl (co-produced by Garry Marshall, many years before he directed “Pretty Woman”), in which she has an interracial romance with Jim Brown before a few bad things happen.
The site does offer two landmarks of African-American cinema, Melvin Van Peebles’s tortured, bluntly confrontational “Sweet Sweetback’s Baadasssss Song” (1971) and Bill Gunn’s “Ganja & Hess” (1973), a vampire story that consistently upends the conventions of all the genres from which it draws. One of the stars, Duane Jones, is the superb actor who starred in the 1968 horror classic “Night of the Living Dead” and whose career never broke out of genre films — with the exception of the 1982 drama “Losing Ground,” directed by Kathleen Collins.
I’m not in the business of telling other businesses their business, but it seems to me that if the service wants to build on its existing formula, expanding its own parameters to include work by maverick African-American filmmakers both past and present wouldn’t be the worst idea. The aesthetic, or at least the ideological, distance between, say, “Ganja & Hess” and Haile Gerima’s searing “Ashes and Embers” (1982) is not as great as one might immediately presume.