WASHINGTON — President Trump’s proposal to slash domestic spending in order to preserve the two biggest drains on the federal government — Social Security and Medicare — has set up a battle to determine who now controls the Republican Party’s ideology.
The outcome could map the course of major challenges to come, including a revision of the tax code, a huge increase in infrastructure spending and any effort to balance the budget.
Since the start of his insurgent campaign, Mr. Trump has opposed his party’s long-held positions on a range of policies, including free trade, how to deal with Russia and the future of government entitlement programs.
Mr. Trump’s budget blueprint — which is expected to be central to his address to Congress on Tuesday night — sets up a striking clash with the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, who has made a career out of pressing difficult truths on federal spending. For years, Mr. Ryan has maintained that to tame the budget deficit without tax increases and prevent draconian cuts to federal programs, Congress must be willing to change, and cut, the programs that spend the most money — Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid.
But Mr. Trump, in a dogged effort to fulfill his campaign promises, has turned that logic on its head in the budget outline he is expected to present to Congress this week. That blueprint would make good on his promise to increase spending on the military and law enforcement by $100 billion over the next 18 months. And it would extract all of the savings he can from the one part of the budget already most squeezed, domestic discretionary spending, potentially decimating programs in education, poverty alleviation, science and health.
None of this should be a real surprise: Mr. Trump repeatedly said during the campaign that Republican promises to transform Medicare, and slash entitlement spending, were the reason the party lost the White House in 2012, helpfully name-checking Mr. Ryan, who sat at the bottom of the ticket that year, in his analysis.
But Republicans in Congress had hoped that reality, combined with the influence of the two former Republican House members in Mr. Trump’s cabinet — Tom Price, now head of health and human services, and Mick Mulvaney, his budget director — would have led to new conclusions. Social Security, health care and net interest now comprise nearly 60 percent of all federal spending, and that figure is expected to soar to 82 percent over the next 10 years; Mr. Mulvaney and Mr. Price have long been advocates for pruning.
This is not simply a fight for an ideological core — it is a question of what can pass Congress. A budget with no entitlement cuts and one that does not balance most likely has no chance of passing the House, and could be rejected by Senate Republicans, as well. Mr. Trump’s proposals are too far to the right in terms of domestic cuts and too far to the left in terms of balance.
If Congress fails to pass a budget blueprint for the fiscal year that begins in October, Mr. Trump’s promise to drastically rewrite the tax code could also die because the president was counting on that budget resolution to include special parliamentary language that would shield his tax cuts from a Democratic filibuster. Without it, any tax legislation would have to be bipartisan enough to clear the Senate with 60 votes.
“President Trump has talked about deeper domestic spending cuts than even House and Senate Republicans have talked about,” said Brian Riedl, a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute and federal budget expert who recently worked for Senator Rob Portman, Republican of Ohio.
Good luck with that, Mr. Elmendorf said. “The Republican establishment has consistently overestimated its ability to move Donald Trump to the positions it supports,” he said.
Democrats, of course, will be no friend to these proposals, and may be needed for some of them such as major military spending increases.
The one thing that might get Republicans off the hook: big tax cuts. Should they find a way to do that without Democrats by employing a procedural maneuver that requires a mere majority vote in the Senate, the whole question of cuts in spending or programs may be pushed to another day.
