Jamie McLaughlin isn’t the superintendent of his building on the Far West Side of Manhattan, but sometimes it may seem that way. On snowy days, he shovels the steps and clears the sidewalk. One week out of every month he sorts the recyclables and hauls the trash out to the curb.
Actually the cleaning and the clearing are fine by him — a minor inconvenience for the pleasure of living in a small (five-unit) self-managed co-op building. “We love our apartment, and we love being part of the community,” said Mr. McLaughlin, 35, the president and co-founder of an executive search firm.
Small co-ops have a definite appeal. Maintenance charges are generally lower than in larger buildings. And in a city like New York, where buildings with 50 apartments or more are common, a small co-op “can feel not so cold, not so impersonal, more a cup-of-sugar-from-your-neighbor kind of thing,” said Kathy Braddock, a managing director at William Raveis New York City. But what draws some to such buildings makes them a turnoff to others. After all, not everyone wants to shed the urban cloak of anonymity. And not everyone wants the chores and the responsibilities (arranging for boiler repairs, taking charge of refinancing the mortgage, serving on the board) that are often part of the package.
Think of it as a classic good news/bad news scenario.
The good news: With just a few residents, a small co-op building is almost like a private house, and your neighbors become like family.
The bad news: With just a few residents, a small co-op building is almost like a private house, and your neighbors become like family.
Two and a half years ago, the couple found that unique space — a loft duplex with a balcony in a self-managed, seven-unit co-op in the Flatiron district.
Of course, doing without a management company saves money, one reason small co-ops tend to have lower maintenance fees. They are also light on services and amenities like doormen, gyms and elevators — yet another way to keep a lid on shareholders’ monthly fiscal obligation.
Ms. Coleman is pregnant with her second child. The family needs more space. While that’s the primary reason for their planned move this spring to a larger apartment in a full-service building, it doesn’t hurt one bit that there will be a management company to deal with thorny matters. There will also be many more residents “to spread around the hostility,” Ms. Coleman said with a laugh.
“You have to consider how you fit with the building’s dynamic and whether the shareholders share your beliefs about how to handle problems,” said Ms. Braddock of William Raveis.
A writer, now 45, was counting on pleasant when she moved into a bright, newly renovated 12-unit brownstone in Chelsea 20 years ago. What she got was a living nightmare.
The roof deck was another battleground. “Shareholders would just take it over if they wanted to have people over, and if you came up, you’d be told, ‘I’m having a party here,’ ” the woman said.
Steven R. Wagner, a real estate lawyer, counsels prospective buyers in small co-ops to pay attention to the condition of the building and the size of the reserve fund. “I would look to see if the building had been investing in making regular capital repairs,” he said.
What many see as a downside to living in a small co-op — shoveling snow and hauling trash — Ms. Toh sees as an upside. “You clear the steps with your neighbors, and you bond with them,” she said.
