A son of Jerry Sandusky, the former Penn State assistant football coach convicted of sexually assaulting young boys, was arrested on Monday on child sexual abuse charges.
The son, Jeffrey S. Sandusky, 41, faces 14 criminal counts in Centre County, Pa., including solicitation, sexual abuse, child pornography and corruption of minors for alleged crimes in 2013 and 2016, court records show. Prosecutors said that at least one of his victims — reportedly two teenage girls — was under 16 at the time of the abuse.
According to an affidavit posted online by USA Today, investigators found that Mr. Sandusky had exchanged sexually charged text messages with one of his victims. Mr. Sandusky said that what he had done was “not weird,” the affidavit said, because he studied medicine. Some details of alleged encounters were redacted, though the allegations include statutory sexual assault and involuntary deviate sexual intercourse.
Mr. Sandusky’s father is serving decades in a Pennsylvania prison for sexual crimes against 10 boys. That case led to allegations of a cover-up within the Penn State football program and the university’s hierarchy, and it also led to the downfall of the school’s famed head football coach, Joe Paterno.
Jeffrey Sandusky, one of Jerry Sandusky’s six adopted children, who had stood by his father even after his 2012 conviction, was hired as a corrections officer in August 2015 by the Pennsylvania prison system. A spokeswoman for the Department of Corrections said on Monday that Mr. Sandusky had been suspended.
The Sandusky name was once revered in central Pennsylvania, where Jerry Sandusky coached Nittany Lions defenses that ranked among the best in college football and where he founded a charity to help troubled youths. But the former coach’s arrest in 2011 and conviction on charges of rape and sodomy shook the region and the college sports world.
Mr. Paterno was fired after it was revealed that he had been alerted to Mr. Sandusky’s abuse years earlier. The team was barred from postseason play. And the former university president, vice president and athletic director were all charged criminally with endangering children.
But in a 2015 article posted on the sports website Bleacher Report, Jeffrey Sandusky was quoted saying, “My mom and dad are amazing parents,” and saying that his father had been wrongly convicted. The article said Jeffrey Sandusky was recently divorced.
Jeffrey Sandusky’s arrest is among several unrelated high-profile sexual abuse cases to emerge in recent weeks in Pennsylvania. Last week, the authorities in Bucks County accused a man of raping children over decades at the mobile home parks where he worked. And last month, several men were charged with forcing a boy to attend “furry” parties and with molesting him over a period of years.