A Volkswagen executive accused of helping cover up the carmaker’s emissions fraud is arguing that he was a minor player misled by company lawyers and information technology specialists.
The defense offered by the executive, Oliver Schmidt, which was laid out in court documents filed late Friday, could foreshadow his fellow defendants’ strategies as the emissions scandal enters a new phase focused on criminal prosecution.
Other Volkswagen employees may argue they were trapped in a vast corporate conspiracy, portraying themselves, like Mr. Schmidt, as more victim than perpetrator. Such an approach could implicitly shift attention to top managers as Volkswagen tries to rebuild its reputation, stop a decline in its European market share and cope with technological shifts in the auto industry.
The carmaker took a step toward addressing criticism of its corporate culture last week by capping bonuses for top executives and tying their pay more closely to the performance of company shares. But such moves may be overshadowed by a steady drip of revelations by employees like Mr. Schmidt determined not to take the blame for company wrongdoing.
Volkswagen pleaded guilty in January to criminal charges in the United States related to the emissions cheating, but the prosecution of individuals is just beginning. Mr. Schmidt is one of six current of former Volkswagen employees indicted in the United States, and the only one in custody; the others are in Germany. He is the first of nearly 37 people under investigation in Germany to give his side of the story in court documents.
Federal prosecutors in the United States have accused Mr. Schmidt, a 48-year-old German, of knowingly providing false information to American regulators after they became suspicious about the emissions of Volkswagen diesel vehicles in early 2014.
The campaign of obfuscation and delay continued until September 2015, the indictment says, when Volkswagen confessed that engine computers in its diesel cars had been programmed to cover up emissions that were worse than those of long-haul trucks.
Mr. Schmidt details a much different version of events in documents filed by his lawyers in a bid to persuade a judge to release him from a federal detention center in Detroit. Mr. Schmidt has been held without bail since January, when he was arrested in Miami after spending Christmas with friends in the United States.
Mr. Schmidt’s legal motion does not dispute that he acted as Volkswagen’s liaison with regulators from the Environmental Protection Agency and the California Air Resources Board, the state agency known as C.A.R.B. that took the lead in exposing the emissions cheating. Alberto Ayala, deputy executive officer of C.A.R.B., said in an interview last year that Mr. Schmidt had presented him with binders filled with bogus technical information to try to keep the agency from discovering the fraud.
But lawyers for Mr. Schmidt, Volkswagen’s former head of compliance in the United States, said in the court documents that he had been a largely unwitting accomplice. He was not a diesel specialist, the lawyers said, and in meetings with regulators merely did what Volkswagen lawyers told him to do.
“Mr. Schmidt’s participation in these meetings was guided, at times, by internal legal advice, and given his lack of relevant technical expertise, he relied on explanations given by diesel experts,” wrote Mr. Schmidt’s legal team, which is led by David B. Massey, a New York lawyer.
The motion also sheds light on a question that has baffled other defense lawyers involved in the case: Why did Mr. Schmidt risk arrest by traveling to the United States?
Beginning in late 2015, Mr. Schmidt met twice with F.B.I. in London and Detroit, and three times with German authorities, according to the documents. He apparently believed that because he had cooperated, the authorities in the United States would have no interest in detaining him.
That expectation initially appeared to be well founded. Mr. Schmidt passed through the United States with his wife on the way to the Caribbean on Dec. 17, then returned to Miami on Dec. 24 to spend Christmas with friends. He was arrested at Miami International Airport on Jan. 7 as he was about to board a return flight to Germany.
Mr. Schmidt’s lawyers said he would pledge most of his assets, including seven rental properties in Florida valued at $433,000, to win release. He would live with friends in Detroit, surrender his passport and submit to electronic monitoring of his whereabouts, they said.
Mr. Schmidt’s lawyers also argued that he would not be any less vulnerable in Germany, which normally does not extradite its own citizens outside the European Union. German investigators searched Mr. Schmidt’s home in Germany on Jan. 20, according to the motion, and consider him a criminal suspect.
“Mr. Schmidt understands that Germany is no place of refuge for him,” the motion said.