Since firing Coach Jack Capuano in January, the Islanders have won five of six games, including a 3-2 victory over the first-place Washington Capitals on Tuesday. They have moved from last place in the N.H.L.’s Eastern Conference to 3 points out of a playoff position.
But they can’t seem to escape discussion of their uncomfortable marriage with Barclays Center in Brooklyn, where the team has played the last two seasons.
A deadline looms at the end of this year to renegotiate the Islanders’ lease, and the team appears limited to three imperfect options: return to a renovated Nassau Coliseum, build a new arena in a resistant city neighborhood, or convince Barclays Center that the team is still a viable commodity.
Either side can opt out of the current agreement as early as January 2018. Depending on which side terminates the deal, the Isles would need a new home after the 2017-18 season or the 2018-19 one. According to a Bloomberg report this week, financial projections by the Barclays ownership team, which pays the Isles $53.5 million per year for rights to operate the business, showed the arena could make more money with concerts and other events.
The Islanders have new owners this season in Jon Ledecky and Scott Malkin, and the N.H.L. is monitoring the situation.
“The owners are committed to the franchise,” Gary Bettman, the league commissioner, said last weekend during All-Star Game festivities. “They’re committed to New York and the great fan base that has followed the Islanders. There are some issues about playing in Barclays. It may be fundamental to the system, and that’s not something that can be fixed in the short term.
“I think, as is prudent, Scott Malkin and Jon Ledecky are reviewing the situation and looking very seriously at what their options are,” Bettman said.
Since the Islanders moved into the arena in 2015, several issues have dogged them. Average attendance is 12,773, third lowest in the league, despite the team’s resurgence in recent weeks. Sightlines at the asymmetric Barclays, which was not built with hockey in mind, have been problematic, and the ice has been subpar.
With the aging Coliseum below N.H.L. standards for amenities, the Islanders left their Long Island home of 42 years after the 2014-15 season. The team was subject to relocation rumors for years as several plans to construct a new arena on Long Island failed to gain support.
For the last 18 months, the Coliseum has been closed for renovation. The area around the arena in Uniondale will also be the site of a future retail and entertainment district.
For some time, it had been assumed that the renovated Coliseum, designed to seat 13,000 when it reopens this spring, would be too small to house an N.H.L. team. Barclays Center’s roughly 15,800 seats for hockey are the second fewest in the league, behind Winnipeg’s 15,294. But the N.H.L. considers potential ticket revenue as much as stadium capacity. At present, the Islanders are averaging fewer fans in Brooklyn than the projected capacity in Long Island.
And Nassau County has been told that the Coliseum could be expanded to its pre-renovation capacity of 16,000-plus for ice hockey.
The Nassau County executive, Edward P. Mangano, said there was room for seats to be added to accommodate the Islanders. He met with Ledecky and Malkin in November, along with representatives from Barclays Center, and came away believing the team could be on its way back. For now, the Isles are committed to playing only six games each season at the renovated Coliseum.
Ledecky, a New York native, and Malkin, who grew up in Connecticut, paid $485 million to Charles Wang for the franchise, according to Forbes, and would probably prefer to remain in the region.
They reportedly have explored building an arena next to Citi Field in Queens or near Belmont Park. But a new arena, in a metropolitan area that already has four competing for concerts and events, is fraught with logistical and financial problems. Attempts to construct a new outdoor stadium in Queens by the owners of New York City Football Club, the M.L.S. team, have been thwarted by community activists and politicians.
Complicating all these issues are the crossover relationships of the involved parties. Barclays Center is operated by Brooklyn Sports and Entertainment, which also manages Nassau Coliseum. Mikhail D. Prokhorov, the Russian billionaire and principal owner of Barclays Center, also owns the Nets, but is said to be seeking investors for the team and the arena.
Fans of the Isles appear as conflicted as executives who are scrambling for a solution.
Stephanie Beige, a Manhattan lawyer and season-ticket holder who has been an Islanders fan since the team’s glory days in the 1980s, would prefer the team stay in the city.
