Tzvetan Todorov, a Bulgarian-French literary theorist and historian of ideas whose concerns in dozens of books ranged from fantasy in fiction to the moral consequences of colonialism, fanaticism and the Holocaust, died on Tuesday in Paris. He was 77.
The cause was multiple system atrophy, a progressive brain disorder, his son Sacha said.
A disciple of Roland Barthes, Mr. Todorov became prominent in the 1970s for his work on structuralism, a method of interpretation — influenced by cultural anthropology — that focuses on recurring patterns of thought and behavior.
Mr. Todorov’s later books included intellectual portraits of the thinkers Benjamin Constant, Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Mikhail Bakhtin; he compiled, based on extracts from her letters, notes and diaries, the unwritten autobiography of the Russian poet Marina Tsvetayeva.
He was especially drawn to episodes of moral turbulence. In “The Conquest of America: The Question of the Other” (1985), he concluded that native peoples, who, unlike Europeans, lacked a concept of “otherness,” were unable to defend themselves against an enemy who could manipulate their perception of reality and confuse their planning and reasoning.
His 1989 book “On Human Diversity” looked at how French authors have approached “the other,” and it made the case for both universal values and respect for diverse cultures.
Mr. Todorov’s book “Facing the Extreme: Moral Life in the Concentration Camps” (1996) took note of the paradox that human decency and goodness exist even in the most evil situations. The volume was “a tribute to the small number of ‘just’ men and women who showed both courage and generosity,” the political scientist Stanley Hoffmann, who died in 2015, wrote in a review in the magazine Foreign Affairs.
In “A French Tragedy: Scenes of Civil War, Summer 1944” (1996), Mr. Todorov described an episode in which members of the French Resistance in central France killed 13 members of a pro-Nazi French militia. In retaliation, Mr. Todorov wrote, the militia murdered 38 Jews in the village of Saint-Armand by throwing them into a well and finishing them off with rocks and cement.
Mr. Todorov’s 2001 study of the rescue of most Bulgarian Jews during the Holocaust concluded that their saviors had complex motivations: They were sympathetic to the Germans and to authoritarian rule, but were also repelled by anti-Semitism.
In an interview in December in the French newspaper Le Monde, Mr. Todorov expounded on what he saw as a dual challenge to French life: the threat of terrorism and the threat of overreaction by the authorities. He cited the idea of “complementary enemies,” the title of a 1961 book by one of the thinkers he most admired, Germaine Tillion, a member of the French Resistance and an anthropologist who studied Algeria’s war of independence.
“This explains, in part, the bad mood that is constitutive of the French spirit,” he said.
Mr. Todorov was born on March 1, 1939, in Sofia, the capital of Bulgaria, the son of Todor Borov, a university professor, and Haritina Peeva, a librarian. He did his undergraduate studies at the University of Sofia. Then, like his contemporary Julia Kristeva, the philosopher and psychoanalyst, he moved from Bulgaria — then in the grip of the longtime Communist dictator Todor Zhivkov — to France to pursue postgraduate work.
Mr. Todorov, 24 when he emigrated, had grown up with an instinctive skepticism toward government, one that relented after the fall of the Iron Curtain in 1989.
Mr. Todorov completed his doctorate under Barthes at the School for Advanced Studies in the Social Sciences in 1966, and he began teaching at the National Center for Scientific Research in 1968. In 1983 he helped found the Center for Arts and Language Research, involving scholars from both institutions.
Mr. Todorov became a French citizen in 1973. His marriages to Martine van Woerkens, a scholar of India, and to the novelist and essayist Nancy Huston ended in divorce. He is survived by a son, Boris, from the first marriage, and a daughter, Léa, and a son, Sacha, from the second.
