Like every Grammy category, best rock performance has its own history, which also serves as a metaphor for the vagaries of the annual music awards. Since 1979, when the category was introduced, it has honored great songs (Bob Seger’s “Against the Wind”) and greatly popular ones (Survivor’s “Eye of the Tiger”); it’s had repeat winners (U2, seven times) and surprise winners (Bonnie Raitt and Delbert McClinton, for a 1991 duet). Three years ago, Imagine Dragons won, even though David Bowie and Led Zeppelin were also nominated, which may have puzzled even Imagine Dragons.
But this time, when the five nominated songs were announced by the Recording Academy, some Grammy voters raised an eyebrow: In addition to fairly straightforward nods for David Bowie (for “Blackstar”) and Twenty One Pilots (for “Heathens”), there was one for Beyoncé and two for live TV broadcasts of songs whose eligibility, in their original versions, had already expired.
To be eligible for this year’s Grammy Awards, music must have been released after Oct. 1, 2015, but before Sept. 30, 2016. Disturbed recorded “The Sound of Silence” for its album “Immortalized,” which was released before the deadline. But because the band played on “Conan” during the eligibility period, its label, Warner Bros., could nominate it.
Alabama Shakes included “Joe” as a bonus track in Japan and other non-North American countries on its second album, “Sound & Color,” which was released in April 2015 and won a 2016 Grammy as best alternative music album. “Austin City Limits” didn’t include “Joe” in the January 2016 broadcast, but offered it as a web exclusive on its site.
The nominating process begins when record companies submit their artists for consideration in specific categories after strategizing to increase the odds of winning more trophies; then the academy scrutinizes the submissions for chicanery. Mr. Freimuth said that there were 24 committees that adjudicate genre, made up of experts in each specific style. When Beyoncé’s label, Columbia Records, submitted her for best rock performance, an academy staff person flagged it for discussion.
According to a senior music executive who attended the meeting, and spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss the internal deliberations, there was a “very spirited debate that took maybe five minutes” and included several voters’ suspicions that by recording a rock song and a country song (“Daddy Lessons”) on her album “Lemonade,” Beyoncé was trying to “run the table” on nominations in a diverse group of categories.
Sizing up his own chances for winning, Mr. Draiman said, “If we were to lose to anybody, Bowie’s the one I’d be voting for.” Did he, as an academy member, vote for Mr. Bowie rather than for his band? “We’re gonna leave it a mystery,” he said with a laugh.
