Science|Cosmos Controversy: The Universe Is Expanding, but How Fast?
Recent measurements of the distances and velocities of faraway galaxies don’t agree with a hard-won “standard model” of the cosmos that has prevailed for the past two decades.
“If it is real, we will learn new physics,” said Wendy Freedman of the University of Chicago, who has spent most of her career charting the size and growth of the universe.
The Hubble constant, named after Edwin Hubble, the Mount Wilson and Carnegie Observatories astronomer who discovered that the universe is expanding, has ever given astronomers fits. In an expanding universe, the farther something is away from you, the faster it is receding. Hubble’s constant tells by how much.
But measuring it requires divining the distances of lights in the sky — stars and even whole galaxies that we can never visit or recreate in the lab. The strategy since Hubble’s day has been to find so-called standard candles, stars or whole galaxies whose distances can be calculated by how bright they look from Earth.
In 2001, a team led by Dr. Freedman reported a value of 72 kilometers per second per megaparsec (about 3.3 million lightyears), in the galumphing units astronomers prefer. It meant that for every 3.3 million lightyears a galaxy was farther away from us, it was moving 72 kilometers a second faster.
Hubble’s original estimate was much higher, at 500 in the same units of measurement.
Dr. Freedman’s result had an error margin that left it happily consistent with other more indirect calculations, that had gotten a slightly slower and lower value of 67 for the Hubble constant. Those were derived from studies of microwaves emitted and still lingering in the sky from the the primordial Big Bang fireball.
As a result, in recent years, astronomers have settled on a recipe for the universe that is as black and as decadent as a double dark chocolate chunk brownie. The universe consists of roughly 5 percent atomic matter by weight, 27 percent mysterious dark matter and 68 percent of the even more mysterious dark energy that is speeding up the cosmic expansion. Never mind that we don’t know exactly what all this dark stuff is. Astronomers have a good theory about how it behaves, and that has allowed them to tell a plausible story about how the universe evolved from when it was a trillionth of a second old until today.
“No explanation I know of is less ugly than the problem,” Lawrence M. Krauss, a theorist at Arizona State, said.
Dr. Riess and his colleague Stefano Casertano got roughly the same answer of 73later last summer, strengthening the claim for a mismatch of Hubble constants. They used early data from the European spacecraft GAIA, which is measuring the distances of more than a billion stars by triangulation, thus allowing astronomers to skip some of the lower rungs on the distance ladder.
They calculated that the odds of this mismatch being a statistical fluke were less than one part in a hundred — which might sound good in poker but not in physics, which requires odds of less than one in a million to cement a claim of a discovery.
George Efstathiou, of the University of Cambridge and one of the leaders of the Planck mission responsible for its cosmological analysis, said Dr. Riess and his team had underestimated the errors in their measurement.
Dr. Riess and his colleagues have stood by their work, however, and the plot thickened further in December when a group called H0LiCOW (don’t ask) from the Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics in Garching, Germany, reported its own value of 72 for the Hubble constant, also inconsistent with the Planck space mission’s analysis.
Led by Sherry Suyu of Max Planck, the group measured the delays experienced by light rays from five distant flickering quasars as they followed different paths around massive galaxies on the way from Out There to us. . The technique, they say, depends only on geometry and Einstein’s theory of gravity, general relativity, making it independent of other assumptions about dust or the makeup of stars.
There is wiggle room, Dr. Riess and others say, for both the modern and the primordial results to be right, because Planck measures the Hubble constant only indirectly as one of several parameters in the standard model of the universe. Other parameters could be tweaked.
The most likely candidates to fill the gap, Dr. Riess said, might be a new form of the ghostly particles called neutrinos, already known to be abundant in the cosmos. They come in three types that can change into one another as they traverse space; some physicists have suggested there could be a fourth kind, called sterile neutrinos, that don’t interact with anything at all.
This is the age of “precision cosmology,” and while everybody agrees that it is still too soon to tell, the avalanche of data from GAIA and the coming James Webb Space Telescope is just beginning, Dr. Freedman said. In the next few years she hopes the Hubble constant can be measured to 1 percent accuracy.
She said the situation reminded her of the late 1990s, when discrepant distances to distant supernova explosions led to the discovery that the expansion of the universe was accelerating under the influence of dark energy. Dr. Riess won a Nobel Prize for his part in that, and dark energy took its place in cosmic orthodoxy.
