Can a luxury auto ad help bridge the deep political chasm in America — and, while it’s at it, sell cars?
General Motors’ Cadillac division is about to find out.
While that may not be impossible in the age of President Trump, it has become far more difficult — as some advertisers learned at their peril during this month’s Super Bowl. Mr. Trump’s election has caused a tectonic shift in advertising — just as it has in media more generally — and themes that might have once seemed innocuous or patriotic have suddenly become politically charged, controversial and divisive.
Yet the ad prompted an anti-Budweiser boycott campaign on social media by Trump supporters.
With Mr. Trump’s treatment of women an issue, a Cadillac rival, Audi, ran an overtly issue-oriented Super Bowl ad, showing a man’s daughter winning a downhill cart race against an all-boys lineup.
Advertisers are bracing for any backlash to Sunday’s Oscars ceremony ads, especially since Meryl Streep drew Mr. Trump’s wrath and a Twitter barrage after criticizing him at this year’s Golden Globes award ceremony.
When it comes to Mr. Trump, Cadillac faces a more delicate task than most. The president and his wife, Melania, arrived at the inauguration in a heavily armored custom Cadillac known as the “Beast,” and the Cadillac brand is indelibly linked to the White House. Cadillacs have been used by every president since Woodrow Wilson.
Like most major national ads, work on Cadillac’s Oscars campaign began nearly a year ago, when Mr. Ellinghaus had dinner with Arthur Sadoun, chief executive of the advertising agency Publicis Communications (and now chairman and chief executive of Publicis Groupe), to discuss this year’s campaign.
Cadillac was in the third year of an ambitious effort to reposition itself as a distinctive global brand. The first iteration of the “Dare Greatly” campaign featured the chanteuse Édith Piaf and iconoclastic personalities like the Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak.
Both Mr. Sadoun and Mr. Ellinghaus thought the campaign needed to evolve, while remaining true to its origins. Still, “it didn’t take the results of an election” to know the American public was polarized, Mr. Sadoun said.
Perhaps it took two non-Americans — Mr. Sadoun is French, Mr. Ellinghaus is German — to suggest that by acknowledging the divide, an ad campaign might actually help heal it. After all, America had been divided before in its history — at times far more than now. (Hence the image of a civil rights demonstration.) The nation had overcome the divisions, moved forward and prospered, the American dream intact.
For many years (though not in recent decades), the Cadillac brand embodied that dream. Perhaps Cadillac’s ad could remind Americans of the nation’s resilience and inherent optimism, and “celebrate what America is capable of,” Mr. Ellinghaus said.
Cadillac executives didn’t do any formal market testing of the ad, but they did preview it for a few audiences, including a group of Texas Cadillac dealers, who gathered in Dallas a few weeks ago for a meeting with their division leaders. If the ad was likely to cause a backlash from pro-Trump factions, dealers from Texas were as likely as anyone to anticipate it.
The reaction, she said, was overwhelmingly enthusiastic.
So I had one major question: With only a few glimpses of actual Cadillacs in the ad, and all of those vintage models, will it actually sell cars?
That, everyone involved with the campaign told me, isn’t the main goal of this particular ad. (It will be followed during the awards ceremony with other Cadillac ads spotlighting specific models.) This is a long-term investment that will “elevate the brand,” in Mr. Sadoun’s view.
