 But if a parent of a sick baby says something rude to the medical staff, the quality of care might suffer, a new Israeli study suggests.
But even such mild unpleasantness was enough to affect doctors’ and nurses’ medical skills. Individual performance and teamwork deteriorated to the point where diagnostic skills, procedural skills and team communication were impaired and medical errors were more likely, compared to control scenarios in which the mother would just say something general about being worried. 
Dr. Riskin said rudeness has long been part of medical culture, whether between senior doctors and trainees, or between surgeons and nurses in the operating room.
Dr. Bamberger, a co-author on that earlier study as well, said that many of the physicians weren’t even conscious that someone had been rude. “It was very mild incivility that people experience all the time in every workplace; things slip out that maybe shouldn’t slip out.” But in response to even mild rudeness, he said, people need to expend cognitive resources deciding whether they are in a threatening situation, and whether the threat is going to get worse; those concerns can draw cognitive resources away from the task at hand, and teamwork suffers.
The findings are consistent with earlier studies of rude behavior in other workplace environments, which have shown that even mild rudeness can have a potentially big impact. In both of the NICU studies, the effects on performance were significant; rudeness explained more error than the levels of error that have been shown to result from sleep deprivation.
In the latest study, the teams again knew that they were being observed while they dealt with simulated medical emergencies: a very premature birth, a baby in respiratory distress, a newborn severely deprived of oxygen. They were also told they would need to respond to family members while taking care of the critically ill babies, standard everyday imperatives in newborn intensive care.
The new study also looked at two different strategies to see whether they might help the teams deal with the rudeness.
In one, the medical personnel were asked to do a writing exercise immediately afterward, imagining the story from the mother’s point of view. But that narrative exercise seemed to have no effect on subsequent performance.
The other intervention did seem to provide some benefits. In that exercise, staff members were asked to play a computer game before the simulation, developed for people with post-traumatic stress disorder. In the game, participants were exposed to faces showing different emotions, rating them as either “angry” or “happy.” Then, after their threshold for perceiving threats — the angry faces — was established, they got feedback designed to raise that threshold, to help deflect their focus on minor threats.
Everyone working in the NICU understands that parents are under tremendous stress and cannot necessarily be expected to demonstrate good manners at all times. But it’s critical for the members of the medical team to be aware of the risk and to acknowledge the problem, Dr. Riskin said, in order to help protect one another and deliver optimal care.
