Something was wrong with Betsy Gotbaum’s poodle.
Harry, a reddish-brown 5-month-old puppy, was usually a ball of energy. But Ms. Gotbaum, the former New York City public advocate, had a hard time rousing him one morning last month.
“He wouldn’t eat, he wouldn’t drink, his head was bobbling back and forth,” Ms. Gotbaum said.
She rushed Harry to Animal Medical Center on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. Many tests were done. Only one came back positive: Harry had gotten his paws on some marijuana.
A few days later in Queens, a veterinarian came home from work to find her own cairn terrier, Bella, lying in her urine, trembling and fearful.
The vet did not have to wonder why: A bag of white-chocolate marijuana goodies she had picked up in Colorado sat empty beside Bella.
“Dog freaks out on pot” may sound like a scene from a stoner comedy or a viral video, but it happens surprisingly often. In New York City, veterinarians say, canine marijuana poisoning has become a daily occurrence.
Animal Medical Center says it treats several cases a week.
Fortunately, the effects — lethargy, wobbling gait, dribbling urine and saliva, overreacting to sound and light and movement — are not life-threatening. Treatment usually consists of inducing vomiting, if the ingestion was recent enough, and simply keeping the dog hydrated in a quiet place until the drug clears, though that can take a couple of days.
Tina Wismer, the medical director of the A.S.P.C.A.’s national animal poison control center, said she did not know of a single death from a dog eating marijuana that did not also involve chocolate, which is highly toxic. But a few have come close.
The center saw a 144 percent increase in pet marijuana overdose calls from 2010 to 2015. New York generated more calls than any other state except California.
It is unclear whether dogs have a lower tolerance than humans for THC, the psychoactive ingredient in marijuana, but regardless, the math is unforgiving: A single cookie potent enough to get a 150-pound human righteously stoned could have 10 times that effect on a 15-pound dog.
Have You Used Marijuana While Pregnant?
We want to learn more about who is using marijuana in pregnancy, and why. Share your story with us here.
Sometimes, the owner is slow to come clean about the cause of the dog’s malaise.
“I tell them, ‘Look, I’m not the police, I really don’t care, it’s just going to help me diagnose your dog a lot quicker,’” Dr. Levitzke said. He explained that a confession could also save money on tests for more serious conditions like kidney failure and liver disease that produce similar symptoms. Often, Dr. Levitzke said, owners will say the animal got into their roommate’s stash.
Harry the poodle’s vet, Richard Goldstein, the chief medical officer at Animal Medical Center, said that a trip to the veterinary emergency room can lead to some tense family discussions.
For Ms. Gotbaum’s part, she swears she last smoked marijuana circa 1976 (she could not stop laughing and hated it).
“I would tell you — I don’t care, makes no difference to me anymore,” said Ms. Gotbaum, who is 78 years old and has not held public office since 2009. Her live-in boyfriend, Peter Lewis, said he never tried it, as did their housekeeper, Julia Alvarez, who often takes Harry for his walks.
The household’s working theory: Harry scarfed something off the ground the night before on a walk to Central Park. “In the park, I’m always smelling marijuana,” Ms. Alvarez said.
Cats, by the way, tend not to partake. The A.S.P.C.A. poison center says that dogs account for about 95 percent of pet marijuana poisonings.
Indeed, a six-pound terrier-Chihuahua mix in Greenwich Village has made two emergency trips to the vet since December.
Preventing such cases would seem to be as simple as keeping one’s stash secured, but that can be difficult.
In Crown Heights, Brooklyn, there is a food-obsessed shiba inu who belongs to a woman who loves marijuana. One day in December she cooked an ounce and a half of pot in coconut oil to draw out the THC, put the oil in a big batch of brownies, made tea with the mostly spent leaves and threw them away. As she does whenever she leaves home, she secured the trash can with childproof locks and put it on top of the stove.
The woman came home to a heap of trash on the floor and the dog sprawled in the midst of it.
