Illustrated. 508 pp. Atlantic Monthly Press. $28.
The Bolsheviks viewed the ideology of Marxism as essentially scientific in its analysis of human progress, and science was always a vital part of their conception of the Soviet Union, which they trumpeted as the first state ever founded on “scientific” principles. Its rulers, particularly Lenin and Stalin, regarded themselves as manifestations of the “dictatorship of the proletariat,” which gave them the authority to adjudicate on everything in society, including the arts and sciences. Lenin was an intellectual, at home as much in the British Museum Library as in the Kremlin. Stalin was a published romantic poet and enthusiastic autodidact with a library of thousands of books, not only read but annotated. They had the confidence to interfere in every genre of art and every discipline of science. Stalin would soon be hailed as the all-knowing coryphaeus (leader of the chorus in Greek drama) of science.
Ings, the author of “A Natural History of Seeing,” skillfully relates the life stories of these “bourgeois” scientists. There was Ivan Pavlov, who observed, among many other things, that dogs secreted saliva when they expected food. There were the psychologists Lev Vygotsky and Alexander Luria, who conducted research on cognitive development. (Luria could be said to be the inventor of the lie detector.) At first, the scientists were surprised to find themselves endowed with new equipment and honor. But the picture darkened once Stalin began demanding astonishing jumps in creativity and production, which in turn made the scientists more important but more dangerous and therefore more policed and persecuted.
Yet Lysenko’s simple solutions and eager promises appealed to Stalin, who loved gardening and was obsessed with growing lemons in his greenhouses at his dacha near Moscow. When challenged by the esteemed geneticist Nikolai Vavilov, Lysenko responded viciously, denying the existence of genes. Vavilov rushed to appeal to Stalin, who received him but sneered, “You are the Vavilov who fiddles with flowers, leaves, grafts and other botanical nonsense instead of helping agriculture, as is done by Academician Lysenko.” Vavilov was arrested in 1940. The world-famous scientist died in prison in 1943.
But Lysenko’s charlatanism was well known even among Stalin’s courtiers. After the war, Stalin’s heir apparent, Zhdanov, challenged Lysenko, who continued to be backed by a furious Stalin. He had a variety of reasons: asserting his total supremacy in his years of decline; reinforcing absolute party control over society; promoting what he saw as the practical over the theoretical; supporting a scientific proletarian against bourgeois experts. There was also the fact of his demented arteriosclerotic megalomania.
The end of the war saw the challenge of the American nuclear bomb, which shocked Stalin. He ordered his diabolical henchman Lavrenti Beria to develop a Soviet bomb — fast. Beria had already created special laboratory prisons — sharashki — where jailed scientists worked in menacing comfort (brilliantly portrayed by Solzhenitsyn in “The First Circle,” his best novel by far) and often produced stellar results. The physicist Leon Theremin, rescued from the gold mines of Kolyma to work in one of Beria’s sharashki, invented listening devices soon used to spy on the British and Americans in Moscow, for which he was awarded the Stalin Prize: Such were the twists of fortune for Stalin’s scientists. Acclaimed physicists like Peter Kapitsa, Yulii Khariton and Igor Kurchatov were alternately bullied and spoiled by Stalin and Beria. Ings quotes Kapitsa’s magnificently aristocratic letters to Stalin complaining “it is time for comrades like Comrade Beria to begin to learn respect for scientists.” Beria later tried to take revenge. “I will remove him for you,” Stalin replied, “but don’t you touch him.” There in a nutshell was the delicate relationship between the cruelest of tyrants and his scientists — and in 1949, Stalin got his nuclear weapons.
What’s more, Ings’s history contains many mistakes starting with the birthday of Stalin himself: There is a choice of two. Officially it was Dec. 21, 1879 (New Style). In reality, Stalin was born on Dec. 6, 1878 (Old Style), or Dec. 18, 1878 (New Style). This book muddles both and gives the birthday as Dec. 18, 1879. In 1881, Alexander II was assassinated, but it is wrong to say his route “never varied.” He alternated routes, and that was why the terrorists had two plans. The Bolsheviks and Mensheviks didn’t miss the 1905 revolution; they launched an armed uprising that had to be crushed by the army. Dzerzhinsky remained head of the secret police until his death in 1926, not giving it up when he became head of the Supreme Council of the National Economy. In 1940, Finland was not “in Russian hands,” but it did sue for peace. And so on.
Over all, however, Ings is an entertaining storyteller who often captures the essence of things — Stalin was indeed “the last in a long line of European philosopher kings.” Filled with priceless nuggets and a cast of frauds, crackpots and tyrants, this is a lively and interesting book, and utterly relevant today when the Trump administration is challenging the scientific establishment on climate change. We in the West have long laughed at the “Coryphaeus of Science,” but has the United States now elected its own?