All these years later, Ryan Gomes can remember the smallest details.
He remembers how five of his assists for the Boston Celtics that night were a result of Paul Pierce’s shooting prowess. He remembers how Jamie Young, then the team’s video coordinator, discreetly told him at halftime that it looked promising. And he remembers how, after the game, Jeff Twiss of the public relations department retrieved the ball.
When Twiss presented it to Gomes a few days later, one of the panels was shaded in green and white to represent the Celtics, and it featured Gomes’s statistics: 10 points, 10 assists, 12 rebounds.
In an otherwise nondescript Celtics victory over the Charlotte Bobcats in November 2006, Gomes — a solid player but never a star — had come away with a sliver of N.B.A. history. The triple-double — reaching double digits in three major statistical categories — is a rare achievement for most players. Gomes, who was a second-year forward at the time, finished his eight seasons in the N.B.A. in 2014 with just that one.
There is no shame in that. Most players go their entire careers without a triple-double. Since 1983, the chance of one occurring in any single game has been just 3.7 percent — or once every 27 games, according to Basketball Reference, which has records for only that period.
That is a useful prism through which to view the feats of Westbrook, the Oklahoma City Thunder’s starting point guard and a triple-double virtuoso. He entered this weekend’s N.B.A. All-Star festivities with 27 triple-doubles this season. James Harden of the Houston Rockets, in second place, has 15. The rest of the league has combined for 28.
More than that, Westbrook is averaging 31.1 points, 10.5 rebounds and 10.1 assists through 57 games this season, putting him on pace to become only the second player to average a triple-double for a season. Oscar Robertson did it in 1961-62, when he also set the single-season record for games with a triple-double — 41.
The topic began to bother Westbrook months ago.
“Honestly, man, this triple-double thing is kind of getting on my nerves,” he told reporters in December, back when he had just 12 triple-doubles for the season.
Is there a bigger first-world basketball problem than collecting too many triple-doubles?
Consider the plight of more than 100 current and former players since the early 1980s — All-Stars like Jerry Stackhouse and Reggie Miller, highfliers like Shawn Kemp and Jerome Kersey, and even unsung players like Steve Stipanovich and Ben Uzoh, each the owner of one, and only one, triple-double.
“I know how hard it is,” said Derrick Rose, a Knicks guard whose lone triple-double came when he was playing for the Chicago Bulls in 2011.
Brandon Jennings, Rose’s teammate on the Knicks, had a near miss in his very first N.B.A. game, finishing with 17 points, 9 assists and 9 rebounds for the Milwaukee Bucks in a loss to the Philadelphia 76ers in 2009. One of his teammates missed a late-game layup that would have resulted in his 10th assist, Jennings recalled in an interview this month, and then that same teammate stole a rebound away from him, botching Jennings’s chance.
At the time, Jennings said, it did not seem like a big deal. He was 20 years old and new to the league. He figured he would have more opportunities. Instead, years later, Jennings has one triple-double in 516 career games: 20 points, 10 assists and 10 rebounds in a Bucks win in October 2010.
Jennings has a greater appreciation for the triple-double — and what players like Westbrook and Harden are doing on a regular basis — now that he is older.
Like Jennings, Richard Jefferson, a 36-year-old forward with the Cleveland Cavaliers, recorded the only triple-double of his career as a much younger man. In March 2003, Jefferson was a second-year player with the Nets, and Byron Scott, then the team’s coach, leaned on him to supply big minutes in a game against the Rockets in the absence of the injured Kenyon Martin.
“I was just a young kid playing with a lot of energy,” Jefferson said.
The Nets were in control throughout the second half, and teammates became aware that Jefferson was closing in on the necessary numbers. Jason Kidd, who finished his career with 107 triple-doubles, good for third behind Robertson (181) and Magic Johnson (138), was the Nets’ point guard. Jefferson recalled how Kidd guided him through the experience.
“He was just kind of nudging me: ‘Hey, you need two more rebounds,’” said Jefferson, who crammed 30 points, 11 assists and 10 rebounds into 47 minutes of playing time.
Brian Shaw, now the Los Angeles Lakers’ associate head coach, is the rare player to have recorded a triple-double off the bench: 11 points, 10 rebounds and 10 assists for the Orlando Magic in a blowout victory against the Los Angeles Clippers in December 1995. It was the only triple-double of his career. Shaw said he was unaware of what he had done until after the game.
Yet the circumstances could not have been more different three months later when Anthony Bowie, Shaw’s teammate, pulled off one of the more notorious triple-doubles in league history. With Orlando up by 20 points against the Detroit Pistons, Bowie grabbed his 10th rebound and, fully aware that he needed an assist to complete his triple-double, called for a timeout — with 2.7 seconds left.
It was not the most glowing display of sportsmanship, and then it somehow got worse. Doug Collins, who was Detroit’s coach, was so irate that he had his players stand near the opposite basket in protest as Bowie passed to a wide-open teammate for his 10th assist. Before the final buzzer had even sounded, the Pistons had stormed off the court.
The two teams met again in the first round of the playoffs.
“Oh, we smashed them,” Shaw said.
Triple-doubles mean more to some than others. Put Rose in the “others” category. He had 22 points, 12 assists and 10 rebounds for the Bulls in a win against the Memphis Grizzlies in January 2011. Asked last week if he remembered anything from that game, Rose said, “Not at all, man.” Statistics, he said, mean little to him, and that includes triple-doubles.
Jose Calderon, a point guard in his 12th N.B.A. season, is a member of a more rarefied club: two career triple-doubles. Curiously enough, both came in a five-week stretch of the 2012-13 season. Calderon, who now comes off the bench for the Lakers, was playing for the Toronto Raptors at the time. He remembers the first because the Raptors broke a four-game losing streak, and he remembers the second because he corralled an errant 3-point attempt with 3.5 seconds left for his 10th rebound.
Gomes, too, has a spot in a semi-exclusive group. He is one of five players with triple-doubles in both the N.B.A. and the N.B.A. Development League. Nine years after his triple-double with the Celtics, Gomes had one last season with the Los Angeles D-Fenders of the D-League, scoring 18 points to go with 18 rebounds and 10 assists in a win against the Reno Bighorns.
Gomes has since become an assistant coach for the D-League’s Long Island Nets. But for one night, he savored the experience.
