Styles Q. and A.
For 25 years, Linda Wells, 58, served as the editor of Allure, the Condé Nast magazine about beauty trends that she had helped found.
There, Ms. Wells — a former reporter for The New York Times — lab-tested and guinea-pigged beauty products, placed celebrities like Julia Roberts and Jennifer Aniston on her covers, and diligently chronicled the shift from high-stakes plastic surgery to quick-fix injectables.
In November 2015, with Condé Nast confronting the challenges posed to print publications by the rise of digital media, Ms. Wells was abruptly replaced by Michelle Lee, then a largely unknown former editor of Nylon.
Now, after a year spent writing for New York magazine and producing beauty packages for Condé Nast’s arch competitor, Hearst, Ms. Wells is headed back to full-time employment as the chief creative officer of Revlon.
The position brings her to a prominent public company that, like many beauty behemoths, has struggled to keep up as younger rivals attract consumers with savvy online marketing.
Revlon has had five chief executives in just over a decade. Almay, a company it owns, is not performing well. Revlon no longer sells in China. And one of Ms. Wells’s big tasks will be figuring out how to reposition the brand on social media, which was a challenge in her Allure job.
But few would count out a respected industry veteran with a near encyclopedic knowledge of the beauty world. Here, Ms. Wells speaks about her firing, her last year and what she will be doing in the new job.
Q. In a recent profile of the makeup artist Pat McGrath for New York magazine you wrote: “Makeup has always been fashion’s poor cousin. … Makeup is self-absorption; fashion is self-expression.” Yet here you are going to the mother ship.
A. Exactly. And I’m a believer. What I love about beauty is that it’s private and public, and so the part of a woman that’s looking at herself in the mirror and experiencing the happiness and fears and all the turmoil that you confront in the world, that to me is the heart and soul and what makes beauty exciting.
Will you be designing lines and picking colors? Or will this be more about marketing and advertising and being a spokeswoman for the brand?
Well, I haven’t started so I can define that better as I go along, but my understanding is that I’m going to watch what the creative directors of each brand are doing. Some of that could be advertising, packaging, product development, digital. So I think it will be a bit of both.
You’re a friend of Ron Perelman, the chairman and C.E.O. of MacAndrews & Forbes, Revlon’s majority shareholder. Is that how you were approached to do this?
I’ve known him for a long time and the funny thing is, I wrote the first story in The New York Times in the business section after he purchased Revlon. That was my first encounter with him. But I had a lot of conversations with Fabian Garcia, Revlon’s C.E.O., about this.
Revlon has had some ups and downs the last few years. NYX Cosmetics, an 18-year-old company based out of Los Angeles, has 10 times as many followers on Instagram as Revlon. Revlon brought in a new C.E.O. this year. It has announced a restructuring. What, broadly, do you think needs to shift?
Well, I think it’s in a great place. They’re already making a shift, between the acquisition of Elizabeth Arden and the reorganization of the company itself. So I think they’re primed to really change. Legacy brands have a certain nostalgic value, but you can’t subsist on nostalgia alone.
You left Condé Nast after 25 years of editing Allure, where you earned a reputation for bringing a healthy skepticism to the industry you were championing. You once told a writer that you weren’t going to run a piece she was writing on a self-tanner until she tried it on herself. I imagine there was stuff you tried and might not recommend.
Including this serum that was made from the foreskin of a poor, poor baby. Maybe the product was great, but it was bright red, and that was a whole experience I couldn’t cope with. Then it made my skin break out in welts. It was like the foreskin of this tiny child was making its revenge.
You were open about having tried injectables.
I remember, I first got Botox in Paris during fashion week. I was having lunch with a Saudi billionaire and she said: “I’m going to the doctor. Come with me.” Botox was not approved in the U.S. at this time. I knew I shouldn’t do it, but I went anyway. I wanted to experience it. I was 34. So I have a healthy skepticism, but then I also think I should know what I’m talking about.
Later, Botox became a kind of Rorschach test on vanity. Why do you think it was?
There was nothing else like it. I guess there was collagen and there was silicone, but they were so sketchy at that time. There was no other injectable used for anti-aging. And the fact that Botox is a toxin, the fact that it was a poison and the fact that it paralyzed your muscles, all made it sound like a bad B horror movie. And Botox is kind of a gateway drug. It opens you up to all the other injections and all the other lasers. But I’m a believer. I think it’s safe. And there were positive aspects, too.
People became less ashamed about trying to look younger. It’s been used well and not used well. There’s nothing inherently wrong with wanting to look younger.
When you were replaced at Condé Nast by someone much younger, did you feel your age was part of why you were being let go?
Well, people did talk about the age difference. I don’t think it’s that simple. It was time for Condé Nast to make a change, and they needed to cut budgets and I was expensive. I had a team and a way of working. So I understand that.
Grace Mirabella famously heard she was being fired at Vogue when Liz Smith announced on TV that her replacement was Anna Wintour. Was your experience like that?
I didn’t find out on TV. I’m not going to tell you how they told me. But I addressed my team to tell them I was leaving. Everyone burst into tears, and I said: “I’m sorry I’m not crying, I can’t help it. I’m stoic.” Because it wasn’t a life job. Working there, I felt I was going to be fired every day. And then one day I was.
You’re speaking to me from a hiking trail in California. How very Hillary Clinton of you.
It’s the metaphor. It’s what we do as women. It also clears your head. I’m doing yoga now and I don’t like yoga. I really don’t. But I’m trying.