ALLISON CRUTCHFIELD AND THE FIZZ at Monty Hall (Feb. 6, 8:30 p.m.). The songwriter Allison Crutchfield broke out five years ago as the frontwoman of the ragtag indie-punk outfit Swearin’, but she is now coming into her own as an accomplished solo artist. Ms. Crutchfield’s debut album, “Tourist in This Town,” released last week, represents a stunning creative leap forward, and her immaculately arranged indie pop evokes alt-rock songwriting greats like Liz Phair and Kristin Hersh.
NOSAJ THING at Good Room (Feb. 3, 10 p.m.). As a teenager growing up in Los Angeles, Jason Chung, the mastermind of Nosaj Thing, was inspired by the hip-hop production of Dr. Dre. He has since become a go-to producer for M.C.s like Chance the Rapper, Kendrick Lamar and Future. But Mr. Chung is also compelling as a solo artist, and his material, including the intoxicating 2015 album “Fated,” shows off his ability to weave diverse sonic ideas (woozy beats, sped-up vocal samples, glitchy synthesizers) into sublime and strange sonic tapestries.
SAMPHA at Terminal 5 (Feb. 9, 9 p.m.). The British artist Sampha Sisay, who performs as just Sampha, has collaborated as a producer and singer with top artists like Kanye West, Drake and Solange. But after years as a behind-the-scenes studio wizard, Sampha is releasing his long-awaited first studio album, “Process,” on Friday. Like James Blake and the xx, Sampha creates achingly beautiful soul and R&B music with heavy electronic influences, and he tops his lilting songs with strikingly personal storytelling. On the gorgeous ode “(No One Knows Me) Like the Piano,” for instance, Sampha honors the instrument that ultimately inspired him to discover his musical gifts.
WHITE DENIM at Brooklyn Bowl (Feb. 9-10, 8 p.m.). Since forming over a decade ago, this Austin-based four-piece remains one of indie rock’s most wildly inventive groups — and one of its most continually underrated, too. On its seven albums, including the 2016 release “Stiff,” White Denim has delivered a heady blend of fuzzed-out soul, hip-swiveling funk, far-out psychedelia, classic British Invasion-era rock ’n’ roll and more. The band has endured the departure of the members Joshua Block and Austin Jenkins in recent years, but a lineup change hasn’t stopped the frontman James Petralli from continuing to push his crew into bold new sonic territories. With Sam Cohen (Feb. 9) and Ikebe Shakedown (Feb. 10).
J. D. ALLEN TRIO at Smalls Jazz Club (Feb. 6, 10:30 p.m.). For roughly a decade, the tenor saxophonist J. D. Allen has accomplished what is now a rarity in jazz: He has held together a trio without reshuffling its personnel — deepening a collective language and sharpening his voice as an improviser. Mr. Allen’s saxophone, somewhere between mournful and swaggering, often holds parallel conversations with Gregg August’s bass and Rudy Royston’s drums. On last year’s album, “Americana: Musings on Jazz and Blues,” the group dealt head-on with its musical and cultural inheritance, earning broad acclaim. The trio typically plays live sets straight through, with no breaks between songs. It’s an immersive, purifying experience.
KRIS DAVIS at the Stone (Feb. 7-12, 9 p.m.). Ms. Davis’s piano playing can seem to submerge you in its sound, though her style is more solid than liquid. Last year, the astonishing pianist released “Duopoly,” a collection of duets with a variety of improvisers. This week, starting on Wednesday, she’ll continue the project, engaging a different duo partner each night. (She opens the run on Tuesday with a trio performance.) Ms. Davis will be joined by the vocalist Jen Shyu, the bassist Michael Formanek, the guitarist Julian Lage, the drummer Johnathan Blake and finally the saxophonist Ingrid Laubrock.
MARIKA HUGHES at Barbès (Feb. 4, 6 p.m.). An ecumenical cellist and vocalist, Ms. Hughes ranges deftly into chamber music, indie rock, R&B and avant-garde improvising. She boasts a husky tone and a pensive touch on the cello, favoring wide arcs of melody that often allude to the blues. For this performance, Ms. Hughes revisits the repertoire from her 2011 album, “Afterlife Music Radio,” a solo cello recording on which she plays compositions written specifically for her by musician friends. The show begins her monthlong residency of Saturday-evening gigs at Barbès; the other weeks, Ms. Hughes will appear with small ensembles.
MATTHEW SHIPP TRIO at the Cutting Room (Feb. 9, 7:30 p.m.). Last week the avant-garde pianist Matthew Shipp released “Piano Song,” a trio recording that works as a panorama of his wide-ranging creative spirit. There are passages of off-kilter swing; crunchy backbeats; and spark plug, atonal improvising — all guided by Mr. Shipp’s gangly improvisational flow. Now 56, he says that “Piano Song” will be his last studio album with his current label, Thirsty Ear, and this show is meant to commemorate the occasion. It features the personnel from the record: Michael Bisio on bass, and Newman Taylor Baker on drums.
YOTAM SILBERSTEIN QUARTET at Jazz Standard (Feb. 8, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). The Israeli-born guitarist Yotam Silberstein improvises in a cutting tone and writes heady original tunes that seem to tug the straight-ahead jazz tradition in new directions. You’ll occasionally notice coiled rhythms and minor scales that recall Jewish folk music, but chatter in the patois of contemporary jazz. Mr. Silberstein performs here in celebration of a newly released fifth album, “The Village,” which features all original compositions. His quartet will include the pianist Glenn Zaleski, the bassist Matt Penman and the drummer Eric Harland.
CAMILLE THURMAN WITH THE DARRELL GREEN TRIO at Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola (Feb. 7, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Ms. Thurman has a lithe and attenuated attack on the tenor saxophone and an equally effortless style on the flute. And she’s a triple threat, having won awards for her abilities as a scat vocalist. At this show she will play two sets of onrushing postbop with a stellar band: the pianist David Bryant, the bassist Lonnie Plaxico and Mr. Green, a drummer.
McCOY TYNER at the Blue Note (Feb. 6-7, 8 and 10:30 p.m.). One of the most influential living jazz pianists, Mr. Tyner, 78, emerged from Philadelphia in the early 1960s as a charter member of the John Coltrane Quartet. With a darkly combustive left hand and open-ended chord voicings in the right, he helped to define the group’s classic sound while paving the way for the boundless abandon of Coltrane’s later period (if not its atonality). But Mr. Tyner’s legacy must also include his sensitive playing on ballads, and his strengths as a composer and bandleader. He appears here with the saxophonist Gary Bartz, the bassist Gerald Cannon and the drummer Francisco Mela.
