Milo Yiannopoulos had everything he needed to be a smash success in today’s conservative world: a big personality, an intuitive sense for baiting the left and no inhibitions about causing offense.
It hardly mattered that he did not consider himself much of a conservative.
But Mr. Yiannopoulos’s downfall this week — a dizzying 24 hours in which he lost his speaking slot at the pre-eminent conservative conference, had a book deal canceled and, on Tuesday, resigned under pressure from his job as a senior editor at Breitbart News — was a sign that in today’s political culture, when each day seems to bring a fresh lowering of the bar for decency and civility, some limits still remain.
His glib remarks about pedophilia by Roman Catholic priests and his endorsement of sexual relations with boys as young as 13 drew widespread condemnation from many of the conservatives who had long stood by him, even as he offended so many others with his insulting remarks about Hispanics, African-Americans, Muslims and Jews.
Many on the right are pointing to the Yiannopoulos controversies as a symptom of a trend toward conservatism as performance art, placing less value on ideas like small government and self-reliance than it does on attitude, personality and provocation. While there are respected conservative thinkers on issues like tax reform, immigration and health care, they say, provocateurs like Mr. Yiannopoulos suck up most of the oxygen, becoming the public face of the movement and pushing more serious ideas to the sideline.
On a smaller scale, Mr. Yiannopoulos’s stardom fits neatly with the political culture of a Republican Party that watched Donald J. Trump, a reality television star and businessman, triumph over a party structure that prized loyalty and legacy. That came after personalities like Mr. Yiannopoulos, Sarah Palin, Ann Coulter and Glenn Beck had drowned out the conservative movement’s once-revered intellectual voices.
Provocateurs like Mr. Yiannopoulos became even more popular the more they rail against the left and its perceived intolerance of their most over-the-line remarks. It almost did not matter who Mr. Yiannopoulos was fighting — an African-American television star, campus demonstrators, the corporate leadership of Twitter — as long as he was fighting.
“That knee-jerk defensiveness takes conservatives down some weird, dark alleys,” Mr. Sykes added.
Even as it let Mr. Yiannopoulos go and condemned his comments on pedophilia, Breitbart was defiant.
Alex Marlow, Breitbart’s editor in chief, called the comments “indefensible” and “appalling” during his radio program on Tuesday morning. But he also described the release of the audio, by a conservative group called the Reagan Battalion and after Mr. Yiannopoulos had been announced as a speaker at the Conservative Political Action Conference, a “coordinated hit” by liberal groups intent on hurting his ascent.
By naming him a speaker at this week’s Conservative Political Action Conference — a stage for the right’s most prominent voices — movement leaders were telegraphing how big of a space Mr. Yiannopoulos had come to occupy in their world, whether they agreed with him or not.
The chairman of the American Conservative Union, Matt Schlapp, seemed to acknowledge on Monday that the decision to invite Mr. Yiannopoulos, 33, was at least in part a nod to voters, especially younger ones, who respond to his antics.
As he gained notoriety, Mr. Yiannopoulos’s presence on college campuses became as much about what would happen outside the lecture hall as what he would say inside. Realizing that, conservative groups began holding him up as a baton-carrying defender of the First Amendment, seeking him out with greater interest because of the outrage he was almost guaranteed to provoke.
And that backlash, illustrated in its most extreme form at the University of California, Berkeley, this month when rioters smashed windows, set fires and threw rocks at police, would become a tailor-made exhibit for the right in their case against the intolerance of conservative thought in academia.
When that appearance was canceled, even Mr. Trump expressed his outrage on Twitter.
It appears that Mr. Yiannopoulos does not expect to be off the stage for long. He said on Tuesday that he would proceed with publishing a book, saying other publishers were interested, and that he was planning to start a media venture.
