1. The Trump administration detailed plans to deport millions of immigrants, a major shift in enforcement policy that is expected to face resistance from many states and dozens of so-called sanctuary cities.
The new Homeland Security rules authorize the expulsion of undocumented immigrants who commit even minor offenses, and make it easier to deport people immediately. This is how deportation works, step by step.
Immigration will be high on the agenda as Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson and the secretary of homeland security, John F. Kelly, visit Mexico this week.
A day earlier, his daughter Ivanka Trump, who has converted to Judaism, called for protections as nearly a dozen Jewish community centers across the country received bomb threats by phone.
Above, a Jewish cemetery in St. Louis where nearly 200 headstones were toppled over the weekend.
3. Republicans home for the congressional recess have been greeted with an earful at town hall-style meetings. Those who scheduled no meetings faced criticism that they were ducking constituents.
In Iowa, a pig farmer (and Democrat) furious over the possible repeal of Obamacare gave Senator Charles Grassley a bottle of Tums.
“You’re going to need ’em the next few years,” he said, drawing laughs from the crowd.
4. 
His explanation of the comments, in a video that surfaced over the weekend, as “British sarcasm, provocation and gallows humor” appeared to sway few.
He also lost a book deal and a speaking engagement at the Conservative Political Action Conference.
5. A riot in an immigrant neighborhood in Sweden was seized upon by Trump supporters as validation of his claims — based on a Fox News feature — that the European country had experienced a surge in crime and violence linked to refugees.
Preliminary statistics do not show a major increase in crime from 2015, when Sweden processed a record 163,000 asylum applications, to 2016, and Mr. Trump’s assertions baffled Swedes.
6. Trinidad and Tobago is scrambling to stop young Muslims from going to Syria to take up arms for the Islamic State.
Per capita, the Caribbean island nation has the largest number of foreign fighters from the Western Hemisphere who have joined the militant group, according to John L. Estrada, a former U.S. ambassador there.
7. Political dissent is simmering in the art world.
More than 65 writers, artists and actors published an open letter opposing Mr. Trump’s efforts to bar people from seven predominantly Muslim countries.
And if history is any guide, at least some of the stars at the Oscars this Sunday will criticize Mr. Trump’s approach to immigration and other issues.
Above, Meryl Streep’s impassioned speech at the Golden Globes.
8. Mardi Gras is next Tuesday, and a small family brewery in the bayou country of southern Louisiana is ready.
Bayou Teche Brewing, known for some of the most distinctive craft beers in the United States, is preparing a special drink for the old Cajun version of the holiday. Men dress in handmade costumes and traverse town on horseback, begging for ingredients for a communal gumbo.
The beer — wheaty, slightly hoppy and high in alcohol — pairs well with the gumbo, and the style is celebratory, for the arrival of spring.
9. Scientists are suddenly questioning how well we know our cosmos.
Recent measurements of the distances and velocities of faraway galaxies don’t agree with a hard-won “standard model” of the cosmos that has prevailed for the past two decades.
10. Finally, we’ve been rummaging through our archive of 165 years of Times wedding announcements.
Zuckerberg Anne Bezos and ZRT5771 were married Feb. 21, 2182. The Rev. Peter Thiel of the Church of Singularity officiated on 3362 Khufu, a private asteroid off Mars.
Want to look back? Here’s Friday’s briefing.