Gary Cartwright, a longtime Texas journalist whose sharp writing, fearless reporting and fast living established him as one of the state’s greatest nonfiction writers and a kind of Lone Star cousin to Hunter S. Thompson, died on Wednesday in Austin, Tex. He was 82.
His death, in a hospital hospice unit, was confirmed by the author Jan Reid, a friend.
Friends said Mr. Cartwright had fallen recently inside his home in Austin, where he lived alone, and was unable to reach a phone. He remained there for days before he was discovered and taken to the hospital, they said.
Mr. Cartwright was the dean of a loose-knit class of Texas journalists who pushed the bounds of long-form journalism and helped bring national acclaim to the regional magazine some of them wrote for, Texas Monthly. His career with the magazine began with the first issue, in 1973, and continued to his retirement in 2010.
“He was definitely our version of Hunter Thompson as much as anybody,” said Evan Smith, the chief executive of The Texas Tribune and a former editor in chief of Texas Monthly.
Mr. Cartwright wrote a 1998 memoir about his life-changing heart attack (“HeartWiseGuy”), mused in print about the con man who was the best man at his wedding (his second of four) and described his sex life as an elderly man in the pages of Texas Monthly.
In the weeks leading up to the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in 1963, the Dallas apartment that Mr. Cartwright shared with his friend and fellow reporter, Bud Shrake, was a popular late-night hangout for, among others, Jack Ruby and one of Ruby’s favorite strippers, Jada.
In the 1960s and ’70s Mr. Cartwright belonged to a group of writers — including Mr. Shrake, Dan Jenkins, Billy Lee Brammer and Larry L. King, one of the writers of the hit Broadway musical “The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas” — whose hard, boozy living and freewheeling prose captured and exemplified the era.
“It seemed like they were living lives of joy and engagement and with a sense of recklessness that was beyond the reach of most of us,” Joe Holley, a columnist and editorial writer for The Houston Chronicle, said in an interview. “They lived hard. They wrote well, and they seemed to be intensely alive.
Mr. Cartwright published another memoir, “The Best I Recall,” in 2015. He also wrote screenplays and novels.
He was born in Dallas in 1934 and grew up in the tiny West Texas oil town of Royalty in the late 1930s. With defense plants in the Dallas-Fort Worth area hiring after the start of World War II, the family moved to Arlington, the Dallas suburb, where his mother worked in a dress shop. His father worked at a defense plant in Fort Worth.
After high school Mr. Cartwright attended Arlington State College and the University of Texas, enlisted in the Army for a two-year stateside stint and earned his bachelor’s degree afterward at Texas Christian University.
He got his start in journalism in the mid-1950s, covering the police and sports for newspapers in Fort Worth and Dallas. He became the anchor of Texas Monthly and mentored a generation of young journalists, including Nicholas Lemann, the author and former dean of the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism.
“Gary was a Texas news guy to the core — somebody who grew up in old-school, smoke-filled, blue-collar newsrooms and went on to become one of the first Texas journalists to make a national reputation in long-form journalism,” Mr. Lemann said.
Mr. Cartwright is survived by a son, Shea; a sister, Lea Hickman; five grandchildren and numerous great-grandchildren, Mr. Reid said. Another son, Mark, died of leukemia in 1997.
Even more famous was his 1976 Texas Monthly cover article about one of Ruby’s stripper friends, a Texas folk hero named Candy Barr.
