The Rangers and the Columbus Blue Jackets are vying for playoff position in the Metropolitan Division — although to the winner may not go the spoils.
Along with the Pittsburgh Penguins, the Rangers and the Blue Jackets are jockeying for the three spots below the first-place Washington Capitals.
But it will be the division’s fourth-place team that ends up with what figures to be the best playoff draw of the three runners-up, starting the postseason against the winner of a weak Atlantic Division.
So there was some solace in a 5-2 loss to the Blue Jackets, who recaptured third place in the division and put the Rangers in fourth, a position that would match them up against Atlantic-leading Montreal — a team with 8 fewer points than the Rangers with six weeks left in the season.
The Rangers have been nearly unbeatable this month, and they had not lost in regulation at home since the last day of January, when those same Blue Jackets roared to a 6-0 lead en route to a 6-4 win, chasing Rangers goalie Henrik Lundqvist along the way.
In this fifth and final regular-season contest between the teams, Alexander Wennberg and Cam Atkinson each scored twice, and Josh Anderson scored once to give Columbus a convincing victory, if not an altogether strategically worthwhile one.
“We know these guys always play well here, so we knew it would be a battle,” said Blue Jackets forward Brandon Dubinsky, a former Ranger who was sent to Columbus in a July 2012 trade that brought in Rick Nash.
Rangers center Derek Stepan did not mince words after this latest home loss to the Blue Jackets, who scored 21 goals against the Rangers in winning three of their five meetings this season.
The Blue Jackets (39-16-5) were playing their first road game since Feb. 7 after blasting the Islanders, 7-0, at home on Saturday.
As they did in their previous visit to Madison Square Garden, the Blue Jackets scored early in the first. This time the opening goal came at 1 minute 2 seconds, when Wennberg tipped in a shot from the point by David Savard.
Nash tied the score at 4:07 of the first with his 18th goal, assisted by Jimmy Vesey and Stepan. But the Rangers (40-20-2) could not muster much offense against Columbus goaltender Sergei Bobrovsky, who made 28 saves for his 32nd win.
Since losing at home to Columbus on Jan. 31, the Rangers have been dominant, compiling a 9-1-1 record heading into Sunday’s game. Their only regulation loss was a 4-2 road setback against the Islanders on Feb. 16.
Much of the Rangers’ recent success has been thanks to Lundqvist, who came into Sunday’s game with a 1.91 goals against average and a .939 save percentage in his past 14 games. But the Blue Jackets found their way past him five times on 26 shots.
The feisty Blue Jackets, who won 16 straight earlier this season, are playing with confidence under Tortorella, the Rangers’ coach from 2009 to 2013.
“We probably just played our six best periods of the year,” Tortorella said of his club’s winning weekend after a five-day break.
Columbus kept pressure on the Rangers throughout the second period and took a 3-1 lead at 9:47, when Wennberg scored his second goal, after a scramble in front of Lundqvist.
In the third, Atkinson added his team-leading 29th goal at 4:12 with an assist by Dubinsky. Anderson made the score 5-1 at 19:36 before the Rangers’ Jesper Fast scored with a second to play.
“Tonight there’s no doubt that the whole group was off,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said.