It looked as if the third time was going to be the charm for the London Stock Exchange Group and Deutsche Börse.
But nearly a year after agreeing to a merger, the London Exchange said the deal was unlikely to be approved by European regulators.
The European Commission had made the sale of a majority stake in MTS, an electronic platform for trading European government bonds and other fixed-income products, a condition for the transaction. The London exchange said that was a “disproportionate” remedy and would not commit to it.
Deutsche Börse said that it would wait for more information from the commission and that it expected a decision by the end of March, The Financial Times reports.
William A. Ackman is sensitive to stereotypes about profiteering. In a New Yorker article, he pitches his activism as a public good and argues that short selling is a way of pointing out issues that regulators might not have the resources to find.
But when it came to his costly campaign against Herbalife, Mr. Ackman didn’t want to lead the way. He wasn’t sure whether, with the amount of money that his firm, Pershing Square, would have to spend just on legal advice, it was a lucrative enough proposal.
But then David Einhorn, the founder of the hedge fund Greenlight Capital, questioned Herbalife on an earnings call and Mr. Ackman saw his opportunity.
“We assumed that Einhorn would be carrying the flag, and we could just ride his coattails,” Mr. Ackman told The New Yorker.
Warren E. Buffett is known for being persistently optimistic about the prospects of the American economy, and his enthusiasm seemed to reach new heights in his annual letter.
“Americans have combined human ingenuity, a market system, a tide of talented and ambitious immigrants, and the rule of law to deliver abundance beyond any dreams of our forefathers,” Mr. Buffett wrote.
He had less enthusiasm for hedge fund returns.
The results for investors were “dismal — really dismal,” Mr. Buffett wrote.
You can read the letter in full here. Mr. Buffett will be on CNBC answering questions at 6 a.m. Eastern time.
• The Senate is scheduled to vote on the confirmation of Wilbur L. Ross, President Trump’s pick for commerce secretary. Mr. Ross has maintained that in that role, he would protect American workers and tear up bad trade deals that harmed American industry. But those same trade deals helped him amass a fortune around the world.