When former Mayor Edward I. Koch was alive, he was so unconstrained that he was considered unavoidable for comment. Three years after his death, this observation still holds true.
Mr. Koch’s family has discovered what may amount to a posthumous salvo against his archenemy, Donald J. Trump.
The two had tangled numerous times while Mr. Koch was mayor of New York City for 12 years, and neither was known to mince words.
A trove of correspondence on Mr. Trump contains mostly memos and letters that have been published before, but the keepers of Mr. Koch’s papers at the La Guardia and Wagner Archives at LaGuardia Community College said there was no indication that several of the most vitriolic and detailed criticisms of Mr. Trump had appeared in print.
Even if they did, they are a poignant reminder of the relationship in the 1970s and 1980s between New York City’s most outspoken politician and most vocal developer.
Mr. Koch apparently wrote this undated and untitled essay around 1990, when Mr. Trump was divorcing his first wife, Ivana, and the mayor had unsuccessfully sought a fourth term.
He and Mr. Trump had clashed over a number of issues, including a tax abatement for Trump Tower and the developer’s proposed Television City project on Manhattan’s West Side and how it meshed with the city’s efforts to keep NBC from moving to New Jersey.
Neither the White House nor the Trump Organization responded to a request for comment on Monday.
Pat Thaler, the mayor’s sister, a former associate dean at New York University who helped organize participants for the Women’s March on Washington in her New Jersey community, said on Monday that Mr. Koch would have opposed the Trump agenda on reproductive freedom, health care, freedom of the press and immigration.
“Clearly, he thought him a self-serving egomaniac,” Ms. Thaler said.
In the papers she found, Mr. Koch elaborated on his antipathy toward Mr. Trump with several examples.
One involved the proposed West Side convention center. The former mayor said he was told that Mr. Trump had an option on one site, and that if the city selected it, Mr. Trump would donate his $500,000 brokerage fee to the city — if the convention center was named for him. He later agreed to donate his fee regardless.
After a committee selected the site, Mr. Koch wrote, he never heard from Mr. Trump again about the fee offer.
“That is exactly what happened,” Mr. Koch wrote.
The mayor suggested that the rink be renamed if Mr. Trump waived his $3 million bill to the city. Mr. Koch said Mr. Trump declined, but promised a generous gift in the future.
