Aside from its memorable name, the city of Medicine Hat, Alberta, has another distinction: It owns about 4,000 natural gas wells and also produces about 1,500 barrels of oil a day. For years, that allowed the city to keep its gas-fired streetlights burning day and night. Profligacy was cheaper than paying someone to turn them off and relight them.
Now, Craig S. Smith reports, Medicine Hat has gone the other way and become a leader in renewable energy. And, perhaps more important, the city of 63,000 has plans to copy Norway and use some of its energy wealth to set up a sovereign wealth fund.
Ms. Murray is the daughter of the former National Hockey League and Team Canada coach Andy Murray. This article in The Calgary Herald gives more background on her career and her father’s role in it.
Pedaling If an ambitious plan announced by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York comes to pass, Canadians will have a new option for traveling to New York City: cycling. Lisa W. Foderaro looked into the governor’s plan to spend $200 million to build new trails and stitch together existing routes to create the 750-mile Empire State Trail. As envisioned, the route will split north of New York City with one leg heading to the Canadian border between Buffalo and Fort Erie, Ontario. Ms. Foderaro told me that the destination of the other leg, north through the Adirondacks, had yet to be finalized. But a preliminary map, which is not online, shows it hitting Canada somewhere south of Montreal. The Peace Bridge between Buffalo and Fort Erie allows cyclists to cross, but they must walk their bikes on the sidewalk, which is less than ideal.
If you’re a Canadian cyclist, please let me know if you’d consider using the trail for a cycling tour in the United States. Similarly, I’d be interested in knowing if it will prompt American readers to ride into Canada.
In other bicycle-related coverage, if, like most people, you accept that Karl von Drais invented the bicycle, then the device marks its bicentennial this year. The New York Times’s Travel desk has pulled together a list of cycle tours that might be considered celebrations of that anniversary. They include a ride from Haida Gwaii in British Columbia to St. John’s, Newfoundland, which is also marking Canada’s 150th anniversary.
Opening While President Trump is now leading the United States, business operations bearing his name continue on. Dan Levin reported from Vancouver, British Columbia, on the opening of Canada’s second Trump hotel and condo complex. In both developments, Mr. Trump licensed his name, with his company operating the hotel portions of the buildings. Unlike the insolvent Trump Tower in Toronto, the Vancouver building seems to be a financial success. It was developed by the Holborn Group, which is headed by Tiah Joo Kim, 37, who is the son of a wealthy Malaysian investor once imprisoned on what were viewed as politically motivated charges. Mr. Levin found that all 217 condo units had been sold. The buyers include a wealthy family from China and Bill Streeper, the mayor of the Northern Rockies municipality of Fort Nelson in British Columbia. “The Trump name represents quality,” said Mr. Streeper, who bought his unit in 2013.
Comfort Food In her humor column about New York, “I Was Misinformed,” Joyce Wadler partly blames Prime Minister Justin Trudeau for her recent weight gain.
— The fashion designer Erdem Moralioglu, who was raised in Canada, introduced a political tinge to his recent show in London.
— Class matters, significantly, when it comes to pay in Britain.