The parent of the Snapchat smartphone app thinks it is “a camera company.” It’s almost as if its initial public offering filing on Thursday — which may raise up to $3 billion and leave the company valued at up to $25 billion — was somehow confused with GoPro’s from a few years ago, when the camera-hardware maker said it was in the media business.
Snap Inc., the purveyor of disappearing messages, has some big things going for it that GoPro didn’t have. Social media networks have a tendency to be winner-take-all propositions, and Snapchat is one of the winners. It is growing, too: Revenue, at just over $400 million in 2016, was nearly seven times what it was in 2015.
That kind of statistic helps justify huge technology sector valuations. There’s plenty of room for growth in revenue per user, if Snap gets it right. At just over $1 per user per quarter right now, it’s in the same ballpark as Facebook when it went public in 2012. Facebook, Mark Zuckerberg’s $385 billion giant, has pushed that up to nearly $5 in the most recent quarter.
That said, Snapchat’s growth in average daily users is slowing, with only a 3 percent increase, to 158 million globally, from the third to the fourth quarter of last year. And unlike the profitable but admittedly slower-growing GoPro at its 2014 I.P.O., Snap’s cash is disappearing faster than its messages. Nearly $1 billion evaporated in the last two years.
Investor concern could be amplified by Snap’s insistence that it is a camera company. Executives like its co-founders, Evan Spiegel, 26, and Robert Murphy, may not really think that, but it still jars that they say so.
They are also trying out something that even they concede doesn’t seem to have been done before — selling investors nonvoting stock right out of the gate. Even Facebook and GoPro initially gave outsiders one vote for every 10 that insiders’ shares have.
Having no say at all when executives may be living in a bubble is a significant investment risk. Allowing founders control disproportionate to their economic interest paid off at Facebook but not at the struggling GoPro, where the shares are trading at less than half the I.P.O. price. Smart investors might consider taking Snap at its word and valuing it a bit more like an actual camera company than they otherwise would.