STORRS, Conn. — When Connecticut won its 11th N.C.A.A. women’s basketball title last spring— its fourth in a row — President Barack Obama joked that he would keep a room with a cot waiting for Coach Geno Auriemma and the Huskies’ regular visit to the White House.
“He does seem to spend an awful lot of time here,” Mr. Obama said.
A trip to the White House, with the ceremonial awarding of a jersey to the president, has long been an affirmation for champion teams. But ire over the election of President Trump has spurred activism by athletes, coaches and officials perhaps not seen since the civil rights movement and the war in Vietnam.
Breanna Stewart, the former UConn star who helped lead her team to the last four national titles, joined a protest at Los Angeles International Airport against Mr. Trump’s temporary ban on visitors from seven predominantly Muslim nations, a policy since rebuffed in federal court. Six members of the New England Patriots, who recently won their fifth Super Bowl, have said they will skip the team’s White House trip, which has not yet been scheduled.
And now Mr. Auriemma is being asked a question he hadn’t faced since his teams began winning titles in 1995, during the first term of the Clinton administration: Would any or all of the Huskies decline to meet the president should they win a 12th championship in April?
UConn has won 100 consecutive games since 2014. And while the Huskies are not a lock to win a 12th title, they are favored again to cut down the nets in triumph at the Final Four in Dallas. Now coaches, current players and the team’s former stars are wrestling with the issue of whether UConn should visit the White House in celebration.
The Huskies’ players are amateurs, some still teenagers, not professionals with agents, union protection and multimillion-dollar contracts. They have kept up with the current political situation, and the responses by other athletes, through social media and classroom discussions. Their own reactions were nuanced and considered.
Ms. Stewart and Maya Moore, another former UConn star, said they expected that whatever decision the team made, it would be done collectively. Gabby Williams, a junior forward, agreed.
Mr. Auriemma, who will turn 63 during the N.C.A.A. tournament, said the dilemma for him was reconciling respect for the office of the presidency with the possibility that some players might object to meeting Mr. Trump, feeling unwelcome at the White House because of the president’s statements and positions on women, minorities, immigrants and Muslims.
“If we’re fortunate enough to win it, and your players walk in and go, ‘Listen, I’m not going,’ we’ve never had to deal with that before,” Mr. Auriemma said.
There is no pressing need for an answer now, he understands, no need to cross a point of no return. The national championship game is not until April 2, and there is no guarantee that UConn will be playing or winning.
He later expressed shock that Mr. Trump had been elected president.
“Because it’s the president of the United States,” he said.
Sue Bird, the former UConn point guard who won two N.C.A.A. titles and two of her four Olympic gold medals while playing for Mr. Auriemma, said that if some players felt unwelcome at the White House, he would surely take that into consideration.
Ms. Bird stressed that she was speaking about her own observations, not about any impression that Mr. Auriemma had directly given her. Any decision, she said, would be a “tough call” and would be made by the coach with the intent of protecting his players.
The Huskies are a diverse team ethnically and culturally, and as with any team, there are varied political opinions, players said.
Forward Batouly Camara, a native of Manhattan and a transfer from Kentucky who is practicing with UConn but not playing this season, is a Muslim whose parents immigrated from the West African nation Guinea.
Her mother, who holds dual citizenship, has been reluctant to travel back to Guinea, where she runs an orphanage, Ms. Camara said, even though Mr. Trump’s travel ban does not target the country. But she added, “I don’t feel anything harsh or anything at all” toward the president.
Ms. Camara said she had received “an overwhelming amount of support” from teammates, coaches and others in the UConn community, for which she was grateful.
The family of Ms. Collier, the sophomore forward, has a history of political involvement. Her paternal grandfather, Gershon Collier, was a diplomat in the West African nation Sierra Leone who helped secure the country’s independence from Britain in 1961. He later became its ambassador to the United States and chief justice.
Ms. Williams, UConn’s best player, said her personal view would be to visit the White House.
