The race for the Oscar for best foreign-language film usually doesn’t get much attention, considering the category’s scope. But this year you may be aware of one nominee, the Iranian director Asghar Farhadi, who is among the prominent artists to be affected by President Trump’s ban on visas for travelers from predominantly Muslim countries. Mr. Farhadi’s drama “The Salesman” is one of five films up for the foreign-language film statuette.
Here’s a look at all the contenders and where to watch them.
The Plot: The verdant island of Vanuatu in the South Pacific is the setting for this Romeo-and-Juliet romance, which features members of local tribes playing roles in a star-crossed romance. After a violent dispute between tribes, one woman, Wawa, is married off to patch things up, but she actually loves Dain, a strapping warrior.
The Critics’ Verdict: “‘Tanna’ is a movie in which every single shot is picturesque, and more than a few of them are genuinely beautiful,” The New York Times’s reviewer, Glenn Kenny, wrote.
The Directors’ Take: Bentley Dean and Martin Butler made the film with a minimal crew and drew on local lore, including a song about a tragic suicide by a couple in a similar predicament. “I actually think of ‘Tanna’ as a cinematic translation of the song that’s in the film,” Mr. Dean said.
The Plot: This harrowing drama centers on German child prisoners of war who were forced to clear mines on a beach in Denmark following the Nazis’ surrender. Life-or-death suspense is built into the existence of its young characters, and even the hard-bitten Danish soldier who oversees them develops sympathy.
The Critics’ Verdict: The unusual, little-known story and heartstring-tugging suspense have gripped many critics, with a few reservations. The child POWs — at once ex-soldiers and orphans of the Third Reich — pose an intriguing tangle for the viewer’s sympathies.
Where to Watch: The film is opening in theaters on Feb. 10.
The Plot: A would-be corporate climber (Sandra Hüller) gets a reality check from her practical-joker father (Peter Simonischek).
The Plot: You may have already seen or heard about this portrait of a prickly old busybody still in mourning for his wife. After all, it’s based on Fredrik Backman’s best-selling novel of the same name, and Hannes Holm’s adaptation has only continued the story’s success by becoming a hit in several countries. The film’s insight into the man’s heartwarming past tends to strike a chord with anyone who has known an Ove of their own (or had one as a parent).
Where to Watch: It’s in theaters (here’s a list of locations) as well as online at Amazon, FandangoNow, GooglePlay, iTunes and Vudu. Here’s The New York Times review.