West Virginia led Kansas on Monday night by 14 points with three minutes to play. Ranked in the middle of the top 25 most of the season, the Mountaineers seemed ready to thrust themselves into the national championship picture.
In a memorable collapse — or rally, from host Kansas’ point of view — West Virginia squandered its lead. Over those last three minutes, the Mountaineers ended up managing only one field-goal attempt — it missed — while going 7 for 11 from the free-throw line. Over the same span, Kansas scored 21 points to send the game to overtime, where it won comfortably. Kansas was aided immeasurably by a full-court press that helped force four West Virginia turnovers, two of them on steals by Landen Lucas.
Losing because of a press must have stung for the Mountaineers, because they have become known for having college basketball’s best press themselves. West Virginia has earned the nickname Press Virginia by forcing 569 turnovers, the most in the country by more than 80, and an average of 22 a game. More than a quarter of its opponents’ possessions end in a turnover, also best in the country, and it is tied for first in steal percentage.
That swarming defense has led to some impressive victories, including at Virginia in December and a 21-point romp over then-No. 1 Baylor last month.
Still, the upstart Mountaineers are in a familiar spot in the Big 12, looking up at Kansas. At 8-5 in the conference, they also trail Baylor and are only a half-game ahead of relatively unheralded Iowa State.
West Virginia has been adored all season by one group: handicappers. Even after the loss, Jeff Sagarin has the Mountaineers ranked second in the country, behind undefeated Gonzaga. Inpredictable, which calculates how teams are rated by linemakers, has them sixth, down from second last week. Indeed, despite being No. 3 in the country and playing at home, where it is virtually unbeatable, Kansas was only a 2.5-point favorite in Monday’s game, thanks to the great respect bookmakers have for West Virginia.
In contrast, the R.P.I., an index that is a key factor in determining N.C.A.A. tournament berths, and which does not account for scoring margin, is unimpressed, ranking West Virginia 29th even before Monday night’s loss.
This wide discrepancy seems to make the Mountaineers’ eventual landing place in the tournament a mystery. Bracketologists at ESPN and CBS seem to have split the difference, slotting West Virginia as a No. 3 seed, the equivalent of being ranked ninth to 12th in the national polls.
Kansas’ more conventional playing style, long beloved by voters, and its 23-3 record seem to make it a sure No. 1 seed, even if the computer rankings do not agree. Sagarin has Kansas seventh, and ninth with his more score-oriented “predictor” ranking.
Kansas is basketball royalty, frequently among the nation’s best teams. The Jayhawks were ranked No. 3 in the preseason, their fourth straight year in the top five, while West Virginia was an afterthought at No. 20. In part, that is because Kansas won the title in 2008 and has made five of eight final 16s since. The program also typically lands high-profile all-American high school players, including Josh Jackson, a freshman who is averaging 17 points a game. West Virginia has nothing like the basketball pedigree. But computers are unimpressed by reputation.
No matter how impressive West Virginia’s statistics are, the team will be chagrined by blowing the big lead on Monday night and eager to exact revenge in the conference tournament in Kansas City, Mo., in March. If handicappers and their computers are to be believed, the teams could meet in the later stages of the N.C.A.A. tournament.