In 2009, Curtis Byers was a shy 16-year-old with a halo of hair, an aptitude for science and an allergy to school. Seven years later, the halo has been buzzed short, but the love of science remains and he is aiming for a career in veterinary care.
In 2009, the oldest of the three Byers siblings, Daniel, was 17 and a student at Park West High School in Hell’s Kitchen in Manhattan, where he was preparing for a career in cooking. Seven years later, he is a professional cook, with a string of restaurant jobs and catering work on his résumé. His current goal: culinary school (and a way to pay for it).
And from her two-bedroom Harlem apartment, Lynette Byers, now 85, keeps an eye on all three — the boys still at home and Rayshell in her second year at Salem College, an all-women’s university in Winston-Salem, N.C. That is a little too far for Ms. Byers’s complete comfort, even though Rayshell has provided her with an iPhone to keep in touch via text and FaceTime.
It was the goals, dreams and hopes of the Byerses that led the Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of New York, one of the eight organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, to give them $289 seven years ago — $110 for an electric mixer and baking tins for Daniel, $50 for Rayshell’s application fee to an after-school arts program and $129 for a toolbox for Curtis.
Strangers still mistake Ms. Byers for her children’s grandmother, which did not bother her in 2009 and does not bother her now. She took in all three as foster babies — they are genetic siblings — and formally adopted them when she was in her 60s, after her own son had grown.
“I guess they keep me young,” she said.
During a recent interview, it hardly seemed that seven years had passed, except that Ms. Byers’s sons are taller. (Daniel is 6 feet 6 inches, and Curtis is just a few inches shorter.) Daniel gets Rayshell on FaceTime, and the Byerses huddle around on Ms. Byers’s easy chair for a talk that defies both time and distance.
Daniel pulls out his personal phone, which is filled with photos of dishes he has created: his own spins on baked chicken, rice and cabbage, shrimp Alfredo, a variety of soul food dishes and lots of Mexican food. “I like spicy,” he said.
Daniel added that he spends at least three hours a day cooking, even on days when he is not working.
Curtis, left, Rayshell and Daniel when they were children.
But when talk turns to the future, Curtis grows more serious: “I want to work with animals.” Financing that education is a problem here, too.
The family’s participation in the Neediest Cases campaign looms large in their memories. It goes beyond the money itself.
