Pro Basketball|Kevin Durant Is Gone. Durant, Okla., Is Sad.
Kevin Durant Is Gone. Durant, Okla., Is Sad.
DURANT, Okla. — Kelly Green, the men’s basketball coach at Southeastern Oklahoma State University, battles relative obscurity by using all the tools at his disposal. Until recently, Green highlighted the campus’s unique geography to sell out-of-state prospects on his Division II program.
Green felt much more comfortable using this tangential connection back when Kevin Durant was still playing for the Oklahoma City Thunder. But those ties disappeared when Durant signed with the Golden State Warriors in free agency over the summer, forcing Green to scrap his pitch.
The grief over Durant (the player) is palpable in Durant (the city), a quiet community of about 17,000 people about 150 miles southeast of Oklahoma City that has, in small ways, paid the price for pure coincidence. One teenager sought retribution by campaigning to change the name of the city to Westbrook. Basketball players at Durant Middle School hear the occasional barbs from opponents.
But mostly, people here — like many Thunder fans across the state — are sad that Durant left.
Kevin Durant is set to make his return to Oklahoma City this weekend, when the Warriors play the Thunder on Saturday night. Vestiges of Durant remain here in Durant, most notably tucked among bins of merchandise at Hibbett Sports on West Main Street. Late last month, on a rack near the cash register marked “Clearance: Up to 50% off,” six Durant T-shirts from his days with the Thunder were priced to sell at $4.97 apiece. They were not exactly flying out the door.
Natalie Robertson, an assistant manager at the store, said some people had bought Durant T-shirts around the holidays as gag gifts. At least one patron, she said, had announced his intention to use one as kindling for a bonfire, which was perhaps an unorthodox form of therapy.
“But most people are like, ‘Why are you still selling these?’” she said.
Considered the magnolia capital of Oklahoma, Durant — traditionally pronounced DEW-rant rather than duh-RANT — was founded in the early 19th century by Dixon Durant, a prominent businessman, minister and civic leader. (Kevin Durant is not in any way related to Dixon Durant.) The city itself is a fairly tranquil place, complete with tourist attractions.
“You know we have the world’s largest peanut, right?” asked Asia Willingham, a teacher whose husband, Zach, coaches the seventh-grade boys’ basketball team at Durant Middle School.
But that sense of civic serenity was briefly upended over the summer thanks to the handiwork of Ryan Nazari, a 17-year-old high school student from Edmond, Okla. Dismayed by Durant’s decision, Nazari started a petition on Change.org that sought to rebrand the city. Durant would become Westbrook, after Russell Westbrook, the Thunder’s star point guard.
And then it quickly became popular, collecting nearly 3,000 signatures. Nazari’s parents were unaware of their son’s extracurricular project until they heard about it on the local news.
“And my dad was like, ‘What are you doing?’” said Nazari, who plans to study biomechanical engineering in college.
It might be worth noting that Nazari has never actually been to Durant, where most residents seemed to get a kick out of the petition. They are, however, not changing the name of the city. Nicolas Crouse, a 13-year-old shooting guard at Durant Middle School, has a vested interest in the status quo. His great-great-great-great-great-grandfather, he said, was Dixon Durant.
Like Nazari, Crouse said he was bummed about Kevin Durant. In the dreary aftermath of Durant’s decision, Crouse dug out his Durant replica jersey but resisted the urge to cut it into tiny pieces. Instead, he settled on a more peaceful form of protest: He slapped a strip of masking tape across the name on the back and wrote “Westbrook” on it.
If there are others who cannot help themselves, Crouse does not entertain any fantasies that Durant will ever return to the Thunder. Crouse values loyalty.
Heavner, one of Crouse’s teammates, attended several Durant-era games at Chesapeake Energy Arena, including one in January 2014 when Durant scored a career-high 54 points in a narrow win over the Warriors. Heavner said he had looked up to Durant. He tried to emulate his shooting stroke.
“He could score the ball with such ease,” Heavner said.
As for the N.B.A. All-Star Game this month, when Westbrook and Durant will be reunited as teammates for the Western Conference, Heavner offered Westbrook some unsolicited advice.
“I hope he doesn’t pass him the ball,” Heavner said.
Green, the coach at Southeastern, where Dennis Rodman was a star player in the mid-1980s, said he would never blame a professional athlete for pursuing another opportunity. It is a business, after all.
The hard part for Oklahomans, Green said, was coping with the realization that they could be spurned by a high-profile athlete whom many considered an adopted son. This was a new and disheartening experience for many of the Thunder’s more impassioned fans. Remember: When the Seattle SuperSonics relocated to Oklahoma City in 2008 as the Thunder, the franchise became the state’s first to compete in any of the four major pro leagues — and Durant was the face of that franchise.
That did not turn out to be. Jalik Lewis, a 13-year-old point guard at Durant Middle School, dwells on missed opportunities. When Durant was still playing for the Thunder, Lewis thought it would have been cool if Durant had actually visited Durant.
But while Lewis was disappointed by Durant’s departure, he does not hold grudges, he said. He prizes his three Durant jerseys, his two Durant T-shirts, his Durant sneakers and his Durant athletic socks.
At the same time, Lewis does not expect Durant to be warmly received in Oklahoma City this weekend.
Here in Durant, there may not be joy, but at least there is a little bit of forgiveness.