“I’m good, but just today I realize I’m a little nervous,” Viola Davis told the Bagger on Wednesday night at the Beverly Wilshire Hotel, during Alfre Woodard’s annual Oscars Sistahs Soiree.
The Bagger’s first thought, “That’s impossible.” Followed immediately by, “This woman is acting.” Ms. Davis, who is up for best supporting actress for her performance in “Fences,” tends to be the center of gravity of every room she is in: It’s hard to imagine her being nervous about anything. She is also the closest thing in this Oscar race to a lock.
But nerves are especially jangled in the days leading up to the Academy Awards on Sunday. Months of relentless campaigning and carb restrictions could leave anyone a little raw. It was clear, though, that Ms. Davis, along with fellow nominees Ruth Negga and Octavia Spencer, were relishing the event.
Ms. Negga (up for best actress for “Loving”) told the Bagger that she had actually been enjoying the whirlwind of the season. Ms. Spencer (in the supporting category for “Hidden Figures”) tucked herself into a couch in a corner, alongside Tessa Thompson and Tracee Ellis Ross. About two dozen actresses, all black, were there, including Aja Naomi King, Rashida Jones and Diahann Carroll, and a few reporters were allowed to circulate before getting the boot around 9 p.m.
The Essence gala, now in its 10th year, differs from other awards because of its sense of unity and purpose. Honorees are announced in advance, and this year prizes went to Ms. King (“The Birth of a Nation”), Issa Rae (“Insecure”), Janelle Monáe (the singer who also starred in “Hidden Figures” and “Moonlight”) and Yara Shahidi (“black-ish”). The event always feels less like an awards show than a sanctuary, filled with talk of black girl magic, authenticity and representation, and this year, as in previous ones, the focus was not on the ills of the world —– or anything overtly political — but on the women in the room.
“You keep going because little brown girls need to see images of themselves onscreen,” the singer and actor Common told the audience at the outset.
The speeches from Ms. Monáe and Ms. Shahidi were deeply personal and thoughtful, and Ms. Rae had the room guffawing, but it was Ms. King who captured the night. She has had a rough year: Her performance as the wife of Nat Turner in “The Birth of a Nation” had been heralded as a breakthrough, but the film went down in flames after controversy erupted over the filmmaker Nate Parker’s past. Ms. King never referred to that disappointment, but in a powerhouse speech laid bare her pain and doubts.
The room erupted. “She just snatched my soul a little bit,” Gabrielle Union, the night’s host, said, returning to the stage while daubing away tears.
