WASHINGTON — When President Trump said Wednesday that he would not insist on the creation of a Palestinian state as part of a peace agreement between Israel and the Palestinians, was he breaking with decades of American policy?
Or was he just thinking out loud?
Those have become recurring questions during the turbulent early weeks of this unorthodox presidency. Mr. Trump has delighted in bringing his deal maker’s style to the diplomatic arena, challenging established principles and flouting time-tested formulations.
But he has just as readily reversed himself, sowing confusion among allies and adversaries and raising questions about how seriously to take any of his pronouncements.
In December, as president-elect, Mr. Trump declared that the United States should no longer be bound by the “one China” policy, the 44-year-old diplomatic principle that underpins America’s relationship with the Communist government in Beijing. He said he proposed to use it as a lever to extract a trade deal or more cooperation on North Korea.
There was predictable consternation in Beijing and among foreign policy experts in Washington. They fretted that Mr. Trump was recklessly undoing the landmark China diplomacy of Richard M. Nixon and Mao Zedong — fears that were misplaced, it turned out.
Last week, Mr. Trump telephoned President Xi Jinping and promised to abide by “one China,” having discovered that Mr. Xi was not willing to talk to him until he disavowed his statement. For Mr. Trump, one China was a bargaining chip; for the Chinese, it was nonnegotiable.
On Wednesday, seasoned Middle East peacemakers predicted a similar cycle for comments on the two-state solution. Mr. Trump, they said, would quickly discover that there is no “one-state solution” to the Israel-Palestinian conflict — at least none that would be remotely acceptable to both sides.
If the president is serious about peace, which he appeared to be in his news conference on Wednesday with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, they said he would inevitably return to two states, an article of faith for presidents since Bill Clinton first endorsed it in January 2001.
There is nothing wrong with questioning old assumptions, Mr. Trump’s defenders point out. Even President Barack Obama said shortly before he left office that his successor’s willingness to think outside the box was refreshing. The problem, several analysts said, is that Mr. Trump often does not seem to grasp the complicated logic behind the principles he is jettisoning.
Standing next to an inscrutable Mr. Netanyahu on Wednesday, Mr. Trump talked about two-state and one-state formulations as though they were interchangeable — items on a Chinese menu, in the words of another Middle East negotiator, Aaron David Miller.
There was a time, Mr. Trump acknowledged, when he believed the two-state approach was the easiest way to resolve the Israel-Palestinian conflict. But, he continued, and his words trailed off as though he seemed to recognize he was about to wade into treacherous diplomatic waters.
Mr. Trump was getting at something: There is no longer much hope for a two-state solution, given Mr. Netanyahu’s right-wing government and the exhausted leadership of the Palestinian Authority. Rather than parse the president’s words for policy implications, some experts said, one could read them as a statement of his intent to be realistic and flexible.
Nor did Mr. Trump try to discredit the two-state formula; he merely opened the door to other options. Once Palestinian officials get over their reflexive indignation, said Ghaith al-Omari, a senior fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, they will focus on his enthusiasm for a deal rather than obsess over semantics.
For Mr. Trump, “one China” is one element in a complex, unsatisfying relationship. But for China’s leaders, who have viewed Taiwan as a breakaway province since the Communist revolution, it is the bedrock of their international legitimacy. They were not willing to return to business as usual until Mr. Trump recanted his comment.
Thus ended a break with tradition that lasted barely two months.