Babies on the Indonesian island of Bali don’t start off life on the right foot — or on the left.
That is because a prevalent and ancient custom there says an infant’s feet should not touch the ground for the first 105 days after birth.
The practice derives from a belief that newborns are still close to the sacred realm from which they came and therefore deserve to be treated with veneration. Belief in reincarnation is widespread in Bali, where most people practice a local form of Hinduism. A child’s birth is seen as the rebirth of a deceased relative, with ancestors returning as their own descendants.
Infants are seen as visitors from a higher plane, who need to be respected — and kept off the floor. Preventive hygiene and high infant mortality rates may also have played roles in the custom’s origins.
Mothers and other female relatives are generally responsible for ensuring toes never touch turf, but fathers, uncles, neighbors, storekeepers and the occasional tourist are recruited to keep an infant aloft. Children are typically not entrusted with the task lest the baby be deposited in the dirt.
At home, the baby is usually placed on a bed and, in a more traditional home, a kind of clay bucket may serve as a playpen.
After 105 days — or 210 days, in some Balinese communities — an elaborate ceremony, known as nyabutan or nyambutin, is held. “It’s a kind of coming into the world for the baby,” Professor Vickers said.
At the start of the ceremony, the parents are purified. A ritual then bids farewell to the 108 spirits and thanks them for having protected the baby.
Holy water is sprinkled, and food offerings are made to appease demons and entice benevolent spirits to strengthen the child for the next stage of life.
“Usually a trance shaman, called a balian, officiates and communicates with the ancestors to find out who has been reincarnated,” Professor Vickers said.
The hair carried by the baby since birth, considered unclean, is cut off.
Finally, the infant touches the ground for the first time and is officially given a name. In some ceremonies, a number of names are written on leaves that are placed amid burning sticks; the first leaf to burn is the name bestowed on the baby.
What if the feet do touch the ground before the ceremony?
