PEORIA, Ariz. — Wil Myers hates the feeling of batting gloves, so he never wears them. This time of year, especially, he spends a lot of quality time with his bats, twirling them like batons in the San Diego Padres’ clubhouse, gripping and waggling them around in his massive hands. He needs to build up calluses on his palms.
Feelings are raw, too, on the San Diego sports scene. The departure of the Chargers for Los Angeles last month did not hit Myers personally; he is not a football fan, not even of the Carolina Panthers, who play less than a mile from his off-season home in North Carolina. But the Chargers’ move leaves the Padres as the only major pro sports team in town, and a singular entity in baseball.
Every other team in the majors has at least one neighbor in the N.F.L., the N.B.A. or the N.H.L. Only the Padres have a whole market to themselves. Yet after their sixth losing season in a row, at 68-94, they cannot offer a winning alternative to soothe the loss of the Chargers.
The Padres have been San Diego’s team since 1969, when they joined the National League as a mustard-and-brown expansion franchise that lost 110 games. All these years later, in generic white and navy, they still have not won a championship. The Chargers never won a Super Bowl, either; they were routed in their only appearance, in 1995, just as the Padres were swiftly beaten in the World Series of 1984 and 1998.
For this season, anyway, the Padres might be further from that goal than any other team. They recently signed Myers, who had 28 homers and 28 steals last season, to a six-year, $83 million contract extension. But several positions are unsettled, and with few reliable starters, Green has said he may consider a piggyback style of game management, with starters replaced quickly by long relievers.
Far below the surface, though, the Padres believe they are positioned well. Last summer, with several big-spending teams restricted in their spending allotments, General Manager A. J. Preller poured $70 million into the draft and international markets. He also made several trades for prospects, bolstering a farm system whose talent level has risen to third in baseball, from 20th, in rankings by ESPN’s Keith Law. Only the Braves and the Yankees rank higher.
Preller was perhaps too aggressive in his trades; he was suspended for a month late last season after the commissioner’s office determined the Padres had not provided complete medical records to rival teams. But the result of the whirlwind season, Preller hopes, will be the kind of foundation that has helped his old team, the Texas Rangers, win throughout this decade.
Soon after the Padres hired Preller in August 2014, he engineered a flurry of trades for veterans like Matt Kemp, Craig Kimbrel and Justin Upton. The fans responded, with attendance rising to 2.45 million in 2015, the highest since 2007, when the Padres were coming off consecutive division titles. But when the 2015 team flopped, Preller pivoted quickly, dealing away some of the newcomers and letting others leave for draft-pick compensation.
While one trade backfired badly (acquiring Kemp from the Dodgers for catcher Yasmani Grandal), it was a worthwhile strategy; the Padres needed a jolt, and Preller had planned to rebuild the farm system, anyway. He said it was healthy to raise expectations at the start, so fans would understand that the team would try anything to win.
The Padres acquired their best prospect, the 22-year-old center fielder Manuel Margot, before last season in a trade with the Boston Red Sox. Last summer, in the Futures Game in San Diego, Margot made a leaping catch to rob a home run. He returned for a late-season cameo after hitting .304 with 30 steals in Class AAA.
Padres fans have heard about prospects before, of course; every losing team likes to promote its future. The difference now is that fans have no local alternative. The spotlight is theirs, and the Padres promise a good performance. They just need time.
