Charles Oakley sounds as if he is not quite ready to move on.
One day after Oakley met with the Knicks’ owner, James L. Dolan, in an effort to end one of the more embarrassing episodes in franchise history, Oakley demanded Tuesday that Dolan publicly apologize to him.
Oakley, a fan favorite dating to his days as a rugged Knicks forward for much of the 1990s, made those comments in an interview with ESPN Radio in what amounted to Day 7 of a conflict that began last Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden.
Oakley, who has long been estranged from the organization for being critical of Dolan, showed up at the Garden that night to watch the Knicks play the Los Angeles Clippers but ended up being taken from the arena in handcuffs after an altercation with security guards.
Two days later, on ESPN Radio, Dolan alleged that Oakley needed help to address alcohol and anger-management issues, extraordinary accusations that Oakley has vehemently denied. At the same time, Dolan said he was indefinitely barring Oakley from attending games at the Garden.
Whatever Dolan’s intentions, his initial actions backfired. The ban, in addition to Dolan’s statements essentially portraying Oakley as troubled, produced a firestorm of negative publicity for Dolan, who is already an unpopular figure among the team’s fans.
Commissioner Adam Silver then got involved, arranging Monday’s meeting, with Oakley and Dolan joining him at the N.B.A.’s headquarters. Michael Jordan, the principal owner of the Charlotte Hornets and a close friend of Oakley’s, took part by telephone.
Afterward, Silver said in a statement that Oakley and Dolan had apologized for the events of last week and that Dolan hoped to welcome Oakley back to the Garden in the “near future.” That seemed to imply that the ban had been lifted.
On Tuesday, Oakley pumped the brakes. Although he acknowledged that Dolan had apologized to him, Oakley said that he was not so quick to forgive and that he would be unwilling, at least for now, to accept any invitation from Dolan to attend another Knicks game.
The episode has cast a shadow on the organization — and on the current players, who have their own problems in the midst of a 23-33 season.
In his radio interview, Oakley also revealed that after his arrest, the Cleveland Cavaliers’ LeBron James had called the Manhattan precinct where he was being held. James is among the high-profile players who have expressed their support for Oakley, which has increased the pressure on Dolan to make amends.