The success or failure of Reckitt Benckiser’s $17 billion deal will be decided in China. Britain’s cleaning-products-to-condoms group is giving $90 a share in cash for the American baby formula-maker Mead Johnson. Cost savings justify only around half of the $3.8 billion premium, though. Making up the balance depends largely on increasing sales in the People’s Republic.
Reckitt Benckiser, valued at $64 billion, unveiled its deal with Mead on Friday, just over a week after confirming that the two were in talks. It expects the tie-up to generate around $250 million of annual cost savings after three full years, mainly by merging the companies’ back offices and driving a harder bargain with suppliers.
Taxed at 25 percent, those savings are worth about $1.9 billion in today’s money — half the value of the 30 percent premium that Reckitt is handing to Mead shareholders. Add the savings onto Mead’s expected earnings for 2020, and the return on Reckitt’s total investment is just over 5 percent — short of the 7 percent cost of capital typical for a large consumer goods group. Reckitt, run by Rakesh Kapoor, says the purchase will exceed its cost of capital after five years. That will depend on increasing sales in the $46 billion global infant nutrition market.
On paper, prospects are bullish. Chinese children will be responsible for around half of the global growth in milk formula sales in the next five years, according to Euromonitor. China’s decision to relax its one-child policy and the increase in women reaching for baby formula as they head out to work should bode well for Mead.
Yet it is also a hugely fragmented market, with around 2,000 baby food brands, many of which are aggressively cutting prices. Food safety scandals have made middle-class buyers in China wary of buying domestically. A government crackdown on informal imports of baby formula via Hong Kong hurt Mead’s sales in Asia in 2016.
The American company is struggling to adapt as new regulations push sales online. Reckitt, which generates nearly a third of its China revenue online, should help to get Mead’s e-commerce offering up to scratch. Reckitt’s reaching its financial targets depends on it.