LOS ANGELES — In a courtroom here on Friday, the defense attorney Dick DeGuerin went on the attack on behalf of his client, the New York real estate scion Robert A. Durst, who is accused of murdering a close friend, Susan Berman, 17 years ago. Prosecutors say Mr. Durst shot her in the back of her head to prevent her from revealing what she knew about the disappearance of his first wife, Kathleen Durst.
Confronting Mr. Durst’s former friend Nick Chavin, who in sensational testimony on Thursday said that Mr. Durst had admitted the killing to him, Mr. DeGuerin quickly set the tone: “It took seven months for you to come up with the story about Bob Durst confessing to you?” he said.
Mr. DeGuerin was referring to conversations between Mr. Chavin and Deputy District Attorney John Lewin during seven months in 2015, when Mr. Chavin has said he was grappling with whether to tell Mr. Lewin what Mr. Durst had told him.
The actual trial is still as much as a year away, and Mr. Chavin’s appearance in Los Angeles Superior Court was part of an unusual proceeding known as a conditional examination. In such an examination, prosecutors can question witnesses before a trial if they are 65 or older and in danger of dying or being killed before the case is heard.
Defense lawyers can cross-examine the witnesses, and the proceedings are videotaped in case the witnesses are not available to testify at trial.
Also citing transcripts, Mr. DeGuerin suggested Mr. Chavin had concocted the confession to get work from the Durst Organization, the real estate firm owned by Mr. Durst’s estranged family, and the gratitude of Douglas Durst, Robert’s brother.
Mr. Chavin ultimately did not get the job.
Mr. Chavin said he struggled for months over whether to reveal what had happened at the dinner with a man he once regarded as his best friend. His answers were merely an attempt to “waffle,” he said, until he came to a decision.
”I deliberated many months about what I wanted to say,” Mr. Chavin told Mr. DeGuerin.
The case against Mr. Durst is circumstantial; there were no witnesses to Ms. Berman’s death. And Mr. Durst has never been charged in his wife’s disappearance. Her body has never been found.
In interviews with The New York Times over the past 17 years, Mr. Chavin described his friend, whom he called Bobby, as a genius who understood real estate and had a dry sense of humor and eccentric habits.
Mr. Durst was a best man at Mr. Chavin’s 1988 wedding. Mr. Chavin had introduced Mr. Durst to the woman who would become his second wife, Debrah Lee Charatan. Mr. Chavin had worked for the Durst Organization; his wife, Terry Chavin, had worked for Ms. Charatan before joining the company as a real estate agent.
Mr. Chavin’s decision to become a prosecution witness two years ago represented a remarkable turnabout in his friendship with Mr. Durst.
Mr. Chavin testified that Mr. Durst’s admission during a 2003 trial in Galveston, Tex., that he had sat in a pool of blood and dismembered the body of a neighbor shook the “primary foundations” of his belief that Mr. Durst was not violent.
Mr. Durst was acquitted in that case after saying the death was an accident during a struggle to defend himself.
Mr. Chavin’s friendship with Ms. Berman came first. He testified he was an aspiring musician in California fronting a band, Country Porn, in the 1970s when he met Ms. Berman, a reporter for The San Francisco Examiner.
“We felt like kindred spirits,” Mr. Chavin recalled during testimony that began Wednesday.
But Mr. Chavin decided in 1980 it was time to get a “day job” and moved to New York, where Ms. Berman was working as a magazine writer. Mr. Chavin got a job as an advertising copywriter.
Ms. Berman introduced him to Mr. Durst, whom she had met in Los Angeles in the 1960s. Mr. Durst helped Mr. Chavin propel his career with a $400,000-a-year account to advertise a skyscraper built by the Durst family.
Then, in February 1982, New York’s tabloids were filled with stories on the disappearance of Kathleen Durst. Ms. Berman dealt with reporters on Mr. Durst’s behalf, but confided in Mr. Chavin more than once that Mr. Durst had admitted killing his wife.
Nevertheless, Ms. Berman was intent on shielding Mr. Durst, Mr. Chavin testified. She said nothing could be done about Kathleen Durst’s death and they should protect their friend, he told the court.
Mr. Lewin, the deputy district attorney, asked Mr. Chavin why he had never contacted the police, instead waiting until investigators approached him in 2001.
“It didn’t seem it was my place,” he said.
Mr. Durst stopped talking to Mr. Chavin in the mid-1990s after Mr. Durst’s father, Seymour, and his uncle decided to bypass Robert and designate his younger brother, Douglas, to take the helm of the Durst Organization.
After a New York State Police investigator reopened the investigation into the disappearance of Mrs. Durst in 2000, Mr. Chavin told a reporter that he missed his friend and never believed that Mr. Durst had killed his wife, despite what Ms. Berman had said.
But in December 2000, the police found Ms. Berman dead. Mr. Chavin subsequently told investigators what Susan had told him, but still insisted she was an unreliable storyteller.
Eight months later, Mr. Durst was arrested in Galveston, where he was accused of murdering a neighbor in a rooming house he had rented while posing as a mute woman.
Mr. Chavin was dumbfounded, but still believed his friend was innocent.
Mr. Durst called Mr. Chavin from jail, asking him to come to Galveston for moral support. Mr. Chavin declined.
But in 2014, Mr. Durst began calling Mr. Chavin again and the men reunited. They had dinner and talked about old times.
Mr. Durst urged Mr. Chavin to sit for an interview with producers who were making a documentary for HBO about his life.
Mr. Chavin testified he told Mr. Durst that participating in the documentary was a bad idea, but he persisted anyway.
