In further fallout from the Russian doping scandal, United States lawmakers will conduct a hearing on Feb. 28 focused on strengthening antidoping controls in international sports before the 2018 Winter Olympics.
A House subcommittee asked several antidoping and sports officials to testify at the hearing, according to a spokeswoman for the House Committee on Energy and Commerce, which has jurisdiction over sports.
The list of those who will appear as witnesses at the hearing in Washington next week had not yet been confirmed, the spokeswoman said Tuesday, but it was expected to be made public by Friday.
Weeks before the Rio Olympics last summer — as global sports officials considered excluding Russia from the Games after learning the nation had blatantly breached antidoping controls at the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi, Russia — congressional lawmakers wrote to Thomas Bach, president of the International Olympic Committee. They expressed concern about systematic doping cover-ups in Russia, which had been detailed by the nation’s former antidoping lab chief, and about conflicts of interest within the global antidoping effort.
A Senate subcommittee directed similar concerns to the top official for the World Anti-Doping Agency — or WADA, the global regulator of drugs in sports — questioning why the agency had been slow to act on whistle-blower tips about coordinated cheating in Russia that dated back years.
The United States contributes roughly $2 million a year to WADA, which relies on funding from national governments and the Olympic committee.
Officials for the I.O.C. and WADA have communicated with lawmakers in recent months regarding reforms to the global antidoping system, which sports officials have called a priority in the wake of the 2016 Games.
Speaking in Switzerland in December, Mr. Bach said he had not been able to travel to Washington at the invitation of lawmakers but that he was providing answers to their inquiries.
Ahead of the 2018 Winter Games, which begin in Pyeongchang, South Korea, in less than a year, the I.O.C. has appointed two committees to consider the evidence of Russian doping made public by regulators late last year and explore possible further sanctions against the nation.