It’s a fine late-summer weekend just before Labor Day, and we’ve come to the Inn at Shelburne Farms, a charming old estate on Lake Champlain, far from the book-glutted world of Manhattan. But not that far: Thanks to my “stay connected whether you want to or not” iPhone, I get updates at all hours of the day and night from Bookish, Goodreads and Lit Hub bannering the new Hot Titles. I can be out on a lake paddling my canoe, and up will pop the shortlist for the Man Booker Prize. If you’re lounging in a rain-rotted Adirondack chair reading “Mrs. Dalloway” on your Kindle, put it aside. The new Jodi Picoult is here.
But for how long? Will the “long-awaited” books of 2016, the Ann Patchett and Margaret Atwood and Stephen King, be read in a hundred years? Does it matter? We want to read these authors now. They shine brightly in our cultural firmament. Still, I can’t help brooding, as I drift through the inn’s well-stocked library, about the evanescence of even these long-awaited books.
It’s an imposing room, stuffed with Victorian furniture and old lamps. Built by one of America’s great fortunes — it was once the country estate of Cornelius Vanderbilt’s granddaughter — it feels right out of an Edith Wharton novel. The Inn at Shelburne Farms belongs to a period when people had libraries, when reading was a central activity in life. It was how you got your information.
I doubt the owners of these books read more than a few of them, but who am I to judge? Anatole France, asked if he had read all the books in his library, is said to have replied: “Not one-tenth of them. I don’t suppose you use your Sèvres china every day?” But they look as if they’ve been perused if not exactly read. Bound in leather, their fading pages rough-cut and tissue-thin, they have no jackets; their titles and the names of their authors are stamped in gold leaf on the cover. They aren’t just books; through the gentle weathering of time, they’ve become objects of beauty.
I take one down and cradle it gingerly in my hands: “George Eliot’s Life as Related in Her Letters and Journals,” by J.W. Cross. Cross was Eliot’s husband, best known for having tried to commit suicide by leaping into the Grand Canal while on their honeymoon. It’s illustrated with black-and-white etchings and has a musty old-book smell, as if it’s been moldering for decades in a hot attic room. Yet when Cross’s book was published in 1885, four years after Eliot’s death, it was read and discussed by everyone who cared about (what was then) contemporary literature. Cross maintained a high profile: He defended his portrayal of Eliot’s relationship with the philosopher Herbert Spencer, who insisted their affair had been platonic, and launched a futile effort to have Eliot buried in Westminster Abbey. “Cross did not fade away,” Eliot’s biographer Frederick Karl wryly noted: “He would do that later.” Like everyone else.
There’s one shelf of new and sort-of-new books that includes John Updike’s “The Music School,” a collection of stories I read in 10th grade; Annie Proulx’s “The Shipping News”; and Karen Russell’s “Swamplandia!,” the Hot Titles of 1966, 1993 and 2011. They’re doomed, too; In the years to come, they’ll lose their covers and their pristine pages will turn brittle. Their authors’ names will be forgotten. Literary immortality is an illusion. What does it mean for a book to “last”? Last for how long? A few decades at best.
But is that really why we write? I published my first book, a biography of Delmore Schwartz, almost 40 years ago. It, too, will soon begin its long journey to oblivion. I can imagine the stages: from that fabled used-books emporium the Strand to the remainder shelf of a secondhand book shop in a Maine resort town to the “de-acquisition” bin of a public library in Iowa to the bookshelves, if I’m lucky, of a country inn.
Is that such an ignominious fate? I didn’t write my books for posterity (not that posterity would have cared): I wrote them for myself. Which doesn’t mean I didn’t hunger for readers and fame. I never could have endured so much hard, solitary labor without the prospect of an audience. But this graveyard of dead books doesn’t unnerve me. It reminds me that I had a deeper motive, one that only the approach of old age and death has unlocked. I wrote to answer questions I had — the motive of all art, whatever its ostensible subject. There were things I urgently needed to know. Why did Schwartz, the most promising poet of his generation, end up dying at the age of 52 in a fleabag hotel in Midtown Manhattan? Why did my next (and last) biographical subject, Saul Bellow, tear up his life to feed his fiction, marrying five times, tormenting himself and others, finding in his self-inflicted suffering the elixir of his art? And what traumas buried within myself was I trying to unearth by spending decades on their stories? It wasn’t the hope of immortality that goaded me to write: It was obsession.
It would be nice to think that some visitor to the Inn at Shelburne Farms might come across one of my books a century from now and flip through a few pages before reshelving it. Or even be inspired to order it from AbeBooks or read it on Google or — who knows what lies in store? — absorb it through a book chip implanted in the brain. Delmore redivivus! But that was never the point.