Lt. Gen. Harold G. Moore, whose fortitude saved most of his outnumbered battalion in 1965 in the first major battle between American and North Vietnamese troops — exploits immortalized in a book and a movie starring Mel Gibson — died on Friday at his home in Auburn, Ala. He was 94.
His death was confirmed by his son Col. David Moore who, like his brother Lt. Col. Stephen Moore and their father, was a West Point graduate.
General Moore recounted his battlefield heroics in 1992 in a best-selling book, “We Were Soldiers Once … and Young,” written with Joseph L. Galloway.
Mr. Galloway, as a 24-year-old war correspondent for United Press International, had witnessed the battle, one of the war’s bloodiest, in the Ia Drang Valley in November 1965. Mr. Gibson played General Moore in “We Were Soldiers,” the 2002 film adaptation of the book.
“He was a phenomenal man of great strength and character, courageous and like a father to his troops who got most of his boys out of there after he landed in a hornet’s nest,” Mr. Gibson, who visited the general a few months ago, said on Monday in a phone interview.
General Moore later fended off an antiwar protest by Jane Fonda at a California base and oversaw the sweeping transition to an all-volunteer Army after the war. But no moment in his 32-year military career was as transformational as the brief American victory at Ia Drang, in shaping both his heroic reputation (he was George Armstrong Custer’s heir as commander of the Seventh Cavalry Regiment) and his view that America’s combat role in Vietnam was futile.
The North Vietnamese retreated after the battle, but they went on, with the Vietcong, to wage a successful guerrilla war that ended in 1975 with the fall of Saigon, the South Vietnamese capital.
And why he hated war.
On Nov. 14, 1965, Hal Moore, at the time a lieutenant colonel and battalion commander, and about 450 troops from his First Battalion were ferried by helicopters to Landing Zone X-Ray, a field near the Drang River in South Vietnam, six miles from the Cambodian border. They stumbled on more than they had bargained for: three North Vietnamese regular army regiments that at times outmanned them 12 to 1.
“By midafternoon in 100-degree heat we were strongly outnumbered, taking heavy casualties in a cliffhanger fight to the finish,” the general wrote in a West Point yearbook.
Finally, reinforcements and the firepower of helicopter gunships, fighter-bombers and American 105 mm howitzers positioned several miles away turned the tide.
The American death toll at X-Ray was 79. As the reinforcements marched to a second landing zone named Albany, they suffered heavy casualties in an ambush that was largely covered up at the time. When the combat in both places ended, as many as 3,000 North Vietnamese and 234 Americans were dead.
By the end of November, the American toll in the Ia Drang Valley had risen to 305, branding it as the Valley of Death.
Harold Gregory Moore Jr. was born on Feb. 13, 1922, in Bardstown, Ky., then a city of about 2,000, where his father was an insurance agent. His mother was the former Mary Crume.
He was 15 when his father first suggested he consider West Point, provided he got a required recommendation from a United States senator. As a high school senior, though, all Hal was able to extract from Senator A. B. (Happy) Chandler was a patronage job in the Senate warehouse in Washington.
By the time he graduated from George Washington University in 1942, though, World War II had begun, and more appointments to military academies were available. This time he was successful, making it to West Point and graduating in 1945.
His wife, the former Julie Compton, died in 2004. In addition to his sons David and Stephen, he is survived by another son, Harold Gregory Moore III, known as Greg; two daughters, Julie Moore Orlowski and Cecile Moore Rainey; a sister, Betty Karp; a brother, Ballard; 12 grandchildren; and four great-grandchildren.
After West Point, General Moore served in the Korean War and in Europe. He was deployed to Vietnam in 1965 and was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for valor at Ia Drang.
Returning to the United States, he was assigned to plan for the withdrawal of troops from Vietnam; commanded Fort Ord in California, where he dealt with antiwar demonstrators, including Ms. Fonda; and was named the Army’s deputy chief of staff for personnel in Washington.
General Moore likened Ia Drang to the Spanish Civil War before World War II: a dress rehearsal for the tactics that both sides would employ for the rest of the war and a harbinger of a prolonged stalemate in seesaw battles over territory.
