PARAMUS, N.J. — Past the Nike Factory Store and the Banana Republic, J. Crew and Gap outlets, and then up the elevator to a desolate hallway above a Marshalls department store, Susan Munroe found one of the places where she feels closest to God: a chapel.
It is known officially as St. Therese’s Chapel, but the black letters on the glass door on the second level of the Outlets at Bergen Town Center label it, simply, Chapel on the Mall. For years, it has been a humble home of Roman Catholic worship inside this sprawling temple of consumerism, in a New Jersey community known as a capital of shopping.
“There’s no doubt of God’s presence here,” Ms. Munroe said from her perch at the desk in the gift shop, a wall of crucifixes and a plate bearing the likeness of Pope John Paul II hanging behind her. Ms. Munroe dedicates most of her waking hours to volunteering in the chapel, her duties as varied as bookkeeping and helping the priest administer communion.
But after nearly half a century, surviving renovations and changes in mall ownership, the chapel is offering its final prayers. Ten years ago, the mall’s management shifted the chapel from a cramped basement to a more spacious spot upstairs, but it came with a catch: The lease would be month to month. Earlier this year, the chapel was told it would have to leave, as the management has other plans for the space. The final Mass is this week, on Ash Wednesday, the start of the season of Lent. Where it might next hang a crucifix is unclear.
The chapel, run by the Carmelite religious order, has at least three Masses a day, six days a week. (Bergen County’s blue laws, in a twist of irony, keep the chapel closed on Sundays.) It is in a space tucked away from other stores, with little foot traffic. But the chapel is listed in the mall directory, and worshipers occasionally stumble in or hear about it through word of mouth. The chapel draws almost 1,000 people to Mass each week.
The mall’s manager did not respond to a request for comment.
St. Therese’s Chapel has been a place where a woman in her 80s, who has retired from driving the busy roadways to her home parish, can walk to morning Mass, and where another woman said she drew strength as her 3-year-old daughter was being treated for cancer. (The daughter is now 21 and healthy; her mother still comes.) Groups gather in the chapel to pray the rosary, while others dip in for confession.
But many worshipers say they are not upset with the mall, and instead, expressed gratitude for the generosity they had been shown by the management over the years. They are choosing to meet this setback with optimism: The last time they had to move, they ended up in a better location, and now they are praying that this will be an instance in which history repeats itself.
Places of worship are not often found squeezed in with food courts and makeup counters, but such sanctuaries represented an effort to reach worshipers where they were. The Carmelites operate another chapel in a mall in Peabody, Mass., outside Boston. In Paramus, the windowless chapel has the low-slung tiled ceiling and fluorescent lights of an antiseptic office space. But a crucifix hangs at the front of the room, which is lined with prayer candles, statues and even children’s art. Stained-glass windows have been hung in light boxes on one wall.
On a recent Saturday morning, Mr. Rotella was among the three dozen people who came to the first Mass of the day. The priest, the Rev. Eugene Joseph Bettinger, did not have the help of altar servers or readers. The only choral music came at communion when the priest hit the play button on a small boombox.
After Mass, Father Bettinger, whose beard and ring of hair matched his white robes, took a seat in the gift shop. Ms. Munroe kept handing him items that people had purchased so he could bless them: the crucifixes a woman bought for her nephews, a figurine of the Virgin Mary carrying a baby Jesus, a stack of prayer cards.
He said new potential locations had already been scouted, but finding a new home will not be easy. “You see the potential, the possibilities — if you can afford it,” Father Bettinger said of some of the places.
Cost, he noted, was proving to be one of the biggest factors. The chapel was self-sustaining, he said, and sends money to the Carmelite order. The chapel had been paying less than $2,000 a month for rent, but many places where the chapel might relocate were closer to $10,000.
He also worried about proximity. He recognized the essential role the chapel played for regular worshipers and wanted to make sure they were kept updated, collecting phone numbers and addresses (both the traditional postage version and email), to encourage them to make the move.
Ms. Munroe, 56, came to the chapel soon after the move upstairs. She had come to New Jersey from New York City to care for a friend’s ailing mother and found the chapel when she was looking for an afternoon Mass. In those days, she said, she was not a morning person.
As a consecrated virgin, which is different from being a nun, Ms. Munroe took a vow of service. She has decided to plow her time and energy into the chapel, living with friends in nearby Oradell.
She treasures her ability to serve, pointing out the grin on her face when she helps during Mass. “I get filled with the Holy Spirit,” Ms. Munroe said. She has also been drawn to the “prayerfulness” of the chapel and the sense of community. She was among those hoping that a new location would emerge.
A woman buying children’s prayer books shared her concern about the chapel’s closing.
Then she rushed out into the hallway, looking for Father Bettinger. The next Mass was about to begin and the woman’s prayer books needed his blessing.