Will this be Rayna Jaymes’s swan song? Find out on “Nashville.” Or watch Famke Janssen build on the role she created in last season’s “The Blacklist” in its new spinoff. Meanwhile, the podcast “My Brother, My Brother and Me” becomes a web series.
NASHVILLE 9 p.m. on CMT. Is Rayna Jaymes about to go out in a blaze of country music glory? After surviving her knife-wielding stalker last week, Connie Britton’s beloved songbird was driven home in a police car — only to be T-boned by a pickup. What happens next is anybody’s guess. At 10, “Sun Records,” a new series loosely inspired by the musical “Million Dollar Quartet,” chronicles the birth of rock ’n’ roll through the rise of Elvis Presley (Drake Morgan), Johnny Cash (Kevin Fonteyne) and Jerry Lee Lewis (Christian Lees) and the Memphis label’s founder, Sam Phillips (Chad Michael Murray), who set the trajectory.
 Who killed Wes? Annalise and the Keating Four are pushed to the limits when details from the night of the fire are revealed.
THE BLACKLIST: REDEMPTION 10 p.m. on NBC. Last season on “The Blacklist,” Famke Janssen strode into the role of Scottie Hargrave, head of a private military-intelligence firm whose mercenaries tackle the morally ambiguous situations that governments like to keep clear of. She was also quite possibly the biological mother of the spy and assassin Tom Keen (Ryan Eggold), who had been told that he was actually Christopher Hargrave, kidnapped from his parents’ home at the age of 3. Now Scottie has her own show, and she’s bringing Tom along with her. The winter finale of “The Blacklist” leads in at 9.
MY BROTHER, MY BROTHER AND ME on Seeso. The podcast, admittedly an acquired taste, becomes a web series. But the concept stays the same as three West Virginia brothers (Griffin, Travis and Justin McElroy), who have no business giving advice, dole it out — explaining such matters ashow a man can persuade his wife to let him get a pet tarantula, or how to get students to stop looking at electronic devices. “The show would be better if the brothers spent less time laughing at their own jokes, but over all it does a commendable job of translating the deadpan quirkiness of the podcast to the small screen,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times.