NOW LIVES A global nomad, she moves among Airbnb rentals in New York and Los Angeles, an apartment in Milan (a “storage closet,” she said) and her parents’ home in Murcia.
Her two passions will merge this week: She is scheduled to be a D.J. for Jeremy Scott’s after-party during New York Fashion Week. “If I’m in the same city, I’m always playing his parties,” she said.
BIG BREAK Ms. Abellán first made a name for herself on Instagram, where she would post images of herself in provocative positions, wearing eclectic, colorful outfits. One of her posts got the attention of Rihanna, who tapped her to play one of her henchwoman in the revenge-fantasy music video for “Bitch Better Have My Money” in 2015. “She found me on the internet and wanted me to be in the next video,” Ms. Abellán said.
Her already promising modeling career took off: Ms. Abellán walked in Rihanna’s Fenty x Puma show in Paris last fall, and for Fausto Puglisi at Milan Fashion Week. She has also appeared in fashion shoots for Glassbook, Nylon Mexico and Indie magazines.
LATEST PROJECT Ms. Abellán was a D.J. at last year’s Hard Fest, an electronics and alternative-music festival that traveled across the United States, and featured musicians including Desiigner and Boys Noize. In March, Ms. Abellán, who describes her sound as “electroclash with a little bit of techno,” will go on her first solo D.J. tour in South America, with stops in Santiago, Chile, and Medellín, Colombia.
NEXT THING Ms. Abellán designed her first clothing collection, Pain, for the Warsaw-based label Misbhv. The silk kimonos, shorts and halter tops that make up the collection were inspired by a journey through Japan. She plans to continue designing more.
STYLE MEDLEY Mixing trends and decades is a defining characteristic of Ms. Abellán’s look. “I might be wearing something from the ‘90s, the ’70s,” she said. “It depends on my feelings.” Ms. Abellán makes a point of trying to visit vintage stores in every city she travels to, and names a children’s leather jacket and classic Versace shades as some of her favorite finds.