1. The Senate voted to confirm Senator Jeff Sessions as attorney general.
Mr. Sessions brings a sharply conservative bent to the Justice Department and its 113,000 employees. A former prosecutor, he promises a focus aligned with President Trump on tough enforcement of immigration, drugs and gun laws.
The Republicans’ silencing of Senator Elizabeth Warren for airing Coretta Scott King’s criticism of Mr. Sessions from decades ago appeared to only amplify her message.
2. Mr. Trump lashed out at a three-judge federal appeals panel that appeared skeptical of his order banning travel from seven predominantly Muslim countries. He called the hearing “disgraceful” and hinted that the judges were politically motivated.
The president also attacked Nordstrom, one of several retailers that have pulled away from his daughter Ivanka.
The Daily: In today’s podcast, we listen in on the travel ban litigation and revisit the words of the novelist and essayist James Baldwin. Listen here if you’re on a computer, here if you have an iOS device or here for an Android device.
3. It’s love, interrupted. For couples trying to navigate America’s immigration system, the president’s executive order has thrown relationships into turmoil.
Jehan Mouhsen, above, is pregnant and waiting in New York for her husband, a Syrian doctor who played a crucial role vaccinating more than a million children in his country as polio was on the rise. He’s stuck in Turkey.
The White House is finishing an executive order for the Pentagon to bring future Islamic State detainees to Guantánamo Bay prison, according to administration officials and a draft order obtained by The Times.
And Yemen has withdrawn permission for U.S. Special Operations ground missions in its country amid outrage over civilian casualties in a commando raid, the first authorized by Mr. Trump.
5. We visited five cities along the U.S.-Mexico border, where many are anxious about what a new wall might mean.
An 18-year-old in Nogales, Mexico, suggested that Mr. Trump could take an even larger role in the construction.
Above, the existing wall in Tijuana.
6. A Russian judge convicted the opposition politician Aleksei Navalny, above left, on fraud charges, increasing the likelihood of President Vladimir Putin’s election to a fourth term next year.
7. In East Africa, there are celebrations for a new railway line from Djibouti to Ethiopia that showcases China’s effort to extend its influence on the continent with aid and expertise.
Not everyone is comfortable with China’s vision for Africa, but there’s a lot to embrace. In tiny Djibouti, that means $14 billion worth of projects, including three ports, two airports, a water pipeline and jobs for thousands of local workers.
That’s from a set of newly discovered letters from Jacqueline Kennedy, explaining to a British suitor, standing next to Mrs. Kennedy in the photo above, why she had broken his heart and married Aristotle Onassis.
The letters, to be auctioned next month in London, point to the depth of feeling behind the public mask of one of the most celebrated women of her time.
9. It’s New York Fashion Week, and there’s one big change from years past: less star power.
Celebrities used to be able to command thousands of dollars — some up to $1 million — to show up in a front-row seat. But with money tight, designers are cutting back. And some argue that the scene has played out, and the famous and glamorous are simply no longer interested.
10. Finally, a question.
What do you do with a decaying 130-year-old work of art, mythmaking and Civil War history that is longer than a football field, more than 40 feet tall and urgently in need of a new home?
Atlanta’s answer: Save it.
Thanks to $35 million raised by philanthropists, “The Battle of Atlanta,” one of the largest oil paintings in the world, will be painstakingly restored.