Fashion|Move Over, Wikipedia. Dictionaries Are Hot Again.
Move Over, Wikipedia. Dictionaries Are Hot Again.
In the hours after Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, was silenced by her Republican colleagues for “impugning” a fellow senator by reading aloud a letter Coretta Scott King had written that was critical of Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama (later confirmed as attorney general), thousands of Americans did what they always do: They tapped away at their phones.
But they weren’t checking text messages or liking a photo on Facebook. They were thumbing through online dictionaries, looking for a definition of “impugn.” On Wednesday morning, the dictionary publisher Merriam-Webster posted on its website that searches on the word had surged.
“It’s been at the top for almost 12 hours now,” said Peter Sokolowski, the company’s editor at large.
A tweet posted to the dictionary’s feed linking to this definition quickly racked up several hundred retweets.
At a time when many are questioning the definition of common words they thought they understood, after years of the English language being degraded by text messages and hashtags, dictionaries have made a surprising comeback in the United States.
On dictionary apps and websites, “lookups” (which, according to Merriam-Webster, is one word) of words or phrases related to news events have precipitously increased. Bibliophiles are becoming social media stars. Sales of print dictionaries remain brisk and are a profit center for some publishers.
The most commonly used dictionaries, whether in print or digital, reflect what is known as “descriptive lexicography,” meaning that editors study the way people use words and determine their meaning based on that evidence.
Social media has been revolutionary in changing the access lexicographers have to the evolution of how words are used. Yet the process of evaluating evidence and writing definitions in a clear and unbiased manner remains the objective, said Katherine Connor Martin, head of American dictionaries at Oxford University Press.
But some dictionary companies are embracing the personality-driven culture of the digital age to make lexicography more accessible and perhaps drive advertising revenue through clicks. Merriam-Webster and Dictionary.com use Twitter and other networks to share “word of the day” features, real-time data about words that are suddenly being searched by large numbers of people and cheeky observations on public figures and their use of language.
On Feb. 6, the company shared a tweet from the president: “Any negative polls are fake news, just like the CNN, ABC, NBC polls in the election. Sorry, people want border security and extreme vetting.” The dictionary’s tweet overlaid his words with a definition for paralogize (“to draw conclusions that do not follow logically from a given set of assumptions”), which was Dictionary.com’s word of the day.
The intent is not to be political or partisan, said Lauren Sliter, who runs the marketing department at Dictionary.com and writes the Twitter feed. Juxtaposing current events with unusual words the site is introducing helps demonstrate the relevance and usefulness of an expanded vocabulary, Ms. Sliter said.
Merriam-Webster has also been identified as “throwing shade” at politicians, for its posts on surges in lookups for certain words and its word-of-the-day entries. For instance, in late January, as the nation was ensnarled in debates about Mr. Trump’s desire to build a wall at the Mexican border, “barbican” — which means “an outer defensive work; especially: a tower at a gate or bridge” — was the word of the day.
On Tuesday, Ms. Naturale helped roll out 1,000 words Merriam-Webster is adding to its online dictionary (the words will make it into the print version eventually). They span the scientific (prosopagnosia) to the culinary (chef’s knife) to the political (Flotus) to the contemporary (photobomb, binge-watch).
To introduce “face palm,” she wrote: “Most common spelling as a verb: face-palm. Most common spelling as a noun: facepalm.” The tweet included an animated GIF demonstrating a man face-palming as part of a new collaboration between Merriam-Webster and Giphy Studios.
