1. President Trump has called for a “historic increase” in U.S. military spending as he prepares to deliver a high-stakes address to a joint session of Congress on Tuesday.
Mr. Trump wants an additional $54 billion in spending that already outpaces the rest of the world by a long measure. “We have to start winning wars again,” he said.
Congress will have the last word on his proposed budget, which is expected to include tens of billions of dollars in cuts from the Environmental Protection Agency and the State Department, while leaving Social Security and Medicare alone.
Mr. Trump’s plan puts him on a collision course with the House speaker, Paul Ryan, over control of the Republican Party’s ideology.
2. “Nobody knew that health care could be so complicated,” Mr. Trump told a group of the nation’s largest health insurers and governors, describing his struggle to replace Obamacare.
Governors of both parties demanded that the change not deprive anyone of coverage.
Across the country, Mr. Trump’s supporters rallied, aiming to defend a president they say has been treated unfairly by the press and his critics and to counterbalance anti-Trump protests. More rallies are planned for Saturday.
3. We can explain the Oscar blunder of the ages. The presenters, Faye Dunaway and Warren Beatty, were given the wrong envelope.
That left the “La La Land” producer who had just given his acceptance speech to announce that the real winner was “Moonlight.” Here’s what it was like onstage. The consternation sapped some of the glory of the moment from “Moonlight” and its all-black cast.
Protests against Mr. Trump were evident in speeches and blue ribbons. Here’s the full list of winners, our TV critic’s review, and photographs from the red carpet.
4. Tougher enforcement of immigration rules was popular in one Southern Illinois town — until one of its most beloved residents, Juan Carlos Hernandez Pacheco, was arrested.
The Daily audio news report talks to the reporter who covered the story and some of the townspeople who saw Mr. Trump’s campaign rhetoric became a reality. Listen from a computer, on an iOS device or on an Android device.
5. A letter from Warren Buffett ricocheting around Wall Street offers his most damning assessment yet of the hedge fund industry. The billionaire investor concluded that at least $100 billion had been lost to the sky-high fees charged by the funds and other money managers.
“I believe my calculation of the aggregate shortfall is conservative,” Mr. Buffett wrote in his annual letter, released on Saturday to the shareholders of his conglomerate, Berkshire Hathaway.
6. Geert Wilders, the far-right Dutch icon, lives under police protection because of death threats. So he built his swelling movement by using the internet and social media to talk to voters without the filter of journalists.
How Mr. Wilders and his party fare in elections on March 15 could indicate the strength of the far-right movement elsewhere in Europe.
The rate at which these new strains have emerged in recent years terrifies public health experts — and many consider them just as dangerous as viruses like Zika or Ebola.
8. Could the reaction to Russian doping cost Los Angeles the 2024 Summer Games?
Some sports experts see the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency’s campaign for stronger sanctions against Russia and a global regulatory overhaul as potentially alienating some officials with the International Olympic Committee.
“Fighting with an organization responsible for giving future Olympic Games — it’s a big mistake,” said a top Russian sports official and honorary I.O.C. member.
9. With its petite size and dark smudges around its eyes, the snub-nosed vaquita could be in a cartoon. But it’s on the endangered list.
In fact, it’s on the brink of extinction, with as few as 30 remaining in the Gulf of California that conservationists are scrambling to save.
The problem? The tiny porpoise is trapped and drowned in curtains of illegal gillnets used to catch a fish that shares the same waters: the totoaba, highly prized by the Chinese, who believe it has medicinal value.
10. Finally, the Harvard Law Review elected its first black female president in 130 years. ImeIme Umana, 24, the daughter of Nigerian immigrants, follows in the footsteps of President Barack Obama, the journal’s first black male leader, and Susan Estrich, the first female editor.
“It still feels like magic that I’m here,” she added.
