LONDON — State visits to Britain are supposed to be about ceremony — banquets at Buckingham Palace, rides in horse-drawn coaches and small talk with Queen Elizabeth II — rather than politics.
But even before a date has been set, President Trump’s trip to London has provoked a fierce political dispute, with an online petition urging the British government not to allow an official state visit, and outspoken suggestions that Mr. Trump does not deserve to join Charles de Gaulle, Nelson Mandela and Barack Obama as dignitaries who have been accorded the honor of addressing Parliament.
The argument came in reaction to comments made on Monday by the speaker of the House of Commons, John Bercow, who said he opposed the possibility that Mr. Trump might be asked to address Parliament, citing “our opposition to racism and to sexism.” Prime Minister Theresa May extended the invitation to Mr. Trump, on the queen’s behalf, during a visit to Washington last month.
Some Conservative Party lawmakers have accused Mr. Bercow of hypocrisy because he has welcomed controversial leaders like the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, who addressed Parliament in 2015. Others have suggested that Mr. Bercow’s outspoken intervention overstepped the tradition of political neutrality associated with the role of the speaker.
John Bercow, the speaker of the House of Commons, said Monday that he would oppose having President Trump address Parliament.
Mr. Bercow has long been a controversial figure in Parliament, and his political journey from the right wing of the Conservative Party to a more liberal brand of politics has made him enemies along the way.
But the dispute underscores the divisions in Britain over the decision to invite Mr. Trump, which has prompted more than 1.8 million Britons to sign a petition calling on the government to cancel the state visit.
On Tuesday, the backlash against Mr. Bercow was led by Sajid Javid, the communities secretary, who, while avoiding direct criticism of Mr. Bercow, told the BBC that ministers did not agree with the speaker’s view.
“The government is very clear: President Trump is the leader of our most important ally, he’s elected fairly and squarely, and it’s manifestly in our national interests that we reach out to him,” Mr. Javid said.
Some female Labour deputies called for a boycott of any Trump speech. And so far there has been no attempt in Parliament to bring up for discussion a no-confidence motion in Mr. Bercow. That suggests that lawmakers may be reluctant to upset the speaker, who controls debates, or have calculated that he would survive any vote to unseat him.
In fact, Mr. Bercow’s intervention is not conclusive, as the lord speaker, the speaker of the House of Lords and the lord great chamberlain, who represents Queen Elizabeth, would also have to agree to any government request to invite a head of state to speak in Parliament. On Tuesday, the lord speaker, Norman Fowler, said that he would keep an “open mind” on whether to invite Mr. Trump and that Mr. Bercow had apologized for a lack of consultation before his statement on Monday.
But the unease has been compounded by the uncustomary speed of the invitation to Mr. Trump, so soon after he was inaugurated. Mrs. May’s critics say she rushed into the move to ingratiate herself with Mr. Trump because she is desperate to conclude a quick trade deal with the United States to help compensate for Britain’s looming departure from the European Union.
On Tuesday, there was another reminder of the lingering divisions over withdrawal from the European Union, this one from Scotland, where a majority in last year’s referendum voted to remain in the bloc.
The Scottish Parliament voted Tuesday to oppose Mrs. May’s plans to begin negotiations on withdrawal by the end of March.