BOGOTÁ, Colombia — A homemade bomb exploded near a bullring in Bogotá on Sunday, injuring two dozen police officers and two civilians, the Colombian authorities said.
The explosive device, which shattered windows in nearby apartment buildings, appeared to have been left in a sewer outside a new youth hostel popular with foreign backpackers. It was detonated just a few hours before a scheduled bullfight, as police officers in riot gear were gathering ahead of a demonstration by animal rights activists.
The authorities did not give a motive for the attack and said they had no evidence that it had anything to do with the resumption of bullfighting at the ring. Some local news organizations speculated that the bomb might have been placed by members of the National Liberation Army, the country’s second-largest rebel movement, which has carried out small attacks on police targets in recent weeks.
Mayor Enrique Peñalosa initially said on Twitter that a police officer had been killed. But as the blast scene was brought under control, he deleted the post. An official police statement said that 26 people had suffered shrapnel and blast injuries, all but two of them officers. All of the wounded were taken to three nearby hospitals. Six were in critical condition with eye injuries, officials said.
Juan David Gonzalez, an owner of the hostel, El Pit, said that his two dozen guests were shaken by the blast, but that none were injured.
A video of the explosion that was broadcast on local television shows a cloud of debris knocking down a phone cabling box and quickly engulfing a busy street corner as cars and pedestrians pass.
Last month, the police fired tear gas and arrested dozens of young demonstrators as mobs attacked spectators attending the first bullfight in the city in four years. But bullfights have gone off without a hitch since then, and Sunday’s spectacle at Bogotá’s 1930s-era brick bullring was set to be the last of the two-month season.
Bogotá’s previous leftist mayor outlawed bullfighting in 2012. But the Constitutional Court later overturned the ban, ruling that bullfighting was part of Colombia’s cultural heritage and could not be blocked.
Despite the tense environment in recent weeks, Mr. Peñalosa all but ruled out that the bullfight protesters were to blame.
“It’s not part of our hypothesis,” he said after an emergency meeting with his top security aides.