The confrontation over President Trump’s ban on refugees and visitors from several predominantly Muslim countries reached the courts at the weekend, foreshadowing the years of legal battles that could lie ahead for the administration.
The ban was blocked at a Federal District Court in Seattle and an appeals court in California refused to reinstate it. The government was instead ordered to file a brief defending Mr. Trump’s order.
That is not the only immigration issue that is in the headlines.
Debate over the use of H-1B visas has also been simmering as employers prepare for Mr. Trump to sign an executive order to overhaul the program.
H-1B visas are intended to bring in foreign professionals with college degrees and specialized skills to fill jobs when qualified Americans cannot be found. There could be as many as a million H-1B visa holders residing in the United States, accounting for up to 13 percent of jobs in the technology sector alone.
Critics say that American companies are gaming the system to snap up visas so that they can replace American workers with cheaper, temporary staff members. But proponents of the H-1B say it is an important way to attract top talent to the country.
The status of the immigrants protected by the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program is also a source of concern.
Many of these people are worried that they will lose the protections that allowed hundreds of thousands of people taken to the United States as children to obtain jobs, pursue college degrees and live openly in the country where they were raised.
They already face difficulties in completing their education. One of these people, Mitzie Perez, is trying to challenge policies that make it difficult for undocumented students to finance higher education with a lawsuit seeking class-action status.
At the same time, the unwinding of government regulations put in place during the Obama administration continues apace.
Ajit Pai, the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, stopped nine companies from providing high-speed interest service at a discount to low-income individuals. He also withdrew an effort to keep prison phone rates down and scrapped a proposal to break open the cable box market, as part of a flurry of actions last week, many of which were not publicly announced.
Consumer advocacy groups and telecoms analysts were stunned. The message was: the F.C.C., an independent agency, will mirror the Trump administration’s rollback of government regulations.
The proportion of women and minorities on the board seats of Fortune 500 companies has increased (a little), but most of the positions are still held by white men, according to the Alliance for Board Diversity and Deloitte.
Why aren’t more women and minorities on these boards?
Companies still turn to people with chief executive experience and these tend to be men. There is also little turnover in board seats, so change is unlikely to come quickly.
One possible bright spot: many board members are in their 70s and likely to step down in the coming years, opening up seats to more diverse members.
• The International Monetary Fund will hold a board meeting to discuss whether it will participate in Greece’s current bailout program. It must reach an agreement with Greece’s European creditors over debt calculations and austerity conditions by Feb. 20, when European finance ministers meet in Brussels to review the program.
• Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, will speak to members of the European Parliament. He is expected to face questions about what the Trump presidency means for the eurozone and whether rising inflation rates will prompt the central bank to begin withdrawing its economic stimulus measures.