A memorial on Officer Eric Mumaw’s car on Friday in Nashville.Credit...Mark Zaleski/Associated Press..
A woman whose apparent suicide attempt led to the death of a Nashville police officer last week was arrested on Monday — the same day that a memorial service was held for the officer.
The woman, Juli Glisson, 40, was released from a hospital and arrested and charged with aggravated vehicular homicide and probation violation, according to the Metropolitan Nashville Police Department. On Thursday, she was operating a car that dragged Officer Eric Mumaw to his death in a suburban Nashville river, according to an arrest warrant affidavit.
“Officer Mumaw gave it everything he had right up until that final moment when he did what he had always done: He served and protected us,” Mayor Megan Barry of Nashville said at the memorial service. Officer Mumaw was posthumously awarded the Medal of Valor, the department’s highest honor.
He and two other officers had been called early Thursday morning to the Cumberland River, where they found an intoxicated Ms. Glisson in a vehicle on a boat ramp near the water’s edge, according to the affidavit. They had been alerted to the situation by a family member who noted that Ms. Glisson had been suicidal in the past, according to the police.
The car was running and in park when another officer, Trent Craig, began talking to Ms. Glisson. She asked him what would happen if she drove into the river, and he said that the responding officers would have to try to save her life, according to his account in the affidavit.
At some point, Ms. Glisson shifted the car’s gears. After failing to stop her, Officer Craig backed away. Officer Mumaw, however, had been trying to open the driver’s door and was not able to move away in time. He slipped on the slick ramp, and the vehicle pulled him into the river, where he died, the police said.
Ms. Glisson admitted to having had seven or eight beers before speaking with the officers and had a blood alcohol level of 0.21 percent, according to the affidavit, more than two and a half times the legal limit. Bond was set at $150,000.