MESA, Ariz. — Long before he managed the Chicago Cubs to a World Series catharsis last fall, Joe Maddon was a scout here in Arizona. His mentor was an old pitcher named Gene Thompson. Maddon loved him.
“Geno would walk into your house to sign you after the draft, and you’d go through this wonderful process: Sit down with Mom and Dad, maybe aunts and uncles, other people are there, cakes, a couple of beers, everybody’s happy,” Maddon said on Wednesday, after the first spring workout for his pitchers and catchers.
The topic, in that moment, was actually Miguel Montero, the veteran catcher who lost his job last year to a rookie, Willson Contreras. But it’s an apt metaphor for the one-word message Maddon wants to sear into the minds of his returning champions: uncomfortable.
Last season, to be sure, was a wonderful process for the Cubs, who hoisted more than a couple of beers after their thrilling victory over the Cleveland Indians in Game 7 of the World Series. For the first time in 108 years, everybody is happy in Wrigleyville and beyond.
Just wait till the games start. At their worst, the Cubs are an attraction, and no one alive has seen them this good. Their goal now is to do what the 1908 team did: Repeat as champions. The Cubs, who also won in 1907, were the first team to win consecutive World Series. The Yankees did it most recently, from 1998 through 2000.
With three tiers of playoff series and a system that encourages parity, the current gap without a repeat champion is the longest in major league history.
Indeed, while the title was hardly a sure thing — they are the Cubs, after all — it was not a surprise, either. The Cubs had reached the N.L. Championship Series the year before, had a deep and nearly flawless roster, and their 103-58 record was easily the best in the majors. They embraced the target, as Maddon had said, and dutifully knocked it down.
Now, Bryant said, the season will be a failure unless the Cubs return to the World Series. That roughly echoes George Steinbrenner’s edict during the Yankees’ dynasty, as voiced in the clubhouse by Derek Jeter. The looming presence of a domineering boss kept the Yankees on edge, but Maddon hopes a softer touch can create a similar feeling here.
Maddon’s mind games get a lot of attention, but makeup of the roster naturally matters most. Before the Yankees repeated in 1999, they traded for a hungry superstar, Roger Clemens, who helped maintain their intensity. No such presence has joined the Cubs since their victory parade, but there are a few changes.
They traded for a seasoned closer, Wade Davis, to replace Aroldis Chapman. They will give Jason Hammel’s old rotation spot to Mike Montgomery or another left-hander, the veteran Brett Anderson. After letting Dexter Fowler leave for St. Louis, they will turn over center field to the 22-year-old Albert Almora and Jon Jay, a veteran newcomer.
That alignment leaves a bit of a logjam, but if that is the Cubs’ biggest problem, they should be fine. Ben Zobrist can play left, right or second, where Javier Baez plays; Kyle Schwarber will probably stay in left, but he may also catch; Jason Heyward plays center or right; and Bryant shifts among third, left and right.
Epstein will soon have a third ring, to go with the two he won as the architect of the Boston Red Sox teams that captured the World Series in 2004 and 2007. Those stamped a once-cursed franchise as a force in the new century, just as the Cubs have become. Maddon’s slogan aside, it is a lot more comfortable to work for the Cubs without the burden of their ancestors’ failure.
