When The New York Times decided to expand in Australia, a rift with the United States seemed about as likely as a 25-point Super Bowl comeback. Enter Donald Trump.
You’ve probably already read about his phone call with Prime Minister Turnbull: the brevity of the exchange; President Trump’s rejection of a deal that would bring up to 1,250 refugees to the U.S. from Australia’s detention centers in Manus and Nauru.
If you want to see who those refugees really are, watch this Times video, or just look at the photo above of Behrouz Boochani, a dissident from Iran.
If you want more context, read Jane Perlez, writing from Beijing about how that combative call — along with Mr. Trump’s rejection of the Trans-Pacific Partnership — threatens to push Australia closer to China. You may also enjoy this GIF capturing the call’s essence, or the message below, from a protest in Melbourne on Feb. 3.
What I found especially interesting was the response beyond the White House.
Senator John McCain, a Republican former prisoner-of-war in Vietnam, stepped in immediately, calling Australia’s ambassador to the United States, Joe Hockey, to assure him of an “unwavering support for the U.S.-Australia alliance.” Secretary of State Rex Tillerson followed up this week with another call.
Digging deeper, The Upshot, a part of The Times that uses data to drive analysis, looked at how Americans view the world, and found that for Republicans in particular, Australia was Public Ally #1.
On social media too, Americans and Australians have told me that the bonds of culture, business and travel will not be broken by politics, and if my own inbox is any kind of guide, goodwill continues to shape the U.S.-AU relationship.
Or at least it’s shaping this project. On Twitter in my introductory newsletter two weeks ago, I asked what to read to better understand Australia, and dozens of you responded. Several books came up again and again, led by “The Fatal Shore,” by Robert Hughes (below).
Several readers suggested Helen Garner, to which I say, yes: I found her most recent collection, “Everywhere I Look,” to be a model of restrained prose and candid humor.
Catherine O’Neil, another reader who emailed us, suggested I zero in on an actor. “Watch any movie starring David Gulpilil — the man is a genius,” she said.
She also wrote that I should get beyond the coastal cities of Australia, a common refrain with great merit, and also past the English speakers.
Below are a few stories from The Times about Australia and the world that I found interesting over the past week or so, followed by a new feature from our friends at Watching, The Times’s guide for all things television.
We hope you’ll keep reading and tell us what you think at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| P.S. If you’ve applied for a job or pitched a project, bear with us as we go through the proposals and applications. We’ll be responding over the next few weeks.
This week’s New York Times Magazine includes a fascinating feature detailing the experience of a Chinese teenager (Korbin Yang, in the photo above) who moved to Oxford, Mich., for his final two years of secondary school. He hoped to find an American girlfriend; instead it rekindled his love for China.
We’ve got people in New York who pay close attention to what parts of our report Australians read more than others and guess what, folks: morbid nature photos are a big hit Down Under. Take a look at our Science story rounding up the world of #BestCarcass ... if you haven’t seen it already.
As immigration continues to divide the United States, Australia and many other countries, it may be worth looking at Farhad Manjoo’s latest column arguing that the success of Silicon Valley is only possible because of its culture of openness to the world. The roster of executives and founders born abroad extend from Google to Instagram.
Welcome to a new feature for Australians from Watching, The New York Times’s TV and movie recommendation site: a list of new movies and TV shows added to the Netflix Australia library.
At the beginning of every month, Netflix lets us know which titles are being released for customers in Australia, and we’ll be sharing the titles we think are most interesting. Everything mentioned on this page was available to stream starting on Feb. 1, unless otherwise indicated. I’ll stick with “Little Lunch” for now, but other suggestions are welcome.