When Omar Abdel Rahman died last Saturday while serving a life sentence for a 1995 conviction in a plot to blow up New York City landmarks, it came as little surprise that the nearly universal view of him as a dangerous terrorist would not be shared by his former lawyer Lynne F. Stewart.
What was something of a surprise was that Ms. Stewart, who then called Mr. Abdel Rahman “just the latest in a long line of American heroes who were convicted wrongfully,” was around to do so.
Three years after she was granted a “compassionate release” from federal prison in her own terrorism case after doctors had said that Ms. Stewart, ill with cancer, would not survive beyond 18 months, she has endured, remaining unmellowed, especially about Mr. Abdel Rahman.
Ms. Stewart sought an early release from prison while serving a 10-year sentence for smuggling messages from the imprisoned Mr. Abdel Rahman, known as the blind sheikh, to his followers in Egypt.
She had been found to have breast cancer, and in 2012, doctors at the Federal Medical Center, Carswell, in Fort Worth, said that the cancer had spread to her lungs, lymph system and bones, according to court papers filed by her lawyer.
The judge, John G. Koeltl of Federal District Court in Manhattan, ultimately granted Ms. Stewart a compassionate release after a request by the government, which said that she qualified for such release because she had a terminal, incurable illness with a life expectancy of less than 18 months, and because of the relatively limited risk, if she were released, of recidivism and danger to the community.
Ms. Stewart was interviewed on Thursday in her living room in Brooklyn, where she was joined by her husband, Ralph Poynter, and later that day on the phone, one day after she had returned home from her latest treatment at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. Doctors had told her that she had suffered a “couple of strokes,” she said.
“Paradise,” Mr. Poynter interjected.
“Paradise,” Ms. Stewart corrected herself. She said that she was nontheistic.
Ms. Stewart, who has been disbarred, had represented other notorious clients but her career was inextricably linked to Mr. Abdel Rahman.
Mr. Abdel Rahman was convicted in 1995 of plotting what prosecutors said was a campaign of urban terror in the United States. They said it included the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center, which killed six people, and was to have included targets like the United Nations and the Lincoln and Holland Tunnels. Prosecutors said Mr. Abdel Rahman’s exhortations to his followers amounted to directing the conspiracy.
Mr. Abdel Rahman died at the Butner Federal Correctional Complex in North Carolina at 78. A prison spokesman said the cause was complications of diabetes and coronary artery disease.
An exhibit in the federal courthouse at 40 Foley Square commemorating the 125th anniversary of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit includes a display of major terrorism appeals that were heard there. Ms. Stewart’s case — and her photograph — are prominently displayed, with cases like those of Mr. Abdel Rahman; Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, who carried out the 1993 World Trade Center bombing; and four Qaeda operatives who conspired in the 1998 bombings of two American embassies in East Africa.
