Icelandic mysteries, with their stark landscapes and frontier atmosphere, have a natural kinship with the American western. “Trapped,” a 10-episode series beginning Sunday on Viceland, takes the resemblance further: Its hero, a lumbering, bearlike, small-town police chief named Andri (Olafur Darri Olafsson), is a classic western sheriff.
Comprising equal parts nobility, incorruptibility and cranky gloom, he’s the center holding together this reasonably absorbing slab of Nordic noir, which was created by the film director Baltasar Kormakur (“Everest,” “2 Guns”).
And Viceland gets extra points for topicality: In a country where fictional murders outnumber real ones, “Trapped” has been getting attention for its parallels to the current case of a missing woman that has become a national obsession.
The show’s action begins when a fishing boat hauls in a limbless, headless corpse just as a ferry from Denmark is pulling into a remote town in eastern Iceland — the middle of nowhere in the middle of nowhere. Multiple complications are introduced: The body may be connected to a human trafficking ring, to a plan to sell the port to Chinese interests or to a fire that gutted the local fish factory (and killed Andri’s sister-in-law) eight years earlier.
The title “Trapped” is in part a reference to life in a provincial backwater, and the story takes place in the shadow of Iceland’s financial meltdown nearly a decade ago, which is an evergreen source of misery and greed for mystery stories.
“Trapped” also refers to the plot gimmick that sets the tone for the series’s early episodes: The corpse is discovered just as a storm blows in, cutting off all access to the town and leaving its three-person police force alone to cope with a growing number of dead bodies.
He’s helped immeasurably by Ilmur Kristjansdottir as Hinrika, one of Andri’s cops, who shares his devotion to the work but is about 50 percent more emotional and demonstrative. As the season progresses Ms. Kristjansdottir, like a lovable deputy in a western, completely steals our sympathies.
The story has its slow spots and melodramatic excesses — did there really need to be an avalanche? — but Mr. Kormakur keeps the mystery legible and never lets the tension sag too far. And while he’s no John Ford, he and his cinematographers make good use of the setting — the neat houses stepping up the sides of the fjord, the gigantic ferry looming over the town, the cars buried in drifts of snow (an essential plot point that New York City dwellers will enjoy). Whatever your winter is like, Andri’s is probably worse.