327 pp. Flatiron Books. $25.99.
 Laurie Frankel has a son who, in first grade, decided he was a girl. (She recently wrote a Modern Love column for The Times about it.) Her new novel, “This Is How It Always Is,” centers on a young boy who decides he is a girl. The fictional family lives in Seattle, just like the author’s real family, and they come more or less from the same social class. You can almost see Frankel flipping through the family albums, looking for inspiration.
The result is a novel that feels more like a fictionalized account, in ways that are both deeply satisfying and sometimes limiting. Frankel unfolds the story more or less in chronological order: A couple (Penn and Rosie) date, fall in love, have children (five!), and then the last one (Claude) disrupts the expected order by declaring he is a girl (now Poppy). The parents find themselves on new and scary terrain, trying to balance Poppy’s safety and happiness in a world where she might be bullied with her need to be herself.
This is an intimate family story, and these day-to-day parenting dilemmas are where Frankel shines. “Please God, Rosie prayed, let him be looking at porn.” In fact, Penn is Googling vaginoplasties. The book is full of such unexpected encounters you feel Frankel must have lived through, or heard about: The inquisitive 3-year-old who wonders: “When I grow up and become a girl, will I start over?” The kindergartners who are totally unfazed when Poppy changes her name and starts wearing dresses. The resentful older brother who makes a homophobic school project. The looming apocalypse that is puberty.
These moments startle, and yet the book feels a little too close to home, a little too, well, safe. Frankel places Poppy in a thoroughly empathetic and loving family, the kind that picks up and moves to Seattle the minute they encounter a whiff of homophobia in their town. Mom and Dad understand, the principal understands, even Grandma is on board; and waiting in the wings is a wise guru of a therapist. What Poppy is living through is extraordinary, unimaginable, and yet one never feels she will be anything but O.K.
The greatest risk Frankel takes with Poppy is having her family keep her real identity a secret. When they move to Seattle, they decide not to tell any of her friends she was born a boy. This provides the book’s main tension, as Frankel plants, mystery-style, a handful of possible culprits who will unravel the ever elaborate family deception. The last third of the book is more satisfying for being unpredictable, and dangling the possibility that Poppy is going through something as radical and disruptive, even as dangerous, as it seems.
By the end, Poppy has to confront what she’s been able to avoid. She and the whole family have to embrace her whole identity, and not just the limited one they invented for the world. Frankel doesn’t take us all the way through puberty, but she leaves us understanding that Poppy has a long way to go before she settles. This is when I realized that the title of the book is not a political statement but an ironic one, since nothing is how it always is.