But in a case that has been filled with mysteries and odd plot twists, North Korea still would not acknowledge that the man killed was indeed Kim Jong-nam. And it gave no indication that it would agree to Malaysia’s demands to question a senior staff member at the North Korean Embassy in Kuala Lumpur in the investigation into Mr. Kim’s death.
Meanwhile, relatives and acquaintances of the two women Malaysia has accused of carrying out the killing — by applying poison to Mr. Kim’s face as North Korean agents looked on — insisted that they must have been duped into doing so, though the Malaysian authorities say otherwise.
Mr. Thanh, a 63-year-old veteran who was wounded in 1972 during the war with the United States, said he had seen little of his daughter in recent years. He said she left the family’s home, in a small farming village south of Hanoi, at 17 to attend community college, where she studied to be a pharmacist.
She later left Vietnam to work in Malaysia without telling her family, Mr. Thanh said. He said she rarely visited. When she returned home in January for the Tet holiday, he said, she had little money for the customary gifts and stayed only a few days.
On Thursday in Nghia Binh, Ms. Huong’s hometown, her brother, Doan Van Binh, said that she posted on Facebook under the alias Ruby Ruby. Her Facebook photographs and the attached location information appear to show that she has visited Malaysia twice since January, and her Facebook friends include several people who write in Korean.
North Korea has called for the release of Ms. Huong, an Indonesian woman and a North Korean man who are being held by Malaysia in connection with the death of Mr. Kim.
The statement on Thursday from the Jurists Committee was cited by the state-run Korean Central News Agency, in the first comment on the killing from the North’s official news media. The statement accused the Malaysian authorities of pursuing a case “full of loopholes and contradictions” that proved that its investigators “intended to frame us.” It said Malaysia had done so under South Korean influence.
According to the statement, the Malaysian Foreign Ministry and the local hospital first told the North Korean Embassy in Kuala Lumpur that Mr. Kim had died of “heart stroke,” asking North Korea to take the body and cremate it.
But Malaysian officials’ attitude began changing after the South Korean news media, citing anonymous sources, reported that Mr. Kim had been poisoned, according to the North Korean statement.
“The Malaysian secret police got involved in the case and recklessly made it an established fact” that the death had been a poisoning, according to the North Korean statement, which did not refer to Mr. Kim by name.
The statement questioned how Ms. Huong and the Indonesian woman accused in the killing, Siti Aisyah, 25, could have survived if, as Malaysian officials said, they used their hands to administer a deadly poison to Mr. Kim.
Ms. Siti grew up in Indonesia in similar circumstances to Ms. Huong’s, in a small farming village called Sindangsari, about four hours east of Jakarta. She went to school through sixth grade, married at 16 and divorced at 20, according to family members and official documents.
Family members and Indonesian officials have said they believe she was tricked into thinking that the attack on Mr. Kim was part of a comedy video, involving spraying liquid on unwitting victims in public. The Malaysian authorities have said that both women were aware that the liquid was toxic.
Rahmat Yusri, the head of the Jakarta neighborhood where Ms. Siti lived while she was married, said she was an unlikely assassin. He recalled that she did not have close friends.
The Malaysian authorities have said that four North Koreans were believed to have directed the attack and that they fled to their homeland after it was carried out. On Wednesday, the Malaysian police said they were seeking to question an official at the North Korean Embassy, Hyon Kwang Song, in the case.
Channel NewsAsia, a Singaporean news agency, reported on Thursday that Mr. Hyon had been recorded on closed circuit cameras at the airport after the killing, seeing off the four North Koreans as they boarded a flight on the journey back to their homeland.