TAMPA, Fla. — By virtually any metric, Andrew Miller was the Cleveland Indians’ best relief pitcher last year. But during the Indians’ run to the brink of a World Series title, Miller was not used in a traditional role as the team’s closer.
Instead, Miller was called upon when Manager Terry Francona determined there was a critical juncture, meaning that if the Indians were clinging to a one-run lead with the bases loaded in the fifth inning, Miller would be summoned because that moment seemed the most likely to determine the game’s outcome.
Three times during the playoffs, Miller entered during the fifth inning. Only once did he enter as late as the eighth — when he notched his only save of the playoffs, in Game 3 of the American League Championship Series against Toronto. He began the playoffs with 15 consecutive scoreless innings.
Miller’s performance, along with the way he was used, provided a clarion call for those who believe that traditional relief pitchers’ roles should be reconsidered.
Another could come Friday morning in a place far removed from the World Series stage — a hotel meeting room in St. Petersburg, Fla., where Miller’s former Yankees teammate, the superb setup reliever Dellin Betances, will have his 2017 salary determined by a three-person arbitration panel.
Betances is seeking $5 million; the Yankees offered $3 million.
Even if he loses in arbitration, Betances will be a winner. Last season, he made $507,500, the lowest salary of any Yankee. With a $3 million annual salary, he would also be the highest-paid noncloser in his first arbitration-eligible season.
But Betances, who turns 29 next month, will make a case that he deserves more.
At 6 feet 8 inches, with a fastball that averages around 97 miles per hour and a knee-buckling curveball, Betances has become a dominating presence for the Yankees. He has made the All-Star team in each of his three years, and his 15.5 strikeouts per nine innings was the highest in baseball last season. He excelled initially as a closer when the Yankees traded Miller and Aroldis Chapman at the nonwaiver trade deadline before slumping badly in the final three weeks of last season.
Betances will revert to the setup role after the Yankees signed Chapman to a five-year, $86 million free-agent contract in December, the most lucrative contract ever awarded to a relief pitcher.
It is exceedingly rare for the Yankees to end up in arbitration. It has happened only one other time since 2000 — when they defeated pitcher Chien-Ming Wang in 2008. The $2 million gap is the largest of any player who will go to arbitration this season, and it is the largest the Yankees have ever carried to the panel.
“The numbers were just too far apart,” Hal Steinbrenner, the Yankees’ owner, said when asked Wednesday why the two sides could not resolve their differences.
The Yankees will be represented by the team president Randy Levine, General Manager Brian Cashman and the assistant general manager Jean Afterman, while Betances will be accompanied by his agent, Jim Murray, and others from his agency, Excel Sports Management.
Each party will be given one hour to make its case, which will be followed by a 30-minute rebuttal and summation, according to terms of the collective bargaining agreement. The player goes first, followed by the team. The panel is expected to deliver a decision within 24 hours.
Betances, who received permission from the team not to report until after the hearing, has been working out on his own. He posted on social media a photo of himself pitching on a high school mound, and he plans to pitch for the Dominican Republic in the World Baseball Classic next month.
The arbitration process is very much tied to precedent and statistics, according to one agent who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he did not want to publicly discuss a case that did not involve his client.
Newer statistics — such as fielding-independent pitching and wins above replacement — are increasingly being used, the agent said. However, because the arbitration panel does not explain its decision, it is hard to know exactly which numbers carry the most weight.
So, in Betances’ case, how much value should be placed on one of baseball’s most dominant relievers, whom the Yankees choose to use in critical situations that do not involve a save — which, for years, has defined a reliever’s worth?
Tyler Clippard, a Yankees reliever who is represented by the same agency as Betances, said there was not a player with comparable production, role and service time as Betances.
He paused for a moment, considering the nuances of the case.
“It will be interesting,” he said.