Alec Baldwin, who has made headlines with his impersonation of President Trump on “Saturday Night Live,” returns to host for a 17th time. And the violinist Joshua Bell plays with the National Symphony Orchestra.
SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE 11:30 p.m. on NBC. Alec Baldwin has been no stranger to this season. He made headlines before the election, when he first appeared — in a wig with a wavy comb-over, orange makeup and a pouty grimace — as Donald J. Trump, then a candidate. Mr. Baldwin’s cameos have since become expected, if highly anticipated, nearly every weekend. Well, now he’s back, and for a full episode as he hosts the show for a record 17th time. Ed Sheeran is the musical guest.
FROM STRAIGHT A’S TO XXX (2017) 8 p.m. on Lifetime. The latest Lifetime original movie inspired by a true story is this tale of Miriam Weeks (also known by her porn alias, Belle Knox), a Duke University freshman who starts acting in pornographic films to cover her tuition costs. But another student outs her to the rest of the school, and she finds herself on the receiving end of death threats and cyberbullying.
48 HOURS 9 p.m. on CBS. In “Murder in Beverly Hills,” Erin Moriarty takes a deep dive into an interview between Robert Durst — the infamous New York real estate heir and subject of the HBO docu-series “The Jinx” — and the prosecutor trying to imprison him in the killing of Susan Berman 17 years ago.
JOSHUA BELL AND THE NATIONAL SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA 8 p.m. on Medici.tv. Live from Kennedy Center, it’s the star violinist Joshua Bell conducting this orchestra in a performance of Beethoven’s Symphony No. 7 — which is famous for its second movement, the captivating Allegretto. Then, the Kansas City Symphony director Michael Stern takes up the baton while Mr. Bell performs the solo part in Édouard Lalo’s “Symphonie Espagnole,” a concerto-like piece inspired by Spanish dance melodies. This music will be accompanied by the Brooklyn-based Dance Heginbotham (led by John Heginbotham, a longtime member of the Mark Morris Dance Group). Available to stream after Saturday.