When federal immigration officials arrested 41 people in the New York region this month, immigrant advocates suggested the action was an indication of the Trump administration’s new priorities in detaining and deporting undocumented immigrants.
On Friday, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or ICE, released a list detailing the offenses of those who were detained. Among the most serious were 12 people with convictions for sex-related crimes, including three cases of rape and six involving offenses against children; nine with convictions for driving under the influence; three with robbery convictions; and two with convictions for distribution or sale of cocaine.
All of the convictions listed qualified as deportable offenses under the Obama administration.
“Citizens of New York City and the surrounding areas are safer every time another criminal is removed from the street,” Thomas R. Decker, director of enforcement and removal operations in ICE’s New York office, said in a statement.
It was unclear how old the convictions were, whether the people — who were identified by age and nationality, but not by name — had served prison sentences or under what circumstances they were in this country.
An ICE official who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the cases were active said that most of them were at local detention centers and that it was unlikely any had been deported yet.
In New York and around the country, there have been numerous accounts of the agency conducting sweeps or setting up checkpoints. Those reports are false, according to ICE officials.
Although some of those arrested came from countries like Guinea, Guyana and Jamaica, most were Hispanic. Nine Mexican nationals were arrested, and the Mexican Consulate in New York said it had been notified of each arrest after it occurred.
Consular officials have urged members the Mexican community not to act out of fear because that could make them vulnerable to fraud, Mr. Izzo said.
A spokeswoman for City Councilman Jimmy Van Bramer, a Queens Democrat, said that on Monday a constituent had reported being defrauded in Woodside. The spokeswoman, Arielle Swernoff, said four people in ICE jackets had approached the person, demanding money and threatening deportation.
The person had handed over $250, Ms. Swernoff said, but did not go to the police out of fear. The Queens district attorney’s office urged anyone with similar experiences to come forward and said they would not be asked about their immigration status.
Donna Lieberman, the New York Civil Liberties Union’s executive director, expressed wariness about the ICE list, citing conflicting signals about enforcement priorities from the administration.
ICE has said the recent operations targeted convicted criminals, as the list released on Friday indicated. But President Trump, in an executive order signed before those actions, widened the scope of the criminal offenses for which undocumented immigrants could be deported.
Immigrants must only be charged, not convicted, of a crime, or merely found to have “committed acts that constitute a chargeable offense,” the order said.
“That leaves vulnerable virtually a huge number of people,” Ms. Lieberman said.
Those arrested in the New York area were among more than 680 people detained nationwide, 75 percent with criminal convictions, according to ICE. Agency data shows that the number was not unprecedented compared with average weekly totals during the Obama administration, which was active in deporting unauthorized immigrants, including some deemed low priority.