Carlos Tavares has shown he can quickly turn around troubled European carmakers. Within three years of his taking charge at the Paris-based PSA Group, the company’s profit margin has tripled. Now Mr. Tavares may be preparing to take on a new challenge by acquiring General Motors’ troubled European unit.
Combining Europe’s third- and sixth-largest makers of passenger cars would be a big step toward ending the gridlock in the Continent’s auto industry. Despite years of downsizing and a rebound in demand for new vehicles, the industry suffers from overcapacity. Peugeot plants operate at around 74 percent of their potential, according to Evercore ISI analysts.
Uniting the Opel and Vauxhall brands with Peugeot and Citroen would lift PSA’s European market share to 16 percent, second only to Volkswagen’s 24 percent. Bigger companies have better bargaining power with suppliers and are better able to pay rising research and development costs.
Renault of France and Nissan of Japan provide a possible road map. The companies, which are both run by Carlos Ghosn as chief executive and have significant cross-shareholdings, reckon their alliance lowered costs by 4.3 billion euros ($4.5 billion) in 2015 — equivalent to about 3.5 percent of combined sales.
If PSA and General Motors Europe achieved similar savings, costs would fall by 1.9 billion euros, based on joint revenue of around 55 billion euros last year, excluding Peugeot’s car-parts maker, Faurecia. Taxed at 25 percent and capitalized, those savings would be worth close to 15 billion euros — similar to Peugeot’s market value.
Placing a value on G.M.’s European business, which has lost money for more than a decade, is tricky. The company could inject its business into PSA in return for a stake, though it sold its holding in the French group a few years ago. Alternatively, PSA could pay cash. Evercore ISI reckons G.M.’s European pension liabilities are so large that it might need to pay PSA to take over the business.
Even if Mr. Tavares can overcome these obstacles, investors recognize that most auto mergers fail to live up to their promise. The French government, which owns 13.7 percent of PSA, may want to protect employment at home. More than half of G.M.’s European workers are in Germany, where wages are high, unions powerful and layoffs costly. As attractive as it seems on paper, a Peugeot-Opel merger faces a winding road to riches.