John Bercow, the speaker of the House of Commons, said Monday that he would oppose having President Trump address Parliament.
LONDON — Invited just days after his inauguration to make a state visit to Britain, President Trump is expected to travel to London this year to meet Queen Elizabeth II amid all the pomp and ceremony the British can muster.
The comments will embarrass both the British and American governments and add to the controversy over a planned state visit that has attracted opposition in Britain, where more than 1.8 million people have signed a petition urging the government to cancel Mr. Trump’s trip.
The British prime minister, Theresa May, has insisted that the invitation to Mr. Trump stands. With Britain planning to leave the European Union, Mrs. May is eager to strike a quick trade deal with the United States, and British officials are hoping that the state visit may smooth those talks.
But Mr. Bercow’s comments, made to lawmakers in Parliament and greeted with cheers from some deputies, are unlikely to help Mrs. May’s trans-Atlantic diplomacy.
“Before the imposition of the migrant ban, I would myself have been strongly opposed to an address by President Trump in Westminster Hall,” said Mr. Bercow, referring to the oldest part of the parliamentary building, in which foreign leaders have sometimes addressed both the elected House of Commons and the unelected House of Lords, the upper chamber.
“But after the imposition of the migrant ban by President Trump, I am even more strongly opposed to an address by President Trump in Westminster Hall,” he added.
Mr. Bercow said that an invitation to address Parliament was not up to him alone, although he added that he would be one of only a handful of people involved in asking a foreign leader to speak, either in Westminster Hall or in the Royal Gallery, another chamber of the Parliament building.
“I feel very strongly that our opposition to racism and to sexism and our support for equality before the law and an independent judiciary are hugely important considerations in the House of Commons,” Mr. Bercow said.
Those include President George W. Bush, who visited in 2003 and did not address Parliament. President Barack Obama did deliver a speech in Westminster Hall in 2011 on his state visit, and President Xi Jinping of China spoke in the Royal Gallery in 2015.
A number of British lawmakers have been threatening to organize a boycott of any speech by Mr. Trump in Parliament.