For the nation’s top executives, a summons to the White House has long been a much-coveted honor.
Now, less than a month into President Trump’s administration, it’s become something to be ducked, at least for some.
A Trump invitation “has become a double-edged sword because the population is so divided,” said Jeffrey Sonnenfeld, a professor at the Yale School of Management who organizes meetings of chief executives there.
Things seemed different as recently as December, when the Blackstone Group’s chief executive, Stephen A. Schwarzman, announced the formation of the President’s Strategic and Policy Forum, whose members would “meet with the president frequently to share their specific experience and knowledge,” as Mr. Schwarzman put it at the time.
Then, executives were clamoring to make the cut, even those who had been cool or in some cases hostile to Mr. Trump’s candidacy. Well over 100 chief executives approached Mr. Schwarzman and the Trump transition team angling to be included.
Only two people declined, citing time pressures: Apple’s chief executive, Tim Cook, and the Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates.
The final list of 16 included such business luminaries as Jack Welch, the former chief executive of General Electric; Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase; Bob Iger of Disney; Mary Barra of General Motors; and Virginia Rometty of IBM.
Soon after, Elon Musk of Tesla Motors, Travis Kalanick of Uber and Indra Nooyi of PepsiCo were added, buttressing the group’s expertise in technology and consumer products.
Then Mr. Trump was inaugurated and in short order unleashed his divisive immigration order, leading to chaos at airports and nationwide protests. Exactly one week later, on relatively short notice, he convened the first meeting of the forum, with live television coverage from the State Dining Room of the White House.
Even though nearly every company represented in the forum issued a statement that to varying degrees distanced it from the immigration order or even denounced it, the images of the meeting risked looking like an endorsement of the Trump administration and its policies.
Images of Mrs. Nooyi, an immigrant born in India (and now a citizen), who sat next to Mr. Schwarzman and within camera range of Mr. Trump, seemed especially incongruous.
And all of this was before the abrupt resignation of Michael T. Flynn as national security adviser and renewed questions about the Trump campaign’s contacts with the Russians.
Mr. Kalanick was the first on the forum to feel the wrath of consumers. Protesters accused Uber of “collaborating” with Mr. Trump and chained themselves to the doors of the company’s headquarters in downtown San Francisco. Soon after, the hashtag #DeleteUber trended on Twitter. Within four days of the immigration order, 200,000 users had deleted the Uber app, and one of the company’s rivals, Lyft, reported that downloads of its own app had more than doubled.
In an effort to quell the protest, Mr. Kalanick resigned from the forum the day before its first meeting. The “implicit assumption that Uber (or I) was somehow endorsing the administration’s agenda has created a perception-reality gap between who people think we are, and who we actually are,” he said in a memo to employees.
Protest flared and a social media boycott campaign took root after the founder of Under Armour, Kevin Plank, joined Mr. Trump’s 28-member Manufacturing Jobs Initiative, announced in January, and then praised the president’s pro-business policies on CNBC.
Some Disney employees organized demonstrations in three cities this week, demanding that Mr. Iger resign from the forum, even though he didn’t attend the first meeting because of a conflict with a long-scheduled company board meeting. The demonstrations drew about 120 protesters, the company said.
At the same time, Out & Equal, an advocacy group for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people, praised Mr. Iger’s membership in the forum in a letter to the company, citing his support for workplace equality and ability to influence the president.
As the Uber experience suggests, the risks of engaging with Mr. Trump are highest for companies with direct exposure to consumers, especially those who can easily switch to a competitor less identified with the Trump brand. General Motors and PepsiCo could face more consumer reaction; the banks and money managers less so; and industrial concerns like General Electric even less.
At the same time, the benefits of being part of the forum and gaining the ear of the president are obvious: Virtually every Fortune 500 corporation has vitally important interests affected by the federal government, from antitrust, labor and trade policies, to tax reform and bank regulation, including changes to the Dodd-Frank Act.
A spokesman for JPMorgan Chase declined to comment.
And refusing Mr. Trump’s invitations risks a presidential Twitter broadside, something that is unprecedented in American political and business history and whose impact is still being assessed. Yahoo Finance last week said it had sifted through more than 34,000 Trump tweets and identified attacks on 62 businesses, including at least two represented in the forum, General Motors and Boeing.
Optics aside, Mr. Sonnenfeld of Yale said the president’s overtures to executives represented a welcome change from the Obama administration, which largely ignored big business and summoned bankers to Washington to browbeat them publicly over the financial crisis. By comparison, Mr. Trump embraced members of his business forum as “the best and the brightest” and said he welcomed their ideas.
Charles Elson, a professor and expert in corporate governance at the University of Delaware, also praised the president for reaching out to business leaders. He said he disagreed with Mr. Kalanick’s decision to resign.
Mr. Schwarzman’s office made a similar point when I inquired this week. “Steve has advised presidents from both parties in the past and feels a duty to help any administration that calls on him if he’s able to do so for the good of the country,” Christine Anderson, a spokeswoman for Mr. Schwarzman, said.
