When I learned about the Underground Railroad as a child, I always wondered about the last steps to freedom. Growing up in Richmond, Va., the former capital of the Confederate States of America, the remnants of slavery and the Civil War were a constant reminder of the past. I imagined slaves traveling through treacherous terrain, with bleary eyes and a lingering sense of trepidation, but with a steely determination to live in a country that would affirm their humanity.
Detroit, whose code name was “Midnight” on the Underground Railroad, was a pivotal location on the network. The Detroit River separates the United States from Canada, where slavery was abolished through the British Imperial Act of 1833. Though slavery was also illegal in Michigan when it was admitted to the Union in 1837, bounty hunters crossing state lines still posed a threat to black residents of Detroit. Fugitive slaves set their sights on what lay across its border: the city of Windsor, Ontario, and its southern neighbor Amherstburg.
As I drove through downtown Detroit and approached the Detroit River, a multitude of road signs directed me to both the Detroit-Windsor Tunnel and the Ambassador Bridge, the city’s two major arteries to Canada. But there was a significant landmark that I needed to visit first.
The Detroit neighborhood of Greektown, with its Romanesque architecture, is home to the Second Baptist Church, which dates to 1836 and is one of the oldest black churches in the Midwest. The church even predates Michigan’s admission to the Union by a year. The first members of the church broke off from the city’s First Baptist Church because of discriminatory practices, and the split gave them an opportunity to aid runaway slaves more discretely.
Today, the church is a historic anchor in an area that has had a significant amount of economic investment; the Greektown Casino is just a few paces down the street, and numerous chain and local restaurants line Monroe Street. The church, however, has retained its storied link to one of the earliest American struggles for equality.
Tours of Second Baptist are available by appointment, and after attending an uplifting service upstairs, I met my guide on the ground floor. Looking at old photographs and timelines, I learned about the church’s first pastor, the Rev. William Monroe, who started the first known school for black children in Detroit in 1839. The Rev. Monroe was also a station master in the Underground Railroad. As I took in this fact, the air became cooler. We were near the back doors and were about to enter the basement.
At the top of the narrow set of stairs was a small plaque that read, “Entrance to Escapees’ Haven.” Looking down the stairway, I thought about the mixed emotions that escapees must have felt. They were less than two miles from Canada, a reason for jubilation, yet a wrong move could cost them their long-awaited freedom.
Walking down the stairway, I entered the “Croghan Street Station,” the code name for this particular stop. The basement space was drafty, not a surprise for Detroit in the winter. On the wall were painted lists of Underground Railroad routes, which included paths like the Old Sauk (Chicago) Road, Grand River Trail, and a route from Chicago to Duluth, Minn., to Mackinaw City, Mich., heading to Canada through Sault Ste. Marie.
The Croghan station gave me a sense of the fragility of American democracy during the 19th century. The basement was actually used during the Underground Railroad, one of the many pockets of resistance to slavery. Even more perilous was the threat caused by the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850, where freed slaves could be kidnapped, denied counsel and returned to the South.
As I walked up the stairs, I turned back and looked at the room. For the roughly 5,000 slaves who sought refuge here, this was one of their last interactions with the United States.
Back in my car, I took the tunnel and arrived in Windsor. After a passport inspection and some questioning, I made it into Canada. My quick trip across the border was relatively simple. But I started to think about the onerous effort it took for escapees to journey from “Midnight” to Windsor. In their minds, they were no longer slaves, but so many challenges remained.
If you pull a trap door at the pulpit, a set of stairs leads to a lower level, where you can see the back foundation of the old building.
We then walked over to two areas of the original church structure where there were removable panels in the floor. While there is no recorded proof that these areas were officially part of the Underground Railroad, the possibility exists.
Though to a lesser extent than in American cities, bounty hunters would occasionally come across the Canadian border to kidnap former slaves and sell them back into bondage, so threats did remain.
“People would ring a bell when the bounty hunters were spotted to give enslaved people enough time to hide,” Ms. Talbot said.
The Amherstburg Freedom Museum, roughly 30 minutes south of Windsor in Amherstburg, consists of a main museum building, the Nazrey African Methodist Episcopal Church National Historic Site and the George Taylor Log Cabin. Nazrey Church was built in 1848 by former slaves who arrived in Amherstburg by the Underground Railroad. Bishop Willis Nazery, an early leader of British Methodist Episcopal congregations, was also a conductor in the Underground Railroad, and the church was used as a rest stop for escaped slaves as many continued inland to locales like North Buxton and Chatham-Kent.
The church building, with a gray stone exterior, is no longer used for religious services. Visitors can freely walk around the interior and take in the architecture. The front of the church has a curved staircase and a traditional, bannister-laden pulpit.
The Log Cabin is an early example of a regional log building. George Taylor, an escaped slave from Kentucky who fought in the Civil War, lived in the cabin. A second floor was added to the structure in the 1800s, featuring artifacts like a rope bed from the 1700s and a plow from 1862.
A permanent museum exhibit, featuring items like an 1897 edition of Harriet Beecher Stowe’s “Uncle Tom’s Cabin,” and maps of Underground Railroad routes from Missouri, Kansas and Tennessee, is on the ground floor.
Heading back to the United States, I stopped at the nearby Riverfront Trail, a park adjacent to the Detroit River in Windsor, which afforded panoramic views of the Detroit skyline through some lingering fog. The river, known for its strong undercurrents, was filled with large chunks of ice and was moving rapidly.
The frigid river added to the difficulties of escaping to Canada during the winter. And yet thousands upon thousands of escapees risked their lives, for freedom.
As the Ambassador Bridge loomed ahead, I thought about the enduring link between Detroit and Ontario. For escapees on the way to their promised land, this strait between two countries was more than a mark of sovereignty, but an affirmation of humanity, somewhere in the distance.