After a high-powered meeting organized by N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver on Monday afternoon, James L. Dolan said that he hoped that Charles Oakley would return to Madison Square Garden as his guest soon.
Dolan, the owner of the Knicks, and Oakley, among the most beloved players in franchise history, met at Silver’s request less than a week after Oakley was hauled out of Madison Square Garden in handcuffs after a skirmish with security personnel at a Knicks game. Dolan subsequently barred Oakley from entering the arena, suggesting that Oakley had problems with alcohol and anger management.
On Monday, though, Silver announced in a statement that both Dolan and Oakley were contrite. Dolan, Silver said, expressed a hope that Oakley would return to the Garden as Dolan’s guest in the “near future” — a stunning reversal that would be a welcome relief for Knicks fans who have chanted Oakley’s name at recent games while jeering Dolan.
“It is beyond disheartening to see situations involving members of the N.B.A. family like the one that occurred at Madison Square Garden this past week,” said Silver, who was in attendance when Oakley was led out of the arena in the first quarter of Wednesday’s game between the Knicks and the Los Angeles Clippers.
Silver brokered the peace summit over the weekend. Michael Jordan, the owner of the Charlotte Hornets and a close friend of Oakley’s, participated in the meeting by telephone.
The meeting came as the Knicks — and Dolan, in particular — were facing increased public pressure over the incident involving Oakley. Several high-profile players, including LeBron James and Chris Paul, have backed Oakley while Dolan has attempted to shield himself from waves of negative publicity, going so far as to invite Latrell Sprewell, another long-estranged former player, to sit courtside with him at Sunday’s game at the Garden.
It was a transparent public-relations ploy that did little to quell a growing firestorm. On Monday, the Rev. Al Sharpton of the National Action Network called for Dolan to immediately lift the ban against Oakley and threatened to stage protests at future games.
Oakley, 53, who was a rugged forward on outstanding Knicks teams in the 1990s, has long been a fan favorite. But he has been estranged from the Knicks for years, a rift owed in part to his habit of harshly criticizing Dolan and the direction of the organization. He also accused Dolan of having security follow him whenever he attends games at the Garden.
But Oakley has insisted that he was not acting inappropriately on Wednesday night when, after acquiring his own ticket to the game, he sat down not far from Dolan. A number of fans who were sitting near Oakley said they had not seen or heard him being belligerent. Others suggested that he seemed combative. In any case, after security guards approached him, a shoving match ensued, and Oakley was eventually led away as fans and players from both sides looked on in disbelief.
On Friday, Dolan announced that he was taking the step to bar Oakley from the arena out of concern for the safety of the team’s other paying customers, implying that Oakley was a danger to the general public. He also said that if Oakley sought “help” for his behavioral problems, Dolan would consider welcoming him back to the Garden in the future.
Oakley responded by saying that there was “something wrong” with Dolan and that he planned to confer with his legal team.
On Monday, Silver and Jordan stepped forward in an effort to help save the Knicks from themselves.