Gentry, a boutique in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, that started in 2012 as H. W. Carter and Sons, has a good selection of workwear classics but also leads the way with trends; see the wider cropped pants as evidence. Its owner, Alan Maleh, 51, is also the founder and publisher of Man of the World, a plush quarterly magazine for style-conscious men.
What are you looking for when you buy for Gentry?
Guys want … I call it a “lifer.”  You don’t want to give it up. For the Gentry guy, it’s a little younger, a little edgier. They have a timelessness, classicism, made with beautiful fabrics, beautiful details.
What’s the hardest part about owning and running a store right now?
Keeping the experience fresh, keeping the product fresh. That can be difficult for a specialty boutique. We’re in sale season now, but look around — it doesn’t look picked apart. The key is to keep the store energized and to keep the consumer coming in and seeing change, not a drab sales environment.
I love your website, how the models look like real dudes. What’s your approach to the web?
The web has been such a challenge for us brick-and-mortar retailers, but it’s also been an advantage for us. As much as people shop online, a lot of consumers want to touch and feel. They want someone to talk to, they want advice. It’s a different experience, and both are important, and I don’t think either one is going to permanently go away. We’re not trying to make ourselves what we’re not. We’re a cool, neighborhood, multibrand men’s store with elevated, high-end brands. We want to keep an organic look and feel to what we do. The models are everyday guys — and we get criticism for it — but they have a sense of style, they have a sense of confidence.
How have shoppers evolved since you’ve been in business?
Guys are much more particular. They’ve become more educated. They want it to feel good, to be comfortable, to look good. Also, the web has made monsters out of us, where guys will wait and wait to get their piece at the right price. And this is the key to what guys are looking for today: Every guy wants a story to tell about the piece. So we’re looking for pieces that have a true, authentic story.