Sports|Athletes Stand to Gain in a Settlement With the N.C.A.A.
Athletes Stand to Gain in a Settlement With the N.C.A.A.
Thousands of current and former college athletes could receive $5,000 or more from an agreement to settle part of an antitrust lawsuit against the N.C.A.A., a lawyer for the plaintiffs estimated.
The N.C.A.A. and 11 conferences reached a $208.7 million settlement Friday in the case, a class-action suit brought by players over the value of an athletic scholarship.
If the deal is approved by a judge, about 40,000 players from top-level football teams and from Division I men’s and women’s basketball programs will be eligible to receive payments.
In a statement, Steve Berman, a lawyer for the players, called the settlement a “watershed” and estimated that eligible players would receive checks from $5,000 to $7,000.
The settlement ended litigation begun in 2014 by Shawne Alston, a West Virginia football player. For many years, N.C.A.A. scholarships were not allowed to cover more than tuition, books, and room and board. Alston contended that the limit was an illegal cap and that financial aid should account for what is commonly called the cost of attendance, including broader living expenses like clothing, off-campus meals and travel home.
Later in 2014, a federal judge ruled in another case that the N.C.A.A.’s limited scholarships violated antitrust law.
In 2015, the N.C.A.A. — under pressure from its five most powerful conferences, the Big Ten, the Big 12, the Pacific-12, the Southeastern and the Atlantic Coast — altered its scholarship limits and allowed them to include the full cost of attendance.
The additional amount is calculated by each university and usually comes to between $3,000 and $6,000 each year.
Alston’s lawsuit, which was ultimately combined with several others, asserted that athletes who got scholarships between 2009 and 2016 but had not received the cost-of-attendance adjustments were still entitled to the money.
The N.C.A.A. will cover the entire cost of the settlement from its reserve funds. No university will be asked to contribute.
Berman said he expected that piece of the lawsuit to be tried this year.
