WASHINGTON — For Judge Thomas M. Hardiman, the road to the Supreme Court ended in Altoona.
This week’s high court runner-up — who helped pay for his education by driving a cab — drove east from his office in Pittsburgh shortly after noon on Tuesday, just as White House officials were whispering that he was heading toward Washington to an “Apprentice”-style finale with Judge Neil Gorsuch where President Trump would announce his first Supreme Court pick.
At around 3 p.m., under the watchful eyes of a CNN camera crew, he stopped at a gas station in Altoona, then disappeared. The reason for his 100-mile trip — whether it was to visit an old friend or to try to make powerful new ones at the Trump White House — remains something of a mystery.
Three administration officials who did not want to be identified said Judge Hardiman hit the road to Washington to help them maintain the illusion that the selection process was still competitive. Judge Hardiman did not respond to repeated requests for comment on Wednesday. His friends say he was simply visiting a colleague who lives in Altoona.
The day began with a phone call from Don McGahn, the White House counsel, who informed Judge Hardiman that Mr. Trump’s pick would be Judge Neil M. Gorsuch, another conservative appeals court judge, according to two people with knowledge of the situation. But putting on a dignified East Room ceremony announcing Judge Gorsuch’s nomination was important for an administration struggling to recover from the self-inflicted wound of last Friday’s executive order barring migrants from seven Muslim nations, which has provoked a powerful bipartisan backlash.
Getting the optics just right, people close to Mr. Trump said, was a priority. But by late Monday news media outlets were killing the buzz, and starting to report that Judge Gorsuch looked like a sure thing.
Aides in the West Wing worried that interest in the prime-time announcement would quickly fade if the Gorsuch selection was known, and told reporters already staking out Judge Hardiman’s house that he was heading to Washington.
Judge Hardiman agreed to help their cause, according to officials, although it was not clear if he said so explicitly. Trump administration officials told a number of news media outlets that Judge Hardiman was coming to the White House, according to a person close to the process.
But he never left Altoona.
The headlines and Twitter posts all made the obvious “Apprentice” connection — but Mr. Trump’s big 8 p.m. introduction of the telegenic Mr. Gorsuch, minus the runner-up, provided the requisite drama and the president was happy with the results, according to several of his aides.
The man Judge Hardiman was going to see, it turns out, was Judge D. Brooks Smith, who serves with him on the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, an old friend and professional sounding board.
Judge Smith said he did not think Judge Hardiman schlepped the two-plus hours to see him Tuesday at the behest of the Trump White House. He said the judge called him earlier that morning to say he would be dropping by for some advice and to talk over the events of the previous two weeks, when he emerged, for a time, as the front-runner. “I guess it’s true what they say — all roads lead to Altoona,” Judge Smith said with a chuckle.
“He really just wanted to discuss what had happened, and suggesting that he was part of some ruse is an extremely unlikely scenario,” Judge Smith said.
Judge Smith said he also suggested Judge Hardiman “take off a few days.” Another colleague on the Third Circuit bench emailed similar advice: Judge Maryanne Trump Barry, the president’s older sister, who congratulated Judge Hardiman on being considered and suggested he “take some time off,” according to an officer of the court who saw the message.
