Silicon Valley has upended plenty of industries. But when it comes to finance, instead of trying to overthrow traditional players, start-ups have instead begun working with them.
• Start-ups have not managed to displace banks, even as financial services change rapidly.
• Banks are absorbing new ideas from the world of technology.
• The venture capitalists who invested billions of dollars in new financial technology are still waiting for a breakout star.
Their window of opportunity is shrinking, though, because the Trump administration wants to roll back financial regulations in a move that would give big banks more free rein.
Post-crisis regulations had forced lenders to reduce their risks, providing an opening for companies willing to fill the gap.
Bad behavior at Uber had, until this week, only been whispered about in Silicon Valley.
Then Susan Fowler, an engineer who left the company in December, published a blog post detailing discrimination and sexual harassment by her managers, which she said was shrugged off by the human resources department.
Interviews with more than 30 current and former Uber employees, emails, chat logs and records of meetings reflected an often unrestrained workplace culture that created a Hobbesian environment in which workers were often pitted against one other.
An internal investigation has been opened: The board member Arianna Huffington and the former United States attorney general Eric H. Holder Jr. will look into harassment issues and the human resources department.
— Jerome H. Powell, a Federal Reserve governor, speaking on Wednesday. Minutes from the Federal Reserve’s most recent meeting showed that some officials wanted to increase the benchmark interest rate soon, but it remained unclear whether that would happen at the next meeting in March.
SolarCity customers may have looked good enough on paper, but that was only part of the story.
The company, the leading installer of rooftop solar panels and a renewable energy darling, pitched itself to investors on the premise that customers would be signing up to lease a system for at least 20 years.
But The New York Times has found that these agreements were reached shortly before, or even after, customers defaulted on mortgages.
A lawyer for SolarCity had filed a document in court arguing that the company needed to file another document late because it had been inundated with lawsuits naming it as a defendant in residential foreclosure action. SolarCity said that the lawyer had been mistaken in his numbers.
If his figures are correct, however, SolarCity could be facing a threat to its financial performance that it had not disclosed to the government or to investors.
In either case, the situation raises questions about how well the company vets its potential customers.