DealBook|Buffett Asks Big Money: Why Pay High Fees?
Buffett Asks Big Money: Why Pay High Fees?
Poof: $100 billion disappeared.
That’s the figure that Warren E. Buffett recently calculated that pension funds, endowments and wealthy individuals have lost over the last decade to hedge funds and other money managers that charge sky-high fees.
“I believe my calculation of the aggregate shortfall is conservative,” Mr. Buffett wrote in his annual letter, released on Saturday to the shareholders of his conglomerate, Berkshire Hathaway.
The letter, which ricocheted around Wall Street to the consternation of some and the applause of others, was Mr. Buffett’s most damning assessment of the hedge fund industry to date, and it came amid a growing debate about whether professional money managers are capable of outperforming the stock market on even a semiregular basis.
As many investors know, recent failures of these managers to do so has caused all manner of problems — a devastation that Mr. Buffett described pointedly in his note.
However, much of the biggest money in the nation hasn’t taken his advice and continues to pay enormous fees for underperformance.
In his letter, Mr. Buffett offered an unusually cogent, honest and blunt appraisal of the human behavior that drives individuals with money to avoid index funds — and their willingness to pay huge fees.
Mr. Buffett’s index-loving advice may seem counterintuitive coming from a man who is considered the most successful investor in history — and who became so by actively making individual bets in the market.
It also may be hard to square given that millions of people follow Mr. Buffett’s words — and tens of thousands of them make an annual pilgrimage to Omaha to his annual meeting — looking for pearls of wisdom that they can use themselves to beat the market.
Mr. Buffett has long offered guidance about investing, and he often makes it sound easy. “Success in investing doesn’t correlate with I.Q. once you’re above the level of 25,” he once said — but it seems even he recognizes that some investors who follow his principles may not succeed.
“There are, of course, some skilled individuals who are highly likely to outperform the S. & P. over long stretches. In my lifetime, though, I’ve identified — early on — only 10 or so professionals that I expected would accomplish this feat,” he wrote.
Perhaps Mr. Buffett’s advice is being taken: Last year, according to Morningstar, about $505 billion flooded into index funds and exchange-traded funds; $340 billion was pulled from active money managers.
Of course, if everyone buys index funds, what would it do to the market?
And therein lies the rub: That inefficiency is where active investors like Mr. Buffett make money. “I’d be a bum on the street with a tin cup if markets were efficient,” Mr. Buffett once said.
Still, Mr. Buffett is not convinced the big money will take his advice and buy index funds — thereby giving up the dream of trying to beat the market.
I will be among several journalists and research analysts who will ask questions of Mr. Buffett and his partner Charlie Munger at Berkshire Hathaway’s annual meeting on May 6. A live webcast of the meeting will be available on Yahoo Finance. If you have questions you’d like to suggest, please send them to me: arsorkin@nytimes.com.