WASHINGTON — As Democrats battle President Trump on a multiplying array of issues, from immigration and climate change to health care and transgender rights, a group of Democratic governors is pressing the party to set one concern above all the rest: jobs.
Gathered in Washington for a conference of the National Governors Association, Democratic leaders from the states expressed optimism that Mr. Trump had opened the way for a Democratic comeback by governing from the hard right and in a haphazard manner.
But they also warned that voters might not embrace Democrats as an alternative to Mr. Trump unless they presented themselves convincingly as champions of job creation, which they struggled to do in last year’s presidential election. Mr. Trump’s unpopularity, several governors said, will not necessarily usher Democrats back to power on its own — they must frame all their priorities in economic terms.
Gov. Gina M. Raimondo of Rhode Island, a Democrat who is in her first term, said her party had too often failed to put jobs and economic opportunity at the forefront of its agenda. Democrats had erred, she said, by treating jobs merely as one issue in a “check list” of positions.
Ms. Raimondo, 45, a former venture capitalist, stressed that she did not believe the party should change its liberal platform on social issues and called for fierce resistance to Mr. Trump.
Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington State, the vice chairman of the Democratic Governors Association, said Democrats had to make job growth their organizing theme on all subjects, including immigration and the Affordable Care Act. The most effective attacks on Mr. Trump, he said, would cast the president’s policies as harmful to the economy.
Behind closed doors, too, Democratic governors prodded the party to compete harder with Mr. Trump on kitchen-table issues. The president won a slim victory last fall in large part because his platform of trade protectionism and immigration restriction appealed to blue-collar whites in the Midwest, some of whom had voted for Democrats in the past.
Mr. Inslee, who won a second term in November, said there was “broad-scale agreement that our economic message was not successful in the presidential race,” and that the party needed a far more pointed appeal on economic matters.
During a private meeting of Democratic governors on Saturday morning that included the House minority leader, Nancy Pelosi of California, Gov. John W. Hickenlooper of Colorado argued that Democrats needed a clear positive appeal about job growth. In the debate over the Affordable Care Act, Mr. Hickenlooper, 65, said Democrats should highlight the health care-related jobs at stake, according to people who attended the meeting.
Jacque Montgomery, a spokeswoman for Mr. Hickenlooper, confirmed his remarks.
A number of the Democratic governors pressing for a stronger sales pitch on jobs are seen as potential presidential candidates, among them Mr. Inslee, Ms. Raimondo and Mr. Hickenlooper.
With Republicans holding the White House and Congress, Democratic governors have taken a central role in shaping the party’s agenda. A group of them — including Ms. Raimondo, Mr. Hickenlooper and Terry McAuliffe of Virginia — intervened in the race for Democratic National Committee chairman to back Thomas E. Perez, the former labor secretary, who won in a close vote over the weekend.
And mirroring the role Republican governors played during President Barack Obama’s time in office, Democrats in the states have vowed to rally opposition to Mr. Trump and battle his initiatives through legislation and lawsuits challenging his administration.
In some respects, the opposition to Mr. Trump from blue-state leaders may be even more strenuous than what Mr. Obama faced from Republican governors. Unlike at the outset of Mr. Obama’s term, when some Republican governors flirted with accommodating a popular new president, there is little apparent appetite among Democrats for conciliating Mr. Trump.
But Democrats have suffered dire losses on the state level and now hold 16 governorships, most of them in solidly blue states like New York, California and Oregon. The party’s governors are looking to the 2018 elections as a crucial opportunity to recover their standing in state capitals.
Party leaders in Washington, like Ms. Pelosi, have also come to see winning governorships as a priority because of the power many state executives have in drawing congressional district lines. After the 2010 elections, Republicans had extensive control over the process of mapping congressional districts, helping them achieve a viselike grip on the House.
While Democrats are hopeful that they can exploit the political backlash against Mr. Trump and his policies, there is considerable disagreement within the party about how best to deliver a message of contrast with the president.
Gov. Steve Bullock of Montana, who won re-election last year in a state that Mr. Trump carried easily, said he believed Democrats would have to do more than oppose the president to return to power.
“I think we as Democrats have to have a narrative of what we’re for, not just also what we’re against,” Mr. Bullock said.
The jobs-first approach that many Democratic governors favor was on prominent display during a news conference on Saturday morning at a hotel in downtown Washington. A lineup of Democratic state executives took aim at the Trump administration, denouncing Republican efforts to repeal the Affordable Care Act and Mr. Trump’s hard-line immigration policies.
Gov. Dannel P. Malloy of Connecticut, who is the chairman of the Democratic Governors Association, accused Mr. Trump of ignoring his campaign pledge to move quickly on a huge infrastructure program. And he branded Republican health care policies as job killers.
