An image from 84 Lumber’s Super Bowl commercial. The company revised the ad after Fox deemed the original too controversial.
The Super Bowl is a popular destination for commercials showcasing premium water, candy and beer — but politics can make it a difficult forum.
The ad, slated to run before halftime during the network’s broadcast of the game on Sunday, will now showcase the pair on a journey, but omit the wall. Instead, the address of a website will appear on the screen, giving viewers a chance to see how their story ends.
Advertisers pay millions of dollars for commercial space during the game, but the network and the National Football League maintain the right to approve any ad.
“We review spots to ensure they do not violate our advertising policies,” a league spokesman, Brian McCarthy, said in an email. “The ad that will air does not violate our policies.” He did not say if the N.F.L. had asked for 84 Lumber’s original commercial to be altered.
Fox declined to comment, but the network’s advertising guidelines online say that, in general, it will not sell commercial time “for viewpoint or advocacy of controversial issues.” It adds that advertisers cannot use the space to address such topics.
But with political tension in the country running high since the election of Mr. Trump, keeping politics completely away from the broadcast is a difficult task.
Budweiser, for instance, has gained notice it wasn’t anticipating for its Super Bowl ad. The commercial, which was released online this week and has passed two million views on YouTube, recounts how the brewery’s co-founder immigrated to the United States from Germany in the 1800s and notes the discrimination he overcame. Budweiser has emphasized that it is not responding to Mr. Trump’s immigration crackdown last weekend.
In 2012, a Chrysler Super Bowl ad featuring Clint Eastwood was seen by some conservatives as pandering to President Barack Obama after his administration’s bailout of automakers.
It has become a marketing strategy of sorts over the years to intentionally create a Super Bowl ad that will never make it to air, then capitalize on online traffic. But Ms. Magerko said that was not 84 Lumber’s plan, noting that the company is still showing the edited 90-second spot that Fox has approved.
A company representative confirmed that it spent more than $5 million on the ad, which was the average rate this year for 30 seconds.
The company, which draws about $2.9 billion in revenue a year and has been rebuilding since the recession, is keen on igniting a conversation around housing and labor, she said.
