Dore Ashton, an art historian and critic who wrote some of the earliest and most insightful histories of Abstract Expressionism and the leading painters of the New York School, died on Monday in the Bronx. She was 88.
Her death was confirmed by her daughter Paris Marina Devereaux.
Ms. Ashton was closely involved in the small world of artists who were discovering a new pictorial language in the years after World War II, both as a friend of Philip Guston, Mark Rothko and others and as a reviewer for numerous publications, including Art International, The Art Bulletin and The New York Times.
She recorded the scene, and she inhabited it. She made a point of visiting artists in their studios, drinking with them at their favorite haunts and talking philosophy and aesthetics into the wee hours in downtown cafes.
In a clear, pithy style, Ms. Ashton wrote both sweeping histories and intimate studies devoted to individual artists. Her books “The Unknown Shore: A View of Contemporary Art” (1962) and “The New York School: A Cultural Reckoning” (1973) made the case for Abstract Expressionism as the pre-eminent postwar art movement and placed its disparate members into a coherent philosophical frame.
Guston, an artist whom she knew well and about whom she had written on dozens of occasions, elicited a series of penetrating, analytic chapters. For Rothko, with whom she had spent many an evening discussing existential questions, she constructed a philosophical and cultural biography.
“The strength of Ashton’s book lies in the rigor with which she attempts to discover and articulate the intellectual crosscurrents that influenced not only Rothko, but also the other artists of the New York School,” the art consultant Oliver Banks wrote in The Washington Post.
In 1963 the College Art Association gave Ms. Ashton and the architecture critic Lewis Mumford the first Frank Jewett Mather Awards for distinguished arts journalism.
Dore Ashton was born Dorothea Shapiro on May 21, 1928, in Newark, where her father, Ralph Shapiro, was a doctor, and her mother, the former Sylvia Smith, was a reporter for The Newark News. She took the surname Ashton from her mother’s second husband.
Dore (pronounced DOR-ee), as she was known, attended Saturday art classes as a child and, in her teens, studied painting with Moses Soyer at the New School for Social Research in Manhattan.
After earning a bachelor’s degree in literature from the University of Wisconsin in 1949, she traveled to Paris, where she enrolled in the atelier of Fernand Léger. On returning to New York, she took a course with the German art theorist Rudolf Arnheim at the New School.
Her plan to study comparative literature at Yale failed to take into account the department’s requirement that entering students know Latin and Greek. Instead, she accepted a scholarship to study art history at Harvard, where she earned a master’s degree in 1950.
In 1953 she married the Latvian-born abstract painter Adja Yunkers. The marriage ended in divorce. Her second husband, Matti Megged, died in 2003. In addition to her daughter Paris, she is survived by another daughter, Sasha Alexandra Yunkers, and a grandson.
After leaving Harvard, Ms. Ashton began writing reviews for Art Digest, which soon hired her as an associate editor. In making her gallery rounds, she struck up an acquaintance with Howard Devree, the art news editor of The Times, who in 1955 offered her a job as a reviewer.
A tireless champion of new art, Ms. Ashton ran afoul of John Canaday, a staunch anti-Modernist who became the newspaper’s art news editor and chief critic in 1959. In a blistering memo, he accused her of writing to an artistic clique and cheerleading for it.
“Her answer, placed on Canaday’s desk on Monday morning, was a diatribe, reviling her boss with references to Zenocrates and Zola, and throwing back at him his own published words,” Sophy Burnham wrote in “The Art Crowd” (1973).
After leaving The Times, Ms. Ashton, who lived in Manhattan, taught art history at the School of Visual Arts, Cooper Union and the New School, while generating a stream of articles, exhibition catalogs, monographs and biographies.
Her many works also include “A Reading of Modern Art” (1969), “A Fable of Modern Art” (1980), “American Art Since 1945” (1982) and “Noguchi East and West” (1992). Many of her essays were collected in “Out of the Whirlwind: Three Decades of Arts Commentary” (1987), edited by Donald Kuspit.