Last month, the musician Steve Miller backed out of a contract to buy a sprawling estate in Dutchess County, N.Y., for $6.7 million when a bank appraised it for $2.4 million less than what he had agreed to pay.
Now the owners of the estate, John H. Eyler Jr., the former chief executive of Toys “R” Us, and his wife, Gail Eyler, are suing Mr. Miller and his wife, Janice Miller, to keep the $670,000 deposit. A separate lawsuit filed by a limited liability company formed by the Millers demands that the Eylers return the deposit, arguing that they had every right to walk away.
Although this dispute centers on boldface names haggling over an 87-acre property with a pond, swimming pool and a seven-figure price tag, the story is a familiar one: When a sale goes bad, tempers fly.
In this case, a bank appraiser valued the property, 132 Seeley Road in Lagrangeville, N.Y., near Vassar College and Poughkeepsie, at $4.35 million, not $6.7 million. So, the Millers were unable to get the $3.35 million mortgage they had planned.
The dispute is based on two clauses in the contract. The deal allows either party to cancel the sale if the buyer cannot obtain a mortgage commitment. However, it also states that “the sale is not contingent upon a satisfactory appraisal.” While the two parties spar, the home is back on the market and being advertised on real estate websites, listed for $7.75 million.
“The entire dispute is because the buyers changed their mind,” said Mitchell R. Schrage, a lawyer representing the Eylers. At one point, Mr. Eyler offered Mr. Miller a personal loan to resolve the financing problem, but Mr. Miller declined, Mr. Schrage said. “They used this as a weapon to try to beat the Eylers down by $1 million,” he said, referring to the sales price. Richard Duvall, a lawyer for the Millers, declined to comment because the litigation is pending.
Even under the best of circumstances, buying or selling a home can be a nail biter. Will the buyers get a mortgage? Will they survive a co-op board interview? What headaches might the home inspection reveal? Somehow, most deals work out.
But sometimes, they don’t. While many sales fall apart for legitimate reasons, as in the case of the co-op board rejecting the buyer’s application, when one party walks away for reasons that seem dubious, the mood can escalate quickly from tense to vitriolic. Cue the lawyers.
Contracts often include contingencies giving parties an exit, should something go awry. But when a contract is broken under disputed terms, the aggrieved party’s options depend on the language of that deal. In New York, angry sellers often try to hold onto a buyer’s deposit, as the Eylers did. But the buyer might sue for the money back, dragging out the process.
In New Jersey, in rules that seem to favor buyers, a wronged seller cannot keep the deposit, but instead must sue for damages. As for buyers, scorned ones might sue for damages or for “specific performance,” a legal remedy that could force sellers to close.
“As a lawyer, I would sue for everything,” said Steven R. Wagner, a Manhattan real estate lawyer.
But rather than head to court, dueling sides usually end at the negotiating table, since buyers and sellers tend to want to close the deal rather than go to court.
The house needs a new roof? The seller might shave $20,000 off the sales price to cover the cost. The apartment was appraised for less than the selling price? The seller might reduce the price since the buyer can only get a smaller loan, or the buyer might put up more cash since the loan amount would be smaller.
But if one party is unreasonable, the deal can crumble. “It all depends on the parties’ expectations, how much they’re willing to bend,” said Michael Schwartzberg, a real estate lawyer in Bloomfield, N.J.
The risk of a failed deal is often greater in the suburbs, largely because single family homes can have expensive problems that rattle buyers, like old chimneys, leaking roofs and wet basements.
The number of home sales that have fallen apart has risen over the last two years, according to a report by Trulia. The company’s analysis found that in the fourth quarter of 2016, 4.3 percent of homes listed as pending in the United States went back on the market, up from 1.4 percent in 2014. And in New York City, 2.1 percent of deals fell apart in the fourth quarter of 2016, up from 0.7 percent during the same period in 2014. The report also found that deals on starter homes were more likely to fail than those on more expensive properties, along with deals in markets with tighter inventories.
Losing out on an apartment is not just a financial setback; it can be an emotional one. Last summer, Mariana Lo and her fiancé, David Burke, 30, were under contract to buy a one-bedroom co-op in Jackson Heights, Queens, for $375,000. Then the sellers’ lawyer told them the deal was off because the sellers needed more time to renovate their new apartment. After that, Ms. Lo, 28, and Mr. Burke heard nothing.
In October, Ms. Lo and Mr. Burke received a letter canceling the contract, along with a check for their $37,500 deposit. The couple rented a one-bedroom in Hamilton Heights, Manhattan, paying a higher rent than before, and called a lawyer who filed a lawsuit to force the sellers to close.
The lawsuit brought the sellers back to the negotiating table. Ms. Lo and Mr. Burke didn’t get the apartment, but the sellers ultimately agreed to pay them $25,000 in damages. A lawyer for the sellers did not respond to a request for comment.
