Charles L. Bartlett, a Washington newspaper correspondent and columnist who won a Pulitzer Prize for national reporting but who was especially remembered for introducing John F. Kennedy to Jacqueline Bouvier, died on Friday in Washington. He was 95.
Mr. Bartlett was a Washington reporter for The Chattanooga Times and a syndicated columnist in Washington for The Chicago Sun-Times. He later published a newsletter on the political scene for private clients in a journalism career that spanned some 65 years.
While with The Chattanooga Times, he received a Pulitzer in 1956 for articles leading to a Senate subcommittee investigation into conflict of interest issues involving Harold E. Talbott, the secretary of the Air Force in President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s administration. The inquiry resulted in Mr. Talbott’s resignation in August 1955.
Mr. Bartlett first met Kennedy in the winter of 1946 in Palm Beach, Fla., where the Kennedy family had a home. Kennedy was considering a run for Congress at the time. Mr. Bartlett’s parents had a home in nearby Hobe, Fla.
Both Kennedy and Mr. Bartlett were Ivy League graduates (Harvard and Yale, respectively) and both served in the Navy in the Pacific during World War II.
Mr. Bartlett and his wife, Martha, invited Kennedy and Jacqueline Bouvier, whom they also knew socially, to their Georgetown home for a small dinner party in May 1951.
The Bartletts were part of the Kennedy wedding party in September 1953 in Newport, R.I.
Mr. Bartlett’s friendship with Kennedy endured during his presidency, when he would send memos to Kennedy assessing the issues of the day.
Mr. Bartlett said that Kennedy had consulted him on how to respond to an impending increase in steel prices in the spring of 1962. Kennedy’s opposition led to a rescinding of the increase. Mr. Bartlett had been an emissary to the steel interests on behalf of Kennedy.
During the Cuban missile crisis, in October 1962, Mr. Bartlett contacted a Russian intelligence agent in Washington, at the request of the president’s brother Robert F. Kennedy, then the attorney general, as a back-channel means of conveying the American stance to the Soviet leadership.
Mr. Bartlett was a founding member of the racially inclusive Federal City Club, organized in the early 1960s when many members of the Washington power elite resigned from the Metropolitan Club over its whites-only policy.
As a friend of Kennedy’s while covering his presidency, Mr. Bartlett was well aware of the conflict he faced.
Charles Leffingwell Bartlett was born on Aug. 14, 1921, in Chicago, where his father, Valentine, was a stockbroker.
He joined The Chattanooga Times in 1946, became its Washington correspondent two years later, then moved to The Chicago Sun-Times in 1963.
He wrote “Facing the Brink: An Intimate Study of Crisis Diplomacy” (1967) with Edward Weintal.
In addition to his wife, Mr. Bartlett is survived by his daughter, Helen Bartlett; his sons Robert and Peter; and six grandchildren.
In 2013, on the 50th anniversary of the Kennedy assassination, Mr. Bartlett told The New York Times of his emotions on hearing the news on Nov. 22, 1963.
