The occasion of Harry Belafonte’s 90th birthday landing within a few days of the 89th Academy Awards on Sunday makes it a good moment to think about what celebrity political activism looked like a half-century ago, when Mr. Belafonte’s service in the civil rights movement involved acting as a confidant to the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and what it looks like now. Given the current tensions, the Oscars are sure to deliver a number of speeches, in greater volume than might ordinarily be expected, devoted to doing more than merely thanking the good people at Warner Bros. and William Morris Endeavor. Even if our sympathies perfectly line up with the substance of what is said, many of us will find ourselves annoyed — at the prospective opportunism, the posturing, the stridency, the absence of connection in some cases between words and meaningful action.
Consider the recent adventures of Shia LaBeouf, a former Disney Channel performer and star of the “Transformers” franchise (whose name precedes that slightly cringe-making combination of words in any Wikipedia entry: “Shia LaBeouf is an American actor, performance artist and filmmaker”). In collaboration with his artistic partners Luke Turner and Nastja Sade Ronkko, Mr. LaBeouf mounted an exhibit, “He Will Not Divide Us,” on an exterior wall at the Museum of the Moving Image in Queens on Jan. 20, the day President Trump took office.
An early fan of the piece was Councilman Jimmy Van Bramer, chairman of the Council’s Cultural Affairs Committee, who represents the Astoria district that is home to the museum. “I went the first day it was up, in the morning to watch,” Mr. Van Bramer told me, “and I thought it was really powerful and really moving.” Soon after, though, the exhibit began to attract white supremacists who came to vocalize their malice. On Jan. 29, Mr. Van Bramer, a Democrat, held a rally at the site, to which hundreds of Queens residents came, to condemn the vitriol and support inclusion, but the artists complained that the event reframed their original message as anti-Trump when it wasn’t.
What seemed to elude their understanding is that you can’t call something a “participatory performance artwork” and then get angry when people participate on their own terms, especially if, in fact, the artwork encroaches on public space.
Mr. Van Bramer’s constituents, however, soon started calling his office and telling his staff that they were afraid of the presence of neo-Nazis gathering at the site. “The idea of an installation up for four to eight years sounds great,” he said, “but it was freaking people out on the block in a major way.” At one point, Mr. LaBeouf got into an altercation with someone at the site and was arrested. In addition, the nearby 114th Precinct had received calls, Mr. Van Bramer said, from as far away as South Carolina and Britain threatening bombs and gunmen at the site. The exhibit then required a constant police presence, which was obviously a drain on resources.
Infuriated by the termination, the artists issued a statement saying the museum bowed to political pressure and had ignored their early requests to “act responsibly in moderating” the hate speech, as if there were an obvious path to accomplishing that. “I can honestly say I have never seen one of his movies,” the councilman told me, “but after this I can definitely say I’m not a fan of Shia LaBeouf, who showed no concern for the community.” According to Mr. Turner (who spoke on behalf his collaborators), the artists heard from only a single resident about noise, and after a conversation, he said, she was no longer concerned. “This is not indifference,” he said.
Once the piece was taken down in Queens, it moved to a theater in Albuquerque, where the artists themselves dismantled it on Thursday morning after gunshots were heard in the area.
The artists no doubt see this as censorship, but the enemy in this drama is not a museum in Queens or a politician responsive to voters or even a narcissistic creative class. It is the racial and ethnic exclusionists so undone by a work of anodyne conceptual art, created in part by a movie star, that they are compelled out of the dark crevices of the internet and into the sun.
Celebrities are lightning rods in a literal sense. The real work of combating bigotry is handled not by groovy street theatrics but by the hundreds of thousands of ordinary people who march and protest and call their legislators.
Not too long ago, the right wing extremist Milo Yiannopoulos, who resigned this week from Breitbart News and lost a book contract, called Democrats “the party of Lena Dunham,’’ by which he meant the party of elite self-infatuation. The description was not entirely off base. Ms. Dunham, who endures virulent attacks from conservatives that far exceed her negligible wrongdoing, still, nevertheless began her speech at the Democratic National Convention this past summer, saying, “I am Lena Dunham, and according to Donald Trump, my body is probably, like, a 2,” as if the general charges of misogyny surrounding him were secondary to how critically he may view her.
At the Women’s March on Washington last month, Ashley Judd surely endeared herself to not a single factory worker in Michigan when she raised the issue of female actors getting paid less than their male counterparts. Let the Bastille be stormed for the right of everyone to make $20 million a picture.