Since Donald J. Trump became the 45th president of the United States, a flurry of executive orders, court rulings, presidential nominations and confirmation hearings have brought questions about the roles of the three branches of government to the center of national discourse.
In the hallways of Middle School 447 in Brooklyn, talk of gay rights and President Trump’s executive order on immigration has replaced chatter about “the Kardashians or Beyoncé, or somebody’s new sneakers,” said Leslie Hughes, a seventh-grade English teacher.
In this lesson, students use current events to analyze how our constitutional system of checks and balances works, and they investigate executive orders to see how these particular presidential actions fit within that system.
How are you teaching this topic? Let us know.
Before moving forward with this lesson, students need to understand some basic concepts about the U.S. government. To gauge how much background you will need to teach, you might first ask your students to do a K/W/L chart listing what they know, or think they know, about this topic already.
In short: The principle of separation of powers is the underlying reason the federal government is divided into three branches (executive, legislative and judicial), with each branch wielding different powers established in the Constitution. This division of powers among the three branches operates as a system of checks and balances to prevent any one branch from gaining too much power. For example, the president can negotiate a treaty with a foreign government, but the Senate has to approve it for the treaty to become binding. And, if a president commits treason or bribery, Congress can impeach him or her.
The Government Publishing Office provides a primer on the three branches and the system of checks and balances. This diagram offers a helpful illustration, and the Crash Course video above can provide more depth. You can find many more resources online, such as this lesson from the National Archives and this one from EDSITEment, that include activities like studying the grievances listed in the Declaration of Independence (to understand the colonists’ desire to prevent another kingship), watching Schoolhouse Rock’s “Three-Ring Circus,” and analyzing past events to see how checks and balances have operated in history (such as during school desegregation in the 1950s and the declaration of war after the attack on Pearl Harbor).
Once students have an understanding of checks and balances, they are ready to do the activities described below.
Note: The public-domain handout diagramming checks and balances we originally used in this lesson has been replaced, after questions from readers about its confusing wording, with this one.
The president, his cabinet and the agencies they oversee; the two houses of Congress; the various federal courts — all these government actors are constantly at work making, implementing and interpreting laws. In the process of doing their jobs, they sometimes have to check the authority of another branch.
For this activity, students, working in pairs, should look through a recent print edition of The Times or scan nytimes.com to find examples of articles (not Opinion pieces) reporting on the three branches of the federal government and the various ways they provide a check and balance to each other. Students can use this activity sheet to record what they find.
• What is the article’s headline?
• Write a brief summary of the article.
• What example(s) of checks and balances does this article report? What branch is currently being checked, or might be checked in the future, and why?
Then, the class can share the various examples cited and discuss what each example reveals about how well our system of checks and balances works.
Students can also look at the relationship between the White House and Congress, now that both the executive and legislative branches are controlled by the same party. How much should the American people expect a Republican Congress to hold a Republican president accountable if his actions or policies cross the line?
For example this editorial argues that it’s time for Congress to investigate, based on currently breaking news stories about the relationship between members of Mr. Trump’s presidential campaign and Russian officials. What do you think Congress’s role should be?
• To what extent is it clouded by politics?
• Is it effective at stopping overreaches of power?
• Is it fair and reliable?
While the federal government only includes three branches, students can consider the role a free press plays in our system of checks and balances. In fact, the press is sometimes referred to as the “fourth branch” of government. Ask students: Why is the news media so important in helping to maintain the balance of power in the American political system?
To emphasize the value of the press, you might invite students to work in pairs or groups with a recent New York Times front page. Ask them, what articles or images from that day’s front page would probably not be published in a country without a law guaranteeing freedom of the press? Then, invite them to take a marker and draw an X over each of those.
To push the discussions a bit further, students might use our “Censoring the Press” handout before small groups share their ideas. You could even do this activity over the course of a week and create a gallery of such pages.
Or, use this 63-page New York Times Curriculum Guide on Checks and Balances (PDF), which includes three lesson plans on the importance of a free press, as well as additional lessons and student handouts relating to our system of checks and balances.
Then, invite students to investigate President Trump’s relationship with the role of the free press.
What other evidence of the relationship between the press and the president can students find? For instance, why does the Mr. Trump call CNN and other mainstream news outlets, “fake news”?
Read the Op-Ed “Don’t Expect the First Amendment to Protect the Media” by the law professors RonNell Andersen Jones and Sonja R. West. Why do they think Americans should be worried about the power of the news media during the Trump administration? Do you agree? Have actions by the Trump White House supported or undermined their central claim?
While students might be familiar with the concept that Congress makes the laws and the president enforces them, they might be confused by the concept of an executive order. It’s not a presidential power typically emphasized in school textbooks.
With President Trump’s executive orders making headlines at the start of his new administration, students may want to know, how does this action fit into the system of separation of powers?
An executive order is a signed, written, and published directive from the President of the United States that manages operations of the federal government.
In other words, the president is defining the details of how he will enforce the law as already written. To give one example, Congress might declare war on another nation, but the president as Commander in Chief has broad authority in determining how to wage that war. The same principle is true for Congressional laws on anything else — for example, education, energy policy or immigration.
Even though the president has the power to issue executive orders that have the force of law, the president must always cite what specific laws — or the Constitution itself — grant him the authority to issue his order. In addition, these orders are reviewable by the federal courts.
• By searching in The New York Times, Google News and other sources what can you find out about how the public and the media reacted to the executive order? Did it make headlines? What has been the reception? Is it being challenged in any way via the system of checks and balances?
• What’s your personal reaction to the executive order? Does it seem important? Does it seem like good public policy?
Pairs can share what they learned through their research and discuss their opinions of these presidential actions.
One of the most important checks on a president’s authority is the judicial branch’s power to review the constitutionality of executive actions. The power of judicial review, affirmed by the Supreme Court in Marbury v. Madison in 1803, came into full public view in early February when first a federal district judge, and then a federal appeals court, suspended Mr. Trump’s executive order banning immigration from seven largely-Muslim nations and halting the immigration of all refugees to the U.S.
Students can watch Judge James Robart of Federal District Court in Seattle deliver his opinion in the five-minute video above, and then discuss what they noticed about his justification for suspending the president’s executive order, including how he described his role within our system of checks and balances.
President Trump is not the first president to have his policy actions stymied by the courts. President Obama was publicly disappointed when the courts blocked his executive order aiming to shield as many as five million undocumented immigrants from deportation. President Franklin D. Roosevelt criticized the Supreme Court when it blocked parts of his New Deal program during the Great Depression.
But President Trump’s public contempt for the judicial branch and his denigration of specific judges who hand down rulings unfavorable to him seem to be breaking new ground in the relationship between the executive and judicial branches.
President Trump is barreling into a confrontation with the courts barely two weeks after taking office, foreshadowing years of legal battles as an administration determined to disrupt the existing order presses the boundaries of executive power.
Lawyers and lawmakers of both parties said Mr. Trump’s comments reflected a lack of respect for the constitutional system of checks and balances.
Late in the day, Mr. Trump took to Twitter to pre-emptively blame the judge and the judiciary for what the president suggested would be a future terrorist attack.
• Is President Trump promoting a lack of respect for the court system with his comments?
• Are Mr. Trump’s public statements about judges and the judiciary branch weakening our system of checks and balances? Why or why not?
• Or, should his statements not be taken so seriously?
• Has more recent news continued Mr. Trump’s strained relationship with the judicial branch? Explain.
After writing about or discussing the above questions, students can imagine they are a legal adviser to President Trump. What advice would they give the president about how our system of checks and balances is supposed to work, and what role he as president should have within that system.
Finally, students can create their own editorial cartoons, like the one above by Patrick Chappatte, about any of the topics discussed in this lesson. They can even submit it to our annual editorial cartoon contest (see our contest calendar for details).
