BUDAPEST FESTIVAL ORCHESTRA at David Geffen Hall (Feb. 5, 3 p.m.; Feb. 6, 8 p.m.). Iván Fischer’s endlessly magnificent orchestra arrives in town for two programs, consisting entirely of Beethoven, a composer whom the conductor interprets willfully, at times. On Sunday, hear the First and Fifth Symphonies, as well as the Piano Concerto No. 4, with Richard Goode at the keyboard. On Monday, it’s the Eighth and Ninth Symphonies, with the Concert Chorale of New York providing the vocal heft in the finale.
ALICE COOTE at Zankel Hall (Feb. 4, 7:30 p.m.). After the pioneering work of Brigitte Fassbaender, Christa Ludwig and others, it’s no longer a surprise to see a female singer taking on Schubert’s dark, despondent “Winterreise,” even if men still dominate in this repertoire. Ms. Coote, a committed and thoughtful singer who has become a fixture at the Metropolitan Opera, will be accompanied by Julius Drake.
‘DUST’ at Ernst C. Stiefel Concert Hall, Arnhold Hall (Feb. 3, 8 p.m.; Feb. 4, 3 and 8 p.m.). For this strikingly courageous piece of programming from the Mannes School of Music at the New School, Robert Ashley’s opera about memory and loss is given a staging by William Gustafson. Mr. Ashley’s collaborator, Joan La Barbara, is the music director, supervising an array of innovative vocal techniques.
LEONIDAS KAVAKOS AND YUJA WANG at David Geffen Hall (Feb. 8, 7:30 p.m.). On the face of it, this violin-and-piano duo looks unlikely: Mr. Kavakos is serious, contemplative; Ms. Wang, more renowned for rhythmic funk and hair-raising virtuosity. But, somehow, the pairing works. They’ll play Schubert, Debussy, Janacek and Bartok.
ORPHEUS CHAMBER ORCHESTRA at Carnegie Hall (Feb. 4, 7 p.m.). The staples here, Mendelssohn’s “Scottish” Symphony and Tchaikovsky’s Violin Concerto (with Vadim Gluzman as the soloist), offer nothing special. Look instead to the New York premiere of the superb modernist composer Michael Hersch’s “End Stages,” a tone poem that takes as its inspiration sketches, reflecting on mortality, by the artist Kevin Tuttle.
JORDI SAVALL at Carnegie Hall (Feb. 3, 7:30 p.m.). For the centerpiece of La Serenissima: Music and Arts From the Venetian Republic, a remarkable Carnegie Hall festival, Mr. Savall’s various ensembles — Hespèrion XXI, Le Concert des Nations and the soloists of La Capella Reial de Catalunya — join forces with the Orthodox-Byzantine Vocal Ensemble to explore medieval and Baroque music from Venice and its territories, including Persia and the Ottoman Empire. Mr. Savall’s music-making has a rare spiritual quality to it, and his concerts are always events. Do note that he will return to Carnegie with Hespèrion XXI on Feb. 12, for early-modern Venetian instrumental music.