In Bridgette Francis’ Advanced Placement comparative government class at the College of Staten Island High School for International Studies, there was palpable excitement over a recent project — on the North American Free Trade Agreement.
And at Riverside High School in Greer, S.C., “they’re talking about Jeff Sessions and they’re talking about Betsy DeVos,” said Lindsey Beam, a science teacher and adviser to the youths in the government club.
These are signs of unusual times.
With Mr. Trump in the White House, the obsession with politics that has many adult Americans fiercely focused on the Senate’s latest confirmation hearing and the president’s last Twitter message has filtered down to those not yet of voting age. High school and even middle school students are showing a level of civic engagement not seen in years, their teachers and principals say.
That, in part, is because it is so much easier to keep up with current events than it was in the past. Rather than having to sit down and watch the nightly news, teenagers can just scroll through Snapchat and Facebook on their phones. The adults in their lives are more attuned to politics as well, and dinner tables are thick with conversation about Mr. Trump’s latest executive orders. And then there is the ultimate teenage imperative: Their friends are talking about it, and they don’t want to be left out.
“Not only is information easy to find, it finds you,” said Theo Shulman, a high school freshman at the NYC iSchool, standing at a student rally in Lower Manhattan last week opposing Mr. Trump’s policies.
“And Bernie Sanders is the new Zayn Malik,” Theo said.
But the interest is not confined to young people on the left. At Ms. Francis’ Staten Island high school, the students are a mix of liberal and conservative — Staten Island was the only one of New York City’s five boroughs to go for Mr. Trump in the presidential election. Ms. Francis is in her 16th year of teaching, and she has been through plenty of elections, but during this presidential campaign, something started to change, she said.
Her students would ask her arcana about the caucus process and superdelegates. Now, they can offer up specifics about United States border policies during class discussion. When Ms. DeVos was confirmed as education secretary last week, Ms. Francis said, she heard about it from a student.
For teachers of social studies and A.P. government, however, this moment is scholastic manna from heaven.
Krisztina Jankura, who teaches eighth-grade social studies at a Growing Up Green charter school in Queens, said her students had mentioned watching several speeches — which most likely popped up on their news feeds — in which politicians like Senator Bernie Sanders were discussing cabinet posts.
But students can be just as vulnerable to the scourge of “fake news” as their parents.
Ed Raines, principal of Washburn Rural High School in Topeka, Kan., said that in the twilight of the Obama administration, an outraged student brought in an article that said Mr. Obama had awarded himself the Medal of Honor, which he never did. Class time that day was focused on how to evaluate online sources and what red flags students should watch for.
Mr. Raines said that while his school was in a conservative area, he did have some students on the left. And on either side, he said, their questions seem to be seeking something similar: reassurance in an age of bifurcation and rancorous disagreement.
Of course, this political moment has been unusual for adults as well. Emily Kaczmarek, who teaches English and offers college counseling to low-income students in New York City through two nonprofit organizations, said that watching her students become more engaged had helped her see this moment differently.
