Living in Valley Stream, N.Y.
After enduring years of street noise in their apartment in Flushing, Queens, Devanivas Gandham, 58, and his wife, Wilma, 55, began looking for a quieter place several years ago. “We saw many, many houses,” Mr. Gandham said. “And we didn’t like anything.” Then a cousin who lived in Valley Stream, on Long Island, alerted them to a promising listing.
From visits, they knew that Valley Stream — a village in Nassau County, in the town of Hempstead — was “neat, clean and safe,” Mr. Gandham said, so they arranged to see the house. With six bedrooms and three baths, it was big enough to accommodate not just the couple, but also their grown children: their son, Christi, 32, and daughter, Sherleen, 29. (“It’s an Indian custom,” Mr. Gandham said, for unmarried children to live with their parents.) They bought the house in 2015 for $514,000.
Christopher and Kristen DeVoe, both 36, were also familiar with Valley Stream before buying their three-bedroom, one-bath ranch house for $305,000 in 2010. They had been living there with their son, Tyler, then 3, in a one-bedroom apartment in the house of Mr. DeVoe’s grandmother when they learned they were expecting another child. “We knew we needed a bigger place,” Mr. DeVoe said. And Valley Stream was affordable.
The location was another draw. A real estate title closer, Mr. DeVoe travels throughout Long Island, New York City and Westchester County for work. “I can take a five-minute walk and be at the train station,” he said, “and be in Manhattan in 35 minutes.” And if he needs to drive somewhere, he added, the Southern State and Belt Parkways are minutes away.
Still, when a property-tax increase was imposed last fall, he said, it was “a little disconcerting.” Other residents and elected officials were also dismayed at the increase, which some believed was precipitated by a tax abatement granted to the nearby Green Acres shopping mall by the Town of Hempstead Industrial Development Agency.
The incorporated village of Valley Stream is surrounded by the villages of Malverne and Lynbrook to the east, the hamlets of Hewlett and Woodmere to the south, the hamlet of South Valley Stream to the southwest and Queens to the west. Valley Stream State Park is to the north.
Many residential streets within the village’s nearly four square miles have a mix of Cape Cod- and colonial-style houses on modest-size lots. The main commercial area is on Rockaway Avenue, with bakeries, restaurants, a liquor store, a florist and a coffeehouse. But there are also empty storefronts.
New rental buildings are being developed nearby to attract young commuters, retain older residents and improve business. Two luxury rental buildings and a moderate-income one have been completed and another is in the works.
“This will strengthen our downtown, and by so doing, strengthen the community,” said Barbara DeGrace, special assistant to Mayor Edwin A. Fare for economic development.
First-time buyers, especially “from Queens and Brooklyn,” help drive the Valley Stream market, said Kenny Sung, the broker who owns Sung & Associates realty.
And the school-tax dispute “has not affected the market,” said Henry Rojas, the owner-broker of Exit Realty Hillcourt.
Housing inventory is low, so home prices are strong, real estate agents said. Citing Multiple Listing Service data for the 12-month period ending Jan. 25, Ms. Khachatourian said the median sales price for a single-family house was $397,500, compared with $369,000 for the same period a year earlier. As of Jan. 25, there were 59 single-family homes on the market, from a $285,000 two-bedroom, one-bath Cape Cod to a $649,000 five-bedroom, two-and-a-half-bath colonial, she said.
The Henry Waldinger Memorial Library and the Valley Stream Community Center are gathering spots, as isMitchell’s Restaurant on Rockaway Avenue. Come spring and summer, residents flock to the village’s 105 acres of parkland; the Arthur J. Hendrickson Park has a pool complex, walking and cycling paths, sports courts and a lake.
Most of the children in the village attend one of three elementary school districts (13, 24 or 30), encompassing 10 schools, from kindergarten through sixth grade. Some attend Hewlett-Woodmere School District 14, which goes from prekindergarten through 12th grade.
The Valley Stream Central High School District has 4,600 students: It includes Memorial Junior High School, Grades 7 through 9; Central High School, Grades 10 through 12; and North and South High Schools, Grades 7 through 12.
The average SAT scores for the class of 2016 were 471 in critical reading, 483 in math and 454 in writing, compared with statewide averages of 489, 501 and 477.
The Long Island Rail Road has three stations convenient to village residents: Valley Stream, Gibson and Westwood. Most peak trains from the Valley Stream station are scheduled to reach Pennsylvania Station in 32 to 39 minutes. A monthly pass is $252.
In 1834, Robert Pagan and his family immigrated from Scotland, ultimately settling in Valley Stream, said Guy Ferrara, president of the Valley Stream Historical Society. Mr. Pagan opened a general store and a post office, and named the postal area Valley Stream because of its topography.
In 1869, the first regular train service connected Valley Stream with the Rockaways; a depot was built in 1870. The village grew rapidly in the 1920s and was incorporated in 1925.