H. Boyd Woodruff, a farmer’s son whose groundbreaking research enabled fellow scientists to harvest an arsenal of lifesaving antibiotics from ordinary dirt, died on Jan. 19 at his home in Watchung, N.J. He was 99.
His death was confirmed by his son Hugh.
Dr. Woodruff was instrumental in isolating two microbes that, while effective against tuberculosis and other infections, proved toxic to humans. But his findings in the early 1940s inspired the rapid development of streptomycin, the miracle cure used to treat tuberculosis, typhoid, plague and other diseases that did not respond to penicillin and other drugs.
“This was the eureka moment in all antibiotic discovery,” Dr. Douglas E. Eveleigh, a professor emeritus of biochemistry and microbiology at Rutgers University, said of Dr. Woodruff’s research in an email on Thursday.
In 1942, Dr. Woodruff left his laboratory at Rutgers to join Merck & Company, the pharmaceutical giant, where he oversaw the introduction of other antibiotics, vitamins B12 and C, and riboflavin; a treatment for a rare cancer called Wilms tumor; a pneumonia vaccine; and a drug used to treat river blindness.
His mentor at Rutgers, Dr. Selman A. Waksman, and his Merck colleague Dr. William C. Campbell, who developed Avermectin for river blindness, both won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.
Harold Boyd Woodruff, known as Boyd, was born on July 22, 1917, in Bridgeton, N.J. His father, also named Harold, owned a farm, continuing a family tradition that dated to the early 18th century. His mother, the former Velma Smith, was a secretary.
The family farm, which lacked electricity, could not support the Woodruffs during the Depression, so his father resorted to sharecropping and later moved the family to Buffalo, where he worked briefly in a seafood restaurant. They moved from upstate New York because Mrs. Woodruff suffered from the cold — first to Virginia, then to Florida and finally back to New Jersey.
In high school, he considered becoming an architect but, he later recalled, decided he wanted to be a chemist after taking an experimental course that encouraged “unexpected smells and disruptions of nearby classes,” he wrote in the Annual Review of Microbiology in 1981. He enrolled at Rutgers, where he lived above a chicken coop on campus.
He graduated with a bachelor of science degree in soil chemistry in 1939 and earned a doctorate in microbiology under Dr. Waksman in what was then the New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station (now the Rutgers School of Environmental and Biological Sciences).
He joined Merck the same year he married Jeanette Whitner. His wife died in 2015. In addition to their son Hugh, he is survived by another son, Brian, and three grandchildren.
Inspired by Alexander Fleming’s experiments with penicillin and research by a former Rutgers graduate student, René Dubos of the Rockefeller Institute (now the Rockefeller University), Dr. Waksman encouraged Dr. Woodruff to investigate whether actinomycetes, threadlike bacteria found in the soil, could produce what would become known as an antibiotic.
Dr. Woodruff was able to isolate two microbes, culture them and purify the antibiotics they produced: first actinomycin, which he found could inhibit tuberculosis, and later streptothricin.
During that suit, Dr. Waksman said that in isolating streptothricin, Dr. Woodruff had contributed “as much as 20 times” more than Dr. Schatz to the later discovery of streptomycin, Peter Pringle wrote in his book “Experiment Eleven: Deceit and Betrayal in the Discovery of the Cure for Tuberculosis” (2012).
Dr. Woodruff, who was assigned 2 percent of the royalties in the settlement of Dr. Schatz’s suit, later endowed an undergraduate scholarship fund and a microbiology graduate fellowship in soils and environmental biology at Rutgers.
At Merck, he was on the team that during World War II perfected the first commercial mass production of penicillin. He was later the executive director for biological sciences and executive administrator for Merck Sharp & Dohme Research Laboratories in Japan for 10 years. He was also the founding editor of the journal Applied Microbiology.
In addition to Dr. Woodruff’s many awards, a bacterium, Seleniivibrio woodruffii — isolated from sludge in a New Jersey wastewater treatment plant — was named in his honor.