The F.B.I. said on Tuesday that it was investigating the shooting of two Indian immigrants by a white man who leveled ethnic slurs at them and questioned their immigration status before he opened fire at a Kansas bar as a hate crime.
The suspect, Adam W. Purinton, was thrown out of Austins Bar and Grill in Olathe, Kan., last Wednesday after verbally harassing the two Indian men, Srinivas Kuchibhotla and Alok Madasani, and suggesting they did not belong in the United States, the authorities said.
He returned to the bar with a gun a short time later and shot both men as they sat on its outdoor patio, killing Mr. Kuchibhotla and injuring Mr. Madasani, the authorities said. Ian Grillot, another bar patron, was also shot and injured as he tried to stop Mr. Purinton from fleeing the scene.
Mr. Purinton was charged last week with premeditated first-degree murder and two counts of attempted premeditated first-degree murder. The Kansas City division of the F.B.I. said on Tuesday that federal authorities were also investigating the shootings as a hate crime. The move was not unexpected given the nature of the shooting.
The shootings have heightened anxieties about a surge of white nationalism and a climate of hostility toward immigrants and racial minorities in the United States. Sunayana Dumala, the widow of Mr. Kuchibhotla, addressed those fears directly during an emotional news conference last Friday.
In an interview with The New York Times last week, one of the victims, Mr. Madasani, said Mr. Purinton had asked them directly about their immigration status shortly before he opened fire.
“He asked us what visa are we currently on and whether we are staying here illegally,” Mr. Madasani told The Times. Both he and Mr. Kuchibhotla were educated in the United States and were working and living in the country legally.
President Trump has made an immigration crackdown one of the centerpieces of his young administration, including a ban on travelers from seven Muslim-majority countries that is currently the subject of litigation.
