This week brings some serious-minded nonfiction (Wall Street wrongdoing, covert wars, depression) and meaty fiction (an epic bildungsroman, border wars, a multigenerational immigrant saga) with a glamorous dose of diverting memoir from the actress and biographer Patricia Bosworth. Plus, a new book from Kevin Wilson, author of the beloved 2011 novel, “The Family Fang.” I’m especially heartened by the ambitious sweep of this week’s best fiction. There is nothing scaled-back or slight about the stories these writers set out to tell.
THE ORIGINAL BLACK ELITE: Daniel Murray and the Story of a Forgotten Era, by Elizabeth Dowling Taylor. (Amistad/HarperCollins, $27.99.) Taylor’s fascinating and well-researched account of a wealthy black civic leader and businessman (1851-1925) reveals how black Americans benefited from opportunities afforded by Reconstruction policies.
THIS CLOSE TO HAPPY: A Reckoning With Depression, by Daphne Merkin. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $26.) Readers remain drawn to so called “misery memoirs” — for good reason: They are often quite well done. This long-awaited chronicle of the author’s despair is full of sharp observations and a winning frankness. Although its focus is personal, it is an important addition to the literature of mental illness.
PERFECT LITTLE WORLD, by Kevin Wilson. (Ecco/HarperCollins, $26.99.) In this well-constructed, moving novel, a child psychologist persuades a pregnant girl to join an experiment in communal child rearing. This book, from the author of “The Family Fang,” likewise explores what it means to be a family.
4 3 2 1, by Paul Auster. (Holt, $32.50.) This book marks a bit of a departure for Paul Auster, one of New York City’s great contemporary novelists. This latest book is an epic bildungsroman that presents the reader with four versions of the formative years of a Jewish boy born in Newark in 1947. It is a work of outsize ambition and remarkable craft.
THE MEN IN MY LIFE: A Memoir of Love and Art in 1950s Manhattan, by Patricia Bosworth. (Harper/HarperCollins, $27.99.) Bosworth’s second memoir, a vivid coming-of-age story, is emblematic of its time. It covers Sarah Lawrence, the Actors Studio, first marriage, an abortion, career success and the slow suicide of Bosworth’s father, a progressive lawyer. Deliciously gossipy pleasure lies within.
DARK AT THE CROSSING, by Elliot Ackerman. (Knopf, $25.95.) In this absorbing and topical novel by the author of “Green on Blue,” an Arab-American ex-soldier, once an interpreter in Iraq, travels to Turkey so that he can enter Syria. He wants to fight against Assad, but the border is closed and complications arise. Given the current situation in the Middle East, this story could not be more timely.
THE MAN WHO NEVER STOPPED SLEEPING, by Aharon Appelfeld. Translated by Jeffrey M. Green. (Schocken, $26.) The protagonist of this dreamlike novel (in a masterly translation) is a Jewish refugee from World War II who becomes a writer in Israel, like the author.
A GREAT PLACE TO HAVE A WAR: America in Laos and the Birth of a Military CIA, by Joshua Kurlantzick. (Simon & Schuster, $28.) A thorough and affecting account of the American intervention in Laos from 1963 to 1974, which was hidden from the public and prefigured the wars of the past 15 years.
PACHINKO, by Min Jin Lee. (Grand Central, $27.) This stunning novel chronicling four generations of an ethnic Korean family in Japan is about outsiders and much more. A fascinating look at immigrant life among Koreans — and the prejudices they face — in Japan.