Paul Tagliabue is the former commissioner of the N.F.L., the most prodigiously profitable sports league in America. As he ages and his thoughts turn to his legacy, he yearns to be voted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame.
We reporters can be disagreeable, and who has not uttered words he comes to regret? Let’s step past words and take a close look at Tagliabue’s role in overseeing a decade-long cover-up of the N.F.L.’s destruction of the brains of its players.
I pulled up a case filed in 2012 in federal court, Jeff Hostetler et al. v. the N.F.L. The lawsuit is accompanied by a list of dozens, stars and journeymen, who sustained brain damage in service to our most popular pro sport. Some can no longer read; others cannot remember where their home is; others require help eating.
This is not terribly shocking. In 1928, doctors noted abnormalities in the brains of boxers, who, like football players, take blow after blow to the head. By the 1980s, studies revealed short- and long-term damage to the brains of football players.
Tagliabue became commissioner in 1989 and served 17 years. In 1994, two star players retired with serious head injuries from repeated concussions. Tagliabue responded by establishing the oxymoronically named Mild Traumatic Brain Injury Committee. At the urging of Leon Hess, then the Jets’ owner, Tagliabue tapped a rheumatologist, Elliot Pellman, to direct that panel. This doctor had no expertise in head injuries and remained on the Jets’ payroll.
Pellman’s panel worked at a languorous pace.
In fact, Pellman labored to discredit the studies documenting a link between crushing hits and brain injuries. Scientists said he pressured them to remain silent. In fact, it was Pellman’s research that ended up being discredited.
This is the sound of doctors talking in tongues.
Tagliabue was asked about Pellman, who remained in the league’s employ until last year. Faced with so much evidence to the contrary, he insisted that his doctor did fine work. “We were,” he said, “in the forefront” of concussion research.
Culverhouse agreed that Tagliabue did not handle concussions well. But his virtues outnumbered his sins, she said.
She credited him with taking the lead on an issue of real principle and removing the 1993 Super Bowl from Arizona when that state’s voters refused to recognize Martin Luther King’s Birthday as a state holiday.
That gave me pause. Our lives should not be reduced to our worst moments. Then I sat on the subway Friday morning and leafed again through that lawsuit by the injured players. Would we any longer excuse the owner of a coal mine if he presided over injuries that led to hundreds of his employees sustaining life-altering brain damage?
If his factotums covered up the damage, and urged some to silence, wouldn’t we question the quality of his leadership?
If he is inducted, Tagliabue will find the Hall an agreeable place. Walking its hallways, he will find helmets and shoulder pads and old footballs and photos and exhibits glorifying in the toughness of these men. He will not find an exhibit on concussions. In comparison to the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y., which deals openly with the darkest chambers of the sport’s history, from racial exclusion to steroids, the Pro Football Hall of Fame is a company store.
This is dangerous mythology.
Seau retired in 2009. In 2012, he shot himself in the heart. A subsequent study of his brain found he suffered from C.T.E. The Hall of Fame website does not mention details of his death or those medical findings.
That is so, certainly.