WASHINGTON — The Senate hearing on Judge Neil M. Gorsuch’s nomination to the Supreme Court will begin on March 20, the Judiciary Committee said on Thursday, setting the stage for one of the most contested judicial confirmations in a generation.
Democrats, still angry that Republicans refused to allow President Barack Obama to fill the seat over the last 11 months of his presidency, have vowed tough questioning of Judge Gorsuch, who was nominated by President Trump on Jan. 31.
Despite the judge’s strong legal credentials, some Democrats are likely to oppose him, with many people on the left demanding that they push back against Mr. Trump in any way they can. Democrats have also argued that the court seat was effectively stolen by Senate Republicans, who refused to hold hearings or a vote on Mr. Obama’s nomination of Judge Merrick B. Garland.
Republicans hold a 52-seat majority in the Senate, but they would need some Democratic votes to reach 60 and break a possible filibuster. That raises the prospect that Republicans could change Senate rules to prohibit, for the first time in two centuries, the use of the filibuster on Supreme Court nominations. Mr. Trump has encouraged Republicans to employ this so-called nuclear option.
The vacancy that Judge Gorsuch would fill, left by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia, is on track to be the longest opening on the court since the 1860s. Justice Scalia died on Feb. 13, 2016, and the March 20 date means that the hearing would begin 401 days later. Questioning of Judge Gorsuch will begin on March 21, and the hearing will last three or four days. A confirmation vote by the full Senate would not be held any earlier than April.
The longest Supreme Court vacancy in the past century and a half was 391 days, after the resignation of Justice Abe Fortas in 1969.
If not for the blocking of Judge Garland, Judge Gorsuch, 49, who sits on the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit, in Denver, might not be considered a contentious choice.
Democrats who have met with him say he has failed to sufficiently answer some basic questions they believe are critical to making a proper assessment of him, including whether he would serve as a check on what they view as Mr. Trump’s overreach.
