On Thursday, up to 14 inches of snow fell in the New York area. Flights and trains were disrupted. Schools closed.
But fashion doesn’t get snow days.
Day 1 of New York Fashion Week continued mostly as planned, with Lexus briefly canceling its complimentary transportation service and designers sending out urgent emails letting guests know that the shows were still on.
Here’s what you missed while snuggling under the covers.
1. Everybody dealt with the weather in their own ways.
2. Planned Parenthood pins made several appearances.
They were handed out to designers, press and modeling agencies, and members of the media by the Council of Fashion Designers of America as part of a campaign to raise awareness for the group.
3. Adam Selman, who has designed costumes for Rihanna, seemed to have Valentine’s Day on his mind.
4. Thom Yorke was the D.J. at Rag & Bone’s arty party.
The lead singer of the ever-moody Radiohead provided a surprisingly upbeat, danceable soundtrack to the celebration on Thursday night.
5. Calvin Klein’s new designer, Raf Simons, paid homage to Americana.
Though Mr. Simons is Belgian, he still managed to provide a “crystal clear argument for the relevancy of the American idea — and a way forward,” Vanessa Friedman, our fashion critic, wrote in her review of his Friday morning show. And a good thing, too — the fashion world had high expectations for the former creative director of Dior.
6. Chromat dove into politics.
7. Kylie Jenner sat front row at Jeremy Scott’s show.
8. Jason Wu used nearly 68,000 Swarovski crystals in his new collection.
The sparkle (and the show, held at the St. Regis hotel) marked his label's 10th anniversary.
What to look out for tomorrow.
— Taoray Wang shows at 11 a.m. The designer is a favorite of Tiffany Trump.
— Christian Siriano, the designer who dressed Leslie Jones last year for the “Ghostbusters” premiere and whose dress Michelle Obama wore to the Democratic National Convention, shows his collection at the Plaza Hotel.
— Alexander Wang closes out the day with a show on West 146th Street in Hamilton Heights. Look out for the model Hanne Gaby Odiele, who recently became an intersex-rights advocate.