HOUSTON — If it seems that Julio Jones does not fit the mold of a star wide receiver in the N.F.L., that may be because he did not grow up watching football. Ever. A fan of track and field and an avid watcher of the Olympics, he summed up his history of football fandom as having once watched a highlight clip of Barry Sanders.
Jones, the Atlanta Falcons star, has spent the last three seasons locked in a rivalry of sorts — for recognition as the N.F.L.’s top receiver — with Antonio Brown of the Pittsburgh Steelers. But while Brown has become a celebrity along the lines of Michael Irvin or Terrell Owens off the field, Jones has seemed content to gain the respect of everyone in the game, with little use for fame beyond that.
Butler took some ribbing over the post, which he wrote when he was a student at West Alabama, but he said it was more aspirational than egotistical.
Jones did not bite when the Twitter post was repeated to him on Monday, in the players’ first session with the news media.
For most cornerbacks, defending Jones is more nightmare than dream. Listed at 6 feet 4 inches and 220 pounds, he is the total package at wide receiver: big enough to outmuscle any defensive back for a catch, and fast enough to outrun any of them once he has the ball. He has made 497 catches over his first six seasons, which ranks eighth for a receiver in that time frame and gives him 51 more than Jerry Rice, the N.F.L.’s top career receiver, had at the same point in his career.
Any uncertainty about Jones’s ability to handle big moments disappeared in Atlanta’s 44-21 win over Green Bay in the N.F.C. championship game; he had nine catches for 180 yards and two touchdowns. Jones pulled down a number of seemingly impossible catches, including one on which he caught the ball as a defender flipped him over, and held onto it while landing on his head.
His most impressive play was a 73-yard touchdown in which he got more than 60 of the yards after the catch. The play started with LaDarius Gunter, a Packers defensive back, illegally holding Jones as he broke downfield. A penalty flag flew, but Jones did not need the do-over. Gunter had no chance of keeping up with Jones, who left the cornerback sprawled on the turf shortly after the catch and then tossed Damarious Randall, another Green Bay defensive back, to the ground with a stiff-arm before strutting into the end zone.
This weekend may be Jones’s chance to surpass Brown in celebrity. As a Steelers rookie, Brown made his only appearance in the Super Bowl, catching one pass for 1 yard.
Over the last three seasons, their statistics have been remarkable similar. Jones, who will turn 28 on Friday, has caught 323 passes for 4,873 yards and 20 touchdowns, while Brown, 28, who has played two more games, has 371 receptions for 4,816 yards and 35 touchdowns.
In Wednesday’s interview session, Jones made what almost passed for a provocative comment in the Super Bowl buildup. Asked if he thought any player in the N.F.L. could contain him in single coverage, he replied: “One-on-one? No, I do not.” He said it dryly, as if simply stating a widely understood fact.
Jones’s teammates said that any perception that he was dull did not hold up when the cameras, tape recorders and notebooks were gone.
Still, when asked if he could ever see Jones following Brown’s path to competition on “Dancing With the Stars,” Sanu balked.
Dwight Freeney, the Falcons’ veteran defensive end, went a step further.
