Exhibitions from Florida to Cleveland this winter are asking visitors to consider the affinities between sound and visual art — and the way we see (and hear) artwork.
This season, both the Gallery at Windsor in Vero Beach, Florida and Albertz Benda Gallery in New York are mounting work by Christopher Le Brun, a British artist and the president of the Royal Academy of Arts. Both called “Composer,” the exhibitions immediately introduce the connection between paintings and musical compositions, with work titles like “Score,” “Symphony” and “Middle C.” “It’s particularly early 20th-century music that interested me,” he says, “where you’re seeing a battle between tonality and atonality. The spaces that it makes you think of are complicated and speculative and very rich.” Concepts shared by art and music, like texture and tone, impact the way he layers oil on his canvases. And the relationship works in both directions: Le Brun’s painting “Cloud” inspired a piano composition by the composer Richard Birchall (above). For more evidence of artist-musician collaboration, stop by the New Museum’s Raymond Pettibon retrospective in New York — record covers for bands such as Sonic Youth and Black Flag feature the American artist’s subversive drawings.
Another “Symphony” hangs at New York’s Leila Heller Gallery as part of an exhibition that celebrates the birth of the Guggenheim Museum. This early 20th-century painting, by the German artist Rudolf Bauer, similarly connects principles of musical arrangement with the organization of bright, exuberant shapes on his canvas. “The idea of composition is a double entendre,” affirms curator Brooke McGowan Herzog. She points out that concepts such as balance and rhythm also structure an abstract painting. In 1939, Solomon Guggenheim opened his Museum of Non-Objective Painting on Manhattan’s West 54th Street. According to Herzog, the curator and artist Hilla Rebay ensured that both Bach and Beethoven played in the space, creating a contemplative atmosphere. The Leila Heller exhibition includes works from artists who impacted the Guggenheim Foundation collection at its incipient stages, including the famed synesthete Wassily Kandinsky (who heard color and saw sound). The art invites visitors to imagine the days before the Frank Lloyd Wright space opened and classical music stopped flowing through the galleries.
