Álvaro González’s shoe store in the Marylebone neighborhood of London.
LONDON — For 20 years Álvaro González was a secret accessories weapon, designing first at Valentino, then at Tod’s, Jimmy Choo and Valextra. Three years ago, he began to quietly emerge with his own line of leather goods. And this month he fully comes into his own.
His own store, that is.
“Department stores are great, but you only really see the product — you don’t get to see a brand’s or a designer’s personality. I felt it was time for clients to see mine,” Mr. González, 51, said of his tiny boutique, which opened here last week in the affluent Marylebone neighborhood.
“I call Marylebone the ‘10-pounds area.’ It is the one place in London where everywhere feels like it is only a £10 cab ride away, making it very convenient,” said Mr. González, who was born in Spain. He also had a more personal incentive when it came to the store’s location: His home is only a few hundred yards away.
“I can walk over to work in my slippers if I fancied it,” he said.
Mr. González had a personal incentive when it came to the store’s location: His home is only a few hundred yards away.
After creating 100 pairs of sandals to give guests at his wedding in 2013, Mr. González decided it was time to work under his own name. Since then, the women’s line has grown to include butter-soft flat and heeled sandals adorned with colorful feathery plumes, or straps made of alligator or stingray skin, or candy-colored metallic wrappings that snake between toes and over the instep. The simpler men’s sandals also have become a signature.
These sorts of summery styles, and more, are displayed in the new store, where one wall is stacked floor-to-ceiling with chic creamy shoe boxes and the other walls are painted the faintest of dusky pinks. There are hanging porcelain palm fronds and boxes of cactuses behind the till. The décor, inspired by Mr. González’s 12th-century summer house in Florence, Italy, includes a kitschy 1950s garden table made out of a giant tree trunk and a folding cash desk painted with wild horses that he found in Turin, Italy. He is, he said, a flea market fiend.
“I can’t help it: It’s an obsession,” Mr. González said. “I spot these pieces from afar, then have to have them.” Presumably he hopes passers-by peeking through the window will feel the same about his shoes.