They came to Lower Manhattan from around the world to visit the 9/11 Memorial on an unseasonably warm winter day. They came to see where it had happened — where terrorists had crashed two jetliners into the World Trade Center towers, destroying them in horrific plumes of ash, flames and pulverized concrete.
But many did not realize they were also visiting the site of an earlier attack that, while less deadly, presaged an era of terrorism fears in New York City that many believe culminated in September 2001.
It has been almost 24 years since the Feb. 26, 1993, World Trade Center bombing that killed six people and injured around 1,000, and many who gathered outside the 9/11 Memorial on Sunday had no knowledge of the attack or the fiery speech of the man — Omar Abdel Rahman — who the authorities believe inspired it.
Mr. Abdel Rahman died on Saturday in a federal prison in North Carolina where he was serving a life sentence for his role in plotting a broad terror campaign in New York that was never carried out.
Kath Jones of Portsmouth, England, who was waiting with her daughter and her friends to get into the memorial, said she did not remember the 1993 bombing. But for her, as it does for so many, Sept. 11 looms large. She was deployed to Afghanistan four times from 2004 to 2014.
“I was a nurse for the Royal Navy and would take care of the Americans and Brits who came to the military hospital,” said Ms. Jones, 46, who recently retired after serving 25 years.
Lisa Morrison, 54, of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., only learned of the first World Trade Center attack while learning about Sept. 11. “I was surprised that it happened,” she said.
Ravi Singh traveled from his home in New Jersey to see the memorial with his wife and another couple. He did not recall the events of February 1993 — the bombing, followed by the frenzied rush to catch the plotters.
But for some at the memorial on Sunday, the first World Trade Center attack remained a searing memory.
Lindsay Buckley and her husband, Brian, of North Carolina, remembered it well.
