As the N.B.A. comes to grips with DeMarcus Cousins joining Anthony Davis to form one of the most imposing frontcourts in league history, the most striking thing may be how little it cost the New Orleans Pelicans to pull the move off.
But once that shock fades, it might sink in that in a Western Conference dominated by the small-ball Golden State Warriors, a team suddenly exists that best exploits Golden State’s weaknesses.
In exchange for Cousins, a player best described as Shaquille O’Neal having gone to a weight-loss clinic and come back with a crossover dribble and a bad attitude, the Pelicans had to give up only an old and underwhelming rookie (Buddy Hield), a few draft picks, and spare parts (Tyreke Evans and Langston Galloway). It was a shockingly small haul for a 26-year-old franchise player, and it drew comparisons to the Philadelphia 76ers’ trade of Charles Barkley to the Phoenix Suns for Jeff Hornacek, Andrew Lang and Tim Perry in 1992. Cousins is younger than Sir Charles was, may be just as talented and has an even more troubling attitude.
Cousins, a seven-year veteran, is in his fourth consecutive season of averaging in excess of 22 points and 10 rebounds a game. He has stepped things up this season with averages of 27.8 points, 10.7 rebounds and 4.9 assists a game. According to Basketball-Reference.com, the only players to average in excess of 27 points, 10 rebounds and 4.9 assists for a season were Oscar Robertson, Larry Bird, Wilt Chamberlain, Elgin Baylor and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar.
Cousins will team with Davis, creating a frontcourt of nearly unmatched size and versatility. Cousins will most likely take over at center, cementing Davis, a 6-foot-10 23-year-old who just scored 52 points in the All-Star Game, at power forward. They are both likely to sacrifice some statistical dominance, but it is truly remarkable that the team has two players capable of averaging 27 points and 10 rebounds a game (something that has been done by only 21 players).
The question, at least for this season, is whether the Pelicans will dig out of their hole and make the playoffs. Currently 23-34, New Orleans is 11th in a race for eight playoff spots, with Portland, Sacramento (which should sink like a stone) and Denver in its way. With 25 games left, the Pelicans have to work Cousins into their rotation, find solutions for the absence of Hield and Evans, and probably win at least 15 games to safely outpace the competition.
A longer-term question is Cousins’s attitude: He has been a consistent malcontent, and that could rub off on Davis. Cousins could also walk away as a free agent after next season.
In the end, a team that badly needed to be shaken up if it hoped to capitalize on Davis’s prime got the best player available for a trade, and the Pelicans seemingly gave up nothing they will regret losing (especially if the team qualifies for the playoffs, thus devaluing the first-round pick sent to Sacramento).
A season and a half of Cousins very likely outweighs the risks of exposing Davis to Cousins’s antics.
Everyone involved should look forward to April 8, when the Pelicans, 23 games into this experiment, will play at Golden State in what could be a preview of the first round of the playoffs.