Health|Gorsuch Staunchly Opposes ‘Aid in Dying.’ Does It Matter?
Gorsuch Staunchly Opposes ‘Aid in Dying.’ Does It Matter?
Judge Gorsuch’s position is creating anxiety in a movement that recently celebrated victories in several states and expressed optimism about winning more. “He has revealed tremendous personal hostility,” said Kathryn Tucker, executive director of the End of Life Liberty Project.
“I can’t think of any other justice who has written so much on the subject or is so opposed,” said Kevin Diaz, legal director of the advocacy group Compassion & Choices.
As an Antonin Scalia-style originalist, Judge Gorsuch presumably would find constitutional only those rights actually addressed in the Constitution or determined to be in the framers’ minds when they wrote it. Neither the document nor its authors had anything to say about a right to hasten one’s death with lethal medication when terminally ill.
Yet supporters of aid in dying don’t sound as despondent as one might expect, even if Judge Gorsuch is confirmed. Why? They don’t see the issue coming before the Supreme Court anytime soon.
The court has already weighed in, twice. In 1997, the justices heard combined cases from Washington State and New York brought by doctors and dying patients who claimed a constitutional right to physician-assisted death — and ruled unanimously against them.
Oregon enacted its Death With Dignity law that year. The Bush administration tried to block it by depriving participating doctors of their federal licenses to prescribe controlled substances, but the Supreme Court slapped down that argument, 6 to 3.
Five other states (Washington, Montana, Vermont, California and Colorado) and the District of Columbia have since legalized aid in dying through legislation, referendums or court cases. And state courts are where the legal action is likely to remain.
“The Future of Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia” by Neil M. Gorsuch.
“Proponents of aid in dying, like proponents of other progressive views of the Constitution, are going to stay the heck out of the U.S. Supreme Court,” said Vincent Bonventre, a constitutional law professor at Albany Law School in New York.
One area where Judge Gorsuch might have influence, Mr. Diaz said, is in religious-exemption cases. As an appellate court judge hearing the Hobby Lobby case, Judge Gorsuch argued in a concurring opinion that employers with religious objections could decline to cover contraception as part of workers’ health insurance. The Supreme Court later agreed.
In Vermont, two medical groups have challenged the state’s aid-in-dying law, saying that if doctors decline to participate on religious grounds, they should not have to refer patients to other providers or mention the option at all.
Because it’s being heard in a federal court, Mr. Diaz said, that case could eventually reach the Supreme Court. But even a decision for the plaintiffs wouldn’t overturn aid-in-dying laws altogether.
As a practical matter, groups advocating the cause find themselves in state courts almost continually. Montana residents can seek lethal prescriptions at the end of life because the state’s Supreme Court ruled in 2009 that no state statute outlawed it; New Mexicans have no such legal option, after that state’s Supreme Court last year declined to find aid in dying constitutionally protected.
Supporters often fight rear-guard legal actions. In California, for example, groups have sued in state court to stop the new End of Life Option Act, which took effect in June.
In other states, though, it’s supporters of aid in dying who turn to the courts. In Massachusetts and Hawaii, physicians and patients have filed suits arguing that (as in Montana) the practice is not outlawed by state statute and should be legal.
In 2015, New York patients and physicians brought the Myers case, named for a Manhattan resident, Sara Myers, who had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig’s disease.
Should the New York court — or any state high court — find aid in dying protected under its state constitution, it won’t matter who sits on the Supreme Court.
New York’s highest court has national clout, said Edward Mechmann, a lawyer who is also filing an amicus brief in the case as public policy director for the Archdiocese of New York. If the justices were to find aid in dying legal, “I think it would be very influential, judicially and legislatively,” he said.
Years hence, if additional states have adopted aid-in-dying laws and the Supreme Court looks more hospitable, advocates might actually want to bring a federal case that could establish constitutional protection in every state.
