President Trump said a politically charged atmosphere led to the historic best picture mistake at the Oscars, in an interview published Monday on Breitbart News.
It was Mr. Trump’s first reaction to the now-infamous mistake, in which “La La Land” was announced on Sunday night as winner in the best picture category, when the winner was really “Moonlight.” The correct movie was announced minutes later after a brief but stunning spectacle of confusion and shock.
Mr. Trump’s response was a marked departure from the way he had responded to the Oscars in the past; he usually posted his remarks, often scathing broadsides, on Twitter.
Compared to the Screen Actors Guild Awards and the Golden Globes, references to Mr. Trump at the Oscars were less pointed. Jimmy Kimmel, the show’s host, made a number of cracks at Mr. Trump’s expense, but didn’t approach the searing rhetoric that some in Hollywood have employed.
“This broadcast is being watched live by millions of Americans and around the world in more than 225 countries that now hate us,” Mr. Kimmel said in his monologue.
Asghar Farhadi, the Iranian director of “The Salesman,” won his second Oscar for best foreign language film on Sunday, but did not attend to protest the travel ban Mr. Trump’s administration set in motion shortly after entering office.
His statement did not mention Mr. Trump by name.
Mr. Trump has held a long fascination with Hollywood. He briefly considered attending the University of South California’s film school in his youth and appeared in a number of movies and television shows through the decades. In 2007 he won a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. The star was eventually smashed by vandals during his presidential campaign.
Not one to keep his pop culture opinions to himself, Mr. Trump has been harshly critical of the Oscars for years, calling them “boring,” “average,” “sad” and “an insult to the past.” He even once used an expletive to describe what he thought of Hollywood’s biggest night.
He even once pitched himself to host in 2014.
This year, there were no tweets, even after Mr. Kimmel baited the president with one of his own during the show.
It is unclear if he actually was or not.