Two second-half substitutes came on and quickly scored as Juventus won at F.C. Porto, 2-0, on Wednesday after playing with an extra man for an hour in the first leg of the Champions League round-of-16 matchup.
Marko Pjaca and Dani Alves broke through with goals in the 72nd and the 74th minutes to give the Italian champions a commanding advantage.
Porto’s Alex Telles was sent off in the 27th after a pair of fouls.
Juventus hemmed Porto into its area, and Pjaca scored five minutes after coming on.
Alves was even quicker in finding the net two minutes after entering the game.
Pablo Sarabia and Joaquin Correa scored to leave Sevilla a draw away from reaching the quarterfinals of the European competition for the first time in nearly 60 years.
Vardy kept Leicester alive with a goal in the 73rd minute in one of the few chances created by the English champions.
Correa missed a penalty in the 15th minute for Sevilla.
Chris Paul has been cleared by doctors and could be back in the Los Angeles Clippers’ lineup Thursday at Golden State.
Coach Doc Rivers said that Paul had “looked great” in practice Tuesday and that the only remaining hurdle was how comfortable Paul felt after another practice.
Paul has been out since Jan. 16 after tearing a ligament in his left thumb. The original timetable was six to eight weeks, so Paul, a star point guard, could return slightly ahead of schedule.
The Clippers come out of the All-Star break on a four-game winning streak. After playing the West-leading Warriors, they host San Antonio, which has the second-best record in the Western Conference.
The Miami Dolphins have signed the free-agent quarterback Dan Marino.
More than 17 years removed from his final N.F.L. pass and 12 years after his enshrinement in the Pro Football Hall of Fame, Marino “re-signed” with the Dolphins — as did five other prominent former members of the team, all signing ceremonial one-day contracts designed so they could officially retire as members of the franchise.
“This organization, the team, the city, football — it all means so much to me,” Marino said.
The Pro Football Hall of Famers Bob Griese and Larry Little were also among Wednesday’s signees, along with Kim Bokamper and Nat Moore. Sam Madison was delayed but was also issued a one-day deal.
SENTENCE IN GIANTS SEATS SCAM A New Jersey man has been sentenced to five years behind bars for defrauding more than a dozen people out of $116,550 in a Giants seat license scam.
John Gorman admitted last May that he had conned 16 victims into believing he had more than two dozen personal seat licenses at MetLife Stadium available for sale. Monmouth County prosecutors said Gorman, 49, of Matawan, was sentenced Friday.
Gorman shares a name with the team’s director of ticketing. Prosecutors say he let many victims believe he was the team official to make his scheme appear more legitimate.
Gorman was paid in full, but his victims never got their purchased seats. The scam began after the Giants’ 2008 Super Bowl win and continued for several seasons.
The American teenager CiCi Bellis captured her first career top-10 victory when she upset sixth-ranked Agnieszka Radwanska, 6-4, 2-6, 6-2, at the Dubai Tennis Championships.
Bellis is one of two teenagers in the quarterfinals, with the 19-year-old Ana Konjuh beating eighth-seeded Elena Vesnina, 3-6, 6-4, 7-6 (4).
Bellis led, 2-0, in the third set before the fourth-seeded Radwanska rebounded to 2-2. Radwanska faded afterward, with Bellis clinching 16 of the last 22 points.
Top-seeded Angelique Kerber reached the tournament’s quarterfinals for the first time by beating the Olympic champion Monica Puig, 6-2, 6-3.