For a brief period that began in December, students in Northampton, Mass., arriving at elementary schools were greeted once a week by police officers lining the sidewalks to deliver high-fives and encouragement.
It was part of a trust-building program called High Five Fridays, intended to show children that police officers were not the scary men and women they might have heard about or seen on television. Parents overwhelmingly supported the program.
But in January, Jody Kasper, the city’s police chief, started hearing from a small number of parents who said that their children — especially minorities and those who have had difficult experiences with the police — were uncomfortable with the officers’ presence. Concerned that the education of those students might be harmed, Chief Kasper and the school district’s superintendent, John Provost, decided last week to scrap the program.
She noted that most of the response to the effort had been positive, but said the police needed to listen to those who felt otherwise.
In response to the program’s cancellation, a groundswell of parents said the police leaders and school officials had it right the first time. They criticized the decision to discontinue a program that they thought had promoted healthy interactions with police officers. The Police Department’s Facebook page filled with angry comments, many from parents unsympathetic to complaints.
A petition is circulating to reinstate the program.
“I just think my kid will benefit, and the community as a whole will benefit, from positive opportunities for the police and the children to get together,” Tim Chilson, 58, said in an interview on Tuesday.
“I’m a little disappointed because I felt so happy when I got to school,” Maverick said.
At a community meeting in January, one parent, Gina Nortonsmith, said that the program had good intentions but was “ill considered, tone-deaf and potentially damaging,” according to The Daily Hampshire Gazette.
Multiple studies have found a stark racial divide in perceptions of the police. White people are more than twice as likely to say that the police use an appropriate amount of force, treat racial and ethnic groups equally and are held accountable when misconduct occurs, according to a Pew Research Center survey from September.
Northampton, a western Massachusetts city of about 28,000 people, was estimated to be 87.1 percent white in 2015.
Community policing efforts, with a focus on listening and building trust over the long term, were a focus of a task force created by President Barack Obama in 2015 after multiple high-profile police confrontations, including in Ferguson, Mo., in 2014. Chief Kasper said officers got the idea for the high-five program after attending a conference last year in San Diego. Other departments, including one in Conway, Ark., have tried similar efforts.
“It’s important, especially in today’s environment, that children know that police officers are their friends, and they’re someone to be trusted and called upon in times of emergency,” said LaTresha Woodruff, a Conway police spokeswoman. She said she had not heard of any complaints.
Chief Kasper and Mr. Provost, the Northampton superintendent, said they would work to replace the program with other forms of youth outreach. Though Chief Kasper said the officers loved high-fiving students, she said they needed to be thoughtful of children who fear the police.
“One of the things we’re all learning in our current climate is we need to listen to other people and hear what they’re saying,” she said.