For the last State of the City address of his first term, Mayor Bill de Blasio broke with tradition and spoke from notes on Monday, not from a prepared speech. The goal, aides said, was to make the mayor sound more natural and less scripted.
It was not the only way the speech departed from the three previously delivered by Mr. de Blasio.
Since riding into City Hall on a message of progressive change, the mayor has used the annual address as perhaps his most powerful pulpit, arguing for the centerpieces of his agenda.
In 2014, Mr. de Blasio doubled down on his promise to bring universal prekindergarten to children across the city, proposing to pay for it with a tax on high-earning New Yorkers.
In 2015, the mayor focused on affordable housing as his administration ramped up its efforts to pass laws to reshape zoning rules, and require a certain amount of affordable housing in new buildings that benefited from rezonings. He also introduced a plan for a citywide ferry plan, with the goal of rolling it out this year.
Last year, transportation and development projects took center stage in a State of the City address — his first delivered at night — that presented no new vision of the city but plenty of new amenities, including a light rail line along the Brooklyn-Queens waterfront, countdown clocks for buses, and a new innovation hub on Governors Island.
Yet, those who tuned in on Monday found a different sort of mayor, one focused on his accomplishments and providing fewer policy proposals.
“The next front line in the battle is good-paying jobs,” he said, about 45 minutes into the address, setting the threshold at $50,000.
Mr. de Blasio said at the start that the speech would not include many new elements, hinting that he would soon unveil new initiatives on homelessness, opioid addiction and street congestion.
At several points, he paused to look at notes, but he appeared to speak extemporaneously. For long stretches, there were no applause lines at all.
Mr. de Blasio may be counting on voters in November to judge him on the big-ticket accomplishments, and has therefore simply redoubled his commitment to seeing them through.
For example, the promise to create an innovation hub, in last year’s State of the City address, has barely gotten off the ground, and requests for proposals are not expected until later this year.
The mayor’s new tax proposal, like his previous efforts to raise taxes to pay for prekindergarten, may be dashed on the rocky shores of Albany politics.
The lack of boldface new initiatives, as the mayor faces a looming re-election fight, may simply be an example of Mr. de Blasio’s scaling down to allow his potential opponents fewer avenues for attack.
