Tom Brady? Overtime? An incredible Super Bowl comeback?
All the ingredients were there for a Super Bowl ratings bonanza. But viewership for the New England Patriots’ 34-28 overtime victory over the Atlanta Falcons on Sunday night was down slightly compared with last year’s game between the Denver Broncos and the Carolina Panthers.
Sunday’s game drew 111.3 million viewers on Fox, a high enough total to tie it for fourth place among the most-viewed programs in TV history but lower than last year’s 111.9 million.
This was the eighth consecutive year that the Super Bowl exceeded 100 million viewers. And the game’s wild ending — especially after what looked like a certain blowout, with the Falcons holding a commanding 25-point lead late into the third quarter — brought in a huge audience. The game peaked between 10 p.m. and 10:30 p.m. with a 52.1 rating and a 74 share, higher than at any point during last year’s game, according to Nielsen.
Lady Gaga’s halftime performance drew 117.5 million viewers, making it the second-most-watched halftime show, behind Katy Perry’s performance two years ago.
Fox said on Monday that when streams from its Fox Sports Go app and its Spanish-language sports channel, Fox Deportes, were added in, the viewership reached 113.7 million viewers, tying it for the second-best multiplatform performance in Super Bowl history.
Still, for the second consecutive year, the Super Bowl failed to set a ratings record, and the game capped a troubling yearlong trend for the National Football League. Ratings for games in the 2016-17 regular season were down 9 percent from the previous year and were off 6 percent through the first three weeks of the playoffs, according to the research firm MoffettNathanson.
N.F.L. executives argued that the outsize interest in November’s election was responsible for siphoning away viewers, but the ratings, down 12 percent during the election season, were still down 5 percent after it.
Primetime games were hit the hardest. ESPN’s “Monday Night Football” had the biggest loss in viewership, declining 13 percent from the year before. NBC’s “Sunday Night Football” was down 11 percent, and Thursday night games were down 9 percent. And even the local Sunday afternoon games had viewership fall 7 percent this season, according to MoffettNathanson.
Sunday night’s heart-pounding conclusion apparently did not leave viewers wanting more of an adrenaline rush. Fox’s revival of its “24” series had 17.6 million viewers, the lowest viewership for a Super Bowl lead-out program in 14 years.