We were at Astor Wine & Spirits, a few doors from Joe’s Pub, Ms. Everett’s de facto home base for New York shows and where she returns on Feb. 7 and 8 for her signature performance, a mix of brash storytelling and power ballads with her band, the Tender Moments. After decades of grinding it out in the downtown scene while working in restaurants, Ms. Everett is embarking on what promises to be her biggest year yet.
Ms. Everett, with the composer Marc Shaiman on piano, sings the number “I’ll Take You Home” from her autobiographical show “Rock Bottom."
Singing has always been a part of Ms. Everett’s life. As the daughter of a music teacher in Manhattan, Kan., she was steered to voice lessons (and away from computer classes), she recalled in a post-shopping interview at the apartment of her longtime costume designer, Larry Krone.
The lessons paid off: She received a full choral scholarship to Arizona State University, then stayed in Arizona, where she was a karaoke maven and worked at the first P. F. Chang’s. She waited on athletes including Charles Barkley and Mark McGwire and made connections that brought her opportunities like singing the national anthem at baseball games — with no flourishes, she emphasized. “I’m a big believer that if you’re not Whitney Houston, you sing the notes on the page,” she said.
In the mid-1990s, Ms. Everett said, she realized she didn’t want to spend her life as a karaoke singer, and packed up for New York. She hasn’t been back to Arizona since.
A turning point came when a friend introduced her to the world of downtown performance. He took her to see the cabaret duo Kiki and Herb, and Ms. Everett became close with Murray Hill, the borscht belt-style comedian and host. Through karaoke and this network of performers, she landed gigs at Ars Nova and LaMaMa — and, of course, Joe’s Pub.
Over the past decade, Ms. Everett has developed the onstage persona that is familiar and beloved among her fans. Her bawdy comedy, paired with original songs — which, while hilarious and heartbreaking, run the gamut of emotions — now make for a surprisingly cathartic experience.
Writing the show’s stunning finale, “I’ll Take You Home,” for example, started with a melody line and lyrics by Ms. Everett. The final result, which was fleshed out with Mr. Shaiman and Mr. Wittman, is a dynamic progression from a quiet, delicate beginning to a rousing, belted ending that often inspires standing ovations.
“Rock Bottom” ended up selling out, and it occasionally returns to Joe’s Pub for brief runs. One of its newest regulars is Poppy, the dog she adopted in 2015 and a social media celebrity in her own right.
“Since I got her,” Ms. Everett said, “it’s like my songwriting has changed. My life has changed.” She added that, since she has no training as an actor, she thought of Poppy while filming a sad scene in a movie recently. It worked; there were tears.
