Politics|Trump Has Provocative Words for Allies. Congress Does Damage Control.
Trump Has Provocative Words for Allies. Congress Does Damage Control.
WASHINGTON — President Trump has been in office for barely two weeks, but Congress is already in diplomatic damage control.
Senators are huddling in meetings or on embarrassing phone calls with ambassadors of major allies, assuring them that, yes, America is still their friend.
They are cobbling together visits to other nations, something that members of Congress regularly do, but this time with the goal of assuring world leaders that powerful lawmakers do not walk in lock step with Mr. Trump.
Others are drafting legislation to blunt the force of Russia, with which the Trump administration has been uncharacteristically aligned.
They are also trying to discern some kind of consistency from the White House, which was made far more difficult when the administration seemed on Thursday to essentially be embracing President Barack Obama’s positions by demanding that Russia withdraw from Crimea, that Israel curb settlement construction and that Iran face more sanctions for ballistic missile tests.
Mr. Cardin said he would soon be visiting Mexico “to repair some of that relationship.” He and Senator Bob Corker of Tennessee, the chairman of the committee, recently met with Sigmar Gabriel, the German foreign minister, and King Abdullah II of Jordan. Both senators said they picked up on significant concerns. “The king mentioned that recent policies are having an effect,” Mr. Corker said.
Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona and chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, released a remarkable public statement Thursday noting that he had called Australia’s ambassador to the United States, Joe Hockey, to express his “unwavering support for the U.S.-Australia alliance,” after a contentious phone call between Mr. Trump and Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull concerning the status of refugees from an Australian detention center.
Mr. Trump has broken with the policy positions of congressional Republicans on myriad issues, from trade to immigration to tax reform, and they have largely, so far, bent in his direction.
But in the area of foreign relations, particularly when it comes to longstanding American allies like Australia, Democrats and Republicans have been unified in discontent, and sometimes horror. They were displeased with Mr. Trump’s statements endorsing torture. They were made anxious by President Trump insulting the Iranian government on Twitter, seemingly his preferred medium for foreign confrontations.
House Republicans met last week at their policy retreat in Philadelphia with Theresa May, the British prime minister, before she headed to the White House, in part to convey an important message about America’s commitment to NATO.
While such conversations were once box-checking affairs, they have now become a matter of mild emergency, said several House and Senate aides. The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, is particularly invested in international relations and is all but certain to provide quiet reassurance to many diplomats and world leaders.
Senators Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York, and Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, have joined with Mr. Cardin and Mr. McCain to work on a bill that would require the approval of Congress before Mr. Trump could roll back sanctions.
On Thursday, Mr. Graham and Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, Democrat of Rhode Island, said the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime and Terrorism would investigate Russian efforts to influence elections, both in the United States and abroad.
An executive order Mr. Trump issued last week that targets Syrian refugees and all travelers from several predominantly Muslim nations also drew intense criticism from a broad range of congressional Democrats and a fair number of Republicans, largely in the Senate.
But efforts to counter Mr. Trump’s missteps and policy provocations can go only so far. “Congress can’t run an effective parallel foreign policy,” said Martin Indyk, the executive vice president of the Brookings Institution, who served as the ambassador to Israel in the Clinton administration.
