MONACO — Looking back, Vadim Vasilyev can pinpoint the precise moment A.S. Monaco changed. Vasilyev, the club’s vice president, can name a place — the Grimaldi Forum, a grand conference center on the Monte Carlo seafront — and a date: Sept. 21, 2015.
That evening, around 1,000 of Monaco’s most ardent fans packed into a hall to hear what Vasilyev — accompanied by Leonardo Jardim, the club’s coach, and Jérémy Toulalan, its captain then — had to say for himself.
Over the previous two summers, those fans had watched as one of the most ambitious projects in European soccer seemed to crumble. Monaco had spent hundreds of millions of dollars acquiring some of soccer’s brightest stars; now they were all being allowed to leave.
James Rodríguez went to Real Madrid in 2014; a year later, Yannick Ferreira Carrasco joined him across the city at Atlético; Radamel Falcao joined Manchester United, then Chelsea; Geoffrey Kondogbia left for Inter Milan.
And then, a few weeks before the meeting in Monte Carlo and on the eve of the season, Anthony Martial, a young French forward of blistering promise, had been sold to United. In 12 months, Monaco had gone from a boutique of shimmering luxury to an apparently endless fire sale. The fans wanted answers.
“They were really angry,” Vasilyev said. “We had many departures that summer. They needed someone to go out and face them.” Over the course of several hours — at first onstage, and then over drinks and petits fours — Vasilyev did just that.
“It was not the time to hide,” Vasilyev said. “I decided to go out in front of them and say we had no other way. I asked them, ‘Do you want to go back to the second division?’ I said it will be tough, but this is the road now.
Just how drastic the transformation has been should be amply demonstrated when Monaco faces Manchester City in the round of 16 of the Champions League on Tuesday.
The glamour conjured by the club’s name remains, of course, too intricately woven into the fabric of the team to ever disappear. Monaco is still partly owned by the royal family; its players still wear a jersey inspired, according to the officially endorsed history, by Princess Grace; its home, the Stade Louis II, is still nestled between two marinas, thronged with superyachts. It is still, and always will be, the team from the billionaire’s playground.
Since that fractious evening in the Grimaldi Forum, though, Monaco has completely discarded its identity as the team run as if it were a billionaire’s plaything.
That is what Monaco was not so long ago, of course, when its benefactor, Dmitry Rybolovlev, bankrolled a spending spree impressive even by European soccer’s inflated standards.
Rybolovlev, a Russian petrochemical magnate, bought the club in 2011 when it was languishing in France’s second division.
“Even then, he told me quite a few times that his ambition was to win the Champions League,” said Tor-Kristian Karlsen, who became Monaco’s sporting director in January 2012.
Rybolovlev poured money into his scouting system and brought in a high-profile manager, Claudio Ranieri. Rybolovlev commissioned a host of signings, most notably the Argentine teenager Lucas Ocampos, a deal inspired by Rybolovlev’s desire to sign “the most promising teenager in the world who was attainable,” Karlsen said.
More important, at Karlsen’s instigation, Rybolovlev established contacts with Jorge Mendes, the most influential agent in the sport. The relationship would prove crucial when Monaco was promoted, in 2013, and promptly signed three of the most expensive players in French league history: Rodríguez, Falcao and João Moutinho, all Mendes players, among several others.
Monaco seemed the most potent of European soccer’s cadre of arriviste clubs, doubling down on the pattern set by Chelsea, Manchester City and Paris St.-Germain. Four years on, though, only echoes of that era remain: Moutinho and Falcao, who returned last year, will both be in Manchester this week. The club around them is almost the polar opposite to the one they joined.
Jardim’s team is built around young talent; Vasilyev declares with pride that Monaco is self-financing and sustainable. Karlsen said Rybolovlev was always “interested in buying players of a certain age, from certain places, to find out if we could benefit from the transfer market,” even when he was purchasing stars. Now it is those players — the promising and the hungry — who are Monaco’s sole focus.
The result has been eye-catching. Monaco is in the knockout stages of the Champions League and, more impressive, atop Ligue 1, which many had expected to be a cakewalk for Paris St.-Germain. Monaco is enjoying rather more success as a hothouse for talent than it did as a retreat for stars.
And yet, as Vasilyev said, that change was “not really part of the plan.” Monaco always intended to change, but “not so quickly,” he said.
By the time of that meeting in the Grimaldi Forum, it had become clear there was no other choice. In part, Vasilyev attributes that to errors he and Rybolovlev made: They expected big-name players to draw both sponsors and fans, but they did not. Commercial deals did not materialize. Monaco’s famously sparse crowds did not improve. The club’s revenue would never catch up with its expenditure.
In addition, the year that Monaco’s spending stunned Europe, when Falcao and the rest arrived, was the year that UEFA’s financial fair-play regulations — designed to force clubs to live within their means — started to bite.
By the end of that season, Manchester City and P.S.G. had been fined, and placed under transfer restrictions, for breaching the rules. Vasilyev, too, was summoned to Nyon, Switzerland, where UEFA is headquartered, and asked to explain his club’s finances. Monaco, too, faced onerous penalties.
When it became clear it was very real indeed, Monaco knew it had to change tack. Rybolovlev scaled back his spending in 2014, and sold Rodríguez, too; by 2015, the exodus was in full flow.
In hindsight, it would be easy for Monaco to resent its compliance with the regulations, which have since been watered down. As Vasilyev points out, the rules still exist, but they look more like guidelines now. If Monaco had gritted its teeth and accepted the fines — as Manchester City and P.S.G. did — it might still have its team of stars.
Monaco is in no doubt that while it might have come to this road by accident, it is a happy one. It has a team filled with bright promise and a growing reputation as the ideal place for prodigies. Last summer, Djibril Sidibé, a defender, chose Monaco ahead of Arsenal.
“He knows if he excels here, he will then be able to choose any club at all,” Vasilyev said.
Monaco knows its place, knows that sooner or later it will have to cash in on its prospects and allow them to fly the nest. It does so, though, only when the time is right: A $65 million offer from China’s Tianjin Quanjian in January for the resurgent Falcao was turned down.
That was the plan Vasilyev laid out that evening at the Grimaldi Forum: a road that took the club off in a different direction, but one that may yet lead to the same destination.