I applaud the appeals panel’s decision to uphold the suspension of President Trump’s ignominious and discriminatory travel ban. The ruling not only reopens America’s doors for travelers, asylum seekers and refugees from the seven blacklisted Muslim-majority countries but also delivers — amid the unsettling outset of Mr. Trump’s aggressive and capricious presidency — a reassuring check on executive power.
Make no mistake. Donald Trump is brilliant and light-years ahead of both his friends and his enemies. As he “loses” this recent clash with the law, he wins.
This man who is so good at building things has already begun the clever construction of the “get out of jail free” card that will insulate him against blame for any future terrorist activity that takes place on his watch. He is positioning himself to be seen as the hero who tried to prevent such an attack as he battled against an intransigent system that wouldn’t let him.
President Trump issued an executive order temporarily halting immigration from seven countries for 90 days so he could create an immigration strategy in that time that would make America more secure. While he is fighting the courts over this order, why doesn’t he proceed on developing that strategy anyway and advise the American people of his efforts?
My daughters are 11 and 12 years old.  They are not scared of Syrians and they do not worry about Islamic terrorists. For their generation, Sandy Hook is the keystone event, not 9/11. They have fire and active-shooter drills at school. They are scared of another Adam Lanza or James Holmes or Dylann Roof or Omar Mateen.
My daughters are of the Obama generation, the most racially diverse generation yet. They do not fear the “other.” The first president they will remember is a black man with African and Arabic names. Theirs is not the generation of tolerance; it is the generation of acceptance.
This is Barack Obama’s legacy, and why the Muslim travel ban will be remembered as a vestige of bigotry.
This is a classic example of myopic voting. So zealous about wanting fewer regulations, the farmers backed Donald Trump, not believing he’d actually try to make good on his promise to deport illegal immigrants. Now the farmers are facing the specter of labor shortages.
I was living in Washington State several years ago, the last time there was a “crackdown” on illegal migrant workers. The orchard owners and farmers were panicking, not having enough labor to harvest their crops. They were offering $125 a day, but no “Americans” showed up to do the backbreaking work. Imagine that! What happened to: “The illegals are stealing our jobs”?
Well, we’re about to find out just how much these “illegals” contribute to our society. When people start paying $3 a head for lettuce perhaps they’ll wake up.
Yes, we need immigration reform, but this scorched-earth mentality is cruel, absurd and, ultimately, bad for our nation.
As an American citizen and the daughter of immigrants, I’m heartbroken that immigration officials elected to deport Guadalupe García de Rayos, a Mexican woman with two American-born children who has lived and worked in this country since the age of 14.
Ms. Rayos’s only crime was to use someone else’s Social Security number to obtain legal work. What is particularly galling about this is the fact that just five months after Ms. Rayos’s arrest, the Supreme Court issued a ruling limiting the federal government’s use of identity theft laws to go after undocumented immigrants trying to gain employment. If Ms. Rayos had been stopped a year later, she would have had no criminal conviction on her record, let alone a felony. She would not have faced deportation.
If President Trump wants to tighten immigration, he should concentrate his efforts on gang members and those convicted of violent crimes. To tear apart a family based on a law that our highest court ruled against is a travesty of justice.
The writer is the author of a series of novels about the undocumented.