Here’s a look at some of the top findings.
High school students may broadly back the First Amendment, but not without limits: Their support is tempered depending on the kind of speech and where it’s delivered.
“While support for the First Amendment as a general concept has never been higher, the devil’s in the details,” said Jonathan Sotsky, director of strategy and assessment for the Knight Foundation.
Ninety-one percent of the students may support the right to express unpopular opinions in general, but only half as many — 45 percent — support that right when the speech in question is offensive to others and made in public. Bullying speech enjoys slightly less backing, and students are even less supportive of either kind of speech when it’s delivered on social media.
Many students find little sacred in professional reporting: More than half put as much or more trust in photos, videos and accounts shared by individuals online than in traditional news sources. The 726 teachers surveyed, however, were far more skeptical of the online postings.
Students may have faith in firsthand accounts shared online, but they are still generally wary of the news they see there. Eighty-two percent said they had “some” or “a lot” of trust in the information found in newspapers, compared with 77 percent for television news and 70 percent for news websites. Just 49 percent reported similar levels of trust in news shared on social media.
The survey results suggest that high school students and adults differ greatly in how they consume news.
Students are almost twice as likely as adults to “often” use mobile devices for news and nearly three times as likely to report “often” getting news from social media. Adults are much more likely to report “often” getting news from local TV and newspapers.
Students are far less concerned about their privacy on the internet than adults, according to the survey. But that is changing: In 2016, 76 percent were somewhat or very concerned about privacy online, compared with 70 percent two years earlier.