384 pp. Penguin, paper, $18.
Though the poetry world may seem like a play “with a hundred parts, all small,” poetry critics stand on a much less crowded stage. Orr, a columnist for the Book Review, is certainly part of the ensemble, and he does more with his hour than strut and fret. “You, Too, Could Write a Poem” collects some 15 years’ worth of essays and reviews, and covers all manner of poets and poetic controversies. Orr’s role seems to be that of mediator. Whether he’s weighing the meaning of Oprah’s foray into the poetry world (“Spring Fashion Modeled by Rising Young Poets,” read one headline in O, The Oprah Magazine) or questioning the notion of virtuosity, Orr writes with generous reasonableness and accessibility. He’s also a gifted practitioner of similes, describing for instance the way Louise Glück’s poetry “produces great effects with delicate shifts in tone, like an oceangoing bird that travels a hundred miles between wing flaps.” But most of all he possesses an apparent and infectious love for his subject, and his passionate expertise makes this book an elucidating joy.
One might wonder, though, for whom Orr writes: those keen to the poetry world’s nuances or those merely keen on poetry. He occasionally refers to “shoppers at Barnes & Noble,” who presumably stand in for poetry’s “average reader,” but when he broods over whether there are any great wedding poems (may he recommend something by Glück?), he fails to acknowledge the kind of verse the denizens of Barnes & Noble would actually read at their weddings, say Cummings’s “I Carry Your Heart With Me (I Carry It In)” or something by (the horror!) Rod McKuen. It’s unlikely, of course, that Orr would have allowed such clichés at his wedding, which makes it just as improbable to find him shopping next to these Barnes & Noble types, talking with them, recommending volumes. But who knows? Perhaps they, too, will read his book.
404 pp. Tin House, paper, $16.95.
In his fiction Elkin interested himself in vocation (a bail bondsman, a D.J., a franchiser, etc.), whereas his essays revolve around his own proclivities and peccadilloes, so the voice that sings from “Pieces of Soap” is entirely Elkin’s. “The secret to life,” he writes in “Acts of Scholarship,” “is to specialize,” and Elkin is nothing if not an expert on himself. Throughout the pieces here, he takes the reader deep into, for instance, the myriad problems arising from multiple sclerosis (a limp, a cane, a wheelchair, grab bars in the shower), which take up the greater part of the lengthy “An American in California,” ostensibly a travelogue. In “At the Academy Awards,” Elkin describes his “first celebrity,” which turns out to have been a general he saw during basic training in 1955. He finds endless ways to digress into autobiographical tangents, usually with some crying and kibitzing.
Elkin’s inimitable language is an exuberant blend of high allusions and colloquial registers, as bounce-and-pop as it is stop-and-go. His sentences can contain, on the same page, wonderful one-off puns (he refers to remainder shelves as “has bins”) and a stretch of boisterous brilliance — if a narrative begins, he notes, with “a couple holding hands,” it will “climax in some spectacle of outrageous sky’s-the-limit orgy of almost Busby Berkeley proportion, as choreographed as battle, as all Barnum’d and Bailey’d three-ring’d, combination lust.” But if he can inspire with his inventiveness, he also, as John Updike noted, “rarely knew when to stop.” This can grow exasperating at times and self-indulgent at others (the didactic description of the flamenco dancer in “Performance and Reality”). Such risky tendencies are common in the literarily dexterous — think of Joyce, Nabokov and Pynchon — but as at an elaborate buffet, if you can stomach the lesser parts, you’ll leave satisfied and completely stuffed.
298 pp. Counterpoint, $28.
The opening essay of Fussell’s honest and evocative collection makes an argument for the relevance of food as an important literary subject. “Eating, like speaking,” she writes, “reconnects through the imagination what reason has learned to disconnect through the senses.” But there is another, darker side to studying sustenance: “We don’t like to be reminded that if dung were not caviar to the dung beetle, the earth would be covered” in excrement.
The whole collection is this great. Whether she’s writing about food, her primary matter (though this covers everything from mayonnaise to Jell-O), her complex family life or culinary superstars like M.F.K. Fisher and Alice Waters (who provides the introduction here), Fussell is a gifted essayist and a meditative thinker, as enriching and relevant as she makes her subjects.