NEW ORLEANS — James Harden was staying out of it.
He was referring to the continuing rift between Kevin Durant and Russell Westbrook, two former teammates who do not seem to like each other much these days. Their weekend here was an awkward reunion for two global icons, both All-Stars for the Western Conference. As such, they were obliged to share oxygen, if not much else, at Smoothie King Center.
Perhaps there was a brief détente for the West’s 192-182 victory over the East. In the first quarter, Westbrook came off the bench to join Durant on the floor. On their fourth possession together, Durant tossed a lob to Westbrook for a dunk. Their teammates erupted on the bench, and it appeared as though Westbrook and Durant were capable of coexisting, at least for one night.
In a game completely devoid of actual competition and anything that remotely resembled defense, Anthony Davis of the New Orleans Pelicans set an All-Star Game record with 52 points on his home floor, breaking a mark held by Wilt Chamberlain, and was named the game’s most valuable player. Westbrook scored 41 points, and Durant had 21 to go along with 10 rebounds and 10 assists.
Once upon a time, Durant and Westbrook played together for the Oklahoma City Thunder. Last summer, Durant left for the Golden State Warriors in free agency. Westbrook was not pleased. According to various accounts, their only communication in the many months since Durant’s departure came a little over a week ago, when they screamed at each other in the second half of a Warriors victory in Oklahoma City.
Before Sunday’s game, they proved equally adept at avoiding the mere mention of the other person’s name. Durant, for example, was asked how he dealt with potential distractions.
As for Westbrook, he refused even to dip his toes into the topic. Consider his response to a question about being in the same locker room as Durant.
An intrepid reporter attempted to ask a follow-up about Durant. Take it away, Russ.
At Saturday’s public practice at the Superdome, Westbrook and Durant kept their distance. Whenever possible — which was often — they took up residence at opposite ends of the court. Warriors Coach Steve Kerr, who coached the West All-Stars, said he had no intention of organizing any kind of meeting between the two to work on healing their feud. That was not his job.
It should be noted, of course, that Durant and Westbrook are both in the process of assembling remarkable seasons.
Durant, a long-limbed forward, is averaging 25.8 points, 8.3 rebounds and 4.9 assists for the Warriors, who have a league-best 47-9 record. He is also shooting a career-best 53.9 percent from the field, a product of his own improvement, along with the ability of his high-profile teammates to draw defensive attention.
Durant and Stephen Curry have developed into a particularly dynamic tandem. There is always a period of adjustment when players are new to each other, Kerr said, especially when they are superstars. But Curry and Durant are almost unstoppable when they are on the court together. Then add to that the set of challenges Klay Thompson creates from the 3-point line.
In Durant’s absence, Westbrook has hauled the Thunder to a 32-25 record. He is averaging 31.1 points and 10.5 rebounds, both career highs, along with 10.1 assists. He is bidding to become only the second player to average a triple-double — double figures in three of five major statistical categories — for an entire season. Oscar Robertson did it in 1961-62.
With Durant, though, the Thunder were title contenders. Last season, they took the Warriors to seven games in the conference finals — and probably would have advanced to face the Cleveland Cavaliers in the N.B.A. finals had Thompson failed to engineer some late-series heroics.
Westbrook was already a competitive individual before Durant left town. But Durant’s departure appears to have motivated Westbrook even more, no small feat. And in that way, despite their clear differences, Westbrook and Durant remain connected. Westbrook feeds off the anger, uses it as fuel.
This is his version of happiness. This is the way he has fun.