Media|Some See Media Bias. But ‘the Enemy’? Not Quite.
Some See Media Bias. But ‘the Enemy’? Not Quite.
Biased? Probably. Oppositional? Maybe. Essential? In theory. But the enemy? Not so much.
President Trump last week called the news media “the enemy of the American people.” But in interviews around the country this week, Americans of varying political affiliations, even those with serious misgivings about the media, largely allowed that the president’s characterization had gone too far.
Mr. Trump’s presidency has exacerbated already deep ideological divisions in the country, and Americans on one end of the political spectrum increasingly find themselves unable even to look their counterparts in the eye. But if there has been one instance in the last month when the rift has not seemed quite as large, perhaps it has been the response to Mr. Trump’s harsh rebuke of the media.
Still, the feeling toward the news media among those interviewed was far from warm and fuzzy. Many said they believed the media was flawed in general, and certainly when it came to the coverage of Mr. Trump and his administration.
Mr.  He has referred to the news media as the “opposition party” and repeatedly called legitimate news organizations “fake news.” He and his aides have also consistently attacked the media’s credibility, calling out factual mistakes made by organizations sometimes even after corrections were made. But if the tactics were meant to convince the public that the media was a deceitful adversary, they did not appear to be having quite the desired effect.
According to a Quinnipiac University poll released on Wednesday, 61 percent of respondents said they disapproved of the way Mr. Trump talked about the media. Fifty-two percent said they trusted the media more to tell the truth about important issues, while 37 percent said they trusted Mr. Trump more to do so. The political divide, however, is stark: Among Democrats, 86 percent said they trusted the media more to tell the truth, while 78 percent of Republicans said they trusted Mr. Trump more.
A Fox News poll released last week showed respondents about evenly divided on whom they trusted more to tell the truth.
“Nobody is perfect,” said Nick Lortie, 24, a plumber from Merrimack, N.H., who voted for the Libertarian candidate, Gary Johnson, in the presidential election.
“It’s like if the weatherman says it’s going to rain and it doesn’t — if someone tells them something and it turns out to be wrong, it’s not their fault,” he said, referring to the media.
Rick Rutter, 56, a pastor and executive director of a local rescue mission from Nashua, N.H., chuckled at the idea that the media was the enemy of the American people. But he, like many others interviewed, said he did see a litany of problems with the press.
The news media, however, was acting like an enemy in at least one respect: It was exhausting him. During the run-up to the election, Mr. Rutter said, he had cut the cord in part because keeping up with different interpretations of current events on television had become fruitless.
“I do think it’s a failure to understand, and also a failure to respect the opinions of Trump voters,” he said.
Often, a negative perception of the media reflected a deeper frustration with coverage unrelated to coverage of Mr. Trump.
“Holy moly — in my opinion, I believe they’re pretty biased,” Amber McDowell, 37, who owns a flower shop in Broadus, Mont., said about the news media. Still, Ms. McDowell, a registered Republican who said she had never voted for a Democrat in a presidential election, said she “wouldn’t go as far as ‘the enemy’ ” in describing the news media.
Charles Funderburk, 46, a contractor in Little Rock, Ark., and a conservative Republican, said he felt he was “only getting half-truths” from the news media.
Cindy Lyons, 40, who helps her husband run a tent rental business in Grand Rapids, also stopped short of siding with Mr. Trump’s characterization of the media but allowed that he might not be that far afield. “I don’t know if I agree with it, but I see where it’s coming from,” she said.
Ms. Lyons, a mother of five boys who described herself as “kind of in the middle” in terms of her political leanings, said that while she did not think the media was untruthful, she, too, was put off by the frequent negative coverage.
But even those critical of the news media and its coverage of Mr. Trump appeared ready to give it all a rest.
