This interview with Cedric Bru, the C.E.O. of Taulia, a maker of invoicing software, has been edited for space and clarity.
Q. Tell me about your early years. What were some early influences?
A. I’m from a city called Narbonne, on the French Riviera. I grew up in the middle of vineyards. My family and all my relatives worked, or still work, in the wine business.
My parents played a very important role in my growth, but my grandfather is my business hero because of his ability to lead people with his charisma and authenticity, and not just in one setting.
He had his own vineyard. He was also a managing director for a larger vineyard. And he was mayor for 35 years, and he ran several nonprofits. When you look at him, you can tell that he’s a good man, and that he’s not trying to maximize any situation just to benefit himself.
No. 1 was being passionate about things, and doing them because of the core values they represented, and because they aligned with his own core values.
The second was his willingness to bring people together from different backgrounds. When he was mayor, his team included people from the left and the right. He was able to get them to cooperate and get the most out of them.
What were some early leadership lessons?
In my very first management role, I really wanted to try to be perfect and lead by example. And it worked to some extent, but it also carried a lot of limitations, because I was not allowing myself to say that I didn’t understand something. The bigger problem was that the people who worked for me responded by doing the same thing.
What about more recent lessons?
I had to rebuild the entire management team in my current role for various reasons. And as I did that, I started to think about what I learned playing rugby. You need to trust the people on your team.
People need to know that if they are ever close to a cliff — about to make a risky decision or hire the wrong person — they can turn around, ask their colleagues for help. And if I’m close to the cliff, they can grab me and I will welcome it.
How do you create that environment?
It’s all about vulnerability, and it’s something we talk about at our quarterly off-sites. I told my team that the key goal for those meetings would not be to talk about the business or make strategic decisions. I said that I would personally assess the success of those off-sites based on the trust established between people.
At first, a lot of people didn’t understand what I meant completely. It was about how we want to work together, and the focus was on trust and vulnerability. I really wanted people to understand that it is O.K. to connect at a deeper level.
I started by sharing that I was going through a very difficult time personally, as my wife and I were separating. They saw that it was hard for me to share that with them. But once the tone was set, there were a lot of tears in the room as everyone shared their own personal story.
What question did you pose to everyone to start those conversations?
What do you want others to know about you that they don’t know already? That was it. People showed a lot of empathy, and after just a day and a half, people could connect at a personal level significantly better.
It’s all about the words. It’s what people should consider changing, not what they should change. When the environment is safe, and when it’s about what is best for the team, people become much more open.
We need to equip our people to be O.K. with saying, “I need help” or “I don’t know.” And it starts at the top.
I believe that people overperform when they are happy. And I don’t believe that companies make people happy. People find happiness in a company, in their life. It’s not external. People have to be happy with themselves.
And happiness is personal; the way you find happiness in a company is different from mine. So I ask questions that are tailored to understanding how they will find happiness here. It becomes a shared assessment.
I will ask how you will find happiness at Taulia, and I want you to think how feasible it is. Because if you don’t think you can find happiness here, I don’t want to work with you. It’s not good for you. It’s not good for everyone else.
I also want to see how aware they are about themselves. So I will ask them to think of everyone they’ve managed over their career, and then imagine what these people would say if I asked them, “What is the No. 1 strength that you admire in this person that would make you want to work for them again?” And then I ask about the No. 1 thing this person should change to be an even more effective leader. Then I crosscheck that with background references — not the people they list on their résumé, but I’ll find people who’ve worked with them in the past.
Everyone has blinders, but I want to check the level of awareness people have about themselves.
Learn the strategies that chief executives have developed to help you go beyond the polished résumés and scripted answers to hire more creative and effective members for your team.
My one piece of advice is to be patient. Things don’t happen all of a sudden. You cannot expect the world in your first week on the job. You need a foundation of experience.