Attend the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show, which has been held annually in New York City since 1877. More than 2,800 dogs compete over three days and are judged on agility, obedience and conformation.CreditCredit...Todd Heisler/The New York Times. Technology by Samsung.
As the French bulldogs entered the ring on Monday afternoon, Patricia Hearst Shaw, looking as unassuming as the average spectator, took a seat in the front row of the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show. Dressed casually in a striped top and black pants, she did not seem to fit the part of the well-heeled women of Westminster or its dog-sweater-wearing fanciers. On the edge of a green-carpeted show ring, she teetered between anonymity and renown.
Hearst Shaw, the 62-year-old granddaughter of William Randolph Hearst, has been a regular on the dog-show circuit for more than decade. Here she is known as Patricia. But history knows her as Patty Hearst, the heiress kidnapped in 1974 by a radical group, the Symbionese Liberation Army, who spent almost two years in prison before President Jimmy Carter commuted her sentence. President Bill Clinton issued a pardon in 2001.
Before her French bulldogs, Tuggy and Rubi, entered the show ring at Pier 94 on Manhattan’s West Side, Hearst Shaw mingled in the benching area with two of her granddaughters. The girls smooshed the dogs’ ears and snuggled in close for kisses as their mother, Gillian Hearst, smiled. Once breed judging began, the girls wiggled in their seats, waiting nearly two hours before all 46 Frenchies, one of the largest entries in the field, trotted around the ring.
Before the judge made her final decision, Hearst Shaw jumped to her feet. She just knew. Tuggy won best of breed, and Rubi took runner-up honors as best of opposite sex.
“I’m kind of walking on air at the moment,” said Hearst Shaw, whose French bulldogs had fallen just short in breed judging here throughout the years.
“I have quite a record of best of opposite at Westminster,” she said. “I was like, ‘Ahhhh! I broke that barrier.’” Tuggy competed Monday night in the nonsporting group final for a chance at a spot in Tuesday’s best in show but did not advance.
The sweep is considered uncommon, given the number of French bulldog entries. Among the 200 breeds and varieties at the dog show, golden retrievers have the biggest contingent with 85, followed by Labrador retrievers and French bulldogs, with 46 each. New Yorkers entered the most dogs, 260 of the 2,798. There were 135 foreign entries from 16 countries.
Perhaps it is fitting that Westminster’s top French bulldog belongs to Hearst Shaw, a New Yorker. The breed is the city’s most popular dog, according to the American Kennel Club.
With Westminster being Rubi’s last show, she will join Hearst Shaw in New York with Frida, another retired Frenchie.
At the moment, Frida is whelping a litter.
While Tuggy and Rubi were not far from home, they were joined in the benching area by two bulldogs who had arrived from Japan on Friday. Their two-day journey began on midnight in Gunma, about a two-hour drive from Toyko. It took about four hours for the dogs to clear quarantine before they boarded their flight at 10 a.m. to Kennedy International Airport. Because the airline, ANA, does not allow dogs in coach, the animals, named Nonno and Paris, spent 12 hours in cargo.
With crates equipped with fans, ice packs and a water bottle, they arrived in New York at 9 a.m. on Friday. Were they jetlagged?
“Not based on how much energy they have,” their owner, Mikae Godai, said through an interpreter, Mirabel Koike, who also served as Paris’s handler. Five hours after they landed, the two dogs wrestled on Godai’s hotel bed.
“They’re so used to it,” Godai said. It is the dogs’ third trip to New York, and next month, they will be making their third trip to the prestigious Crufts dog show in Birmingham, England. But the long-distance travel is not for all participants.
Most air carriers based in the United States do not allow brachycephalic breeds, which include popular dogs like pugs and bulldogs, to fly in cargo. The breeds have smaller openings to their noses and elongated soft palates, which makes breathing more difficult. The stress of air travel and the heat can magnify breathing problems.
Hearst Shaw said her dogs flew on private planes only when she traveled with them. “Not everyone can do that, but plenty of owners do it,” she said.
After breed judging ended, the owners from New York and Japan returned to the bench area. The Japanese Frenchies did not win any ribbons, but Godai declared the journey worthwhile. “It was an honor to be part of Westminster,” Godai said.
Nearby, Hearst Shaw said goodbye to her daughter and granddaughters, then followed Tuggy, Rubi and their handlers through the crowd in the benching area. No one seemed to notice. Once the group found the perfect backdrop — the purple Westminster insignia with the pointer — they gathered. Hearst Shaw was behind the camera, not in front of it. She held up her iPhone and snapped.