It’s been a tough week for Uber.
The company is still reeling after a former employee asserted that she had been sexually harassed and then ignored when she told the human resources department.
Now, Uber is being sued by Waymo, the self-driving car business that was spun out of Google’s parent company, Alphabet.
Waymo accused Uber of using intellectual property stolen by one of Google’s former project leaders. It said Anthony Levandowski, who runs Uber’s autonomous car division, downloaded files from Google a month before leaving to start his own self-driving car company, Otto, which was later bought by Uber.
How did Waymo know this? The company said it had been inadvertently copied on an email from a supplier with drawings of an Uber circuit board design that bore “a striking resemblance” to its own (proprietary and highly secret) design.
As for the sexual harassment accusations from Susan Fowler, the former employee, they have prompted an investigation into the workplace culture at Uber.
Some early investors in Uber, however, have already expressed their frustration with the company’s inability to change. The investors, Mitch and Freada Kapor, also questioned the independence of the inquiry.
Snap, the parent company of the disappearing-message app Snapchat, is trying to whip up investor interest before its initial public offering.
But so far, one of the most talked-about features of its I.P.O. is the overwhelming control that the founders, Evan Spiegel and Bobby Murphy, will retain through voting power not available to its public shareholders.
The Deal Professor wrote that a “total disenfranchisement of public shareholders” has been coming for some time among technology companies, but that the risk to potential investors of such a structure was still not justified.
To understand why it came about, it is worth looking back at Snap’s history.
It seems that the situation was spurred by dealings with Jeremy Liew, a venture capitalist at Lightspeed Venture Partners. The term’s of Mr. Liew’s 2012 investment gave him outsize power over the company’s next investment round.
This irked Mr. Spiegel, who took steps to reassert control.
He struck a deal to allow Lightspeed to buy shares at a discount in exchange for it removing certain onerous terms, like a right-of-first-refusal on the next funding round. He later authorized the creation of a class of preferred stocks, which would have 10-to-1 voting rights.
President Trump has promised to bring jobs back. Now he wants manufacturing executives to help him figure out how to do it.
Executives seemed elated to be asked; it could give them an influential hand in shaping Mr. Trump’s economic policies.
On the same day, Steven T. Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, retreated from Mr. Trump’s promise to brand China as a currency manipulator, The Financial Times reported.
Mr. Mnuchin’s comments were, however, followed by Mr. Trump saying that China was a grand champion of currency manipulation.
— Benjamin J. Razi, a partner at Covington & Burling, the law firm that represented Efans Trading Corporation, a small Tennessee company that had cars and $3 million in cash seized by the government. Jurors determined that there was not enough evidence to support a civil forfeiture lawsuit filed by federal prosecutors.
The case was part of a crackdown on a cottage industry of auto export companies that used middlemen and “straw buyers” to acquire luxury cars from dealerships in the United States and resell them for big profits.