Movies|Review: ‘A Cure for Wellness’ Is a Riot of Film References. With Eels.
Review: ‘A Cure for Wellness’ Is a Riot of Film References. With Eels.
Outside of a sushi context, I don’t usually spend much time thinking about eels, but “A Cure for Wellness” gave me no choice. Ever since the screening, I’ve been wondering about those slithery creatures, which you may have noticed in the trailers and the posters, where a bunch of them share a bathtub with Mia Goth, one of the movie’s stars.
Not wondering in the “What does it mean?” sense, mind you. Anyone who has even a slight acquaintance with Freudian theory or Japanese erotica will grasp the psychosexual significance of those eels, who live in the aquifer underneath an Alpine spa and occasionally make their way into the plumbing and beyond. My questions are of a more basic nature: How did they get down there in the first place? Are they an invasive species or part of the native ecosystem? What evolutionary process might account for their curiously symbiotic relationship with the spa’s human residents?
It would be unfair to blame the director, Gore Verbinski, or the screenwriter, Justin Haythe, for declining to provide a thorough explanation. “A Cure for Wellness” defiantly and splendidly flouts the tenets of plausibility and coherence, which have never interested Mr. Verbinski very much. His résumé, after all, includes “The Lone Ranger” (also written by Mr. Haythe), “Rango” and, most notably, the first three “Pirates of the Caribbean” movies. He comes by his knack for enjoyable nonsense as honestly as his taste for aquatic fauna.
The eels may be the key to the puzzle posed by his latest project, or they may be (forgive me) a red herring. Maybe it would be best to drop the piscatory metaphors altogether. “A Cure for Wellness” is a lustrous box of genre candy, the self-revealing work of an auteur who has laid bare not so much his psyche as his online streaming queue. To watch this movie is, above all, to make a list of all the other movies it evokes, sometimes with a literalness that treads the boundary between homage and outright plagiarism.
You will notice a lot of Martin Scorsese’s “Shutter Island” here, as a dogged young man (Dane DeHaan) makes his way through an asylum-like complex of buildings in search of answers, only to become ever more deeply ensnared in the place’s sinister mysteries. You may also catch echoes of Paolo Sorrentino’s “Youth” in the mountain rest-cure setting, the weary disdain for modern life and the visual voluptuousness. Mr. Verbinski doesn’t so much observe shiny surfaces and opulent furnishings as caress them, sending a frisson of visual delight through his camera as it glides down corridors and soars over wooded glades.
There’s a bit of Guillermo del Toro’s “Crimson Peak” in the exuberant gothic creepiness, especially as the plot moves from corporate thriller to psychological melodrama to full-on creep show, complete with incest, medical experiments and ghoulish aristocratic shenanigans. And while these recent movies are the most obvious and distracting influences, an intrepid viewer will pick up hints of Hitchcock and Kubrick (and also, but only at the very end, of Spielberg), of “Suspiria” and Mario Bava.
It’s all in good fun, really, though two and a half hours may be more of this kind of fun than a body can stand. You might feel like you’re in the company of a manic cinephile friend breathlessly recounting his favorite movie scenes in no particular order. You admire his devotion, his taste and his scholarship, but in the end the experience is probably more satisfying for him than it is for you.
Still, the company isn’t bad. Mr. DeHaan brings an air of curdled innocence that inspires an interesting ambivalence.  Dispatched by his bosses to retrieve an executive who has vanished in Switzerland, Lockhart, who is haunted by memories of his father’s suicide, finds himself in the company and eventually the care of Dr. Volmer (Jason Isaacs), a suave Continental with unnervingly impeccable manners. Mr. Isaacs is the kind of silken, charismatic villain that you can’t wait to see again.
More plot summary would be an offense against Mr. Verbinski’s demented inventiveness. Lockhart also encounters a curious elderly patient (Celia Imre), a heavy-eyed limo driver (Ivo Nandi), a tavern full of hostile young locals and a dreamy girl named Hannah (Ms. Goth, looking like a ’70s fantasy hybrid of Shelley Duvall and Sissy Spacek). There are clues and false leads, shocking discoveries and bouts of talking-bad-guy exposition, narrow escapes and fights to the death. And those eels, of course. You’ll figure it all out for yourself, or not. In any case, the moral of the story turns out to be a bit of advice often given to travelers: Don’t drink the water.