When law enforcement officials began a push to use an ethically complicated forensic technique involving DNA in New York, they based their appeal on a high-profile case that had gone unsolved for months: the murder of Karina Vetrano, a 30-year-old jogger, in Queens last summer.
Though a man was charged this week in the killing, the officials still hope for approval of the use of the technique, which allows DNA databases to be searched for a suspect’s relatives.
Vocal advocates of the technique, called familial DNA searching, say they will continue to press for its authorization.
Mr. Ryan declined to name any unsolved cases in which the office hoped to use the DNA search if it was authorized, but said the decision would be made case by case in consultation with the police.
The New York State Commission on Forensic Science, a 14-member panel appointed by the governor to develop standards for forensic laboratories, will hold a public hearing on Friday on whether to authorize familial DNA searching. The forensic method would allow investigators to use DNA found at crime scenes to search databases of offenders’ genetic information with wider parameters to find people who may be relatives of the person who committed the crime.
Proponents of the technique say it can provide valuable leads when DNA evidence yields no direct match for a suspect in these databases.
But there are questions about the ethical implications of searching the databases, which are made up of people arrested in connection with or convicted of crimes, to hunt for their relatives. Critics of the technique say that it is unfair to the African-American and Latino populations, who typically make up the majority of offenders in databases. And some say familial searching raises concerns about privacy issues.
Its constitutionality has not been tested in the courts, and has been outlawed in Maryland and Washington, D.C.
The recent effort to authorize the technique — which has been used in at least nine states — in New York was fueled in part by the public pleas and behind-the-scenes work of Ms. Vetrano’s father, Philip Vetrano. The emotional resonance of his daughter’s case can be seen in many of the letters that have been submitted as testimony to the panel in advance of its hearing.
About 30 of the more than 60 people and organizations that submitted testimony to the commission, many of them members and friends of the Vetrano family, cited Ms. Vetrano as one of their chief motivations for wanting the DNA testing approved. The New York Civil Liberties Union, the Innocence Project, the Legal Aid Society and the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers are among those who oppose its use.
“This represents the triumph of good old-fashioned police work and illustrates the danger of trying to resort to familial testing as the first step in investigating a crime,” he said.
Officials had described Ms. Vetrano’s case as ideal for the method, in part because of the high likelihood that DNA recovered from the murder scene came from the suspect.
The man the police arrested on Sunday, Chanel Lewis, has been linked to the crime through a DNA sample that he gave to the police after he was identified as a potential suspect, the authorities said.
Elaina Feliciano, a resident of Howard Beach who lives near the crime scene, wrote one of the letters in support of the technique. She doesn’t know Ms. Vetrano’s family, but said the case’s grisly details had stuck with her for months. She still hopes that the commission will authorize it.
“What if they didn’t catch this guy?” she said.