Americans are forgiving. We can handle stumbles, presidential ineptitude, bungling, arrogance, presidential self-deception, poorly planned presidential executive orders, insults to world leaders and the desecration of American values. But what we won’t be able to handle is irrational behavior that puts the country in grave danger.
No amount of Democratic whining and protests will change anything so long as Republicans are in the majority and in lock step with party line in support of their president. The essential question is, Do Republicans have a tipping point? Will some level of unstable presidential behavior become so threatening to the country that Republicans will say “enough!”?
The question that must be asked of every Republican in Congress is, Will you save the country from irrational presidential behavior that puts the country in peril, or do you intend to go down with the ship?
I just want to know so I can decide whether or not to find a lifeboat to another country.
We should be relieved that the office of the president is populated by Keystone Kops — above all, the chief himself. For those of us terrified at the prospect of authoritarianism in the United States, the nightmare is that of a truly efficient Trump administration.
Thankfully, the impulsive and narcissistic temperament of President Trump, coupled with his inexperience in government, make that unlikely, at least in the short term.
It would be extremely concerning if indeed this administration were to get its act together through the appointment of officials who truly knew how to get things done, were empowered to do so and were beholden to President Trump’s vision of America.
The writer is a retired organization psychologist.
While Donald Trump’s comments regarding Judge James Robart, a George W. Bush appointee, are truly despicable, your editorial ends with the question, “Who will stop him then?” — referring to Mr. Trump’s hypothetical decision not to obey a court order.
The answer to your question is surely not the Republican Congress and certainly not the spineless Democrats. Rather, it will be us, the people, who will be in the streets once again shaming our politicians for being Mr. Trump’s accomplices as he continues to abuse his power.
As witnessed last month when millions of people took to the streets across our country, there is a clear momentum to prevent Mr. Trump from carrying out his autocratic rule. Yes, “we the people” will be the ones who will stop this increasingly arrogant, abusive and megalomaniac president.
Old Westbury, N.Y.
I agree with Frank Bruni that the wrong way to take on Donald Trump is to get down to his level (column, Jan. 25). I have been struck by the language used in the many comments on social media. This is not unique to the followers of Mr. Trump, although it seems to be more prevalent among them.
I realize that President Trump’s preposterous statements and lies can bring out the visceral in the best of us (myself included), but I cannot help but think of the way Michelle and Barack Obama handled themselves with such dignity during the last eight years of verbal abuse.
One major difference between then and now: President Franklin D. Roosevelt was responding to a genuine crisis in American society, the Great Depression; President Trump seems to be trying to foment one.