James Nichols, a farmer who was detained as a possible accomplice but not charged as one after his brother Terry helped Timothy J. McVeigh detonate a truck bomb that killed 168 people in Oklahoma City in 1995, died on Tuesday in Saginaw, Mich. He was 62.
His death was confirmed on the website of Kranz Funeral Home, which handled his funeral arrangements.
On the morning of April 19, 1995, McVeigh, a veteran of the Persian Gulf war, detonated a powerful bomb in a rented truck at the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building. The bombing was the deadliest domestic terrorist attack in American history.
McVeigh was arrested shortly after the bombing, and Terry Nichols turned himself in to the police two days later. McVeigh had spent time with the Nichols brothers on James Nichols’s farm in the tiny community of Decker, Mich., and he listed James as his next of kin when he was arrested.
Federal agents scoured Mr. Nichols’s farm and found firearms and large quantities of ammonium nitrate fertilizer, similar to the kind McVeigh had used to build the Oklahoma City bomb. Mr. Nichols was detained as a material witness.
In 1992, Mr. Nichols was briefly jailed after refusing to pay child support, telling the judge that he did not recognize the court’s authority.
Despite his outspokenness, Mr. Nichols was well liked in Decker.
“James Nichols is a very moral, very sincere, absolutely honest person,” a resident of Decker said on the ABC News program “Nightline” shortly after Mr. Nichols was arrested.
Informants told the authorities that Mr. Nichols, his brother and McVeigh had detonated small bombs on the farm in years past. James Nichols was held on conspiracy charges based on the allegations of their earlier experiments with explosives, but he was not charged with any crime directly related to the Oklahoma City bombing.
He was nevertheless jailed for more than a month, in the middle of the planting season; his neighbors saw to his farm.
After his release in May 1995, he was allowed to work his farm but kept under surveillance and was ordered to follow a curfew. That August, a federal judge dropped the charges against him for lack of evidence.
Both McVeigh and Terry Nichols were convicted in federal court. McVeigh was executed in 2001; Mr. Nichols faced the death penalty but received a life sentence without the possibility of parole.
James Douglas Nichols was born on April 3, 1954, in Lapeer, Mich., to Robert and Joyce Nichols. He graduated from Lapeer High School and moved to the Decker area in 1975.
In addition to his brother, his survivors include his father and mother; a son, Chase; his partner, Evelyn Durst; and a grandson.