With the influence of his right-wing cabinet, President Trump reversed protections for transgender students that were put into place by the Obama administration. This is not only meanspirited and misguided, but it is also dangerous.
Transgender young people already experience bullying and harassment at alarming rates, along with increased rates of depression and suicide. Removing these protections further stigmatizes these students. As a psychiatrist, I have witnessed firsthand the negative effects of such discrimination.
Next month, the Supreme Court will also bear witness to them as Gavin Grimm, a transgender student from Virginia, brings his case to the court.
Transgender young people deserve our protection and respect. Instead, President Trump has decided that political capital is worth more than the lives of transgender students.
The writer is chief resident in psychiatry at Columbia University Medical Center.
One consistent theme with President Trump is that when in doubt you can count on him to go after the vulnerable. Whether they are immigrants, refugees, Muslims or transgender people, he relies on bullying to promote himself. In fact, his entire “America first” theme amounts to America bullying the world.
Of course, we know that the only way to deal with a bully is to stand up to him, and people are doing just that whether in courtrooms or on the streets. It is one aspect of the political climate that offers hope. People seem up for the fight and are reaching out to one another to offer support.
The America that President Trump reaches out to through his bullying is real, but it is not a true picture of America. In a way I feel sorry for him, because the bully is never secure in his own skin and eventually fails and fails badly. He may pick on the vulnerable along the way, but those who may be vulnerable to his tactics today should not be taken for weak.
The bully, on the other hand, lacks the courage of his convictions. Stand up to him, and he will eventually blow away in the wind.
Water Mill, N.Y.
Reading and hearing that President Trump is a strong supporter of states’ rights is somewhat disturbing given the huge differences among states on reproductive issues, L.G.B.T. rights, gun control, science education in schools and so on.
We are still the United States of America, and we fought a civil war to ensure this. If there are so many areas where laws vary significantly from state to state, that could hinder relocating in pursuit of a job.
For example, do I want to move with my company to a state that permits weapons to be carried openly or concealed?
While states can spend their local tax revenue differently on infrastructure and have different tax rates, there are some basic rights that should be assured to all citizens of all the states. Civil liberties and health care access should not be an accident of birth or a result of where your employer is asking you to relocate.
