On the afternoon of Sunday, Dec. 7, 1941, New York needed all the news it could get as soon as it could get it.
And The Times was there, broadcasting some of the first reports of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, as America was plunged into war.
“The Daily,” which began Feb. 1, is the latest milestone in a 76-year broadcast history.
The New York Times has a surprisingly long history with electronic media. It extends from the early decades of radio through television, immersive videos, podcasts and — most recently — an audio show called “The Daily,” with Michael Barbaro.
Our debut on the air 76 years ago hardly could have come at a better moment.
The moment was 8 a.m. on Monday, Dec. 1. The place was 570 on the dial, radio station WMCA. After a quarter-hour of comedy with Ben Brady, the three-minute “New York Times Bulletins” program, assembled by Times staff members, was broadcast for the first time. It would run every hour on the hour for five years, until moving over to the radio station WQXR, which was then owned by The Times.
“It is our belief that no radio news program can take the place of the newspaper, because the perspective and completeness of coverage that mark the newspaper are impossible to attain over the radio,” Arthur Hays Sulzberger, the publisher of The Times, had said in announcing the program.
On Nov. 19, 1941, news of The Times’s first radio broadcast made the top of the front page.
As the first broadcast was being prepared in The Times’s newsroom at 229 West 43rd Street, President Franklin D. Roosevelt was hurrying back to Washington from Warm Springs, Ga., to face a quickly escalating crisis in the Pacific and the imminent prospect of war with Japan. Perhaps the program noted the current location of the presidential train, which was scheduled to arrive in the capital around noon.
Six days later, a 21-year-old Times reporter named Lester Bernstein — who had been “stuck” with the job of writing the WMCA bulletins — was at home, listening to a football game between the New York Giants and the Brooklyn Dodgers, when the attack was announced.
“I rushed to 43rd Street with a sudden new interest in the job,” Mr. Bernstein later recalled, according to an account by his daughter, Nina Bernstein, an investigative reporter at The Times until last year.
He found a growing pile of wire copy on his wooden desk and a Teletype operator waiting to transmit his words to WMCA. Collaboration between the paper and the radio station, precursor to a long relationship with WQXR, had been in place for only seven days. It made him the first Times staffer to provide the public with news that was already changing the world, the city and his life. ...
An old timer in charge of the city desk that day, Walter Fenton, was scandalized. ‘Hey,’ he said, ‘You can’t say that!’ But it was too late — the words were already on the air. And after all, they were true.
When Mr. Sulzberger announced the first news broadcast to be undertaken by The Times, he said: “The greater the interest in news events, the greater is the interest of our readers to get a full nonsensational statement of these events. We believe that our readers will welcome the opportunity to hear the news at stated times from a source that they have learned to trust.
There was no need to do so in December 1941. There’s no need today, either.