CZECHOSLOVAK-AMERICAN MARIONETTE THEATER at Theater for the New City (through March 5). If snowstorms have seemed scarce in the Northeast this season, you’ll find them unrelenting onstage, at least where the puppetmaster Vit Horejs is concerned. Mr. Horejs, this beguiling company’s founder, is presenting Saturday matinees of “The Winter Tales,” Czech stories that include “The Snow Maiden Snehurka” and “The Twelve Months,” both involving girls adrift in blizzards. But he’s offering some heat, too: His troupe’s “Three Golden Hairs of Grandfather Wisdom,” playing Thursdays through Sundays, concerns an angry king who sends his despised son-in-law to seize three golden hairs from the sun. Don’t be surprised, though, to find happy endings amid all the fire and ice.
‘DESTINATION: EVERYWHERE’ at the Gural Theater at A.R.T./New York Theaters (Feb. 25 and March 4, 3 p.m.). It may be mime, but it won’t be silent. Presented by BKBXKids!, the children’s wing of Broken Box Mime Theater, this show will play hit music, feature a speaking M.C. and enlist young audience members in creating sound effects and dreaming up an adventurous finale. Along the way, they’ll see nine short plays that will take them to the moon and back. Those arriving early can see the mimes put on their makeup; those staying late can take part in a post-show mime mini-workshop.
‘EARS, NOSE AND TAIL’ at the Old Stone House, Washington Park (Feb. 25-26, 10 and 11:15 a.m.). A dog with an identity crisis? That’s the protagonist of this Brooklyn show from Spellbound Theater, which specializes in works for children under 5. Developed at the New Victory Theater with funds from the Jim Henson Foundation for Puppetry, this production uses animation, projections and shadow puppetry to help Dog explore just what he’d like to be. (He’s not sure the whole canine thing is working for him.) The first and last performances are sold out, though, so get your paws on tickets fast.
THE NEW YORK INTERNATIONAL CHILDREN’S FILM FESTIVAL (Feb. 24 through March 19) This amazing cinematic experience is now older than its target audience: 20. But that doesn’t mean that the festival is any less attuned to moviegoers ages 3 through 18 or the wider world. At a time when Hollywood is criticized for its lack of female filmmakers, this year’s festival offers features by six, including the Dutch directors Anna van der Heide and Nicole van Kilsdonk. This weekend, Ms. van der Heide’s “Mr. Frog” explores life through the eyes of a girl whose teacher appears oddly amphibious, and Ms. van Kilsdonk’s “The Day My Father Became a Bush” focuses on a 10-year-old who undertakes a dangerous journey after her dad is drafted. And the shorts program “Girls’ POV” is a festival signature. But you don’t have to be female to love what’s here. The animation highlights include Claude Barras’s Oscar-nominated “My Life as a Zucchini,” about a bereaved 9-year-old boy, and Jakob Schuh and Jan Lachauer’s “Revolting Rhymes,” inspired by Roald Dahl’s skewed — and skewering — visions of fairy tales.
‘A YEAR WITH FROG AND TOAD’ at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center (Feb. 25, 2 p.m.) and the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center at the Borough of Manhattan Community College (Feb. 26, 1:30 p.m.). These characters are men — or rather amphibians — for all seasons in this Casa Mañana production, which follows their adventures from the end of winter hibernation to the start of spring the following year. Based on Arnold Lobel’s series of children’s books, this musical by the brothers Willie and Robert Reale — it played on Broadway in 2003 — provides a gentle portrait of a fast friendship forged by opposites.
