Suzie Conn, a longtime advertising executive from Nashville, had never even seen an alpaca until moving to the country and showing up at a county fair.
“I didn’t even know how to spell the name,” she said.
But she was instantly smitten, and now these gentle, fuzzy relatives of the llama are an important part of retirement life for Ms. Conn and her husband, Gary, who had a long career in sales. The couple, both 70, raise alpacas on the six-and-a-half-acre farm they bought in preparation for retirement about 16 years ago in College Grove, Tenn., nearly 40 miles southeast of Nashville.
So-called hobby, or lifestyle, farms like the Conns’ have been sprouting up across the country in steady numbers. They have been particularly popular among retirees or people close to retiring who are looking to remain productive as they age while fulfilling lifelong passions or just tackling new endeavors.
An online survey published last summer by Transamerica, which handles investment and retirement planning, found that 28 percent of people currently in the work force plan to do some form of work in retirement, including pursuing an encore career or starting a business. Forty-nine percent also dream of pursuing hobbies.
Suzie Conn displays bags of alpaca fleece sheared from the herd at the Tennessee farm she and her husband own.
Would-be farmers can expect to pay $3,000 to $4,000, on average, per acre, Mr. Duffy said, though prices can easily reach $10,000 or more an acre, depending on the number of structures on a property and its proximity to urban centers.
Hobby farms vary widely in size and focus, with the majority of them incorporating both crops and animals — and, more often than not, some chickens, said Roger Sipe, the group editor of Hobby Farms and Chickens magazines. The farms can be close to cities or in remote outposts, he said, and they can be as small as a half-acre or spreads exceeding 50 acres.
Some hobby farmers manage to generate a secondary income, often by selling their products at farmers’ markets and at craft shows, as Ms. Conn does, or from animal breeding. Nearly all these farmers, though, many of whom are on fixed incomes, are happy to at least save on their grocery bills by raising or growing their own food.
Wendy Webster, 57, a recently retired teacher’s aide, enjoys having a ready supply of goat cheese for her family and neighbors from her two-acre farm near Gig Harbor, Wash. She and her husband, Keith, who is also 57 and continues working in the local school district, raise and sell Nigerian dwarf goats. They own eight of them now. They also grow fruit trees and blueberries, along with vegetables like green beans, cucumbers and squash.
Work on their farm can be arduous and even confining at times, especially when it comes to caring for the goats. “They need to be milked in the morning and at night if you want to keep up their milk production — it ties you down,” said Ms. Webster, who has to hire outside help if she wants to travel or take a vacation.
Still, she said, “I’ve never been happier.” Ms. Webster and her husband have opened up their farm to kindergarten classes for free tours, and they also provide goats to a nearby zoo’s petting exhibition for children.
An alpaca at the farm waits for the afternoon feeding. Suzie and Gary Conn bought the farm about 16 years ago.
Kevin Sewell, 64, who is retired from a long career in the aerospace industry, is gradually getting his farm started on 20 acres in Nocona, Tex. (population 3,000), about 100 miles north of Dallas. First, he and his wife, Linda, 62, a retired costume designer, built a modest ranch house, then invested in some farm equipment, bought a heifer, and added a honey-producing beehive and a vegetable garden. Mr. Sewell says he hopes to breed the heifer this spring and buy a calf. “Since we’ve only been hobby farming for a little more than a year, we’re still accumulating everything we need,” he said.
Many colleges and universities, though their extension services, also provide programs and information on their websites. Interested in sheep breeding? The University of Minnesota has a publication online. How about raising chickens? The University of Maryland gives detailed guidelines.
Before she began planting her six-acre hobby farm in Landrum, S.C., Kathy Merlino, 63, enrolled in a rigorous master gardener program at Clemson University’s cooperative extension. Through some trial and error, she harvested thriving crops of blueberries, blackberries, figs, grapes and strawberries, along with heirloom tomatoes, asparagus and other vegetables.
“I wanted to grow vegetables and fruits, and I wanted to understand what it took to grow them,” said Ms. Merlino, who retired early from a career in banking and commercial real estate.
