WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — The contract between crossword puzzle and solver is a sacred one, and it consists of one basic rule: The solver reads a clue, takes his or her best guess at the answer and attempts to fill it in. In return, the crossword promises to play fair and make the answer to the clue something within reach of the solver.
In general, it does this by presenting the solver with clues that read in an almost sentence-like way. Occasionally, however, we are presented with puzzles where we are not quite sure what we’re supposed to be doing with the theme clues, or what they mean. Usually, they will be mid- to late-week crosswords.
Today’s puzzle by Kyle Dolan is one such example. Fear not, however: This is a much easier and entertaining theme to decipher than appears at first glance. All it takes is a bit of experience with a certain kind of word puzzle that you’ve most likely seen before and a willingness to climb.
If you just look at the theme clues in today’s puzzle, it looks like Mr. Dolan is yelling gibberish at us, but that’s not the case. The capitalized series of words in each theme clue is actually a word ladder, and we are being asked to supply the first and last rung in order to get the answer, which is a common phrase in the form of ___ TO ___.
For example, at 17A, the clue is “... SLID SAID SAND SANE SINE NINE ...” I have climbed a lot of word ladders in my time, so I recognized that it was, indeed, a word ladder, but what to do with it?
In working the crossings, I got the TO and eventually NONE, which I recognized as the next probable word after “NINE ...,” the end of the clue. Now I had to figure out the first rung. A bit of pondering what ___ TO NONE could be and some futzing with the crossings, and I got it: the phrase is SLIM TO NONE.
NOTE TO SELF: This was a really cool idea for a puzzle. If this is Wednesday, I can only imagine what Thursday will be like. No pressure, Will Shortz and Joel Fagliano.
■ 1A: I did not know that I knew who GINA Carano was until I did the research for today’s column. I recently watched the movie “Deadpool” and she played a character named Angel Dust.
■ 5D: Wordplay alert! I’m sure there are a lot of things that are “always good in Grenoble,” but today’s answer is the French word for “good” itself, BON.
■ 28D: Sometimes it’s good not to overthink things. A clue like “6-3, 2-6, 7-6, e.g.” is simply the scores for a MATCH.
■ 41D: Hands up if you wrote in STYLUS. Me too. The answer is STYLET, which is used for engraving. A stylus is apparently something different. Not that I’m bitter.
A nice midweek climb, Mr. Dolan.