With his Academy Award nomination for best song, for “How Far I’ll Go” from the Disney movie “Moana,” the Broadway sensation Lin-Manuel Miranda is very close to gaining entry to the most exclusive performing arts group: EGOT holders, people who have won an Emmy, a Grammy, an Oscar and a Tony. (He has already won an Emmy, two Grammys and three Tonys, along with a Pulitzer and a MacArthur fellowship).
How’s it going in London? Are people asking you all the time what’s going on in America?
I’m in the middle of a dream job dancing with Emily Blunt all day, and extremely grateful to be here. They’ve got their head around America — they’re going through Brexit at the same time, so there’s similar uncertainty in their future.
When is the first time you heard the word EGOT and when did you set your sights on it?
Can you talk about how “The Little Mermaid” influenced you?
It launched my own musical career. When Sebastian broke out into the calypso number, I was sort of never the same. It was just so contemporary and unexpected and delightful. I remember feeling dizzy seeing that number, the weightlessness of being transported. “The Little Mermaid” is the reason I became an Oscars nerd. I remember recording the Oscars that year. I had skin in the game.
And now you’re working on a live-action version of “The Little Mermaid,” right?
That news leaked super early. We haven’t formalized anything. I would say that I’m invested emotionally but not attached.
Did Disney approach you or did you approach Disney, for “Moana”?
I interviewed in the winter of 2013 and got the job in the spring, seven and a half months before “Hamilton” opened at the Public. I’d sent them a six-song demo, stuff that emphasized going between languages. I knew a component would be working with Samoan and being able to thread that needle gracefully.
The “Moana” people must have been so amped after “Hamilton” took off.
I think it was mixed. Our producer was like, “Yeah, he’ll finish his founding father musical, and then we’ll have him to write these songs.” For me, “Moana” was an ego check and an oasis in my life as the “Hamilton” phenomenon kept growing. I had to say no to a lot of stuff that would have distracted me. That’s when I wrote songs for “Moana.” I stayed a writer and my head never got too big.
What’s your “Mary Poppins” accent like? Dick Van Dyke got pilloried for his.
I would describe the accent as just shy of Cockney east. More Anthony Newley than Stanley Holloway. That’s a very musical-theater reference. I’m watching British stand-up comedy — East End guys — and I’m also listening to a lot of music, like Billy Bragg. The East End accent now is very different from in the ’30s. You’ll see that mistake on both sides a lot. I’ve seen British productions of American shows and it’s like, “Yeah, that’s a New York accent, but I’m not sure what decade.’” I asked Meryl Streep, who’s in the film, what her favorite British accent is. She said Thatcher. Thatcher was a self-created persona. [Thatcher] took elocution lessons, and made up her own accent.
I did it with full humility, knowing my best accent wouldn’t touch her work. It’s very surreal to work with her. She’s a joy, a delight.