Hours before President Trump rescinded a federal policy allowing transgender students to use the school bathrooms that match their gender identities, his education secretary, Betsy DeVos, met with a representative of gay and transgender employees at the Education Department to warn of what was coming.
But people who have known and watched Ms. DeVos through the years — as a leading advocate of charter schools and school vouchers, a former Michigan Republican Party chairwoman and a major Republican donor — warn against thinking that she will be a meek team player. She may be publicly gracious, even in the face of setbacks, they say. But in her home state, she earned a reputation as a driven, relentless and effective political fighter, using her family’s vast fortune to reward allies and punish foes, and working behind the scenes to pass legislation and unseat lawmakers who opposed her.
Ms. DeVos, who declined to be interviewed for this article, arrived in Washington with no experience inside government and very little history with the president, and she took over a department whose upper ranks are mostly vacant. In the argument over transgender bathroom access, that put her at a disadvantage against Attorney General Jeff Sessions, a former senator with decades of Washington experience and connections who has long had Mr. Trump’s ear.
But critics and admirers alike say they expect her to learn the ropes, build ties and get her way.
Ms. DeVos, 59, grew up in Holland, Mich., in the western part of the state. She worked at times at the auto parts company her father, Edgar Prince, a major backer of Christian conservative causes, founded and built into a billion-dollar business. Her brother, Erik D. Prince, founded and was chief executive of the private security firm Blackwater, a controversial contractor for American personnel in Iraq and Afghanistan. Her husband, Dick DeVos, comes from an even wealthier family — his father was a founder of Amway, the multilevel marketing company — and he ran unsuccessfully for governor of Michigan in 2006.
Opponents have noted Ms. DeVos’s lack of connections to public schools and colleges — she and her husband had private educations, as did their children — or to the problems average families have in paying for education.
For three decades, Ms. DeVos fought to steer tax dollars away from traditional public schools to charter schools, which rely on public money but are operated by private groups, outside public school structures. She also sought public funds for vouchers to pay for tuition at private schools, including religious schools. Opponents call charter schools a conservative plan to undermine public education by starving it of resources, while supporters argue that they give poor families choices and create competition that pressures traditional schools to improve.
But Ms. DeVos has taken the cause further than many charter school advocates. She has supported schools run by for-profit companies and opposed performance standards for them. She has also argued that the free market — parents’ deciding whether to send their children to charter schools — should decide their fate.
Largely because of her efforts, Detroit has the nation’s largest concentration of charter schools. Many of them are low-performing, and the supply exceeds the demand in some places, within a system that has little oversight and has been derided as chaotic. At the same time, Detroit’s public schools, among the worst in the nation, have continued to deteriorate.
Last year, Detroit officials and a bipartisan group of state lawmakers backed legislation to create mechanisms for permitting new charter schools and closing failing ones. But a group Ms. DeVos created, the Great Lakes Education Project, fought against the bill and won. Ms. DeVos said the Detroit public school system should simply be shut down.
Greg McNeilly, a Republican political operative in Michigan who has worked extensively with Ms. DeVos, said she understood what too many Americans did not: that even public schools in the United States that are considered good do not perform as well as those in other developed countries, as measured by student test scores. “I think she wants to have a conversation with the country about what should we expect from our schools, and about being agnostic about the form of schools,” he said.
Ms. DeVos has had a rocky introduction to Washington, to put it mildly. In her Senate confirmation hearings, her shaky answers to questions about education policy and federal law, and her suggestion that some school officials carried guns to protect against grizzly bears — allies say it was meant as a joke — made her a target for late-night television comedy.
The Senate confirmed her, 51-50, with Vice President Mike Pence casting a tiebreaking vote — a first for a cabinet officer.
One of her first acts as secretary was to call the leaders of the two major teachers’ unions, Ms. Weingarten and Lily Eskelsen García, president of the National Education Association. Ms. Eskelsen García said she saw no point in talking yet, but Ms. Weingarten returned the call, and she and Ms. DeVos made plans to visit schools together.
