Standing in front of his 85-foot glass-tile infinity pool overlooking Los Angeles, Bruce Makowsky unveils the centerpiece of the most expensive new home for sale in America.
“You ready for the best view?” he asks. A staff member touches an iPad, and a 20-foot 4K-resolution television mounted on a spiral hydraulic lift rises from the edge of the pool. Even in the bright California sunshine, the vivid image of Beyoncé in concert appears on the screen above the pool, her music booming from 16 underground speakers.
“No other house has anything like that,” said Mr. Makowsky, who made his fortune as a handbag designer and has turned to developing and flipping mansions.
And no other house in the United States has an official price tag as high: $250 million.
Mr. Makowsky’s 38,000-square-foot high-tech palace signifies a new level of superhome — for now. Less than 10 miles away, an even bigger home is under construction that will be listed for $500 million. Together, the two competing properties in the small, hushed Los Angeles neighborhood of Bel Air have become the Godzilla-versus-King Kong of rich real estate, rising as concrete symbols of the new class of supersize wealth and offering a window into the particular needs of today’s billionaires.
Mr. Makowsky, a 60-year-old walking luxury ad who wears $500,000 watches and drives $2 million cars, is betting on demand for what he calls “the curated lifestyle.” Rather than building a big empty box that buyers can design and make their own, he has built an all-inclusive, ready-made billionaire’s lair — where everything from the $30 million car collection to the 7,000 movies loaded in the James Bond-themed theater to the $3,500 Roberto Cavalli table settings comes with the house. Even the seven-person staff (including a chef, chauffeur and masseuse) is included for two years.
The competing home nearby, called “The One,” is nearly three times the size, with more than 105,000 square feet of living space. The master bedroom alone is 5,500 square feet — on par with the area of, say, a five-story Manhattan brownstone or a SoHo penthouse duplex.
The garage for “The One” can accommodate 30 cars. The property, still under construction, will have at least four pools and other interesting water features. The developer, Nile Niami, says the house will be finished in May or June of 2018.
The two builders have kept a respectful distance between them. Both have made fortunes selling ever-bigger and more expensive homes built on speculation.
“I’m thrilled that there will be more exciting homes built for billionaires that create jobs,” Mr. Makowsky said.
Mr. Niami said that while both homes are expensive, they are targeted for different buyers.
While some have likened the house to a giant mall or oversize resort, out of scale with a personal home, Mr. Niami says he’s not concerned about the asking price. “All my houses always sell,” he said.
Yet real estate agents to the wealthy say that Mr. Makowsky and Mr. Niami are betting on the same small pool of buyers at a time when the top of the real estate market is filling up with a larger supply of megamansions.
And the two homes could end up selling for far less, since nine-figure price tags are often used more as marketing tools than as real valuations. The most expensive home sold in the United States is believed to be an East Hampton estate that sold for $147 million in 2014. In California, the biggest sale is believed to be that of a nine-acre estate in Woodside that sold for $117.5 million in 2013.
Mr. Makowsky, however, has made multiple careers out of defying the skeptics. A native of New York City, he founded a leather goods empire in the 1990s with his wife, Kathy Van Zeeland, selling shoes and handbags on the QVC network and eventually selling several companies — the last for hundreds of millions of dollars. He moved to Los Angeles planning to retire but quickly developed a taste for buying, building and selling real estate.
In 2014, he built a so-called spec house that listed for $85 million, a price local brokers said was $20 million to $30 million too high. The house, referred to as the “ultimate billionaire bachelor pad,” featured a $200,000 sculpture of a giant blue hand grenade and a master bedroom modeled after a Louis Vuitton store. After a bidding war against Beyoncé and Jay Z, Markus Persson, the billionaire bachelor who created the Minecraft video game, bought the house for $70 million. The price was a record for Beverly Hills.
Mr. Makowsky said that while the number (more than 2,000) and wealth of the world’s billionaires had exploded, the quality of the homes they bought had not kept pace. He said that today’s superrich had more money than time or artistic expertise, and that they preferred to have their homes curated like museums before they moved in.
His latest creation took 300 workers four years to build.
Rather than a 12-car garage, Mr. Makowsky’s house has an “auto gallery” stocked with 12 examples of some of the rarest, fastest cars in the world, including a 1936 Mercedes that is valued at $15 million. A $1 million, five-foot-high stainless-steel representation of a Leica camera sits under a $2 million polished steel spiral staircase. Among the home’s 130 “art installations” is a chain saw featuring Rolls-Royce hood ornaments, a giant Louis Vuitton syringe, and a huge Birkin bag and stack of Louis Vuitton luggage all carved from honey onyx. Most of those pieces were designed for the house.
The four-lane bowling alley has gold- and silver-plated bowling pins and coffee tables made from Starphire ultraclear glass and aircraft engines. The movie theater has 40 reclining leather seats, and the TV downstairs, at nearly 30 feet, is believed to the largest in an American home.
The house is so loaded with monumental bling that the necessities — 12 bedrooms, 21 bathrooms, three kitchens — seem almost secondary. Mr. Makowsky has shown the home to eight billionaires already, but the property did not come on the market officially until Jan. 18.
When asked about the price, Mr. Makowsky said a proper comparison would be with a mega-yacht and not with another house. Sales of yachts longer than 300 feet have surged in recent years, he pointed out, with price tags topping $400 million.
