Pro Basketball|Latrell Sprewell Visits. Minds Boggle. Knicks Win.
Latrell Sprewell Visits. Minds Boggle. Knicks Win.
If the Knicks had hoped that Sunday afternoon’s game against the San Antonio Spurs would be a return to a semblance of normalcy, that notion did not last long.
Instead, with less than four minutes gone in the first quarter, the Knicks’ owner, James L. Dolan, who has been in the middle of the most recent chaos, sat down at his usual courtside seat at Madison Square Garden. But rather than just sitting with his chief spokesman, Barry Watkins, as usual, Dolan was flanked by two former Knicks stars — Bernard King and Latrell Sprewell — with another alumnus, Larry Johnson, just one seat away.
That Sprewell, of all people, was alongside Dolan seemed both curious and calculating. He had a dramatic falling out with the Knicks and Dolan after he was traded in 2003, including an obscenity-laced tirade directed at Dolan on his first visit back to the Garden as a visiting player.
Now 46 and retired, he had not been back to the Garden in more than a dozen years, but there he was on Sunday. As were King and Johnson, and a number of other Knicks from the past.
The message was clear. Four days after Charles Oakley, another former Knicks star, was led from the arena in handcuffs and two days after Dolan indefinitely banned Oakley from the Garden and characterized him as an essentially troubled person, the Knicks were on a full-scale public relations offensive.
Dolan had come under heavy criticism for the way Oakley was treated on Wednesday and for the negative statements he later made about Oakley, including the unsubstantiated suggestion that Oakley might be an alcoholic.
So Sunday was less about the game, which was nationally televised, and more about the Knicks trying to leave the impression, however transparent the effort, that they do care about their former players. The images of nine former Knicks, including Sprewell, were flashed on the arena’s big screen as the game progressed.
Of course, even before Oakley became the team’s latest headache, the Knicks had already created problems for themselves with their generally poor play on the court and with critical barbs that the team’s president, Phil Jackson, has kept aiming at the team’s one star, Carmelo Anthony. But the Oakley episode made things considerably worse.
As for the game, although the Spurs are the anti-Knicks — a model organization that has won one title after another over the last two decades while the Knicks have often imploded — it was the Knicks who came out on top Sunday, beating San Antonio, 94-90. It was just their seventh victory in their last 27 games. Anthony scored 25 points and moved past Charles Barkley on the career scoring list.
It is unclear, however, whether many people noticed. This game was more about the sideshow that the Knicks have often become as a franchise.
Enter Sprewell. After the Knicks traded him to Minnesota, he returned to play against them at the Garden on Dec. 23, 2003. At the time, he was furious with Dolan, who he believed had helped push him out of New York.
Sprewell scored 31 points in Minnesota’s victory that night but put much of his energy into yelling at Dolan. At one point, in the fourth quarter, Sprewell was so angry that he spent roughly 30 seconds shouting profanities about the Knicks’ owner. The N.B.A. fined him $25,000 for the outbursts.
The enmity that Sprewell displayed back then eventually faded into the past, but that did not make his return on Sunday any less startling.
A Knicks official, who was not authorized to talk about the matter for the record, maintained that the Knicks had been working for months to get Sprewell to return, although his presence on Sunday, in the aftermath of the Oakley controversy, hardly seemed a coincidence.
The Knicks, the official said, did not offer Sprewell any sort of inducement to appear. In what was surely a coincidence, P. J. Carlesimo called Sunday’s game for ESPN Radio. In 1997, Sprewell choked Carlesimo, who was then his coach with the Golden State Warriors, and ultimately served a suspension of 68 games, the second-longest in N.B.A. history.
In any case, it is questionable whether Sprewell’s return will do anything to change the dynamics of the Oakley situation, with many fans siding with Oakley and not Dolan. Spike Lee, perhaps the No. 1 Knicks fan, was at courtside on Sunday in an Oakley jersey.
The current Knicks said they were aware of Sprewell’s presence on Sunday, too. Indeed, when the game ended, Dolan escorted Sprewell and Johnson into the locker room, allowing them and other former players to join the team in its postgame huddle.
