The police in Delphi, Ind., have released a secretly recorded audio and a photograph of a man suspected in the killings of two teenage girls who disappeared while on a hiking trip near an abandoned rail bridge last week.
Law enforcement officials in Delphi, a city of around 3,000 residents about 60 miles north of Indianapolis, released the excerpt on Wednesday, hoping that someone might recognize the voice.
Officials are also investigating whether the voice belonged to the man seen in footage discovered on Liberty’s phone after the bodies of both girls were found on Feb. 14.
The police called the older girl a “hero” for having the courage to make the recording.
Liberty, who was called Libby, and Abigail, known as Abby, were both eighth-grade students at Delphi Community Middle School. They were on the last day of a four-day winter break when they left on a hiking trip on Monday, Feb. 13, the superintendent of Delphi’s schools, Gregory G. Briles, said in an interview on Thursday.
At approximately 1 p.m., the girls set off near the Monon High Bridge, a historical abandoned rail bridge near a 10-mile park trail known as the Delphi Historic Trail, “to walk around and hang out,” the Indiana State Police said.
They had made plans to be picked up later in the afternoon. When they did not show up, a family member called the authorities, and search parties were organized, the police said.
The next day, counselors and staff members were deployed to the middle school to provide support for students, Mr. Briles said.
About 12:15 p.m. on Feb. 14, a search team discovers both teenagers’ bodies in a wooded area near the trail, about a half-mile upstream from the bridge, the police said.
Officials have not said how the girls were killed.
The Delphi Police Department, the Carroll County Sheriff, the State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation have joined the investigation.
On Feb. 15, officers distributed a photo of a man who had been seen on the trail, but they did not call him a suspect until Feb. 19. The man appeared to be wearing bluejeans, a blue jacket and a hoodie.
In a news conference on Feb. 22, the authorities showed an enhanced photograph of the suspect. They also released the three-word audio, saying that both the photograph and the recording were extracted from video on Liberty’s cellphone.
The authorities announced a reward of up to $41,000 and sought the public’s help with tips.
Officials said there is more video from the girl’s cellphone that is germane to the investigation, but it has not been made public. They said they do not know if the girls knew the suspect, or if there had been a chance encounter.
Liberty had participated in the volleyball, softball, soccer and swimming teams. She was a member of the school band and a school team that traveled around the state competing in academic competitions, Mr. Briles said.
Abby was also in the band — she played the saxophone — and was on the volleyball team. Her hobbies included reading.
“Both girls enjoyed being outdoors,” Mr. Briles said.
