SOUTHAMPTON, N.Y. — “Something there is that doesn’t love a wall, that wants it down,” a Robert Frost poem says. Toni Ross did not want to tear a wall down, she just wanted to cut into one, creating a little window to expose what was behind it — copies of sculptures by Renaissance masters.
Ms. Ross, the Toni of Nick & Toni’s, a restaurant that is a command post for the see-and-be-seen crowd in the Hamptons, doubles as an artist. She was preparing for a group show in an Italianate warren that began in the late 19th century as the Parrish Art Museum, another stop on the Hamptons celebrity circuit. The Parrish moved to striking modern quarters a few miles away in 2012. The old building, owned by the Village of Southampton, became the home of the Southampton Arts Center.
Arts center officials referred the idea to Village Hall, where it was turned down.
She offered to return the wall to its original condition after the show and even replace the entire wall if necessary. After a carpenter who has worked with her on past installations told her that little more than a patch would be required, Ms. Ross decided to try again, sending a more detailed proposal and calling Mayor Mark Epley.
The precedent, according to the village administrator, Stephen Funsch, had to do with what would happen after the exhibition.
Ms. Ross said she could understand the qualms if the wall had not been cut into before. But it had. She knew that from a book in the Rogers Memorial Library, not far from the arts center.
The figures were part of an altarlike structure that reaches from the floor almost to the ceiling. It was commissioned by the Parrish’s founder, Samuel Longstreth Parrish, a Europhile whose life straddled the 19th and 20th centuries, when most American art collectors scoured Europe and brought home items that suited their fancy.
Not all were treasures. Some contemporary critics scolded Parrish for having accumulated plaster casts of masterpieces, not the masterpieces themselves. But in Parrish’s day, when photography was cumbersome and foreign travel a luxury, there was value in plaster reproductions: The public learned the canon of classic art from seeing plaster reproductions of ancient statuary.
“He was trying to make a little Metropolitan Museum,” said Donna De Salvo, now the deputy director for international initiatives and senior curator at the Whitney Museum of American Art in Manhattan.
She is an authority on contemporary art with a long list of exhibitions and catalogs to her credit, but her résumé often omits a detail: She is also an authority on the wall at the Parrish. She wrote the book with the photograph that was in the library. And 24 years ago, she assembled an exhibition at the Parrish about the Parrish — and decided to find out what was behind the wall, which was then more like a box that closed off the figures behind from all sides.
“We drilled a hole,” she recalled last week. “We got a flashlight, and there it was.” Her book described it as a “composite altarpiece” with countless angels on four levels, each a copy of a work by Donatello, Lorenzo Ghiberti or the two della Robbias, Luca and his nephew Andrea.
After the 1993 exhibition, she said, she had that wall removed and along with it an unsightly radiator. In its place went the current wall, a single flat panel with no sides, so museumgoers who nosed in close could get a glimpse of the altar.
