As a public-school teacher in Bedford-Stuyvesant, I take exception to the conclusions drawn by Alan Ehrenhalt’s tone-deaf review of “The New Brooklyn: What It Takes to Bring a City Back,” by Kay S. Hymowitz (Feb. 5). Missing from his discussion of the benefits of gentrification in poor black neighborhoods like Bed-Stuy are the increasing rates of homelessness in those areas.
A recent study on homelessness in the Department of Education’s school districts revealed that District 16 (Bed-Stuy) had the highest number of students living in temporary housing in Brooklyn (and the third-highest in the entire city). Many students and their families who do not end up homeless move to Brownsville or East New York.
And contrary to Ehrenhalt and Hymowitz’s claim that gentrifiers improve the neighborhoods they move into, gentrifiers in Bed-Stuy often opt to send their children to charter schools or schools outside the district. This has led to a host of damaging consequences for the public schools of District 16. The callousness with which Ehrenhalt dismisses the “losers” in the gentrification process speaks volumes about his ignorance and/or indifference to the costs of gentrification for poor African-Americans.
In the first paragraph of his review Alan Ehrenhalt writes: “Not too long ago,” gentrification was “pretty much a value-neutral term for the process by which communities exchange one set of residents for another.” The cluelessness of this statement is twofold.
First, it suggests that whenever the socio-economic, racial and/or ethnic composition of a neighborhood changes, it is called gentrification. One obvious counterexample is the influx of African- Americans and Latinos into many parts of Brooklyn that started in the mid-20th century, both literally and figuratively changing its complexion. It was not called gentrification at the time or at any time in the succeeding years.
The writer is a retired librarian and historian.
I was surprised that neither Stephen Kinzer nor Michael Lind mentioned the American conquest of Mexico (1846-48) as the nation’s earlier foray into imperialism. The acquisition of nearly half of Mexico devastated our southern neighbor and brought untold riches to the United States.
Many of the foreign policy debates and economic demands by the captains of industry discussed by Kinzer also occurred as policy makers wrestled with taking “all of Mexico” after the war. With slavery at stake and concerns about the incorporation of nonwhite Mexican citizens and indigenous peoples, all on the eve of the gold rush, it seems that the “American Empire” mentioned in Kinzer’s subtitle arrived a half-century earlier.
The writer is an assistant professor of Latina/o studies at Mount Holyoke College.
When I was an English teacher of mostly rural white students, I found it crucial for them to know the distinction between their home dialect, necessary in their community, and standard English, necessary for the vast majority of white-collar jobs. Teachers must not disparage community speech, but they must teach standard English, the language of the marketplace.
