When Alastair Gibson heard that the Waldorf Astoria was closing, he and his wife made reservations to stay there, even though doing so put a strain on their budget.
For out-of-towners like the Gibsons, word that the Waldorf would soon take a two- to three-year hiatus for renovations had the urgent ping of a homing signal. They wanted to see for themselves what had made the Waldorf so famous for so long: the corridors where presidents, princes and princesses roamed; the restaurants that gave the world eggs Benedict, veal Oscar, Waldorf salad and Thousand Island dressing; the two-ton clock tower in the lobby topped by a little Statue of Liberty; and Cole Porter’s Steinway piano. Maybe even room service, which the Waldorf claims to have inaugurated.
For New Yorkers, the shutdown will mean one less icon on the landscape for a while — and that the galas that have filled the Waldorf’s ballroom night after night will have to find new homes. The closing is scheduled for Wednesday. Checkout time is noon.
The Waldorf will be reconstituted as a smaller hotel with more apartments; the Waldorf Towers, reached through an entrance separate from the hotel’s, has been a suites-only address with longtime residents since the Waldorf opened in 1931. The new apartments are expected to be condominiums. How many there will be has not been announced. Neither have the prices.
The plans are not yet final, but a spokesman for the hotel’s owner said the Art Deco public areas would be restored. The Landmarks Preservation Commission is scheduled to decide whether to designate a long list of Waldorfiana as interior landmarks, from the grand ballroom to the “wheel of life” mosaic above the Park Avenue entrance, which was made with 148,000 marble tiles.
Some guests on Thursday grumbled that the Waldorf needed some freshening up, that the carpet was worn, the furniture in the rooms scratched and dented, and the food warmed over.
The Waldorf has long had a reputation for elegance and élan, a reputation that began when it opened in 1931 as the largest, tallest and most expensive hotel ever built, with 2,200 rooms, 47 stories and construction costs that were estimated at more than $40 million. The hotel’s website listed single rooms for two adults for Friday night for $210 to $829.
Just as the Waldorf’s construction budget was stratospheric for the Depression, so was its $1.95 billion price when it was sold in 2014. The buyer was the Anbang Insurance Group, a Chinese company with ties to Beijing’s ruling elite.
In 2015, after officials linked cyberattacks on government databases and email servers to Chinese hackers, President Barack Obama decided not to stay at the Waldorf when he was in New York for the United Nations General Assembly.
Large gatherings like the Al Smith Dinner led John Doherty, the executive chef from 1985 to 2009, to say he had fed more presidents and heads of state than any other chef.
He recalled hauling food past frozen-zone checkpoints a couple of blocks from the hotel — and once, when the guests were 3,500 patent lawyers, a near disaster. The menu called for steamed vegetables with beurre monté, a whipped butter sauce.
No one smelled it, that is, until the staff took the vegetables out of the refrigerator and began reheating them. “I walked in and I smelled sour vegetables for 3,500 lawyers,” Mr. Doherty said, adding that he ordered all 3,500 portions thrown out and new vegetables cooked in less than an hour.
Mr. Doherty said that he was “not romantically attached” to the Waldorf and that “it does need a transformation of some kind” — a modernization, he said.
But he is betting that customers at his restaurant, the Black Barn on East 26th Street near Madison Square Park, do have such an attachment. Once the Waldorf closes, he will serve a prix fixe menu with dishes from “The Waldorf-Astoria Cookbook,” which he wrote with John Harrisson.