GREENBURGH, N.Y. — Rangers defenseman Brady Skjei carries one souvenir from his rookie N.H.L. season: a two-inch scar on his chin, where he was inadvertently kicked by his teammate Kevin Hayes during a game in December. Skjei had never taken a skate in the face before.
“It was a bit fluky, but I got lucky that it wasn’t lower, like in the neck area,” he said recently.
The other things that Skjei, a 22-year-old who was a first-round draft pick in 2012, has picked up this season have become more obvious to his coach and teammates, particularly in the six weeks since his only healthy scratch of the season.
At 6 feet 3 inches and 211 pounds, with the ability to accelerate on his skates quickly, Skjei is widely thought to have similar potential to another punishing, left-handed-shooting defenseman from Minnesota: Ryan McDonagh, the Rangers’ 27-year-old captain.
With two assists Thursday night against the Islanders, Skjei now has 25, more than any defenseman except McDonagh. Skjei is one of three Rangers defensemen in the past 30 years with at least 25 assists in his rookie season, after Brian Leetch (48 in 1988-89) and Michael Del Zotto (28 in 2009-10). On Thursday, Skjei played a significant number of minutes on the power play and had his third 20-minute game of the season.
But very few prospects enter the N.H.L. as finished products. Although Skjei said that this season had gone “pretty well,” he acknowledged that he had scuffled at times. But every rookie scuffles. A rookie’s objective, McDonagh said, is to learn from mistakes.
“It’s more mental, right?” McDonagh said.
Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault has pointed out, for example, that Skjei has needed to make better decisions with the puck. There Skjei is making progress. He has had 11 giveaways in his last 21 games, compared with 25 giveaways in his first 35 games this season.
Skjei (pronounced “Shea”) played in seven regular-season games and five playoff games for the Rangers last season, showing enough talent that in June the team traded the veteran Keith Yandle, another left-handed, puck-moving defenseman, who was about to become a free agent.
But Skjei had what Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault now calls an “average” training camp. Nick Holden, a defenseman acquired from the Colorado Avalanche in June, was a pleasant surprise. Skjei made the team but then started slowly and did not play much.
In November, the Rangers began to pair Skjei with Kevin Klein, a physical, 32-year-old veteran who is probably the Ranger most likely to end up in a post-whistle scrap. Klein, to an extent, became Skjei’s confidant.
In December, Skjei lamented that he had not been physical enough in responding to Dallas’s Cody Eakins after Eakins charged and knocked over goalie Henrik Lundqvist behind the net during a game.
This season, the Rangers’ defensemen are being coached by Jeff Beukeboom, 51, who helped the Rangers win their last Stanley Cup in 1994. Beukeboom coached Skjei for more than a season on the Rangers’ Hartford farm team after Skjei left the University of Minnesota in 2015.
The Rangers also have McDonagh, now in his sixth full N.H.L. season, and the 32-year-old Dan Girardi and the 30-year-old Marc Staal, who have each played in more than 650 N.H.L. games. They serve as a reference library for Skjei.
Skjei was benched for a Dec. 23 home game against the Minnesota Wild, and as he said recently, “You don’t want to be in that position.” In the nine games that followed, he had only two assists, but it was clear to Vigneault and his teammates that Skjei was gaining confidence. Skjei scored a goal, added an assist and was a plus-3 on Jan. 19 in a 5-2 victory over the Toronto Maple Leafs. He has eight points in the 11 games since.
Vigneault is careful to steer wide of comparing Skjei with McDonagh, but he likes the way Skjei, like McDonagh, can get to full speed in a stride or two, blowing past a forecheck to create chances. At the same time, Skjei has been credited with 93 hits, third among Rangers’ defensemen, behind only the combative Klein and Holden.
