“Maybe I should run for president,” Denzel Washington joked, sitting down to a late breakfast in Midtown Manhattan last week, before immediately issuing a retraction.
He had arrived in the States a few hours earlier from London, where he had been promoting his Oscar-nominated movie “Fences,” and also talking about what everyone was talking about: the politics of the day. Mr. Washington told the Bagger he understood the surge of anger that had fueled Brexit and President Trump’s ascendence, and now he wanted to talk solutions. But first, he wanted grapefruit juice and eggs.
He had squeezed in a few hours of shut-eye and ambled into the Park Hyatt’s restaurant looking a little rumpled still. After settling in, he also discovered two holes in his big woolly gray sweater.
As commanding a presence as his onscreen personas suggest, Mr. Washington, who is 62, also carries a hint of the absent-minded professor. This is the same fellow, after all, who showed up to accept a lifetime achievement award at last year’s Golden Globes having forgotten both his speech and his glasses. But Hollywood adores Mr. Washington, who, armed with charisma and that killer smile, effortlessly charmed the Globes crowd anyway.
Promoting his movie, Mr. Washington has been pushing to elevate awareness of August Wilson, the Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright who wrote “Fences” and adapted it for film. Mr. Washington also has strong opinions on the political turmoil that, invariably, has come to dominate the awards season. Mr. Trump’s presidency was a result of people’s frustrations, Mr. Washington said, but the focus now has to be on finding people work and bridging the bitter national divide.
Mr. Washington certainly has the platform to speak out. In January, he received his seventh Oscar nomination for acting, further cementing a Hollywood royalty status that needed no help. The latest nomination, for his lead turn in “Fences,” was roundly expected, as were the movie’s other nominations, for best film (Mr. Washington was a producer); best adapted screenplay; and best supporting actress, for Viola Davis, who is considered a lock to win.
But Mr. Washington’s peers delivered a whopping surprise last month at the Screen Actors Guild Awards, which usually foretell Oscar winners. Throughout the season, Casey Affleck has been scooping up best actor prizes for his performance in “Manchester by the Sea,” and he was predicted to collect the guild’s trophy, too. Instead, it went to Mr. Washington, who took the stage wagging his head in disbelief, before deploying a winning strategy — disarm them, then own them.
Then, he listed America’s most famous playwrights, making clear who he believes merit inclusion in the pantheon. “Tennessee Williams, Arthur Miller, Eugene O’Neill, Edward Albee, August Wilson,” he said.
Set in the 1950s, “Fences” centers on Troy Maxson (Mr. Washington), a long-winded would-be baseball great and garbage collector, and his homemaker wife, Rose, played by Ms. Davis. Onscreen, Mr. Washington and Ms. Davis share a rich, affectionate familiarity, for good reason: They starred in the play’s 2010 revival, a Broadway smash that landed each of them a Tony Award.
“Fences” is the sixth of Mr. Wilson’s 10-play “Pittsburgh Cycle,” which explores African-American lives in each decade of the 20th century. Mr. Washington is working on bringing the remaining nine plays to the screen, for HBO, a plan no doubt helped by the success of “Fences”: It has earned $54 million domestically so far.
Getting “Fences” to the screen was a decades-long ordeal. It was optioned in the late ’80s but was delayed partly because Mr. Wilson insisted on having an African-American director. Mr. Wilson died of cancer in 2005, at 60, and four years later, the powerhouse producer Scott Rudin, who had by then acquired the film rights, sent the screenplay to Mr. Washington, wanting him to star in and direct it. Mr. Washington replied that he wanted to perform it onstage first, so Mr. Rudin made it happen.
Did he share Mr. Wilson’s belief that the film could have had only a black director?
Had the film come out a year earlier, it would have possibly reshaped Oscars history. Last year, controversy erupted again after all of the nominated actors ended up being, for the second year in a row, white.
And as important as it is for people to speak up, Mr. Washington said, it’s just as important for black artists to keep striving for that breakthrough.
