GREENBURGH, N.Y. — Jeff Hornacek and Phil Jackson sat on a bench alongside the court at the Knicks’ practice complex Tuesday afternoon, some 15 hours after the team’s season had reached its low point in a humiliating loss at home to the woeful Los Angeles Lakers.
The two men talked, and they definitely had plenty to discuss, with the Knicks’ season increasingly looking like a full-fledged fiasco.
But Jackson, the Knicks’ president, was not about to give reporters who cover the team any insight into the conversation he and Hornacek, the team’s coach, were having. Jackson had not spoken with the local news media since September, and he did not on Tuesday, either, instead quickly departing after his conversation with Hornacek had ended.
Still, hours later, Jackson did weigh in, with a comment on Twitter that could be viewed only as yet another attack on Carmelo Anthony, his star player but one whom Jackson seems intent on shipping elsewhere by the Feb. 23 trading deadline, even though Anthony has a no-trade clause in his contract.
In the post on Twitter, Jackson signaled his approval of a Bleacher Report article that examined the evolving relationship between Jackson and Anthony and concluded that Jackson had erred in thinking he could transform Anthony from a one-dimensional scorer into a more well-rounded player.
The article, by Kevin Ding, said Anthony, 32, was a “likable person” who did not possess the desire to win that Kobe Bryant and Michael Jordan displayed when they were playing.
Jackson’s Twitter post came on the heels of other critical comments that he and Charley Rosen, a Jackson confidante, had made about Anthony. Early in December, Jackson took a jab at Anthony during an interview with CBS Sports Network, criticizing his tendency to hold on to the ball. That comment led to a meeting between Jackson and Anthony to smooth things over.
In January, Rosen castigated Anthony in a column on FanRagSports.com, saying he had “outlived his usefulness in New York.” That led to another face-to-face session between Jackson and Anthony.
Now there is the Twitter comment, which will most likely force Anthony to answer more questions about himself and Jackson on Wednesday, when the Knicks play at Madison Square Garden against the Los Angeles Clippers.
It is likely to be another uncomfortable moment for Anthony, which perhaps is Jackson’s intent — if he is trying to convince Anthony that it would be better for him and the Knicks if he agreed to go to another team.
In addition to citing the Bleacher Report article, Jackson’s post also mentioned the unhappy experience he had had in dealing with Michael Graham, who was on his roster when he was beginning his coaching career with the Albany Patroons of the Continental Basketball Association.
Graham had a reputation as a hotheaded player while at Georgetown and was ultimately suspended. And his stint with the Patroons was a brief one, with Jackson cutting him after an argument between the two.
His time with Graham, Jackson said in the post, taught him that “you don’t change the spot on a leopard.” That seemed to imply that Jackson was not surprised that he could not change the way Anthony plays. It also had the effect of comparing Anthony to Graham, which Anthony is unlikely to appreciate.
The Twitter post was Jackson’s first public comment of any sort since Dec. 27, when he announced that he and the Lakers owner Jeanie Buss had broken off their longstanding engagement.
As for the Knicks’ practice on Tuesday, it was testy, with multiple scraps on the court, Hornacek and players said.
Given their feeble effort on Monday, that might have been a good sign. With five losses in their last seven games, the Knicks are 22-31 and stuck on the outer edges of the Eastern Conference playoff race, although, somehow, they were only two and a half games out of the eighth and final playoff spot going into Tuesday’s games.
Asked about his courtside huddle with Jackson, Hornacek said that Jackson, like everyone else in the organization, was not pleased with what was going on.
While shooting guard Courtney Lee offered a mea culpa to those who bought tickets to watch the Knicks on Monday night, he said Tuesday’s practice represented a bright spot in response. He saw a team trying to climb out of a hole.
Meanwhile, though, his boss was making his own statement, via Twitter.