MONDAY PUZZLE — Get yourselves gussied up, because the constructor Andy Hinz is not only making his New York Times debut today, he’s also taking our picture. Remember to stare naturally into the camera.
You might not see the cameras right away, of course. Where’s the challenge in that? We do have a bit of help in the circled squares, however: If you look at the three theme entries at 20A, 33A and 38A, the circled squares spell out the brand names of cameras. For example, at 20A, the circled squares in the answer I CAN ONLY HOPE spell out CANON.
Mr. Hinz offers us a very helpful revealer at 51A, clued as a “Common security device ... or a feature of 20-, 33- or 38-Across,” which turns out to be HIDDEN CAMERA.
While Mr. Hinz’s word list could probably use some maturing, I liked this puzzle very much. ESCAPE ROUTE and NEAREST EXIT are lively long Downs, and (Let them) EAT CAKE makes a return after more than 35 years.
■ 19A: Hands up if you wrote SEVEN. Me too. It turns out that the “Days of the week in a calendar heading” are MTWTF.
■ 9D: National LAMPOON and Mad Magazine were both huge parts of my formative years. I wonder what counterculture periodicals younger people are reading today.
This puzzle was a huge learning experience for me. I worked on dozens of iterations of the theme answers, originally wanting to include two more cameras as long, crossing downs, but I couldn’t ever get it to work right. At one point I desperately had HITABEATNIKONCE (“Utterance by a 1960s bully recounting when he punched Jack Kerouac?”) spanning the middle. I gave up for months, and then one day wondered “What if ... Sputnik was actually called Sputnik One? Wouldn’t that be convenient?” and from there decided to scale back the ambition a bit and just get the thing finished.
I learned a lot about the publishing and revision process, and got some really great assistance from Joel and Will, who helped clean up a couple of corners that really weren’t that great in my original submission. I also learned that my word list has a lot of tedious re-ranking in store for it.
This is my first published puzzle, and I am very grateful for all of the help I’ve received during the entire process. I would especially like to thank Peter Gordon and Patrick Blindauer for their immeasurably helpful tutoring sessions.
A very nice debut, Mr. Hinz. Next time, fewer plural proper names, but I really enjoyed this start to our solving week.
And many thanks to the surprisingly dangerous Caitlin Lovinger for steering Wordplay while I worked on a project to help celebrate the 75th anniversary of The New York Times crossword on February 15th.
The celebration kicks off with the Times Insider panel, “Meet the Puzzle Master!” on Tuesday, February 7 at 6:30 p.m. and will be livestreamed here. Stay tuned for other events throughout the year that will celebrate our favorite pastime.