Each week, a photographer offers a new slice of life from the city’s five boroughs and beyond.
Peekamoose Blue Hole is a favorite swimming spot.
A Manhattan sunset on July 20, as seen from Water’s Edge restaurant.
Passengers on the Seastreak Ferry heading to Sandy Hook Beach on July 4.
The rowboats were out and about on Central Park Lake on a recent afternoon.
The parasailing scene at Plumb Beach, just off the Belt Parkway, on a recent weekend.
Cabs outside the Port Authority Bus Terminal in Manhattan. Two competing ride-hailing apps recently started a service that gives passengers in thousands of yellow taxis the option of making space in the back seat for a stranger, in return for discounted fares.
Corkscrew by the Seashore | Seaside Heights, N.J.
Passengers ride the new roller coaster Hydrus in Seaside Heights, N.J. It replaced the Jet Star coaster which was washed from the pier into the sea during Hurricane Sandy.
Buildings cast shadows as pedestrians made their way along Fifth Avenue in Midtown Manhattan on a recent afternoon.
Cables and one of two pylons on a new section of the Kosciuszko Bridge (or the K Bridge), which connects Brooklyn and Queens over Newtown Creek.
On the first weekend of the city’s new ferry service, a boat from the Rockaways to Lower Manhattan passed through New York Harbor, with Brooklyn visible in the distance.
A Manhattan-bound F train passes over the Gowanus Canal on the Culver Viaduct. The stop at Smith-Ninth Street is the highest station in the New York City subway system.
Afternoon pickup basketball on April 10 in Manhattan.
A child’s birthday request on April 3 was to fly kites in Sheep Meadow, in Central Park. Request fulfilled.
Passengers aboard the Statue Cruises boat as it was departing the island on March 21.
A view from the upper deck of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge on March 22 at dusk.
A flock of birds on Feb. 11 glided between buildings.
The view along the Hudson River Pathway on Feb. 18. In his State of the State address, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York proposed a paved trail spanning over 700 miles from Battery Park up to the Canadian border.
Training Days | New Brunswick, N.J.
Nick Daniele, 8, examines a baseball signed by Chicago White Sox third baseman Todd Frazier on Jan. 16. Todd runs a hitting clinic with his brother, Charlie, during the off-season.
The Firecracker Ceremony and Cultural Festival in Manhattan’s Chinatown kicked off celebrations for the Chinese New Year, the first day of the Year of the Rooster, on Jan. 28.
Walk This Way | Bayonne, N.J.
A pedestrian stays within the lines as he crosses Avenue E on Dec. 23.
No cabs to be had during a rainy evening rush on Eighth Avenue near Pennsylvania Station on Jan. 10.
The view of Main Street Park, along the Brooklyn waterfront, as seen from the Manhattan Bridge on Jan. 8.
Nearly a century in the making (or at least in the planning), the Second Avenue Q train was up and running on Jan. 1, as if it were always there.
Bundled up New Yorkers and tourists alike slip and slide along the ice at Rockefeller Center on Dec. 17.
Members of the Rockettes rehearsing the “The Parade of the Wooden Soldiers” in their studio in December.
The view from the High Line in New York on Dec. 5. Looming in the background: the spire of the Empire State Building.
A Splash of Color | Belvidere, N.J.
People shopping for Christmas trees on Dec. 2 could look beyond the traditional conifers for perhaps a bright blue or purple version.
A cyclist heading down Fifth Avenue on Nov. 16 had plenty of space to maneuver. Just out of the frame: the crowds hemmed in by police barriers in front of Trump Tower.
This park scene on the morning of Oct. 5 illustrates the immutable truth about pigeons: If you feed them, they will come.
Young skaters honing their skills — and alarming their parents, no doubt — at the Pier 62 skate park at Hudson River Park in October.
Skyline | Secaucus, N.J.
A New Jersey Transit commuter train departing Secaucus Junction and heading into the Meadowlands on Sept. 23.
School buses in a parking lot await instructions on Oct. 18.
A view from beneath the elevated platform of the Q train at Ocean Parkway on Oct. 12.
On Oct. 5, it was as crowded as ever at the site of Logan Hicks’s “Story of My Life,” a mural on Houston Street near Bowery.
