Being a teenager isn’t easy. Thanks to puberty, neurological and hormonal developments introduce teenagers to an era of emotional fragility so it’s no surprise that adolescents find handy, if sometimes quirky, ways to reset when they are feeling overwhelmed.
Should parents stand back and admire their teenagers’ inventive coping styles or should they step in with support and guidance? The answer, according to experts, depends on how much control the teenagers have over the source of their stress.
When teenagers can actually do something about the challenges they face, new research confirms what common sense suggests: That adolescents feel better if they face their problems head-on. One recent study found that teenagers who engage in approach coping – working to solve their problems, or actively addressing their emotions about the challenges they face – feel more satisfied with their lives than teenagers who rely on avoidance coping strategies such as ignoring or simply worrying about their problems.
But what about when teenagers face stressors that defy straightforward solutions, such as unrelenting school or social pressures? In that case, looking at old photos or playing an easy video game might be just what the doctor ordered.
Teenagers who are casting about for useful strategies to deal with stress may benefit from mindfulness training or yoga programs that have been found to help adolescents decompress. Yet, as Dr. Lyons observes, “there’s a lot of individual variability in how people respond to stressors. What is an effective strategy for one may not be an effective strategy for another.” I’ve learned that some teenagers reset by playing with the family dog while others like to bake. Some adolescents restore themselves with having a good cry in a long shower while others rinse off the day’s stresses by listening to their sad, angry or happy playlists.
It falls to adults to be on the lookout for teenagers who are dealing with stressors far beyond what any adolescent should be expected to handle, such as traumatic events, the death of a loved one or even extraordinary academic pressures. And we should marshal professional support for teenagers who rely on self-destructive tactics, such as abusing substances or harming themselves, to cope with emotional discomfort.
