When she was just 4 years old, Mary-Patricia Hector saw her friend having trouble remembering her lines during a preschool ceremony. So Mary-Pat, as she is called, bounded onstage, held her friend’s hand and recited the words until her friend found her voice.
“I want to speak, I want to help people, and I want to be president,” Mary-Pat said after the event to her mother, Kathleen Hector, who recounted the memory in a phone interview on Tuesday.
That was in College Park, Ga., in 2001. Now 19, Ms. Hector has parlayed her childhood instincts for helping people find their voice into a political career. This week, she is taking her first step to inhabit public office by running for a City Council seat in Stonecrest, in DeKalb County.
She will become what many say is one of the youngest candidates for an elected office in the state.
In 2016, residents of an area in southeastern DeKalb County voted to incorporate, creating a city of about 50,000 people called Stonecrest. In an election to be held next month, three people are vying for the position of mayor and 17, including Ms. Hector, are competing for five Council seats.
Ms. Hector’s Council bid was approved by county election board officials last week after they said there was no minimum-age restriction.
“She is young, and I am very excited about the fact that a young person has the opportunity to represent her city,” H. Maxine Daniels, the director of the county Board of Registration and Elections said by telephone.
Ms. Daniels could not confirm where Ms. Hector stands among teenagers or young adults running for office, noting that Georgia has 159 counties and hundreds of cities.
Amy Henderson, a spokeswoman with the Georgia Municipal Association, said state law allows a resident who is 21 to run for office, but city charters can set that age range lower.
Young candidates, often fresh from university or still in college, are not without precedent. Some say this is an asset in a changing world in which many young people are bracing for a less-certain future.
Collin Czilli, a councilman in Portage, Ind., was campaigning for his seat while he was a 20-year-old political science student at Indiana University. He is now 22.
“I certainly think there is a challenge because it is hard to get voters and people you talk to at their door to take you seriously at first,” he said. “You get the ‘Aw, you’re too young’ from voters, and you have to try to convince them youth is not necessarily a bad thing.
In Georgia, John Eunice, who works as counsel for Senator David Perdue, was elected to the City Council in Valdosta when he was 18, more than a dozen years ago, and several college students in Statesboro have also run for Council seats there, said Ms. Henderson.
Ms. Hector is no stranger to community involvement. Her mother recalled her daughter organizing a sit-in when she was 11 to try and pressure local officials for a new recreation center, and when she stood up for a troubled neighbor.
As a young adult, the Council candidate has amassed experience in community organizing, working most recently as the national youth director for the National Action Network, during which she met President Barack Obama and other leaders to discuss criminal justice and other initiatives. She also worked in national politics as a youth leader for Hillary for America’s Millennial Victory Council.
Ms. Hector, a sophomore at Spelman College, where she’s studying political science and comparative women’s studies, is running to represent the city’s District 4, which she said was composed mostly of African-Americans of retirement age.
With five weeks left in the campaign, she is going door-to-door, calling voters and visiting places of worship. She says she tries to discuss her platform, which includes addressing youth violence and promoting business and investment.
“I want this to be the Silicon Valley of the South,” she said.
Ms. Hector acknowledges that, as a female black teenager, she is breaking conventional barriers. But she said: “I have never been afraid to take the road less traveled. A lot of people are not going to agree.
