Chumley’s is one of those New York City landmarks with so much history it’s hard to know where to begin in telling it. The West Village bar was a Depression-era speakeasy; a rough-and-tumble watering hole for generations of writers, including Ernest Hemingway, Jack Kerouac and Norman Mailer; a divey hangout for N.Y.U. kids; and a bar tended and patronized by the firefighters of Ladder 5.
It closed in 2007 after a wall collapsed, and the long effort to reopen the place became an adventure in its own right. It was finally resurrected in October by Alessandro Borgognone, an owner of Sushi Nakazawa, and Jim Miller, a firefighter. The black-and-white portraits of writers are still on the walls, but the beer-and-a-shot menu and the food have been elevated to appeal to a more upscale clientele.
Jessie Duré, the 31-year-old bar manager, reflects the change in style. She is a reserved woman who reads scientific journals and books about wine and spirits.
Indeed, she studied neuroscience at McGill University and originally planned to be a doctor, and attended Columbia Medical School. Between college and medical school, she worked at another longstanding N.Y.U. hangout in the Village, Dojo West, and the experience helped turn her into a bartender.
The comfort and familiarity she felt behind the bar puzzled her at first. Eventually, she recognized the parallels between bartending and her family background.
For 30 years, Ms. Duré’s parents, both immigrants from South America, ran the Fieldston Deli in the Bronx. She worked alongside them as soon as she was “old enough to converse and count money,” Ms. Duré said with a laugh.
Ms. Duré continued to bartend while in medical school, managing all three Bar and Books properties. After two years, she had to make a choice — was her workplace going to be a hospital or a bar? Her parents’ hope of having a doctor in the family made the decision difficult.
She took a job at American Whiskey in Midtown, assembling and managing a team that was still with her three years later, she noted. Feeling the need to grow, last year she moved on to Sushi Nakazawa.
When the chance came to create the bar program at Chumley’s, Ms. Duré said yes. Following Mr. Borgognone’s directive, she has tried to fuse its history as a writer’s dive with its more stylish current incarnation.
For instance, the Mr. Easy cocktail she created uses fancy ingredients like Botanist gin; Yuzushu, a Japanese liqueur; and Suze, a French aperitif. Still, a group of college seniors, writers or off-duty firefighters would find much to admire in the cocktail.
Yield: 1 drink.
Shake all and fine-strain into a cocktail goblet over a big ice cube. Dip rosemary sprig in yuzu shu and sugar, char briefly and drop it in.