You write that “the moral case against President Trump’s plan to uproot and expel millions of unauthorized immigrants is open-and-shut.” Even for people who arrived recently and stayed illegally, our own convoluted immigration system needs to be part of the moral equation.
But more disturbing to me is the fact that for many years the United States has actually welcomed undocumented immigrants. The effort to deport people who have long been residents of the United States is a matter of changing the rules in the middle of the game.
Many of us have eaten food harvested by undocumented immigrants, eaten in restaurants where food was prepared by undocumented immigrants, stayed in hotel rooms cleaned by undocumented immigrants, enjoyed buildings constructed by undocumented immigrants, and now receive Medicare, which is partly subsidized by undocumented immigrants.
By letting them come into the United States, rent apartments, get jobs, get driver’s licenses, attend school and pay taxes, we have de facto welcomed them into the broad community that is the United States. Many, if not most, embraced the opportunities here and have become contributing members of this society. We owe them respect and the opportunity to correct the legal wrongs that we allowed, and perhaps even encouraged.
While no fan of Donald Trump, I am not at all certain that the moral case against the president’s plan to “uproot and expel millions of unauthorized immigrants is open-and-shut.” Your statement presumes that one who illegally enters and remains in the country is morally entitled to remain.
Since when does a violation of immigration law impose a moral imperative upon the country whose borders are violated to be complicit in the trespass? While reasonableness and good judgment are essential components of enforcement, no one who enters any country illegally should presume that the passage of time vitiates compliance with or enforcement of immigration laws.
“The Costs of Mr. Trump’s Dragnet” is right on but doesn’t go far enough. What about the lost rents when all these people leave the country? The business the grocery stores will lose? The teachers who will be fired because student enrollment drops? The decline in public transportation income when all these people are not riding buses and subways? The churches that will close because their congregations collapse and contributions go way down? The cars, bikes, toys, clothes, etc. that won’t be bought?
I’m no economist, but this looks a potential economic disaster.
Residents in West Frankfort, Ill., have figured out the inconvenient truth of President Trump’s hard-line deportation policy: These so-called “illegals” are actually human beings, and the president’s call to start “throwing them the hell out of our country” has a profoundly negative effect on our communities.
White House rhetoric that undocumented people are “bad hombres” is plain wrong. Undocumented people are mostly like Juan Carlos Hernandez Pacheco, an active community volunteer in West Frankfort, a family man and the popular manager of a Mexican restaurant.
Undocumented people are deeply ingrained in many communities in America: They are our co-workers, our friends and the devoted parents of our kids’ schoolmates. Many of them toil in agricultural and meat-processing jobs, provide child care and elder care, and do the hotel housekeeping that is critical to our tourism industry. These are important jobs that would otherwise go unfilled by legal residents.
The disingenuous mantra of “they need to get in line” (to immigrate legally) ignores the fact that there is effectively no “line.” Currently, it is extremely difficult for low-skilled workers to gain permanent visas. That program is unrealistically capped and supplies only a fraction of the number of low-skilled workers needed in the United States.
American prosperity depends on hardworking, entry-level workers. Our immigration laws need to reflect that reality.
