During President Trump’s strenuous and freewheeling news conference on Thursday, there emerged a brief respite from the pointed questions about Russia, national security, immigration policy and chaos at the White House.
The answer — UNF News — barely registered with Mr. Trump.
UNF News is not a television network or a radio network, for that matter. UNF, or Universal News Forever, is the baby, identity, passion and obsession of Kyle Mazza, 19, who posed the question about Mrs. Trump.
The question, which was mocked a little on social media, will most likely end up as a footnote about Mr. Trump’s dealings with the news media. But Mr. Mazza’s unlikely path to the White House is a strange tale befitting these strange times.
If Mr. Trump were to start paying attention to UNF News, it would be a start: The network has neither advertisers nor subscribers.
Yet in an era of fake news, overheated partisanship and general rancor, Mr. Mazza seems unfailingly earnest and without an agenda — aside from trying to become a reporter, with his own notion of what that means.
After forming WUNF, Mr. Mazza would write articles about events in his hometown, Fair Lawn, N.J. A few years later, he obtained press credentials from a local cable access channel, Fair Lawn TV, giving him access to courts and other official events.
By the time Mr. Mazza got his driver’s license two years ago, he had seven police scanners and three weather radios.
Mr. Spicer typically calls on media organizations outside the mainstream before getting to more traditional news outlets.
After graduating from high school, Mr. Mazza took classes at the Connecticut School of Broadcasting’s campus in Hasbrouck Heights, N.J., while continuing to pursue his passion.
Mr. Mazza’s parents, he said, supported and helped pay for his journalistic ambitions. Once he could drive, he aimed his sights on Manhattan.
He soon discovered that in addition to Room 9, where the City Hall press corps works, there was an annex room for reporters in the basement, Room 4a.
Mr. Mazza asked the mayor’s office if he could work from that room. The answer was yes, and for the past couple of years, he has become a semiregular in the City Hall press corps. He said he mostly covers politics, breaking news and entertainment, but allowed that he really covered whatever struck his fancy.
Other reporters had mostly kind things to say about Mr. Mazza, even if they said his approach reflected his age and experience.
Mr. Mazza’s work has, at times, created some unease at home. He recalled when, during a State of the City speech by the mayor in 2016, there was a shooting of two police officers in the Bronx, and he wanted to go with the rest of the press corps with the mayor to the hospital.
But even his mother was shocked when she saw him on national television Thursday.
Mr. Mazza had been going to the White House since the election, and said he had gone to four press briefings conducted by Sean M. Spicer, the press secretary, first securing a daily credential, and then weekly passes. He happened to be in Washington on Thursday when Mr. Trump announced that he was going to hold an impromptu news conference.
He was not concerned if some people might view his question as a softball.
