PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — More than an hour before the bustle of spring training workouts began on Friday, Glenn Sherlock and his No. 1 pupil, Travis d’Arnaud, began yet another day in their reclamation project, alone on a practice field.
First, the two played catch while d’Arnaud crouched behind home plate. Slowly, they added more distance to the tosses. Then, d’Arnaud practiced his throwing form on an imaginary stolen-base attempt following each toss from Sherlock. At one point, Sherlock stood behind d’Arnaud to check his form as he jumped into his throwing position. Sherlock wanted to make sure that d’Arnaud leaned back on his right leg.
“It takes a lot of stress off my arm and makes it easier to get it all the way to second base, and it makes you more consistent,” d’Arnaud said later.
After their morning session, Sherlock, who is 56, and d’Arnaud, who is 28, joined the rest of the Mets catchers for workouts that focused on blocking balls behind the plate and framing pitches, along with batting practice.
It made for a full day for d’Arnaud, but it is exactly what the Mets want as they try to turn around a player who, not long ago, was seen as someone with enough potential to be an All-Star. Lately he has been viewed somewhat skeptically.
In the off-season, some thought the Mets would try to upgrade their catching. But instead of bringing in a catcher from elsewhere, the Mets decided to add a catching coach.
Sherlock fills a void. After Bob Geren, a former major league catcher and coach, left the Mets for the Los Angeles Dodgers after the 2015 season, the Mets’ coaching staff lacked someone with real catching know-how.
And although the Mets’ pitching staff performed adequately in 2016 with d’Arnaud, Rene Rivera and Kevin Plawecki behind the plate, there were some issues. Among other things, the Mets threw out only 25 percent of base stealers, below the major league average of 28 percent. Some of that was because of d’Arnaud’s throwing woes.
This is what Sherlock is being asked to address, particularly with d’Arnaud. Sherlock was once a minor league catcher, so his assignment with the Mets comes naturally.
“It definitely helps that Glenn is here now,” d’Arnaud said. “Last year, that’s all on me. That’s not on anybody else. I messed up. That’s why I just worked hard this off-season with Glenn” — and with the Mets’ hitting coach, Kevin Long.
Sherlock spent the previous 19 years on the Arizona Diamondbacks’ coaching staff. With the Mets, his title is third base coach and catching instructor, but his main focus will be on righting d’Arnaud.
To get a head start on his relationship with Sherlock, d’Arnaud flew this winter from his off-season home here in Port St. Lucie to Phoenix, where Sherlock lives. There, d’Arnaud, Sherlock and Plawecki had a few meals together.
“It was a chance to meet them and for them to meet me, and for us to talk and go back and forth with some ideas,” Sherlock said.
While in Phoenix, d’Arnaud, who hit .247 last season, also spent time in the batting cage with Long, who also lives there, and they talked frequently the rest of the winter. In January, Sherlock and d’Arnaud met again, this time in Los Angeles, while d’Arnaud was home for the holidays.
And for now, that has been a better place than last season.
“I was going forward and losing my center of gravity and losing my balance and not using my legs to drive the ball to second base,” he added. He said he hoped that the constant repetition of throwing drills with Sherlock would become second nature.
In addition to d’Arnaud’s throwing, the Mets want some refinement in d’Arnaud’s pitch-calling. Sherlock will help in that regard, too. During batting practice this week, d’Arnaud has also flashed an improved swing. In the past, d’Arnaud was a constant tinkerer. He changed his stance “like the wind at times,” Long said.
Now, d’Arnaud’s swing has been quicker and shorter.
