Few films elicit as many satisfyingly divergent responses as “Les Hautes Solitudes.” By turns alluring and alienating, and wholly silent, it was made in 1974 by the French director Philippe Garrel and is receiving its belated New York theatrical release at the Metrograph. Experimental by design, though perhaps a bit by accident, it mostly consists of images of the American actress Jean Seberg, who, after her debut as a celluloid saint in “Saint Joan,” went off to peddle papers and make love to Jean-Paul Belmondo in Jean-Luc Godard’s “Breathless.” By the time Seberg made “Les Hautes Solitudes,” her most famous roles were behind her; five years later, she was dead from an apparent suicide.
Other beauties come and go in “Les Hautes Solitudes,” principally the American actress Tina Aumont, a feral stunner with slashing cheekbones, whose dark mane creates a sharply chromatic contrast with Seberg’s blondness. Here and there are also shots of the French actor Laurent Terzieff, who appears, Narcissus-like, gazing at his reflection. Mostly the camera looks at Seberg, who looks right back at it, though sometimes away from it, too, glancing up or down or sideways. Occasionally, the close-ups are tight enough that her face looms; at other times, she is framed in a head-and-shoulders shot, much like a classical Greek bust. Every so often, she lies in bed or crouches in a corner.
While these images seem to reveal all, they disclose nothing beneath the surface. All that we know is what we see onscreen and that Seberg’s face is delicate and lightly creased. She’s rarely shown smiling, although there are instances when she laughs emphatically, moments that feel uncomfortable and artificial, as if she were trying out an emotion she had forgotten. We know the texture of her skin; the patterns on the walls; the depth of field; the quality of the light; the contrast of the black-and-white film; the level of grain; the dowdiness of her clothes. She’s partial to granny dresses, or maybe they’re nightgowns, and when she stands in front of a window, the sunlight glows softly, creating a kind of ravishing halo effect: Saint Jean.
The film’s silence works as a kind of invitation, encouraging you to infer meaning and jump to conclusions as one image gives way to the next. You fill in the gaps between them, a process similar to how viewers create meaning through montage, shot by shot. The images in “Les Hautes Solitudes,” though, seem more casually strung together than assembled for specific meanings. That makes sense. In 2011 Mr. Garrel told the French magazine Les Inrocks that the idea “was to make a film out of the outtakes of a film that never existed in the first place.” One of the pleasures of “Les Hautes Solitudes” is that it encourages you to take up filmmaking, as you write that nonexistent movie in your head.