WASHINGTON — The top Republican and Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee gave sharply conflicting views on Monday of their panel’s bipartisan investigation into Russian efforts to influence the presidential election, raising questions about whether they will be able to work together on the inquiry.
The committee’s chairman, Representative Devin Nunes, Republican of California, said that he had been briefed on the intelligence community’s assessment of the Russians and contended that there was no evidence anyone from the Trump campaign had communicated with the government in Moscow.
Yet the committee’s ranking member, Representative Adam Schiff, Democrat of California, said that it was too early to rule out ties between Russia and President Trump’s associates, because the panel had not yet been provided with any evidence collected by intelligence and law enforcement agencies.
The divide has grown starker since The Washington Post reported on Friday that the White House had enlisted Mr. Nunes as part of an effort to push back on a story this month by The New York Times. The Times report focused on contacts between Russian intelligence officials and Trump associates and campaign aides.
In an interview that aired Friday on HBO’s “Real Time with Bill Maher,” Representative Darrell Issa, Republican of California, said that a special prosecutor should be appointed to investigate Russian meddling in the election. The statement from Mr. Issa was notable, as he is a hard-line Republican who was one of President Obama’s biggest critics.
On Monday, Mr. Issa again called for an independent review. “The American people need a cleareyed view of the nefarious actions of the Russian government,” Mr. Issa said.
The issue of lawmakers helping the administration was also a point of contention in the Senate on Monday. The minority leader, Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York, sharply criticized Senator Richard Burr, the Republican chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, who has acknowledged helping the Trump administration push back on the story. Mr. Burr and the intelligence committee’s top Democrat, Senator Mark Warner of Virginia, are also conducting an investigation into Russia.
Republicans and Democrats who set out to work together on politically charged investigations often end up refusing to cooperate with each other. From 2014 to 2016, Democrats repeatedly clashed with Republicans who were leading an investigation into the attacks on an American outpost in Benghazi, Libya. And in 2009, Republicans refused to continue participating in an investigation by the Senate Intelligence Committee into the C.I.A.’s use of torture and deceit in its detention program.
At his news conference, Mr. Nunes said the ”major crimes” that have taken place during the Trump administration were government leaks to the media about national security matters, including transcripts of conversations the president has had with the leaders of Mexico and Australia.