It’s Bowl Day, and whatever your favorite athlete — puppy, kitten, fish or human — there’s something for almost everyone. Prefer games of the more mental kind? Tune into “24: Legacy,” a timely reboot of “24” featuring a new hero and a familiar target: Muslim terrorists.
SUPER BOWL LI 6:30 p.m. on Fox. The New England Patriots, in their record ninth Super Bowl, face the Atlanta Falcons at NRG Stadium in Houston. Lady Gaga, who has been coy about the details of her performance, will take the stage at halftime, after being introduced in a video countdown by Tony Bennett — and dropping through the stadium roof, if rumors are correct. Luke Bryan will perform the national anthem; and Phillipa Soo, Renée Elise Goldsberry and Jasmine Cephas Jones, who originated the roles of the Schuyler sisters in the Broadway musical “Hamilton,” will sing “America the Beautiful.” President George H. W. Bush and his wife, Barbara, will oversee the coin toss. And Bill O’Reilly will interview President Trump at 4 p.m. in the pregame show.
FOX NEWS SUNDAY 10 a.m. on Fox. Vice President Mike Pence makes the rounds of the morning news shows, appearing here as well as on “This Week,” at 10 on ABC; on “Face the Nation,” at 10:30 on CBS; and on “Meet the Press,” at 10:30 on NBC.
KITTEN BOWL IV Noon on Hallmark. One hundred rescue kittens — with names like Tony Slo-Mo, Catsanova and Pounce De Leon — show off their most agile moves as part of the Feline Football League, overseen by its commissioner, Boomer Esiason. Beth Stern hosts; John Sterling and Mary Carillo provide play-by-play commentary. The show will repeat at 3 and 6 p.m. For a little variety, check out “Fish Bowl IV,” in which the Los Angeles Clams take on the Buffalo Gills, at 4 p.m. on Nat Geo Wild.
PUPPY BOWL XIII 3 p.m. on Animal Planet. Team Ruff takes on Team Fluff as 39 baby bruisers — including three with special needs — go in for tackles, fumbles and “Fido first downs.” Dan Schachner calls plays and penalties as the referee; Mr. Punxsutawney Phil, the weather-predicting groundhog, oversees the coin toss. Not to be missed: the Bissell Kitty Halftime Show, starring Kitty Gaga in a rendition of “Puparazzi” with a chorus line of rescue kittens. The action is repeated at two-hour intervals throughout the day and evening. Pregame tailgating starts at 2 p.m.