444 pp. Balzer & Bray/HarperCollins, $17.99.
 It’s certainly a clear explanation of the movement — here called “Just Us for Justice” — but it’s also a page turner brimming with pop culture references and humor. Tupac Shakur, Harry Potter, “High School Musical” and Emmett Till share space, and all seem to belong in the story of Starr Carter, a 16-year-old girl who sees a cop kill her childhood friend Khalil.
Starr shifts between her personas as a student at a schmancy private school and a girl who lives in a neighborhood too dangerous for her little brother to ride his bike. “I taught myself to speak with two different voices,” she notes. She has to decide whether to testify against the officer, and she wrestles with telling her Malcolm X-quoting father about her romance with a white boy.
I marveled at the balancing act between dead-serious politics and concerns familiar to kids and former kids of all backgrounds. At times the carefulness feels schematic: a good cop to offset the bad cops, the thoughtful, educable white kid and the defensive, narcissistic white kid. But there’s plenty for readers of all ages to enjoy.
234 pp. Dutton, $17.99.
A meditation on surviving grief, “We Are Okay” is short, poetic and gorgeously written. The less you know about the plot the better, since the story unfolds in fits and starts, present and past. Marin is a freshman at an unnamed New York college, numb with sorrow and barely functional. We see her earlier life with her grandfather in San Francisco, in a neighborhood near Ocean Beach so vividly depicted you can smell the salt, see the surfers and feel its sandy desolation.
Marin looks back on a summer with her best friend, Mabel, “when love was everything, and we didn’t talk about college or geography, and we rode buses and hopped in cars and walked city blocks in our sandals.” Fascinated by ghosts and disappearances, she hadn’t yet known what it means to be truly haunted.
The power in this little book is in seeing Marin come out on the other side of loss, able to appreciate a beautiful yellow-glazed pottery bowl and other people’s kindnesses, and to understand that she might one day have a girlfriend and a future. The world LaCour creates is fragile but profoundly humane.
360 pp. Bloomsbury, $18.99.
If your jam is bat-out-of-hell pacing, cinematic scenes of otherworldly destruction, snarky comebacks and insta-romance, “The Edge of Everything” is a lot of fun. (I do not sneer at fun. Right now, we need fun.) Zoe’s dad has died exploring a cave; her neighbors have disappeared after a home invasion; her brother, Jonah, is lost in a snowstorm along with the neighbors’ dogs. A terrifying evildoer is on the loose. Zoe, Jonah and the dogs are saved by X, a supernatural bounty hunter whose bare, broad back (which coordinates with his arms, “ropy with muscles and covered with primitive tattoos”) becomes a canvas for images of terrible sins.
The love story and the cruel, ageless paranormal ruling class are, alas, pretty “Twilight”-manqué. But Giles’s vivid portrayals of Montana, the scary thrills of caving, and the rundown hot-spring resort where Zoe’s mom works are a delight.  Is Chipotle still a thing?” There’s also House of Huns, a restaurant staffed by hunky spear-wielding teenage boys with leather straps crisscrossing their naked chests.
407 pp. Flatiron, $18.99.
But Garber’s way with fashion made me swoon: a magical dress shifts on Scarlett’s body in accordance with her moods. If blood and madness, “shameless curves and immoral promises” entice you, well, come to the cabaret.
Zoboi’s accomplished first novel, flavored with Haitian folklore and voodoo, is set on the corner of American Street and Joy Road in Detroit. The book is full of crossings and intersections, double-crosses and crossed fingers — reflecting the betwixt-and-between life of its narrator, Fabiola. She and her Manman are from Port-au-Prince. They’ve set off to live “on this side of the good life” in America. But Fabiola’s mother is detained by immigration authorities, and Fab is on her own with her Matant Jo and cousins Chantal, Donna and Pri.
“In the dark, I practice whispering ‘Dee-troit’ and trying to get my mouth to wrap around the word just right,” Fabiola says. In her strange new life, full of vacant spaces — “gaping holes on the block, like missing teeth” — she sees lwas, spirits, everywhere. The old man sitting on a plastic bucket is Papa Legba, the trickster; Donna’s abusive boyfriend, “with his sunglasses even as night spreads across the sky,” is Baron Samedi, keeper of death. Occasionally we get the perspectives of secondary characters, even of the house on the corner itself. Zoboi’s mash-up of cities and genres is self-assured, elegant and utterly captivating.