It was eight days before the sister-brother design team Nicholas and Christopher Kunz of Nicholas K were to fire their opening salvo at New York Fashion Week, and things were starting to escalate both inside and out of their Park Place loft in Lower Manhattan.
Amid world chaos, visitors and collaborators were also streaming into the loft to help prepare for the show of looks for fall. Models, stylists and messengers were all greeted warmly by the office dog, Barbosa, a boxer rescued two months ago from a park in Puerto Rico.
“I think the braid is too ornate for the look we want,” she told the hair stylist Jon Reyman, who was busy applying a little oil to a model’s hair to give it an extra sleek shine.
Mr. Reyman nodded and agreed. “It’s superchic this way,” he said. “I love it.” Black berets will finish off the look.
On Thursday, Nicholas K will be kicking off the fall/winter women’s collections at Skylight Clarkson SQ, the West SoHo home base for the biannual runway shows. After years at Bryant Park and Lincoln Center, Fashion Week has become diffuse, held at various sites throughout the city.
The company’s three interns, two from China and one from France, were hurriedly dressing and undressing a test model, Mamy Fall, in crimson velvet and silk. Ms. Fall is from Senegal and worried over the weekend whether any other countries would be added to the immigration ban.
The Kunzes had hoped to use her as the lead opening model in the show, but Ms. Fall had arrived with close-cropped hair, so her hair wouldn’t match the rest of the models.
Diversity is an important part of the look at Nicholas K, which has had the opening slot at Fashion Week for the past six years.
“Personally, this season we’re stressing even more diversity and more unity,” Nicholas said.
Their clothes — a style often referred to as “urban nomad” — reflect their worldview, with a range of items such as Bedouin-inspired wraps, Indian ikat textiles, leather headbands and baggy Ottoman pants.
But the utilitarian military look is nothing new for them. Last year, their collection included clothing made from white silk parachute fabric. (Their oldest brother was a members of the Navy SEALs, and their father was a flight surgeon.) This season is filled with sustainable materials, alpaca and vegetable dyes, as well as some metallic pieces.
Thirty-six pairs of black and metallic ankle boots lined the edge of the room, awaiting the 36 models who will be chosen out of around 200 over the next few days of casting. The interns were mixing and matching the clothes as Nicholas and her husband, the Swiss art director Marco Valentin, were shooting them and putting the photos straight into a computer to help decide which looks would be chosen for the show, which will be on Thursday at 10 a.m. Once the looks and models are chosen, the fittings will take place over four days.
Now, with a little over a week to prepare, hair tests were being run by Mr. Reyman as well as makeup tests by Sarah Lucero, who was gently applying gold eye shadow to the Russian model Yulia Ermakova.
Elsewhere, the music was being prepared for the runway’s live stream, a mix of the D.J. Rob Swift and the rapper Latasha Alcindor. Gift bags were being prepared. Seating charts were drawn up for the 600 audience members.
Jehan Bawazer, who runs the office, was sifting through dozens of emails from bloggers and members of the media who want to come to the 15-minute show.
