You understand how this works, right?
President Trump wakes up, reaches for his cellphone and tweets, “Our legal system is broken!” And that morning a few million blue state people reach for a chocolate croissant instead of their zero-fat yogurt. At lunch you learn that Mr. Trump is sparring with North Korea and because the world is going to end any minute, you have a tuna melt. At dinner, you remember that he does not believe in global warming, and as the waters will soon be rising, you figure you might as well send out for pizza. Better do it now before the brick-ovens are flooded. Your million-dollar West Village co-op, too. Goodbye equity. Make it double cheese and pepperoni on that pie.
 If people are gaining weight, it’s because they lack will power, particularly when it comes to eating in Mexican joints, 80 percent of which are run by illegal immigrants.
Hearing this, who hasn’t thought of self-medicating with a bag of warm doughnuts and hightailing it to a sanctuary city? You know what they say: America runs on Dunkin’.
You know what else may be contributing to blue state weight gain?
You look at Canada’s adorable little prime minister, making what appear to be well-considered remarks, saying Canada will welcome those fleeing persecution, terror and war, and you find yourself thinking: What a decent fellow. I’ve made fun of Canada’s indiscriminate niceness for years, but I now see our friends to the north have more than thick-cut bacon going for them. Canadian bacon really is delicious. I especially like it as a winter snack, broiled in brown sugar and maple syrup and accompanied with a glass of icy Champagne. What’s the president tweeting today? “Our legal system is broken.” Leave the bottle.
I must confess: I do find blaming Mr. Trump a pleasant change from the things I usually blame for my overeating: a miserable love life; an ecstatic love life; the stress of too much to do; the stress of nothing to do; a mother who is driving me crazy; a mother who, thanks to a major stroke three years ago, is certifiably crazy.
My mother, living in a Westchester nursing home, was my primary trigger for eating the wrong stuff for the past few months. She had developed an obsession with newborn babies, particularly boys.
“Let’s go to the nursery and look at the babies,” she’d say.
“That would be really nice, Ma, but they don’t have a nursery here,” I’d say.
 But one of my brothers stocks my mother’s room with chocolate covered biscuits and Hershey’s Kisses and cookies, so relief was never more than three feet away.
Are you non-Weight Watchers aware that one Hershey’s Kiss is the equivalent of a pat of butter? Give me a half-hour with my mother and I am good for a double handful; I inhale those suckers as if in a trance, and when I come to my senses, the floor is awash in silver confetti. It should be a wake-up call. But I know there is orange marzipan in the bureau under the television and I have not hit bottom yet.
Then Mr. Trump takes office and orders a travel ban and the people are protesting in the streets. Around this time, Ma, who had been a big traveler before her stroke, also has a new idea.
“Mars,” Ma says.
An aide takes Ma to the bathroom. I talk to two of the other visiting daughters about the Muslim travel ban. We’re all upset about it. One of the daughters says that there is a fear that Muslims will be forced to register and that former Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright just tweeted that if that happens, she will register as a Muslim in solidarity. I have the feeling of unreality I had during 9/11. Meanwhile, down the hall, two female residents with dementia are having screaming meltdowns.
The world has gone crazy, I think; I am literally in a madhouse, and the people outside have also gone mad.  And she’s well taken care of. Thank heavens Medicaid will be in place when she runs through her money at this $180,000 a year nursing home.
Hershey’s Kisses. Where are the Hershey’s Kisses?