Those are the first words spoken in the first moments of William Forsythe’s “Artifact,” the full-length ballet he created in 1984 after taking the reins at the Frankfurt Ballet, a relatively unknown German company with a conventional repertory of story ballets.
The American-born Mr. Forsythe, who had spent most of his professional career — as a dancer, then as a choreographer — at the Stuttgart Ballet, was extending an invitation. Step inside into another kind of story ballet: one populated by mysterious characters, enigmatic text, severely beautiful classical dancing and a panoply of theatrical devices, like a curtain that crashes down repeatedly during a double pas de deux to Bach’s Chaconne in D minor.
That hasn’t been the prevailing critical view of Mr. Forsythe, 67, in his home country — or hometown (he’s from New York City) — where his work has frequently been criticized for its experimental and conceptual tendencies, as well as for its athletic and extreme elaborations of ballet technique. In Europe, though, he has been regarded as one of the most important creative figures in dance for close on three decades. And while Mr. Forsythe created works for important international ballet companies in the 1980s and ’90s, the scope and extent of his work — from Neo-Classical pure dance to highly theatrical, text-based pieces — has remained relatively unknown to American audiences.
What do we see? Dressed in the spare tights-and-leotard costumes that evoke the modernist works of George Balanchine, an ensemble moves with academic precision through the basic steps of the ballet vocabulary: tendu (the leg stretching away from the body, the toes pointed to the floor); rond de jambe (circling of the outstretched leg); battement (the straight leg lifting off the floor). These are executed plainly — the dancers might be taking their daily class — but they are combined with the elegantly shifting head, hip and shoulder changes that are called épaulement, one of ballet’s most important stylistic principles.
At the same time, Mr. Forsythe introduces multiple enigmas. What is the meaning of the words spoken by the elaborately garbed woman who keeps recombining the verbs “see, think, say, hear, remember, forget” in persuasive but bewildering monologues? (“Try not to forget what I am thinking, and you’ll see what I said.”) What does the soft-spoken “Man With the Megaphone” represent? Why does the curtain come down, repeatedly, on the beautiful Neo-Classical drama of Part 2 that is Mr. Forsythe’s equivalent of the “white act” (the swans, wilis and bayadères that provide the pure-dance sections of 19th-century ballets)?
“I remember a story, and it went like this,” says the Man With the Megaphone. But we never get just one story in “Artifact.” We get the multiple stories of classical ballet: its origins in court dance; its narratives of princesses and swans; its relentless repetition of basic technical elements; its hard-working ensembles framing resplendent soloists; the way those soloists emerge from that ensemble, and like Balanchine’s dancers, are costumed identically and sparely. However wonderful an individual performance, the dancers are, in the end, anonymous servants of the art.
