As a step-by-step routine, there appeared to be nothing out of the ordinary in the way quarterback Verlon Reed went about his play calls on Thursday night for the Salt Lake Screaming Eagles of the Indoor Football League.
With the play clock ticking down, Reed would turn to his coach, William McCarthy, who would then relay a call. After returning to the huddle, Reed would explain to his teammates which of the Screaming Eagles’ 40-plus plays they were going to run. Then it was go.
While that routine was commonplace, the way in which the plays had been decided upon was anything but. The decisions were not coming from McCarthy or an offensive coordinator but rather from the fingertips of fans — some in the crowd at Utah’s Maverik Center, some around the United States and others as far-flung as Australia.
The Screaming Eagles claim to be the first fan-run professional football team in the United States. Using a free mobile app, anyone can vote on nearly all aspects of the new team’s identity and function, including calling offensive and special-teams plays.
The experiment did not begin swimmingly. On the Screaming Eagles’ first possession, voters decided on a pass play on third-and-10 from their own 5-yard line. Reed fumbled in the end zone, and Nebraska recovered for a touchdown. Five plays later, on fourth-and-15 from their own 1-yard line, the vote called for a field goal. (The field is 50 yards long.) The kick was blocked and recovered by Nebraska for another score.
That was the last field-goal attempt of the game, which ended in a 78-47 Danger victory.
Before kickoff, voters had already made several decisions, on the team’s uniforms (stripes); an additional concession item (chili dogs); its dance squad’s name (the Lady Eagles); and the team’s warm-up music (“Ruff Ryders’ Anthem,” by DMX).
Michael Sommers, 34, was among those helping select plays, from his home in Miami.
Sohrob Farudi, the chief executive of Project Fanchise, the team’s ownership group, said there was no eureka moment behind his decision to start such a fan-driven team; it was something he had considered for a number of years.
Other sports teams have given fans control of certain parts of their operation — English soccer’s United London, for example, uses a fantasy football-style points system where its fans vote on its starting lineup each week — but football and baseball are the only options for play-by-play voting, Farudi said, because of their regular stoppages.
Farudi previously owned a minority stake in the Arena Football League, which, he said, helped convince him that indoor football would be a suitable choice for a fan-focused franchise. In October 2015, Project Fanchise purchased a slot in the I.F.L., a 10-team league now in its ninth season. Players in the league reportedly are paid about $250 per game, as well as food and lodging costs.
After Farudi’s ownership group, which includes the former Jets and Chicago Bears defensive back Ray Austin, settled on Salt Lake City to host its franchise, the Wild West of the fan-vote method first became evident: The Screaming Eagles’ team name came up against popular suggestions like the Stormin’ Mormons and Teamy McTeamface (Sommers’s choice was the Frolicking Corgis, after his dog). The owners then raised more than $60,000 through crowdfunding, offering willing backers the opportunity to become scouts, to be assistants to the general manager and to warm up the quarterback before games.
McCarthy, whose résumé includes head coach and coordinator positions on four other I.F.L. teams, said he has warmed to a system that, to outsiders, may look as if he is relinquishing control of his coaching duties.
Moving forward, the challenge that Project Fanchise acknowledges is keeping fans like Sommers engaged.
Christian Williams, 29, of Melbourne, Australia, spent $450 during the team’s crowdfunding round to be named one of 10 co-founders of the franchise. He said in a phone interview Thursday that he had analyzed scouting reports and held conversations with the front office via Skype and email.
“I like the fact that I have been involved in the process all the way,” he said.
Project Fanchise also purchased another franchise in the league, the Colorado Crush, which will implement the Screaming Eagles’ model later this season. If all goes well, the group said, it could be implemented across the I.F.L.
