WASHINGTON — Ever since Republicans got down to the business of repealing the Affordable Care Act, the Senate has been singled out as the likely problem. Any plan that could zoom through the House would hit roadblocks among Senate Republicans, many of whom have resisted a wholesale repeal of the health law without a robust replacement plan.
But after weeks of loud protests, boisterous town hall meetings and scores of quieter meetings between members of Congress and health care professionals, patients, caregivers and hospital managers in their districts, it is becoming increasingly likely that a consensus in the House will be just as hard to reach.
The most conservative House members are pushing for a fast repeal of the health law with only a bare-bones replacement to follow: possibly just bigger incentives for people to open health savings accounts to fund their own health needs. Other Republicans are more interested in taking their time to come up with a replacement plan that, as of now, they have failed to cobble together beyond a menu of options.
Among the increasingly concerned lawmakers are those who represent the 24 Republican congressional districts that Hillary Clinton won in the presidential election — roughly the edge Republicans hold over Democrats in the House — and another dozen in districts that President Barack Obama took in 2012 but President Trump won in November. If 25 conservative hard-liners oppose any robust replacement plan, and 30 swing-district House members demand a more generous plan, passage of a compromise bill will be in jeopardy.
“For the first time, Republicans need to demonstrate what they are for and not just being against Obamacare,” said Doug Heye, who served as the deputy chief of staff to former Representative Eric Cantor of Virginia when he was majority leader. Mr. Cantor and House Republican chairmen labored in 2014 to bring a replacement bill for Republicans to get behind, Mr. Heye said, and got nowhere, even with no stakes.
At least four recent polls show that public opinion on Obamacare is tipping in its favor.
Also, recent polls show increasing enthusiasm for the health law as Americans see its repeal on the horizon; a Pew Research Center poll of more than 1,500 adults, released on Thursday, found that 54 percent approve of the Affordable Care Act, while 43 percent disapprove. As recently as December, those numbers were evenly split, with 48 percent approving and 47 percent against.
For Republicans in swing districts in California, New Jersey, New York and other states, the combination is a wicked brew: Those members need to build a winning coalition of base voters who hate the health care law and independents and crossover voters who have recently cottoned to it.
While the 218 votes needed in the House to get the ball rolling remain likely, it is no longer the slam dunk that Republicans had with previous bills to repeal the law, when lawmakers knew their efforts would die in the Senate or on Mr. Obama’s desk.
Some Republicans are trying to keep a low profile back home, like Representatives Darrell Issa of California, Martha McSally of Arizona and Will Hurd of Texas, to avoid the hot seat on health care.
Others, like Representative Greg Walden of Oregon, are smoothing their terms of engagement, increasingly referring more to “repairing” the law than repealing it.
Others are simply taking credit for the law’s popular provisions, like the one that prohibits insurers from denying coverage for pre-existing conditions. Representative Marsha Blackburn, Republican of Tennessee, applauded some of them in a town hall this week and claimed they were added to the law thanks to her party — a claim that is simply not true.
Republicans have been worrying about this long before constituents and protesters began jamming their town hall meetings. Shortly after the election, during a Republican retreat in Pennsylvania, many members privately complained about using the repeal as an avenue to defund Planned Parenthood or repealing without a clear replacement plan, according to a recording of the meeting provided anonymously to The New York Times, The Washington Post and other newspapers.
On Tuesday night, Mr. MacArthur — one of only nine Republicans to vote against the initial bill to begin the repeal process last month — met with protesters who have been standing outside his office, largely to discuss health care.
After the meeting, Mr. MacArthur found himself outside a basement room where a group of local Democrats had gathered, and he wandered in to chat, he said.
