406 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $27.
This is an important, erudite and flawed book about the deepest roots of this inflamed moment, which was shipped to the printer before the outcome of the American election. The fact that the book contains only a smattering of references to the new president strangely enhances the credibility of its doomsaying. Mishra didn’t scramble for a theory to fit the facts. He has a highly developed understanding of the psychic and emotional forces propelling illiberalism’s spread across the globe, a movement united by a sense of disappointment, bewilderment and envy — the spiritual condition that Nietzsche diagnosed as ressentiment. An anger that Mishra both interprets and shares.
This book presents itself as a “history of the present.” His premise is that broad swaths of the globe are retracing the past, reliving the same traumas and violent dislocations that accompanied Europe’s transition to modernity in the 18th and 19th centuries. A trauma felt most acutely by the “young man of promise” in the countries late arriving to capitalism and Enlightenment, especially Germany and Russia. The prospect of freedom and cultural transformation stirred unachievable expectations, which predictably ended in humiliation and rage. This self-righteous West, Mishra argues, obscures its “own bloody extraordinarily brutal initiation into political and economic modernity,” as it arrogantly presses the rest of the world to make that same difficult progression.
There’s more history than present in Mishra’s telling. Just when lessons from the past seem to be building toward a point about ISIS or globalization, he layers on another digression about Dostoyevsky or Ataturk. This tendency can be frustrating — and one begins to suspect it is a crutch, since our current spate of anarchists, populists and terrorists are so much less theoretically minded and articulate than their antique antecedents. It’s a strange imbalance, but Mishra writes with enough style, energy and incision that he carries the reader through.
The antihero of Mishra’s tale — the prophet who best anticipated the crises of our times — is Jean Jacques Rousseau. And a primary source of his greatness is his hatred of Voltaire. Mishra paints Voltaire as the archetypal elite intellectual, and the worst villain of them all. Voltaire celebrated reason as society’s highest virtue. That is, he believed that society should reward talent and brains, not inherited titles. He trumpeted trade and consumerism in language that anticipated the 1990s boosters of globalization. His writings and personal example set terms for the liberalism that would ultimately prevail in Europe.
There’s no doubting Rousseau’s prescience. His criticisms of finance and warnings about inequality are proto-Piketty. But he’s a troubling hero. Isaiah Berlin called him the “greatest militant lowbrow in history and guttersnipe of genius.” Rousseau celebrated militarism and xenophobia. He unabashedly held up Sparta as his ideal. Mary Wollstonecraft, and generations of subsequent feminists, have charged him with contributing to misogyny in its modern form. Mishra knows all this and should be far warier of his own attraction to Rousseau — but that would require him to admit a central lapse in his own argument.
Mishra persuasively damns the arrogance of neoliberals, but let’s say a few kind words for neoliberalism. On the whole, thanks to the advance of capitalism, we live in a world with less abject poverty, less disease, less oppression and greater material prosperity. Mishra dwells in the realm of ideas and emotions, which get short shrift in most accounts of global politics. So it’s bracing and illuminating for him to focus on feelings, what he calls “the wars in the inner world.” But he doesn’t have much to say about the material reality of economics and politics other than angry bromides about the “Western model” and broad, unsupported statements about stagnation. (A sample of his glibness: He notes that “most people have found the notions of individualism and social mobility to be unrealizable in practice.” Why then, we might ask, do so many keep trying for it?) Mishra can’t find the redeeming qualities in liberal democracy and he can’t posit anything to replace it with — which explains why he must resurrect the repulsive Rousseau, brushing aside his least appealing ideas. Like Rousseau, Mishra sympathizes with traditional society. But it’s impossible to defend traditional societies without accounting for their misogyny and xenophobia, which are hardly incidental features. Mishra can’t bring himself to make the case, which means he has no hint of prescription for the crisis he dedicates his book to describing.
When the galleys of “Age of Anger” arrived, I dived for them. They slipped through the mail slot just after the Trump victory rocked my own faith in progress. Liberalism has no choice but to sincerely wrestle with its discontents, to become reacquainted with its moral blind spots and political weaknesses. Technocracy — which defines so much of the modern liberal spirit — doesn’t have a natural grasp of psychology and emotion. But if it hopes to stave off the dark forces, it needs to grow adept at understanding the less tangible roots of anger, the human experience uncaptured by data, the resentments that understandably fester. A decent liberalism would read sharp critics like Mishra and learn.