Would you sell your career for $310,000? It appears that Jeffrey A. Wertkin may have tried to do just that by passing a copy of a sealed whistle-blower complaint against a Silicon Valley company to one of its employees in exchange for that amount.
Unfortunately, he never actually got the money because he was met instead by an F.B.I. agent, who arrested him. Mr. Wertkin responded “My life is over,” according to a complaint filed in the Federal District Court in San Francisco.
His life is certainly not over, but this perplexing case shows how hard it can be to figure out why apparently successful individuals commit white-collar crimes. More important for Mr. Wertkin, if he did what the government outlined in the complaint, this will ruin the rest of his life in ways that no one contemplates when deciding to commit a crime.
Mr. Wertkin was the epitome of success: a Ph.D. and law degree from Georgetown (full disclosure: I received my J.D. there, too), six years in the Justice Department working on whistle-blower cases involving accusations of millions of dollars of fraud, then a partnership at Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld, a leading Washington law firm. This was the classic career trajectory for any aspiring lawyer, complete with a $750,000 home, as The New York Times reported.
The charge filed in the Federal District Court in San Francisco against Mr. Wertkin is for contempt of court, a law that gives a judge broad power to impose a punishment for violating court rules, like failing to keep a whistle-blower complaint secret while the government investigates the fraud claims. Another charge that could be added by prosecutors is theft of government property for taking information entrusted to the government, which can be punished by up to 10 years in prison.
Mr. Wertkin has not yet entered a plea.
But Mr. Wertkin, as the government’s criminal complaint describes, went to great lengths to devise an exchange that could be straight out of a spy novel, involving a code name, a secret rendezvous, text messages and a disguise. Even though it appears Mr. Wertkin has never run afoul of the law before, and his record as a lawyer shows no disciplinary actions, he would not meet the other requirements for a reduced sentence because the conduct involved a detailed plan that played out over about two months. He took many steps to cover up his identity and, perhaps worse, he may have obtained the sealed complaint before joining Akin Gump in April 2016, which would show this was an elaborate process rather than a one-time event.
Mr. Wertkin’s background and otherwise exemplary work record would still be important in a potential sentencing. The focus would shift to the motivation for the crime to explain why he engaged in this type of conduct despite an otherwise successful career.
There is no word yet about Mr. Wertkin’s motivation for undertaking a course of action that now looks almost laughably amateurish, but the silliness may indicate that it was the product of desperation and not a more nefarious plan. It would not be a surprise to hear that there were financial or familial pressures, or perhaps some combination of them, at the root of a decision to put an entire career at risk for an amount that was probably less than his annual pay at the law firm.
Earnings season continues: the week in business.
Whether that would mitigate any punishment that might be imposed remains to be seen. The recent case of Andrew Caspersen shows how judges consider evidence of motive and personal flaws in sentencing, often finding that it ultimately does not excuse the commission of a white-collar crime.
Mr. Caspersen was a successful Wall Street investment banker who defrauded family and friends out of more than $38 million to finance a speculative trading binge. At the sentencing hearing, his lawyer offered evidence that the conduct was the product of a gambling addiction that drove him to keep betting on the market until he went broke.
Federal District Judge Jed S. Rakoff agreed that Mr. Caspersen suffered from an addiction, but still sentenced him to four years in prison, pointing out that “it was a fraud that involved the deception of people who had a lot of faith in the defendant.” Mr. Caspersen recently entered the federal prison in Lewisburg, Pa., to serve his sentence.
For a defendant like Mr. Wertkin, the criminal prosecution is just the first step in a process that will affect him for the rest of his life if he is convicted. As a lawyer, a conviction for this type of conduct is likely to be considered a crime of “moral turpitude” because it involves a significant breach of the duty of a lawyer to maintain the confidentiality of a client’s information.
Under the disciplinary procedures in the District of Columbia, where Mr. Wertkin is a member of the bar, he would most likely be disbarred for a conviction of this type. It is possible to apply for reinstatement after five years, but that requires demonstrating there have not been any other transgressions. Even then, a 2014 survey of lawyer discipline by the American Bar Association shows that the District of Columbia did not grant any of the three applications for reinstatement after disbarment that year, and nationwide only 24 applications out of 781 were granted, so the odds of Mr. Wertkin practicing law again if he is convicted are quite low.
The collateral consequences of a conviction can mean not being able to do some things we often take for granted. The rules vary by state, but a person convicted of a felony can lose the right to vote, own a gun, serve on a jury or enter other professions that require the applicant to prove good moral character.
On a more personal level, a conviction probably means that it will be much more difficult to get a job because some employers shy away from hiring a person who has been convicted of a crime. Even something like volunteering to coach a Little League or soccer team for one’s children may not be possible if it requires a criminal background check, which may cause the organization to decline an offer to help.
So the answer to the question whether it was worth it for Mr. Wertkin is simple in hindsight. But I suspect that it seemed like a good idea at the time.