Hi again. Hopefully Deb will be back tomorrow because she’s back to her normal 110 percent.
There’s no theme today so our constructor, Andrew Zhou, is battling us with challenging clues. While yesterday’s crossword and today’s are both challenges, the solving experiences couldn’t be more different.
I found this to be very much a “Friday challenge” as opposed to a “Saturday challenge.” YMMV but I felt that Will Shortz was giving us a bit of break after yesterday’s workout.
We also have four 15-letter phrases, but because they’re not “stacked” we can expect to be spared from the, shall we say, compromising fill that a stack arrangement often requires. Indeed, there are not a lot of iffy short-fill words. So +1 there.
The “15’s” themselves are a bit of a mixed bag. I like QWERTYKEYBOARDS a lot, largely because of its clue (“Their tops can produce ‘power output’”), but EXERCISE SCIENCE left me cold. It’s a thing for sure, and people do major in exercise science, but I’m not sure that’s enough. Maybe -½.
■ 5A: I first thought SUET, in which we sometimes embed bird seed for winter feeders. It’s kind of a high-calorie edible wrapper. But it turned out the answer, CRAW, referred to a very different kind of bird food holder.
■ 16A: I ignored most of the clue. Novelist. 1856. Five letters. Crossword. READE.
■ 21A: All the letters in “power output” are on the top letter row. Cute.
■ 27A: A few clues today, like this one, had me overthinking. It wasn’t a NODE of nitrogen-fixing bacteria on the roots of a leguminous plant, it was SOIL.
■ 1D: We’ve seen L.G.B.T. before, but today marks to first appearance of L.G.B.T.Q.
■ 8D: WENDY Darling, from “Peter Pan,” popularized the name. We talked about Elmer Fudd’s speech impediment recently, and how it mimics very young speakers. James Barrie had a friend whose daughter called him “my fwiendy-wendy,” and a new girl’s name was born.
Clues that stayed that have personal resonance: 3D (love Henry James’s description of the Seine) and 19A (I studied Xhosa for a semester and Zulu for a year and a half; can’t really speak either to save my life).
As for 1D, it’s the final Q that makes this entry new to a Times puzzle, and semantically, it’s the most interesting letter, what with its dual meaning of “queer”/”questioning.” Although the Q now seems to be standardized, its widespread adoption is still relatively recent, and has its remaining detractors, despite reclamation in inclusive circles of the word “queer.” The National L.G.B.T.Q. Task Force was renamed in 2014, I learned, and Glaad only updated its media handbook to recommend this usage in October 2016. Some advocates, out of desire to be more specific, have adopted my favorite version of the acronym: Quiltbag.
A chance, anyhow, to meditate on a wider significance of single letters beyond the boxes of a crossword puzzle.
I enjoyed this very accessible themeless crossword. How about you?