At the beginning of my second trimester in late March, I was contacted by my obstetrician’s office and was told to come alone for my next ultrasound. At the appointment I learned that my next appointment would be almost two months later. I was incensed.
There has never been uniformity in visit schedules in this country. Until recently, the American practice of 11 to 14 prenatal visits reflected a guideline from 1930. Its prevalence reflected patient preference, as well as providers’ delivering care in the ways they’ve been trained, said Dr. Alex Peahl, M.D., an ob-gyn at Michigan Medicine who has been working on redesigning that university’s prenatal care policies during the pandemic. The practice of frequent visits was not motivated by financial incentives; most practices charge a flat fee per pregnancy regardless of number of visits.
The World Health Organization and others have found success with models averaging eight appointments. “Most countries in the world have less frequent visits with better outcomes,” said Dr. Erica Cahill, M.D., an assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology and complex family planning at Stanford University. And while we spend more per pregnancy than any other country, our infant and maternal death rates are among the highest of industrialized nations.
Against the setting of the Covid-19 pandemic, new guidelines from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists suggest that clinicians group vaccinations and screenings together to reduce the overall number of in-person visits. They recommend an anatomy scan around 20 weeks, and many physicians also order ultrasounds between 11 to 13 weeks and later in the third trimester. In addition to the virtual appointments that many practices are now scheduling, the group suggests remote follow-ups for monitoring diabetes control, hypertension, mood disorders and other conditions.
A new federal change inspired by the coronavirus gives practices the ability to bill patients’ insurance plans for telehealth care, which physicians said represents a major change. It also represents a primary source of revenue at a precarious financial moment when many private practices, major institutions and community health centers are threatened with shutdown.
Dissuaded from visiting clinics but armed with blood pressure cuffs, fetal heart rate Doppler monitors and smartphones, many pregnant women are being taught to self-monitor. For many parents-to-be, it’s the first time we have been involved in collecting our own data or had direct communication with our care teams outside of face-to-face appointments. For some, collecting information about their pregnancy symptoms, blood pressure, weight and fetal heart rates can be oddly empowering at this uncertain time – but only if a person has the resources to do it properly.
Dr. Peahl said that the country’s less advantaged institutions and patients would probably miss out on some opportunities that higher-income patients have. Many blood pressure cuffs start at $25, and fetal heart rate monitors are not covered by Medicaid.
Dr. Jennifer McLeland, M.D., an obstetrician with Vivi Women’s Health in Fort Worth, said that without opportunities to meet in person or access to tools to self-monitor, some conditions might be missed in financially vulnerable expectant mothers, particularly in their third trimesters. She said patients in this population already experience higher rates of preeclampsia, a potentially fatal condition that can be indicated by changes in blood pressure, protein in urine, swelling and other symptoms. Individualizing care for people in these higher-risk categories and with underlying medical conditions is crucial, Dr. McLeland said.
Gynecological care, contraception and abortion access are threatened during this pandemic. Yet when it comes to pregnancy and the weeks immediately afterward, providers do see some cause for optimism. In addition to the rethinking of in-person visit schedules, the coronavirus could motivate the creation of a central set of resources on prenatal care. And doctors have suggested that postnatal care schedules may change from in-person appointments six weeks after delivery to televisits two to three weeks post-birth to check in with parents in this high-anxiety period. It’s a change that could stick and lead to better postpartum experiences for parents and babies.
