The evidence directly linking children’s screen time to cognitive and social harm seems, in reality, to be paper thin.
Staying home is the best thing we can all do to stem the spread of Covid-19. That means our families’ screen time is about to go through the roof — even when the kids aren’t attending classes on Zoom or Google Hangouts — and that’s fine.
Confining ourselves mid-pandemic comes with its own new struggles, but for parents dealing with a heady mix of anxiety and youthful energy, screen time can feel like both a blessing and a curse: It can offer much-needed distraction, while at the same time causing a certain amount of guilt and doubt as to whether our parenting skills are up to scratch.
Over the last half-decade or so, a conventional wisdom has taken hold that smartphone and video game use melts our children’s brains and hobbles their attention spans and social skills, perhaps spelling the demise of human interaction as we know it. This isn’t helped by stories of how some Silicon Valley executives — who presumably are most familiar with what their products can do to us — have now started sending their kids to screen-free schools.
The expert advice, to date, hasn’t been helpful either. For years, the American Academy of Pediatrics preached digital abstinence. But it has since backpedaled, now saying that screens are fine in moderation, to be determined on a child-by-child and family-by-family basis. On the other hand, the World Health Organization has grown more alarmist, deciding that the latest version of its classification manual will include “gaming disorder” as a psychiatric condition.
Put this all together, and we are left with the vague impression that the people in tech are pushing a “drug” that they themselves know to be harmful. Covid-19, therefore, traps families between technophobia and the inevitable reality of rising screen time: Can parents play it safe by going screen-free, but risk madness as children’s pent-up energy manifests in annoying or even harmful ways? Are parents who loosen the reins on Xbox Live, Netflix and TikTok sowing seeds of long-term family breakdowns?
This era of social distancing gives us a chance to get real about the science of screen time effects, and to separate hype from fact.
Other research conducted by Netta Weinstein (and co-written with one of us, Mr. Przybylski) found that the negative effects that do exist probably only kick in for a tiny minority of users (about 0.5 percent) or those spending more than two-thirds of their waking hours online. Work we have supported by colleagues at Cambridge University suggests that the amount of screen time needed to have a practically significant negative impact would be between 11 and an impossible 63 hours per day. Regarding sleep, one estimate finds every hour spent on digital devices costs a young person a couple of minutes of rest each night.
As for video games, various studies actually highlight myriad benefits to online play. Some of our own research shows that two hours a day of screen-based leisure is associated with improved peer relationships and increased sociality. Gaming meets our fundamental needs for exploration, competence and social connection. And games often improve rather than undermine our reasoning abilities.
There are dozens of pieces of reporting — and plenty of anecdotal stories all young parents can share — about families so stingy about screen time that it borders on fundamentalism. The worries here aren’t new. For as long as new technologies have emerged, there has been hand-wringing over their deleterious effects. Those who denounced the rise of radio, film and television are all predecessors to the current generation of alarmists claiming that screen time is a passive, brain-dulling form of entertainment.
But there’s little reason that children can’t spend time playing brainy games or watching age-appropriate educational videos on YouTube or documentaries on streaming services.
Unless the kids you’re responsible for start wandering around tables wearing VR headsets, we ought not panic about their screen time in the coming weeks. The available science shows there isn’t a firm “right” amount, and that more active forms of screen time, like cooperative and team-oriented video games, can actually have positive effects on our mental well-being.
In a bit of good news, this crisis has led to some adversaries burying the hatchet. The games industry and the World Health Organization, once at loggerheads, are now partnering in the #PlayApartTogether campaign. It’s a promising step that provides a glimpse of what could be done if we worked together to leverage gaming for the good of everyone.
There are hundreds of new and timeless video games that parents and kids can play together. And there are countless favorite films now perfectly positioned to be passed down — that don’t just entertain, or distract, but teach ineffable lessons about life, love and family.
