The president has continued to broadcast his personal hopes for the coronavirus, questioning its ability to last into the fall and winter.
WASHINGTON — In February, President Trump told the public that the coronavirus should “go away” by April. In March, he said that the virus may “wash” away by summer. On Wednesday, Mr. Trump told the American public that the virus “won’t be coming back in the form that it was” this fall or winter. He then mused that it might not come back at all.
“There will be coronavirus in the fall,” Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the federal government’s top infectious disease expert, said as Mr. Trump looked on.
More than 40,000 Americans have died from the coronavirus, and the outbreak is still well underway. But in his public remarks, Mr. Trump has continued to broadcast his personal hopes for the virus, questioning its ability to last into the fall and winter.
The president’s latest assertion seemed prompted by his anger with The Washington Post over an interview with Dr. Robert R. Redfield, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, published a day earlier. In that interview, Dr. Redfield warned that fall and winter would be taxing on Americans because influenza and the coronavirus would be circulating at the same time.
“He was misquoted,” Mr. Trump said.
But when pressed by reporters, Dr. Redfield said he had been accurately quoted. “There’s a possibility that the assault of the virus on our nation next winter will actually be even more difficult than the one we just went through,” he said in that interview.
He added: “I didn’t say that this was going to be worse. I said that this was going to be more difficult.” Taking the lectern to quibble with reporters over the article — which had the headline “C.D.C. Director Warns Second Wave of Coronavirus Is Likely to Be Even More Devastating” — Mr. Trump said that Dr. Redfield did not actually know if “the corona” would come back, and that he had spoken to the doctor at “great length” about his comments.
Asked how he could repeatedly assert that the coronavirus would come back in pockets or not at all by the winter, Mr. Trump said multiple times that there was reason to believe it might not. Health experts — including Dr. Redfield — have stressed that Americans need to be prepared either way.
When pressed by reporters, Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the White House coronavirus response coordinator, did not directly support the president’s assertion. But Dr. Fauci, another leading scientific voice for the administration, supported Dr. Redfield’s assertion that the virus would be here in the fall.
Cases have also continued to explode in countries with equatorial climates and those in the Southern Hemisphere, which is currently in the middle of autumn.
