A study shows that three out of four U.S. workers ages 50 to 62 didn’t have an employer-provided retirement plan and health insurance — which will be a big blow to their income later.
When the retirement expert Alicia H. Munnell finished gathering data for a study on American workers ages 50 to 62 in jobs without benefits, she was stunned.
“When I looked at the results I thought, ‘This can’t be right,’” Dr. Munnell, director of the Center for Retirement Research at Boston College, said. The study, published in October and titled “How Do Older Workers Use Nontraditional Jobs?,” found that three-quarters of American workers in that age group had positions that fall into the center’s “nontraditional” category — meaning, those without employer-provided retirement plans and health insurance.
What may be less surprising is the effect these jobs can have on retirement. Depending on how much time workers spent in a job without benefits from ages 50 to 62, they can expect their retirement income to be as much as 26 percent lower than that of people who spent their 50s and early 60s in positions with full benefit packages, according to the center’s findings. It was the first time the center had looked at nontraditional workers in this age group.
Ms. Jacobs is a freelance writer for various outlets, including The Dallas Morning News. Since the coronavirus hit, she has been especially busy.
Ms. Jacobs, 60, started freelancing in 1989. Since 2015, she has freelanced full time. From 2006 until 2013, she was a staff writer at The United Methodist Reporter, a newspaper that shut down. It was the only job that offered her health and retirement benefits since she started writing professionally.
Other Texas organizations she writes for, including a theology school and a seminary, don’t extend benefits to freelancers. And that’s OK with Ms. Jacobs. Her husband, Steve Lavine, owned a market research company and retired comfortably five years ago. When they married in 2009, they combined living expenses, allowing her to increase her retirement savings and buy private health insurance. Mr. Lavine is on Medicare.
She also knows that other workers her age have reason to feel not so fortunate. Ms. Jacobs chose her nontraditional jobs for their flexibility. Freelancing allowed her to work from home when her children, now 27 and 30, were growing up.
Are you helping someone financially because of the pandemic?
If you are helping a family member or friend who has lost income, or are receiving that help, during the coronavirus outbreak, The Times would like to talk to you.
Other workers, like James P. Shelley, felt forced to take nontraditional work in their later years.
Since his 20s, Mr. Shelley had worked as an executive at Southern California health information management companies. He was fired from one firm in his 30s for not meeting sales quotas. A second company let him go in 2005 because it could no longer afford his salary. For decades, he provided his wife and children, now 31 and 29, with health insurance through his employers and made small contributions to company retirement savings plans. Since starting his own business, he has gone without health insurance. His savings have dwindled to zero.
Ms. Jacobs and Mr. Shelley have made careers of their nontraditional jobs, meaning both have spent the bulk of their later earning years forgoing benefits. According to the Boston center’s study, that lands them among the group of future retirees likely to see the highest rate of lost income: Their peers are apt to be 26 percent richer because they won’t have pulled from their own pockets to pay for health coverage or have interrupted the accrual of money in their 401(k)’s or pensions.
Making a career of these jobs also puts them among the majority of workers in those positions, who stay put rather than using them as stopgaps between jobs with benefits or bridges to retirement. Workers who bounced among mostly traditional jobs, with stints at nontraditional jobs in between, had about 6 percent less retirement income, the study found.
“Some people do use these jobs to tide them over between one traditional job and another,” Dr. Munnell said; those workers make up only about 25 percent. Fifty-four percent of the 4,174 respondents in the center’s study stay in their no-benefits jobs for years. Among them are people whose lack of a high school diploma prevents them from securing traditional jobs. Others are in Ms. Jacobs’s position, with a spouse to fall back on.
A January report from the institute found that 40 percent of Americans over 60 draw income from Social Security alone, while only 7 percent pay their bills through a combination of Social Security, a defined-benefit pension and a contribution plan such as a 401(k).
That may be because only about half of U.S. workplaces offer their employees retirement plans, Mr. Doonan said. “Access has been a challenge,” he said.
Yet that access may make the biggest difference when it comes to closing the gap between traditional and nontraditional workers’ retirement income.
The lowest-paid workers may be the most reluctant to try to save for retirement. “There’s a lot of demands on a limited income,” Dr. Munnell said.
Workers like Mr. Shelley, whose business, like the hiring market, has ground down because of the coronavirus, know they are vulnerable. “I believe I have more than 20 years ahead of me, and that I’ll be doing this until the day I die,” he said.
He said he planned to move to a more affordable city when his wife retired and hopes his health holds out, at least until he qualifies for Medicare. “It’s only the catastrophic stuff, like a cancer diagnosis, that I worry about,” Mr. Shelley said.
Dr. Munnell wishes that he and other nontraditional workers were in a position to fret less.
