Companies with up to 10,000 workers, or up to $2.5 billion in revenues, will be able to gain access to four-year loans through the program. Banks will originate the loans and retain a 5 percent share, but can sell the remainder — in total, up to $600 billion — to the Fed. The Treasury will provide $75 billion in backup to protect the central bank.
While companies seeking the loans “must commit to make reasonable efforts to maintain payroll and retain workers,” according to the announcement, the central bank has yet to strictly define what that means or how it will be enforced.
Though the borrowers must follow restrictions on compensation, stock repurchase and dividend restrictions set out in the recently passed congressional package, the Fed stopped short of applying limits on offshoring suggested in the law.
Unemployment claims continue to mount, with another 2.1 million filed last week.
Principal and interest on those loans can be deferred for one year, but the borrowing is not forgivable, unlike the small business loans Congress authorized. The program design is still open to comment. The Fed gave no guidance on when it, or other new programs announced, would be up and running.
Fed relief for states and cities had also been highly anticipated because Congress provided only limited aid to those governments in its recent legislation. The markets that local governments use to issue bonds and finance themselves have been in turmoil, which threatened to make it difficult for officials to fund operations just as revenues dried up and the need for cash skyrocketed.
The new program will buy up to $500 billion of short term notes — with maturities of up to two years — straight from U.S. states, counties with at least 2 million residents, and cities with a population of at least one million residents, according to the Fed release.
The Treasury will also ramp up its insurance on the Fed’s two corporate bond-buying programs and its so-called Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, or TALF.
That’s in part because they are adding riskier debt: Some companies that were downgraded to below investment grade after March 22, for instance, will now be eligible for Fed help. So will some high-yield exchange-traded funds, which are built on bonds but trade like stock.
Companies that benefit from the programs will not be forced to restrict share buybacks or dividends. Congress mandated in its legislation that businesses receiving “direct loans” using the new funding must do both, but the Fed does not see the corporate bond-buying as falling under that umbrella.
The central bank hasn’t slammed the door on the possibility of further expansion.
Thomas J. Barrack Jr., the chief executive of a company that invests in commercial real estate, and a prominent supporter of President Trump, said Thursday that he believed that the TALF was an “appropriate and needed first step” in the government’s efforts to support the market for commercial real estate loans. In a blog post last month he called for federal action to support the commercial real estate market.
Officials are trying to make sure that a broad swath of companies can continue obtaining credit, allowing them to stay in business and hang on to workers.
The Fed’s efforts to pump new money into the financial markets so far have helped improve tense trading conditions. But riskier credit markets — which companies with shaky businesses or bigger debt loads rely on to constantly refinance their obligations — had gotten no direct help, and had seen relatively little improvement.
Borrowing has become comparatively expensive for companies with risky debt. That lowers the chances that such businesses, wobbly in the best of times, will survive the sharp downturn.
The new expansions may help to soften the sharp cutoff between investment grade and junk status, but only to a limited extent. Under one program, American Airlines and United Airlines would not be able to sell their bonds or loans to the Fed because their ratings were below investment grade before the Fed’s cutoff date. Southwest Airlines would qualify, because it is still rated investment grade. Delta, even though it was recently downgraded by Moody’s, would be included.
The central bank did hint at its own boundaries on Thursday. Some lawmakers, including House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, a Democrat, have been urging the central bank to “think big,” while others have worried that the funding going to the Fed would be used to “bail out” big companies.
Mr. Powell emphasized that the Fed cannot actually distribute money, just enable loans.
Jim Tankersley, Emily Flitter and Matt Phillips contributed reporting.