A Khan Academy video guide to the data on income, wealth and other disparities.
Mr. Delaney is a senior editor in the Opinion section.
As part of our new series on how America can emerge from the coronavirus crisis fairer and more resilient, Times Opinion created a partnership with Khan Academy to produce educational videos that explain economic inequality.
The nonprofit organization, founded by Sal Khan, provides free online lessons in subjects from computer coding to Renaissance history. Its classes have been especially sought out for home learning since schools have physically closed amid the pandemic.
You can watch two of the videos created by Mr. Khan below. Like all Khan Academy videos, they are meant to explain complicated material so that viewers can form their own opinions.
These videos are part of a new, free online course on income inequality in the United States available through Khan Academy.
What we’re looking at is a graphic that’s put together by The New York Times. And it’s a way of thinking about how incomes have grown since 1980. So before we even look at the various percentiles of income this black line is interesting to look at because this is real per capita G.D.P. And you can see relative to 1980 real per capita G.D.P. has grown, it looks like about 80%. And that’s interesting because in theory if all of the growth of productivity of a country were evenly distributed, then everyone would be growing on that per capita G.D.P. line. But what’s interesting about this graphic is we clearly do not see that. So for example, folks with incomes in the 90th to 99th percentiles, their income actually is growing in line with per capita G.D.P. And in the year that this was compiled that would be someone after taxes making $120,000 to $425,000 per year after taxes. So that’s a good amount of money, someone making $425,000 after taxes might be making roughly $700,000 or even $800,000 before taxes. But we see a spread for people making more or making less. The folks in the top 1%, their income has grown about twice as fast as per capita G.D.P. And folks in the 0.01%, so this is one out of every 10,000 people, their income looks like it is grown roughly five times faster than G.D.P. And obviously if some folks’ incomes are growing faster than per capita G.D.P. other folks’ incomes have to be growing slower than per capita G.D.P. And we can see that the middle 40%, their growth, it looks like it’s about 2/3 as fast as per capita G.D.P. And the bottom 50%, it looks like their growth is about a third of per capita G.D.P. Now some folks might say, hey this is alarming we see an increase in inequality as our economy grows. While some might say, hey, this is a side effect of capitalism. Everyone’s income is growing in real terms. But in a capitalist world some people might grow more than others. But regardless of your point of view it’s interesting to think about why we see this spread happening and we’re not going to be able to dissect all of it right now but I’ll talk about some of the areas of interest that might explain this phenomenon. And it’s not in any particular order, but some folks would point to globalization. Why would globalization do this? Well, in a globalized world capital can flow to wherever they can get the cheapest labor. And so for example, if you’re someone in the top 1% or someone in the 0.01% and you own a company you could take your capital to a lower cost place.  And so the demand for labor is going to go offshore. And so there will be less demand for labor in your country. So it wouldn’t drive wages up. Another possibility that folks could talk about is technology. Technology oftentimes has a similar effect as globalization. Instead of taking labor and taking it offshore to find cheaper labor technology oftentimes can replace labor. Or another way to think about it, it can make folks more productive. So you don’t need as much labor. And so the folks who own the technology or are able to take advantage of technological trends, well, they might get a disproportionate amount of that G.D.P. growth. Related to both of these is the idea of education. Maybe in a globalized world and a technology world, the payback of education matters even more. And so someone doesn’t get as much of an education and they can’t participate in the benefits of technology as much or jobs that they’re qualified for go offshore so they can’t demand as high wages. Another potential lever to think about is immigration policy which from a wage point of view could have a similar effect as technology globalization. If you have an increase in supply of lower skilled labor, economics will tell us that the price for that labor, which are wages, would be suppressed. Another major lever that folks will definitely point to is tax policy or fiscal policy in general. For example, generally speaking the ordinary income tax rates, the more money you make become a higher and higher percentage of your income. But people in the very high brackets in that top 1% or in that top hundredth of a percent, many of their income comes disproportionately from capital gains income on asset price appreciation. And that type of income today is taxed at a significantly lower tax rate than ordinary income. And then last but not least, you have monetary policy. And this is the actions of the Federal Reserve and interest rates. And many times especially when you go through crises the benefits of lower interest rates might disproportionately benefit those who own capital who are in the position to borrow at those lower interest rates and then invest it at higher interest rates. And that might speak to some of these higher brackets. So I’ll leave you there. The goal of this video isn’t to make a value judgment over what’s good and what’s bad or what likely is the case but just to get us thinking about the trends that we are for sure seeing and what might be the levers, and this isn’t an exhaustive list, that might be causing them.
This is a chart from the New York Times that shows us how per capita GDP has trended on an inflation adjusted basis since 1947. So you can really think about this as the post-world War Ii Arab World War II of course, ended in 1945. It’s always good to read the fine print to make sure we understand what this is telling us and what it’s not telling us. As I mentioned it is adjusted for inflation. It also says that the incomes given here are post-tax and include government benefits. So someone’s getting a government benefit of a certain value per year. That would be included in their income here. And if someone is say making $100,000. But paying 35,000 in taxes then the income is post-tax it’ll be the 100,000 minus the 35,000 or 65,000. And there’s several interesting things here. This is showing us growth since 1947. So it’s not that folks in 1947 that we had a zero per capita GDP or that there was zero income. It’s just obviously in 1947 you haven’t had any growth since 1947. And then as you move forward in time over roughly the next 30 years, you get to about 1980 it looks like you’ve had about 100% growth. Now, whenever I think in terms of percentage growth 100 percent growth 200% growth. I always like to do a little bit of a reality check of how that compared to where I started. I like to view the 0% growth as 100 percent of 1947 I’ll make another axis here on the right to supplement what’s already there. So this would be 100% of 1947. Then if I grow 100% from that. That’s the same thing as doubling. So 200% of 1947 this right over here. If I grow by 200% that means I am at 300% of 1947. And then if I’ve grown by 300% that means I am at 400% of 1947. So one way to think about it is over the course of the 30 years or 33 years from 1947 to 1980 it looks like inflation adjusted per capita GDP has essentially doubled it has grown by 100% And it also looks like in this yellow line where they’re telling us the average income for the bottom 90% So bottom 90% that’s essentially everyone but the top 10% It looks like it’s roughly tracked per capita GDP. In fact, it looks like it might have been a little bit ahead of that over some of those years. So if you go from 1947 to 1980 per capita GDP has roughly doubled and average incomes for that bottom 90% has roughly doubled. Now, something interesting, or at least this graph is highlighting something that might be interesting over the next 40 year period from 1980 to roughly today, which is per capita GDP has continued to trend upward at a seemingly similar rate. But the income the average income for the bottom 90% does not seem to keep pace with that in other videos, we looked at 1980 to now. And we saw this trend, but we didn’t have the historical data from 1947 to 1980 to see that you don’t always see this in order for that to happen that means that the top 10% must be growing faster. I’m just making up some curve like that it must be going at a faster rate. And even this might be surprising some of you, you might say. All right. The bottom 90% is not growing as fast as the average across the country. But by this measure it looks like on an inflation adjusted after tax basis the bottom 90% is at 300% of 1947. Now give or take. And it was at 200% of 1947 in 1980. Give or take, which means that the standard of living since 1980 should have improved by about 50% for this bottom 90% group. And I know for a lot of you all who have been around since 1980 or who know about 1980 says, well, maybe that’s the case. Most of us definitely have better computing power. Now, we have nicer large screen flat screen TVs we have cheaper manufactured goods. But other things feel harder for a lot of folks than 1980. Things like buying a house or health or college tuition. And that goes to something that we will probably dig into more and other videos and that’s how inflation is measured. I’m not going to go into detail other parts on cod Academy we talk about how inflation is measured in the Consumer Price Index. But whenever you look at any statistics it’s always important to think about how are they calculated. What are the underlying assumptions because inflation is trying to captor how much can you buy with a certain amount of money. But that calculation is dependent on what you think people are buying or how you measure the cost of it. So we’ll talk about that in future videos. But the big takeaway here is that the historic trend is that the bottom 90% has roughly grown with per capita GDP. But it seems like there’s something about the last 40 years, whether it’s tax policy. Monetary policy demographic changes technology globalization education and maybe all of the above that has led to a change in the trend.
Kevin J. Delaney (@delaney) is a senior editor in the Opinion section.