President Trump said he would sign the $484 billion package, which replenishes a depleted small-business loan program. Another 4.4 million people filed for unemployment.
A death alters the coronavirus timeline. Did you already have it?
Science offers sunlight as a way to tame the virus, and Trump rushes toward it.
Wednesday was California’s ‘deadliest day,’ with 115 deaths.
As another 4.4 million file for unemployment, help is slow to arrive.
President Trump said he was “grateful” for the action to refill the loan program and indicated he would sign the measure. It was the latest installment in a government aid program that is approaching $3 trillion, which passed with broad bipartisan support even as some Democrats condemned it for being too stingy. But the fight over what should be included foreshadowed a pitched partisan battle to come over the next round of federal relief, which is likely to center on aid to states and cities facing dire financial straits.
The House passed a $484 billion coronavirus relief package on Thursday. President Trump has said he will sign it.
On this vote, the yeas are 388, the nays are 5, with 1 present. The bill is passed. We will fight this virus together until we defeat it together. We did not ask for this virus. We did not invite it. It came from a distant land, but together we will defeat it. We want to put people before politics. Our entire effort will be bipartisan. After all, public health and a strong economy are not a Democrat or Republican issue. Today was an historic day for us to once again pass our now-fourth bipartisan legislation to address the coronavirus crisis. We’re very pleased with the vote, 388 to 5. They saw the light that we could do much more for small businesses. So $60 billion in a set-aside for, shall we say, the underbanked: the women, minorities veterans, Native Americans, rural folks — people who didn’t have big banking relationships but had big credit needs. Another $60 billion in loans and grants for small businesses — all of small businesses. And then $100 billion — $100 billion — for hospitals and testing. Quite a remarkable feat.
At the White House briefing on Thursday, President Trump speculated — dangerously, in the view of some experts — about the powers of sunlight, ultraviolet light and household disinfectants to kill the coronavirus, and suggested testing whether they might be used as potential treatments for Covid-19.
After William N. Bryan, the head of science at the Department of Homeland Security, said at the briefing that the coronavirus dies rapidly when exposed to sunlight, and even faster in the face of disinfectants like bleach and alcohol, an excited Mr. Trump took the floor.
Despite a lack of scientific evidence, Mr. Trump has long pinned his hopes on an array of possible cures for the coronavirus, from sunlight and warmer temperatures to an array of drugs, including the malaria drug hydroxychloroquine, which he has promoted as a “what have you got to lose” remedy. Some of his recommendations, however, have had disastrous effects. Last month, an Arizona man died and his wife was hospitalized after the couple ingested a chemical found in hydroxychloroquine.
Shortly after Mr. Trump made the comments on Thursday, emergency management officials in Washington State posted a warning on Twitter against following the president’s suggestions.
Gov. Gavin Newsom of California said the state recorded 115 Covid-19 deaths on Wednesday, the deadliest day since the start of the pandemic.
Yesterday was the deadliest day for this virus in the state — 115 human beings lost their lives. Families torn apart. It was the deadliest day in the state of California. Hospitalizations down 0.4 percent and 1.2 percent decline in I.C.U.s. But what happened was also significant — what was also — a number of what we call P.U.I.s: These are persons under investigation, and both for hospitalizations and for I.C.U.s. We saw those persons under investigation drop as well. So all four of those categories dropped. We’re walking into a very warm weekend. The most beautiful weekend, to the extent you love warm weather, since January, at least since arguably last summer in the state of California. That means people are prone to want to go to the beaches, parks, playgrounds and go on a hike. And I anticipate there’ll be a significant increase in volume. But I also think if there is, and people aren’t practicing physical distancing, I’ll be announcing in a week or so these numbers going back up. I don’t think anybody wants to hear that. I don’t want to share that information.
Gov. Gavin Newsom of California said on Thursday that the state had experienced its “deadliest day” since the start of the pandemic, with 115 coronavirus-related deaths on Wednesday. The Los Angeles County Department of Public Health reported 68 new deaths on Thursday.
“Covid-19 is rapidly becoming one of the leading causes of death among L.A. County residents,” Barbara Ferrer, the county’s director of public health, said in a statement.
According to The New York Times’s tracking, there have been about 1,500 deaths and 38,000 confirmed coronavirus cases in the state.
Nonetheless, the White House remains resolutely upbeat. “Honestly, if you look at the trends today, I think by Memorial Day weekend we will largely have this coronavirus epidemic behind us,” Vice President Mike Pence predicted on Thursday on Geraldo Rivera’s Cleveland radio show.
The California governor was more somber. While Mr. Newsom noted that hospitalizations and patients in intensive care had decreased slightly from the day before, he said the number of deaths should serve as a warning that even as the weather warms — tempting Californians to flock to beaches or gather outdoors — the virus remains an insidious force.
He also urged patience for local leaders and other Californians who had asked when the state would ease orders to stay at home. The state will first need to significantly ramp up testing capacity. Legions of contact tracers are being trained to help track and halt any outbreaks.
Still, Mr. Newsom on Wednesday announced a first modest step in that direction: Hospitals would again be scheduling what are called elective procedures, which can include medically necessary procedures like tumor removals.
People on unemployment in most states normally receive, on average, less than half their weekly salaries. Now many are poised to receive more than they would have normally earned in their jobs.
The coronavirus pandemic has decimated commercial air travel, leaving major carriers scrambling to stay afloat after consumer demand plummeted. In a securities filing on Wednesday, United said it has cut about 80 percent of its capacity this month and expects to cut 90 percent of its capacity in May.
One in five who were tested for antibodies in New York City had them.
About 21 percent of people in New York City who were tested for coronavirus antibodies tested positive, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said.
So we have undertaken the largest, most comprehensive study of New York State to find out what is the infection rate. And that we started a few days ago. Sample size, so far, 3,000 people statewide. Let’s find out what the infection rate is. We have preliminary data on Phase 1, and this is going to be ongoing. We did about 3,000 tests. But what we found so far is the statewide number is 13.9 percent tested positive for having the antibodies. What does that mean? It means these are people who were infected, and who developed the antibodies to fight the infection. Long island at 16.7, New York City at 21.2 Westchester/Rockland, 11.7 and rest of state, 3.6. This basically quantifies what we’ve been seeing anecdotally, and what we have known, but it puts numbers to it. It changes the theories of what the death rate is. If you get infected, 13 percent of the population is about 2.7 million people who have been infected. If you look at what we have now as a death total, which is 15,500, that would be about 0.5 percent death rate.
About 21 percent of about 1,300 people in New York City who were screened for virus antibodies tested positive, Governor Andrew M. Cuomo said on Thursday.
If those numbers translate to the true incidence of the virus, they would mean that more than 1.7 million people in New York City, and more than 2.4 million people statewide, have already been infected. These numbers are far greater than the 250,000 confirmed cases of the virus that the state has recorded.
Trump renews his rebuke of Georgia’s governor.
840 crew members of the Theodore Roosevelt tested positive.
A remdesivir drug trial was terminated because of a lack of patients.
Islam’s call to prayer will play on loudspeaker in Minneapolis during Ramadan.
Public health experts warn of an overlap of the coronavirus and flu season.
As many Americans look to the summer months with some hope of a return to normalcy, the head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said that the coronavirus and the seasonal flu season will likely overlap later this year. This scenario would overwhelm hospitals and health care symptoms as the virus has in some communities, like New York City.
“We’re going to have the flu epidemic and the coronavirus epidemic at the same time,” Dr. Robert Redfield, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said in a recent interview with The Washington Post.
On Wednesday, Mr. Trump said the virus may not come back at all, a theory his own infectious disease advisers have rejected.
In an effort to protect patients from unnecessary exposure to the virus, doctors, including pediatricians, have transitioned wellness checkups to video appointments. In doing so, public health experts said, immunizations have been dropping at a dangerous rate. And children are not receiving routine vaccines that protect them against measles and other life-threatening illnesses.
This has become a global problem, as national immunization programs in more than two dozen countries have been suspended. This has left more than 100 million children vulnerable, a consortium of international organizations, including UNICEF and the World Health Organization, recently reported.
Pompeo accuses China of covering up extent of epidemic and calls for ban on wet markets.
“We strongly believe that the Chinese Communist Party did not report the outbreak of the new coronavirus in a timely fashion to the World Health Organization,” he told reporters at a briefing in Washington.
The two countries have clashed over the emergence of the disease, part of a broader struggle to control the narrative surrounding a pandemic that has claimed tens of thousands of lives around the world.
In a statement, Mr. Pompeo also called on China to close the wet markets where wildlife is sold for food.
“Given the strong link between illegal wildlife sold in wet markets and zoonotic diseases, the United States has called on the People’s Republic of China to permanently close its wildlife wet markets and all markets that sell illegal wildlife,” he said in a statement.
Beijing has banned the sale of wild animals but has yet to put it into law.
Reporting was contributed by Mike Baker, Peter Baker, Karen Barrow, Pam Belluck, Alan Blinder, Julie Bosman, Jonah Engel Bromwich, Patricia Cohen, Helene Cooper, Michael Cooper, Jill Cowan, Sheri Fink, Jacey Fortin, Thomas Fuller, Maggie Haberman, Amy Harmon, Jan Hoffman, Shawn Hubler, Carl Hulse, Lara Jakes, Zolan Kanno-Youngs, Gina Kolata, Dan Levin, Patricia Mazzei, Andy Newman, Roni Caryn Rabin, Katie Rogers, Rick Rojas, Marc Santora, Dionne Searcey, Eileen Sullivan, Sabrina Tavernise and Neil Vigdor.