Lou Ann Dagen, 66, was one of six residents who died from the virus at one nursing home outside Grand Rapids, Mich., a spokesman for the center said.
Lou Ann Dagen, 66, right, died on Saturday from complications of the coronavirus. Her sister, Penny Dagen, left, regularly communicated with her on video chats using an Amazon Echo Show.
They lived about 20 minutes apart in Michigan, but when a cousin gave the sisters Lou Ann Dagen and Penny Dagen each an Amazon Echo Show last year to make video calls, they would keep each other company for hours on end.
The virtual assistant Alexa connected them during meals and discussions about what was on television.
“I think she just wanted to know that I was there,” Penny Dagen, 74, said of her sister, who lived in a nursing home.
And when Lou Ann Dagen, 66, became gravely ill with Covid-19, the illness caused by the coronavirus, she turned once again to Alexa, Penny Dagen said in an interview on Thursday.
Ms. Dagen discovered voice recordings of her sister pleading with Alexa to intervene as her health worsened. She said she found the recordings on Monday, two days after Lou Ann Dagen died of complications from the virus.
As daily cases in the U.S. pass 50,000, officials stress precautions.
Infections among Secret Service agents explain Pence’s changed visit to Arizona.
Lou Ann Dagen was one of six residents of the nursing home, Metron of Cedar Springs, who died after being stricken with the virus, a spokesman for the center confirmed. Thirty-one residents and five staff members at the nursing home, which is about 20 miles north of Grand Rapids, Mich., have tested positive for the virus, according to the nursing home.
Ms. Dagen said she and her sister were aware of the limitations of Alexa, the ubiquitous voice-activated assistant.
Amazon officials said that smart devices like the Echo Show are not meant as a replacement for life safety services and are unable to contact emergency services.
Ms. Dagen said that her sister had diabetes and high blood pressure, which also contributed to her death. She lived at the nursing home for about 10 years after having two strokes that caused paralysis on the left side of her body, Ms. Dagen added. Her oxygen levels plummeted because of the virus, which she contracted several weeks ago, said Ms. Dagen, who lives in Sparta, Mich.
“It was like she couldn’t breathe,” she said of her sister, who died at Mercy Health St. Mary’s in Grand Rapids on Saturday, shortly after being hospitalized.
A nursing home executive said that the center took appropriate action and that Lou Ann Dagen’s condition deteriorated rapidly.
Mr. Pruitt said the nursing home encouraged the sisters’ regular video calls.
Penny Dagen described her sister, who never married, as multitalented, and said that she played the organ, piano and guitar. She also sang and was an artist who wrote a children’s book, Ms. Dagen said.
The last time she spoke with her sister was on a video call on Saturday morning before she went to the hospital, Ms. Dagen said. She added that she had the recordings of her sister asking Alexa for help on her iPad, but that she did not plan on keeping them.
