Books about quarantined, confined and adrift young people, from “The Cat in the Hat” to “Life of Pi,” for the cooped-up young people in your home.
They’re done with their homework. They’ve played basketball, walked the dog, baked cookies, eaten cookies, FaceTimed with grandparents, TikToked with friends, painted a rainbow and exhausted all age-appropriate options on Netflix. (Sorry, “Tiger King” isn’t for the zoo set.) Maybe it’s time for a book about people they can relate to — kids their own age who have been cooped up and forced to get creative.
“The sun did not shine. It was too wet to play. So we sat in the house all that cold, cold wet day.” A boy and his sister are stuck at home; their mother is out for the day — probably at work, trying not to think too much about what’s going on at home. “And then something went BUMP, how that bump made us jump” … and you know who shows up. 
A bear wearing green overalls (minus one button) is stuck in a department store, waiting with all the other dolls and animals for someone to take him home. One night, when shoppers have gone home and the doors are locked, Corduroy climbs down from his shelf and goes in search of what he thinks he needs to spring him from this place. What he finds is a lesson in patience, fortitude and friendship.
It’s the beginning of summer, and Gregor’s friends are at camp, his mom is at work and his dad is missing, leaving the 11-year-old trapped in his New York City apartment, watching his sisters and grandmother.  He follows, and the two of them end up in the Underland, a world on the brink of war. As it turns out, Gregor is there for a reason … Bonus: There are sequels.
When we meet the Alden kids, they’re begging for bread. They’re orphans; they have a grandfather but they don’t like him. Eventually they set up a makeshift home in an abandoned boxcar in the forest — and the rest, as they say, is history. These are some of the most resourceful kids you’ve ever read about. They never fight! This series is cozy, wholesome, slightly dated and will keep fans of the Bobbsey Twins and the Happy Hollisters busy for a long, long time.
The Doll family has lived in the same house for 100 years. Annabelle Doll has been 8 years old the whole time, and every day she looks out on the same view of the same room in the Palmer family home. The outside world has changed — children who have played with the Dolls have grown up, moved on and had grandchildren — but everything inside stays the same with two notable exceptions: Auntie Sarah Doll disappears, and the Funcraft family moves in. This is when the excitement starts.
“For Tom Long, quarantined in his uncle’s flat in a converted mansion, time ticked drearily until the night he stole downstairs to investigate the antics of an unpredictable grandfather’s clock, and opened a door which led him back into the late Eighteen Hundreds,” wrote our reviewer in 1959. “Here in a sunshiny garden accessible to him only when the contemporary world was asleep, he played with lonesome little Hatty Melbourne, unseen by anyone except Abel, the Melbourne’s perceptive and gentle-hearted gardener.” Pearce’s ghostly love story is perfect for children poised between two worlds — the one where they’re still little, happy to stay close to home, and the one where they crave the freedom and adventure they’re being denied right now.
A sudden blizzard hits, stranding a group of friends at their high school for the weekend. It doesn’t seem so bad at first — at least there’s some potential for romance — but then the pipes freeze, the roof threatens to give way and the snow keeps piling up outside, and suddenly it’s “The Breakfast Club” gone wrong minus the comic relief of Judd Nelson.
Madeline Whittier hasn’t left her decontaminated, all-white Los Angeles home for 17 years. She has SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency, also known as “bubble baby disease,” meaning her body can’t fight threats such as viruses, allergens, bacteria or deadly airborne particles. With the exception of her physician mother and her nurse, Carla, the only people she interacts with are friends she sees virtually — until a parkour-practicing boy named Olly moves in next door. The two strike up a relationship from their bedroom windows and by email. When Madeline witnesses the heartbreak Olly copes with, their relationship takes a life-altering turn.