“Happy Days,” “Laverne & Shirley” and “Full House” were among his shows. And he found the right guy to play the Fonz.
Garry Marshall, the noted producer and director, was talking about the best-known character in one of his best-known television shows.
“I always wanted a tall Italian boy,” he said in an oral history recorded in 2000 for the Television Academy. Instead it was a 5-foot-6-inch Jew named Henry Winkler who ended up playing the Fonz on “Happy Days,” a portrayal so distinctive that what had been envisioned as a supporting role became one of the most recognizable characters in television history.
The man responsible for that casting leap of faith was one of Mr. Marshall’s fellow executive producers on the series, Thomas L. Miller.
“Tom Miller was the whole key to casting Henry Winkler,” Mr. Marshall said in the oral history. Mr. Winkler, who was an unknown when he auditioned for the role in 1973, concurred.
“Tom took me to makeup, plucked my unibrow, told me what to do,” he said in a phone interview. And it was Mr. Miller who called him that October — on his birthday, no less — and told him he had won the role. He had only just arrived in Los Angeles from the East Coast.
Mr. Miller, who produced dozens of other TV shows, including “Perfect Strangers” and “Full House,” died on April 5 in Salisbury, Conn. He was 79.
The cause was heart disease, Warner Bros. Television, which had worked with the production company run by Mr. Miller and Robert L. Boyett, said in a statement.
Mr. Miller was not generally known for the kinds of groundbreaking shows that draw critical acclaim and awards. What he and his production partners did draw were viewers.
“Happy Days,” which premiered in 1974, ran for a decade, 255 episodes in all. “Perfect Strangers” racked up 151 episodes from 1986 to 1993, overlapping for much of that time with “Full House” (192 episodes, 1987-95). Other long-running shows that had Mr. Miller as an executive producer included the “Happy Days” spinoff “Laverne & Shirley” (1976-83), “Valerie” (later renamed “The Hogan Family,” 1986-91), “Step by Step” (1991-98) and “Family Matters” (1989-98).
Thomas Lee Miller was born on Aug. 31, 1940, in Milwaukee to Edward and Shirley Miller. He earned a bachelor’s degree in drama and speech in 1962 at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, then set out for Los Angeles, where he worked for the director Billy Wilder on “Irma la Douce” (1963), “The Fortune Cookie” (1966) and other films.
In 2000, Mr. Miller and Mr. Boyett, his life partner as well as his business partner, relocated to New York, where they helped produce Broadway shows, including “Tootsie” last year.
Mr. Miller, who lived in Salisbury, moved to Connecticut with Mr. Boyett in 2007. Mr. Boyett survives him, along with a brother, Robert, and a sister, Kitty Glass.
Mr. Miller aimed for shows that didn’t try to deliver a Message with a capital M but did have heart.
