Essential workers in the pandemic, truck drivers are moving the groceries and supplies New York needs to weather the crisis.
Joseph Morales puts on a mask and gloves whenever he is delivering truckloads of wine, vodka and gin to a thirsty city.
But he can do nothing about the person who coughs or comes too close in cramped stores.
Even as the coronavirus pandemic has shut down New York City, thousands of truck drivers like Mr. Morales are still rolling through its mostly deserted streets.
They are doing what they always do — moving groceries, household staples, and supplies and equipment — but with new urgency as they keep New York running and help people cope with the worst health crisis in a century.
Truck drivers have been designated essential workers, along with doctors, nurses, police officers, transit workers and many others who have been thrust to the front lines, at risk to themselves and their families. Some UPS and FedEx workers even worry that their trucks and warehouses have become breeding grounds for the virus.
Many truck drivers began working longer hours as the outbreak spread. Manolo Sosa carried virus-fighting essentials — disinfectants, hand sanitizer, wipes and gloves — to senior centers, health clinics and apartment buildings in Manhattan and the Bronx.
On his busiest days, he has made up to 25 deliveries for a maintenance supply distributor, Kandel and Son, or twice as many as before. Grateful customers thank him. “I try to come back again and bring more,” Mr. Sosa, 37, said.
Recognizing the hardships faced by truck drivers, city officials recently opened two rest areas with portable toilets in the South Bronx and on Staten Island that can be used around the clock.
More than 280,000 people over age 18 work as truck and delivery-service drivers in the New York region, which includes New Jersey and Connecticut, making up about 8 percent of the 3.6 million such civilian drivers nationally, according to an analysis of census data by Social Explorer, a research company.
The analysis found that 96 percent of New York region truck drivers are men. About 52 percent are white, while 42 percent are black or Hispanic.
They earn a median annual income of $37,956, compared with $42,827 for all workers.
As the outbreak has paralyzed the New York region, it has fallen to truck drivers to make sure that food and supplies keep moving.
Four times a week, Steven Thomas, 56, makes the nine-hour drive between Brooklyn and Akron, Ohio, in a double tractor-trailer filled with medical equipment, auto parts and household products, including refrigerators and televisions.
“We’re trying to help people get the things they need,” he said.
Now, whenever he stops on the road, he wears a mask, keeps his distance and squirts on hand sanitizer. “As a truck driver, my hands have never been so clean,” he said.
Though trucks drivers have come to the rescue after other crises — including the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks and Hurricane Sandy in 2012 — they have never before worked under such constant threat to their health and safety, said Kendra Hems, the president of the Trucking Association of New York, an industry group.
It is not known how many truck drivers have gotten sick from the coronavirus, according to trucking industry groups. But the largest union representing truck drivers, the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, said thousands of its members in the New York region reported having symptoms of Covid-19, the disease caused by the virus.
To better protect drivers, many trucking companies have provided them with disinfectant, masks and gloves. Some have also encouraged drivers to stay inside their trucks when possible.
The trucking association has ordered 16,000 masks to give out free to drivers and others who need them, and is looking into buying hand sanitizer in bulk.
Ralph Blasi wipes down his seat with disinfectant before heading out to deliver milk, eggs, cheese, yogurt and bottled water to supermarkets, bodegas, nursing homes and hospitals in Queens and on Long Island. He takes along a mask and hand sanitizer to use after handling cash payments.
Some nursing homes no longer allow him inside, so he leaves their orders at the door. Others require him to pass a medical check — taking his temperature and medical history — and that can add 10 to 15 minutes to each delivery.
For his trouble, Mr. Blasi, 53, actually earns less than he did before. His last weekly paycheck was just under $1,200, down from his average of $1,350, he said. Even though supermarkets are ordering more, he is making fewer deliveries overall and earning less commission with so many restaurants closed.
“I’m just trying to deal with it for now, until hopefully things get better,” Mr. Blasi said.
In Queens on a recent morning, Mr. Morales was hauling 566 cases of assorted alcohol for Empire Merchants. Mr. Morales, whose father was a truck driver, earns $38 an hour.
An upside of the pandemic is that traffic has all but disappeared. “It’s almost like driving through a no-man’s land,” he said. Parking is easier, too.
He has fewer stops, mainly at liquor stores. Most of his regular customers were restaurants and bars, many of which have closed for now. He often makes his last delivery by 2 p.m., hours earlier than before.
Mr. Morales, the father of two sons, ages 6 and 9, said he was scared of bringing the virus back to his family. Yet, there he is going in and out of stores, and handling boxes with no idea who else has touched them.
He tries to keep his distance from people, only to find himself often trapped beside them in narrow aisles.
He started having chest pains recently and assumed the worst. It turned out to be a pulled chest muscle from lifting a case the wrong way.
