It’s time to consider a new kind of declaration. A declaration of responsibility.
Mr. Roberts is a former United Nations official.
Wednesday is Earth Day, a useful idea that could only occur to a civilization estranged from Earth.
I was listening recently to a talk by my favorite climate scientist, Kevin Anderson, a paragon of intellectual honesty devoted to bringing us face to face with the facts of our global predicament. The main obstacle he faces in his mission, he has found, is not climate change denial. It is the delusion that the problem has a technical solution.
For example, amid the jubilation of the Paris Agreement, Anderson pointed out with perfect clarity in the leading scientific journals and to anyone who would listen that our plan is based on removing billions of tons of carbon from the air — something no one knows how to do. It has taken years for recognition of this “breathtaking” assumption to dawn and almost all climate models are still based on it.
Nothing could be more foreign to the age. To the conventional mind, which fears inaction and faces only forward, this bowing of the head and backward glance must seem like an unhealthy waste of time. But is it?
On this question, I have found a useful guide in the German philosopher Max Scheler (1874-1928), who, though obscure today, was studied and praised by some of the greatest minds of the last century. To Scheler, the sort of contrition Anderson urges is about the most transformative thing there is.
Scheler, who moved through both Judaism and Christianity, gave it the word repentance, though he stressed there was nothing specifically Christian in his theme. Repentance, wrote Scheler in his 1921 work, “On the Eternal in Man,” is a mighty power that can break the chain of events: “Not utopianism but Repentance is the most revolutionary force in the moral world.” It faces the past, but rejuvenates the future. Its anguish is keen, even burning, but it removes guilt, and “there arises from the whole process a simultaneous peace and contentment which may rise to the height of bliss.” It opens our horizon and “broadens the once ever narrowing future into a broad, bright plain of possibilities.” And it can be sudden.
To Scheler, and importantly to us here and now, this was not merely a form of personal illumination: “We have seen in history,” he wrote, “how Repentance can grow into a mighty torrent, and how it rushes for a generation through whole peoples and civilizations.” Skeptics will rightly point out that this is easier said than done; this state cannot be willed, much less commanded. But was it ever so justified?
We kill off tens of thousands of species every year. Our degradation of the land, sea, air and the Earth as a whole grows too quickly for anyone to keep up with. Descend to the lowest values in the culture; it will not help. Let us say the world is worthless, except for its use to humans. Say the death of millions of the most vulnerable and blameless people is not our concern. The enormity remains, in the unimaginable danger and suffering we are assiduously preparing for our own children.
How can we explain such recklessness? We were trying to improve the world! Is it enough to say that we fell under the spell of ideas that were tragically wrong? Those ideas are now so pervasive they are as much habit as belief. We set out to make a paradise on Earth, and have achieved the opposite.
Places that seemed to European explorers like Eden will now become uninhabitable, and everywhere, the attempt to master nature will leave us more subject to it. We pride ourselves on cleverness and we sought to remake the world with our knowledge. We looked to the future for consolation and to posterity for vindication. But unless we make a great turn, it seems safe to assume we will go down as the greatest fools who ever lived.
Yet, in a technocratic age, we still think in terms of plans and blueprints to be “implemented.” International institutions, even more than governments, are obsessed with targets and indicators. All this despite the evidence: The United Nations statistician Howard Friedman has found, for example, that, except for debt relief, none of the organization’s Millennium Development Goals had a discernible effect.
It is time, then, to consider a new kind of declaration. A declaration of responsibility, acknowledging what we have done and recognizing we were mistaken: a simple expression of collective responsibility for what is wrong.
There is a paradox of intention. The less such a declaration is designed to serve any purpose and the more sincerely it is made for its own sake, the greater purpose it would serve and the more transformative it would be. Eventually it could be adopted at the United Nations. It could borrow the opening words of the Charter, “We the peoples,” but should be the opposite of a U.N. resolution. It should be brief, memorable and vernacular: something all can turn over in their mind and adopt as their own if they choose. It should arise spontaneously, and not be appropriated by any organization. And there is no need for that dispiriting word “environment”; “nature" will do.
This declaration may sound negative, but the greatest challenge is to dispel the illusions that led us into such danger. Negation would be the greater part of creation, opening space for the germane wisdom of Western and every other culture. This “no” would also be a great affirmation, largely implicit, of higher values and a new disposition to the world. It would provide the rallying point that so many have lacked, countering a sense of impotence before impersonal forces. It would trade some vigor for decadence, help remedy the febrile triviality of public life, encourage the standing back our culture finds so hard and leave many quarrels behind. It would undercut more than one kind of hubris: for example, the postmodern view of nature as a social construct. It may be our best hope of breaking the terrible inertia: not the inertia of rest but of restless travel in the same direction.
Of course, there will be objections. For instance: Anything even remotely resembling repentance must be an oppressive relic of Christianity and so should be disqualified. This would be a momentous argument. First, it would prevent us from ever being truly sorry about anything. Second, it would disqualify many of the main tenets of secular Western society, which are clearly borrowed or repurposed from Christianity. The idea of a universal, linear movement toward salvation is uniquely Judeo-Christian.
Now we seek to remake a supposedly inhospitable world with knowledge. We glorify work, “the sweat of the brow,” and our “fortunate faults,” such as avarice, in the ancient belief that they enable our redemption. What is this? The attempt to remake Eden by the means of the fall?
Such a declaration would provoke charges of ingratitude for our achievements, of throwing out the baby with the bath water, and of wanting to turn the clock back. Our achievements are extraordinary, but it is the status quo that now jeopardizes them. The idea of a clean break with the past and of returning to it are both illusory: There are no blank slates, and the past cannot be fully known, much less recreated. It will be said it is immoral to change course when millions of people are moving from one side of the World Bank’s poverty line to the other. But have you noticed how little those people are heard from? Let them speak for themselves.
I don’t delude myself. I know that all this would be seen by most as a renunciation. For some, the sense of abandonment in relinquishing certain beliefs — of our glorious ascent, unlimited economic growth and human perfectibility — will be too much to bear. So even as those beliefs become more absurd, we may continue to catastrophe.
But I do not think it would be experienced as a renunciation. For although our current project claims to liberate, its assumptions tend to diminish us and the world; they are, in truth, a little sad. So, too, is the idea that any epoch is definitive. None are, and merely to escape the presumption would be to feel once more the open horizon: a new freedom, a new responsibility and a more authentic life.
Hugh Roberts is a writer and former United Nations official. He is currently at work on a book on global development and our secular myths.
