The president’s public refusal to wear a mask was the latest way he has cast doubt on their recommendations.
The tension over the scale of the federal response comes as the president defends his administration’s reaction to the pandemic that has now infected more than 270,000 people in the United States and has killed more than 7,000. New polls showed that public support for Mr. Trump’s handling of the crisis has begun to slip, a worrisome development for a president seeking re-election in the fall.
His comments came after a telling interchange between Mr. Trump and Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the White House pandemic response coordinator, at the briefing on Thursday. Dr. Birx expressed concern that too many Americans were not following the guidelines.
The interplay was a rare instance of Mr. Trump doing in real time on camera what officials have repeatedly denied that he does behind the scenes — attempting to water down the effect of what the medical experts were saying.
In a video that leaked online last week, Dr. Fauci was seen telling colleagues at the National Institutes of Health that he regularly made suggestions for the president’s prepared remarks before the daily briefings but that Mr. Trump “almost always” ignores them.
A day later, on Friday, the description on the Department of Health and Human Services’ website for its Strategic National Stockpile was altered evidently to reflect that viewpoint.
“Many states have products stockpiled as well,” it said.
The explosive growth of the virus in many cities over the past two weeks has made clear that the United States has not been following the trajectory of places like Taiwan, Japan and Hong Kong that have kept outbreaks relatively contained so far. And the country has not begun to see the number of new cases level off yet, as Italy has.
“But whether they’re going to hold onto it is an open question,” he added.
Florida, which took longer than most of the country to issue a stay-at-home order and reduce the distances that people traveled, reported increasing cases this week in the Miami, Tampa and Jacksonville areas. Experts say the delays in keeping people at home in Florida and much of the Southeast could make those areas more vulnerable to outbreaks in coming weeks.
