Trouble throughout the New York City region — and, to a lesser extent, the state — was revealed in interviews with caregivers, parents, advocates and senior officials.
In Brooklyn, two parents of adult children in a group home said they were unnerved after another resident died in a suspected coronavirus case. “If it is the virus, what the hell are we going to do?” one of them said, while adding that the staff “deserve a lot of credit” for showing up.
In Manhattan, at the Lexington Parc condominium on East 30th Street, ambulances arrived on three successive days, twice taking away residents of a group home operated in part of the building.
Lawrence Smiley, the building’s longtime managing agent, expressed frustration that he had not received more information from the organization running the home.
New York’s system of care for the developmentally disabled has become increasingly decentralized in the decades since scandalous conditions were revealed at the Willowbrook State School, a Staten Island warehouse for thousands of residents. While the move toward smaller settings has probably been helpful in averting even wider spread of the virus, the state’s oversight has remained a continuing subject of scrutiny and criticism over the years.
In interviews, a number of parents and advocates expressed dismay that the state had not moved more quickly to curtail daily excursions for residents, which continued past the middle of March. On March 16, in internal email traffic obtained by The New York Times, a state nurse expressed alarm to the official in charge of Albany-area group homes.
One of the most outspoken advocates in the state, Michael Carey, whose autistic son was killed in state care in 2007, said the state “unfathomably continued to send vulnerable and elderly residents to day programs” after bars and restaurants had closed.
Some advocates also worry that residents may not receive the best hospital care. This week, a leading oversight organization, Disability Rights New York, filed a federal complaint against the administration of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, claiming that state policies treat the developmentally disabled as second-class citizens who will be less likely to get access to ventilators, should there be a shortage. None has been reported, and state officials say new hospitalizations have been declining. Advocacy groups in Alabama, Kansas, Tennessee and Washington State have all filed similar complaints in recent weeks.
“A real policy prohibiting discrimination in the allocation of ventilators and all health care must be enacted immediately,” said Timothy A. Clune, the executive director of Disability Rights New York.
A spokeswoman for the state declined to comment on the complaint.
Few in New York’s system have been hit harder by the virus than Mr. McGuire and his staff.
Mr. McGuire said his organization had a longstanding relationship with Glen Cove Hospital, part of the Northwell Health system: “Glen Cove knows our guys,” he said. But eventually the hospital, like many others, began turning away patients with lesser symptoms.
As a result, symptomatic residents returned home, probably leading to a further increase in cases.
By March 26, Northwell sent over several nurses in protective gear, who moved through the building conducting tests on both the residents and the staff.
Some staff members began crying, and he tried to reassure them.
The next day, Mr. McGuire, a former caregiver himself, delivered a message to his staff, his hands resting on the knees of his bluejeans. He urged those who had left to return.
There were numerous challenges. Fragile residents had to be left alone at hospitals. James Moran, the chief executive of Care Design, which manages the care of residents in homes across the state, has been working with the state to relax such rules for the developmentally disabled.
“In many cases they can’t speak for themselves, or have anxiety issues, with nobody there who they know who can support them,” he said.
Protective gear was also in short supply at the Bayville home and throughout the system. Mike Alvaro, treasurer of New York Disability Advocates, said that it was a struggle to ensure “that the face masks and the gowns and gloves are there,” and that already stretched budgets were being tested.
Oxygen was another challenge.
"One day, we were fine, and then we were in trouble and we needed oxygen,” Mr. McGuire said. He consulted with his organization’s board and was ultimately able to buy some oxygen from a local welding company. Many remaining residents who had not tested positive were moved out of the house, into a building used for daytime activities.
Mr. Eugene keeps himself isolated at home from his wife, his adult children and even his dog.
