Opinion|Please, Stop Shooting. We Need the Beds.
Dr. Kaufman is a fellow in surgical critical care and trauma surgery at the University of Pennsylvania.
PHILADELPHIA — My pager goes off again: The police are en route to my hospital. They’re bringing a gunshot victim. E.T.A.? Right now.
I feel this crisis intimately at my hospital here. There were more than 120 shootings in Philadelphia last month, according to the city. Our team has taken care of 11 patients injured by bullets over the last seven days alone. All this as the Covid-19 epidemic ramps up in Philadelphia.
As our I.C.U.s fill up with patients struggling to breathe, we look around and ask: Can we save a bed, can we save two beds, for the gunshot victims we know are coming next? Who can watch these ventilated patients if we have to call doctors to the operating room to give a hand?
Other cities are seeing similar problems. Mayor Jack Young of Baltimore issued a plea to his city last month: Save hospital resources for Covid-19 patients by putting your guns down.
We don’t yet know how the Covid-19 pandemic will affect gun violence. According to the Philadelphia Police Department, crime is down overall since social distancing mandates went into effect. But shootings have not slowed and even may be increasing.
Social distancing might reduce conflicts and arguments that can lead to violence. But just as easily, the stress on relationships and livelihoods may increase domestic violence. Suicides already make up 60 percent of firearm deaths and could rise.
I’ve also watched with concern as people line up in front of gun stores, stocking up on firearms and ammunition, supposedly to protect themselves. Instead, they are likely putting themselves and their families at risk, as cooped-up children are at risk of exploring these newly purchased weapons and injuring themselves or others.
The economic effects of this pandemic are likely to hit hardest for those with the fewest resources. Neighborhoods and communities that are already at increased risk for violence because of systemic racism and poverty will suffer, and violence in those areas may increase even further.
We love taking care of patients, but each patient injured by firearms admitted to the intensive care unit is its own tragedy. Every one of these I.C.U. admissions is preventable, because every one of these injuries is preventable.
We have overcome public health crises in the past. The same kind of public health approach that cut deaths rates from motor vehicles by half, even though we drive more now than ever, could be used to reduce firearm injuries. But we need dedicated professionals, comprehensive data and social and political will to identify and carry out evidence-based solutions. These strategies range from licensing laws for firearm dealers and purchasers, to red-flag laws, to making data available to researchers, to community-based focused deterrence programs.
Covid-19 is going to require all our public health resources, but it is far from the only public health crisis we are facing. If we can come together to combat this latest challenge, let us stay together to work on another. So please, stop shooting. We need the beds.
Elinore Kaufman is a fellow in surgical critical care and trauma surgery at the University of Pennsylvania.
Therese S. Richmond, who contributed to this piece, is a professor of nursing and associate dean for research and innovation at the University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing, and research director of the Penn Injury Science Center.