Loosely maintain the three pillars of wellness — sleep, food and exercise — to help keep children on track.
If you have a young child, you’ve probably had it drilled into your head that kids thrive on routine. Small wonder that holiday time — with its explosion of cousins, flight delays, late bedtimes and the “fun uncle” who constantly slips your children cookies — can make parents exceedingly tense.
But your routines need not be completely disrupted, experts say. As long as you loosely maintain the three pillars of wellness — sleep, food and exercise — during the holidays, you can weather them with minimal meltdowns. “Sometimes it’s not so much about sticking to your home routine as it is about finding a new holiday routine,” said Corinne McDermott, a mother of two and the author of the blog Have Baby Will Travel.
If you’re flying, she suggests booking flights that align with your child’s nap times. If your kid naps well in a stroller, take long holiday walks with the stroller hood down so they’ll drift off to sleep (which benefits everybody).
If a hotel is in your plans, it’s always worth asking if it provides any reassuringly homey touches for kids, suggested Trisha Pérez Kennealy, owner of The Inn at Hastings Park in Lexington, Mass. “We’ve done things like kids’ books, blankets, milk and cookies, and we also have white noise machines that people find useful,” she said.
Food routines are also temporarily broken, often by sugar. When we visit my parents’ house, my mother — militantly healthy when I was a kid! — now gleefully stuffs her grandchildren with sugary treats, starting with cotton candy-flavored cereal (yes, it exists) at sunup and ending with thick wedges of chocolate cake at sundown.
At family gatherings, try to get the whole crew outside at least once, early in the day, before it gets dark. One year, to drive the kids out of the house, I declared that it was a “family tradition” to play basketball at a park down the street from my parents’ house. When children are young enough, all you have to do is announce in a formal voice that something is a tradition, and they will unquestioningly accept it as if it’s inscribed on a tablet somewhere.
