Here’s how I keep it together.
My 4-year old is a beautiful cacophony. He sparkles with curiosity and lights up with love — but he can also rip through the house like a tornado. His behavior sometimes seems to come out of nowhere, though I know the aggression builds up throughout each day, in lock step with insecurity and anxiety. Like the time he kicked me hard in the kidney while I was nursing his newborn sister. Breastfeeding my daughter meant my attention was on someone who made my son feel jealous. I saw red before I had a chance to process what had happened.
To raise children is to be overwhelmed at times: I never thought I would be different in that regard. But I assumed the struggle would be a product of dishes and diapers, not my own inner drama. The first two years of parenting were physically tough: The sleep deprivation was grueling and returning to work after maternity leave was depleting. What came after my son’s second birthday, however, floored me in unexpectedly emotional ways. The tantrums and aggression began in earnest, and motherhood became a mirror — in it, I saw my own anger, fear and lack of control reflected back at me. A high school teacher by trade, I have three degrees and hundreds of training hours in topics like applied suicide intervention, wilderness risk management and trauma in children. Surely, I thought, this would be sufficient preparation for raising my own progeny.
But as my tiny tornado grew, so too did his outbursts. My trusted techniques of creative coercion and distraction — I can make a game out of anything, from putting shoes on to doing the dishes, and I’m an expert at pulling out a joke or a riddle to “reset” the situation — were no longer sufficient. Once my son turned 2, the opposition switch was triggered, and my tricks started to fail. His brain was exploding with development, and adding a new baby sister to the mix created the perfect storm. He could actually hurt me now, and sometimes he did. His tendency to kick, hit and throw heavy objects across the room challenged my ability to keep my daughter safe; it was as if my love for my son and my need to protect his new baby sister from his outbursts were in competition.
I felt like I was unraveling, failing; I yelled too much, and daydreamed about having an “easier” child. But one afternoon, while reading Maurice Sendak’s book “Where the Wild Things Are,” I realized I was treating my son like one of the wild things, whereas, of course, he was Max: jubilant in his nascent power but scared and out of control. Unlike Max’s mom, I did not put my child to bed without dinner, but I knew my reactions had sent him sailing across the tumbling seas. I needed a way to call him home, so I did my best to replace my anger with compassion for what he might be feeling.
Like Max, and like all preschoolers, my son needs an anchor when the waters get rough. But just when he needed me most, I found myself being pulled under by my own emotions. Although I never called him names or outright accused him of being at fault, I would yell in anger when hurt. My irrational response was often, “Why would you do that?!” Once the red haze faded, I knew he was just doing what preschoolers are designed to do — but I had a hard time reconnecting with him.
While mindlessly scrolling Facebook one evening, I came across a video describing the Circle of Security parenting program; based on decades of attachment research, this model emphasizes the importance of the parent-child relationship, provides practical tools for raising a secure child and acknowledges the experiences of parents themselves. Here, I found a term that deeply resonates with me: The emotions I feel when attacked by my son are my “shark music.” As caregivers, we have background music composed by our own negative experiences — think the “ta-dum, ta-dum” in “Jaws,” which lets the audience know the toothy antagonist is coming. Although we are each affected by our children in different ways, the shark music can keep us from responding fully to their needs.
It was not my kids I needed to “handle,” it was my own reactions. And that does not mean my son runs the show while I meditate in a corner. Instead, I allow myself the same compassion I grant to him; I have cultivated some unpretentious, busy-parent mindfulness practices to help me move through the resentment and anger. I use short mantras when the shark music starts playing: “He’s not giving me a hard time, he’s having a hard time”; or a Thich Nhat Hanh meditation, “Calm, ease, smile, release.” Even if I don’t feel calm or easeful, just saying those words can shift my mood. I also count to five and become aware of my breath, if I can. These things sound simple, but they give me permission to feel angry, and to let it go.
I’m still learning to let go, but already I’m able to hold my son tighter. Author and physician Gabor Mate said, “There is no closeness that can surpass the sense of feeling known and still being liked, accepted, welcomed, invited to exist.” In giving myself and my children permission to have these feelings and work through them, we grow closer — and maybe their shark music won’t be as loud as mine.
Brianna Sharpe is an Alberta-based freelance writer and educator.