This story was originally published on Feb. 6, 2020 on NYT Parenting.
Dr. Sara Pittenger Reid, a reproductive endocrinologist practicing near San Francisco, encountered the issue of trans fertility during her medical education — and became passionate about helping colleagues learn about transgender patients exploring pregnancy. Recently, she was consulted by Family Equality, an advocacy group in New York, for a series of new online courses designed to educate practitioners on L.G.B.T.Q. issues. We spoke to Dr. Reid about the challenges and opportunities for fertility professionals as trans pregnancy becomes a more common option in the future.
Have you found differences in the concerns of trans fertility patients and cisgender patients?
Everybody who comes into my office has the same questions: Is this going to work? Will I able to have the family I imagine? How much will it cost? How am I going to feel? My heterosexual, cisgender patients are often there because Plan A didn’t quite work out, and sometimes my L.G.B.T.Q. patients come in with a different mind-set. They always knew they would probably need some help or a third person involved to grow their family, so they’re approaching their visit to me with more excitement. For heterosexual couples, they sometimes feel as if they’ve lost control. For L.G.B.T.Q. patients, it’s as if they’re taking control.
Are there specific misconceptions you encounter among trans patients?
Many patients who have been on hormone therapy have been told it will make them sterile. That’s most often not the case.
Beyond conception, what’s known about hormone therapy and fetal health?
The limited amount of data we have on transmasculine patients who have previously taken testosterone and who carry pregnancies is that their neonatal outcomes are just as good as those for transmasculine patients who haven’t taken testosterone. So it’s very reassuring.
As we see more trans pregnancies, what do you expect will change?
The more people who are documenting and sharing this experience, the more it will highlight to trans patients that there are people who will help. In no way do I want to diminish what the experience of someone who is transmasculine is like: to come off their hormones and take fertility medication, so they’ve not only stopped their testosterone but their body is also now making more of the hormones like estrogen that make them feel the way they don’t want to feel. Then to go through a pregnancy, especially if they are viewed in the world as a masculine person. But as more people go through this and are supported, it will make more people comfortable seeking support.
Adam Sternbergh is the Senior Editor at NYT Mag Labs.