Hiring a new nanny will take time and effort, but there are lots of places to look — and great candidates to be found.
This guide was originally published on July 29, 2019 in NYT Parenting. Check our guidance on working with child care professionals during coronavirus here.
Whether you meet with an agency, swipe through a web-based platform or stake out neighborhood playgrounds to get the inside scoop, you can find the nanny who is right for you. And as with so many things in life, the first step comes in being honest with yourself. Once you determine what you truly want in a nanny — from personality to hours to child care philosophy — you’re well on your way to finding the perfect match.
For this guide, I consulted the founder of a nanny agency, the founder of a nanny search site and the founder of a popular online community for parents on the best ways to find the right nanny for your child — and for you.
Begin your search early (but be realistic).
Find a good agency to find a good candidate.
Investigate a nanny share in your neighborhood.
Don’t forget you’re building a team.
Be competitive in your offer.
Start researching your options almost as soon as you or your partner get pregnant — and definitely get serious by the third trimester. Sarah Davis, the founder of Olive You Nanny — a nanny agency with locations throughout the United States — said that by the time you’re six weeks out from when you’d like your new nanny to start, it’s time to start interviewing.
How to even begin?
“Ask everyone you know — even folks without kids — if they know of a nanny that is looking for work,” said Susan Fox, founder of the online community Park Slope Parents.
John Philip Green, the founder and “Chief Executive Dad” of Toronto-based CareGuide and its nanny search site Nanny Lane — who has been through a few nanny searches himself — also said he would tell anyone to start with word of mouth. But he cautions searchers to be realistic: If this is the only mechanism you use to conduct your nanny search, your pool of candidates will be limited.
Green’s Nanny Lane and sites such as UrbanSitter, Sittercity and Care.com present parents and parents-to-be with a lot of nanny profiles all in one place, giving nanny-hirers a sense of how candidates present themselves. Green described these sites as the DIY version of working with a nanny agency (see more on that below) — you’ll still identify a series of potential candidates, review resumes and interview, but you’ll pull the candidates yourself from an online pool instead of having someone at an agency do that step for you.
Because there are so many online parenting groups, there are more places to put word out that you’re looking, Fox said. Resumes will hit your inbox, she noted, but it’s good to be at least a little wary of recommendations you get from total strangers. “There are some con artists out there,” she said.
Think of a nanny agency as equal parts clearinghouse and mentor. For anywhere from $2,000 to $6,000 per search, depending on where you live, agencies will interview and do background checks on their own pool of candidates, and act like matchmakers by also interviewing you. An agency not only brings you potential nannies, but it offers interview tips and sticks with you until you find the right person.
Once you’ve identified an agency you want to work with, remember to reach out again about six weeks before your desired start date so you can start reviewing resumes and scheduling interviews with prescreened candidates.
The nanny share, when two or more families jointly employ one nanny to care for their children together, is gaining traction, Green said. If you live in a densely populated area, you might want to shift your search to trying to find a family you mesh well with and partnering with them in a share — either by searching for a nanny together or by sharing a nanny they already employ. Many nanny-search sites, including Nanny Lane, allow users to search for other families in their area who are seeking a share in addition to searching nanny candidate profiles. The end result could be a win-win-win: You get to split the cost of a nanny’s salary while your child gets both personal attention and peer-to-peer socialization.
“You need your nanny to be on board with you,” Davis said — which means you need to be honest with yourself about who you are and who you need. “If you’re an attachment parent, you’re not going to want a nanny who is more Type A and driven by a schedule,” she said.
Green suggests that before even meeting with candidates, you should start to make lists of things that are important to you, like the nanny’s having a driver’s license, and sharing your approach to discipline, so you know your deal-breakers from the start.
But also keep in mind that there is no standard salary when it comes to the job title of “nanny.” Davis pointed out that factors like number of children and number of responsibilities (like meal prep, laundry and pet care) will all affect a final hourly rate. If you pay less than the average going rate in your community, “your nanny will find out very quickly that she’s being underpaid,” Davis warned. And you will very quickly find yourself beginning the nanny search all over again.
Green also said that it’s important to understand what you have to offer as an employer, adding that “there are things you can do to make your job look good.” A nice photo in your online or agency posting might catch a good nanny’s attention — whether it be of your children (if you are comfortable with that) or even of their favorite toys and playroom. Because experienced nannies are harder to find in some markets, you need to be up front about the number of children, duties, hours and pay — but you also could include details that show your family’s personality and make your position stand out, Green said.
“Frankly, everyone looks good on paper,” Fox said — which is why you have to trust your own parenting instincts.  Sure. However, it’s important that children learn to be cared for by different people with different styles of caregiving.” She recommended that parents have quarterly reviews to keep things running smoothly, do unplanned drop-ins at home and places your child will be, and ask teachers for feedback. “If at any time your gut says, ‘Something’s not right,’ listen,” she said.
And you’ll probably feel more secure in your choices if you can have some points of reference. Fox recommended asking coworkers and friends what they would have done differently when they were hiring their nannies — which is an easier question for people to answer than, “Why do you like your nanny?” and one that will provide more nuanced insights.
Jennifer Gerson is an Atlanta-based writer and reporter with a focus on women’s health, and the mom to a preschool-age daughter.