Opinion|At Least 89 Vaccines Are Being Developed. It May Not Matter.
At Least 89 Vaccines Are Being Developed. It May Not Matter.
A coronavirus vaccine won’t stop the pandemic without all countries having access to it.
Dr. Berkley is the chief executive of Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, a public-private partnership that helps provide vaccines to developing countries.
That is why it is encouraging that the health ministers of the Group of 20 wealthy nations called for accelerating the development, manufacturing and equitable distribution of vaccines against the coronavirus at its April 19 meeting and that last Friday, more than 15 heads of state, the president of the European Union, the director general of the World Health Organization and leaders of other international institutions committed to join together to do the same.
For the governments of high-income donor countries, many of which are already scrambling to divert funds from other uses to cope with the coronavirus crisis within their borders, raising additional billions of dollars will be difficult. But to keep the global population safe, it must be done. Innovative financing mechanisms exist that can translate long-term government commitments into immediate funding by issuing bonds on capital markets. The Ebola vaccine we have today was made possible by such an approach.
A broad range of partners, including biomedical research institutions and health agencies in the United States, the E.U., China and the pharmaceutical industry, working in coordination offers the best chance at developing a vaccine or vaccines. The best of those vaccines then need to be moved into advanced clinical trials to see what works, along with the scaling up of production capabilities to meet the global need.
Estimates put the cost of Covid-19 to the global economy at up to $2 trillion this year. If we can advance the mass distribution of an effective vaccine or vaccines by as little as two weeks, not only would we would save countless lives, but the effort would almost pay for itself by getting the world back to work.
But that also means ensuring that affordability and access do not become barriers to widespread availability. Only by protecting everyone at risk will we end this outbreak and respond effectively to future outbreaks. In the race to develop a coronavirus vaccine, everyone everywhere should be winners.
Seth Berkley, a medical doctor and epidemiologist, is the chief executive of Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, a public-private partnership that helps provide vaccines to developing countries.