And what to do if you want to see long-term financial gains.
Rejection is an experience I’m quite familiar with. As a freelance writer, sending pitches and being told “no” — if I’m lucky enough to get a response at all — is part of my daily routine. This past holiday season, I received one rejection the day after Christmas and two more the day after New Year’s Day. Happy holidays to me, right?
Perhaps this is why the concept of rejection is often on my mind, especially when it comes to finding reasons to embrace it. It seems the start of a new month, or a motivational speech on the upsides of rejection, can give us the drive to finally apply for a better-paying job or pitch a new business idea.
After one or two rejections though, we quickly lose steam and put those lofty goals on the shelf until another new year or motivational speech sparks inspiration again. It’s a tough cycle to break and leaves us safely within the confines of our comfort zone.
While avoiding rejection soothes the ego, it can do more harm than good — not only to our self-worth but also to our bank accounts. Should you opt out of applying for a job you’re qualified for but assume you won’t get, this decision can keep you stuck in a lower-paying role for years. Sitting on a business idea for fear of rejection potentially leaves money on the table when the idea could be profitable.
These choices can have a ripple effect on our personal goals, as many of them are tied in with money, whether it’s saving more, paying off debt or buying a new home. That said, it’s worthwhile to take a closer look at how we deal with rejection and decide whether our fear of it could be the culprit behind delays in the financial success we desire.
As with any fear, the first step in facing it is to figure out the “why” behind it. According to the finance expert Marsha Barnes, the fear of rejection often stems from fear of the unknown. Ms. Barnes sees this fear in her clients frequently, as founder of The Finance Bar, a hub that provides coaching and educational services to promote financial wellness for women and couples.
Avoiding the unknown, Ms. Barnes says, can be one reason some of us start a side hustle to bring in extra cash, rather than pursue a job opportunity with a higher salary. And while a side hustle may mean more money, it also brings more of a time (and risk) commitment in addition to hours you put in at your day job.
Sometimes avoiding rejection eventually makes us believe life would have been much better if we had only tried that thing we were scared to do. Because it’s not possible to know how things would have played out in real life, our minds kick into fantasy mode and fill in the imaginary blanks.
If you don’t apply for that dream job, you might tell yourself how life-changing it would have been, when the reality is that it probably would come with the same challenges you face in your current role.
If you don’t make a move to sell that product or service you’ve been working on, you can tell yourself it would have sold out within days and solved all your money problems. The truth is, it might not have sold much at all and you would need to rework it multiple times to make it more marketable.
The imagination can run wild, which is not always a bad thing. Still, putting yourself out there and facing rejection gets you on the path to find out what actually works and will generate money in the long run.
We fear rejection most when it comes to major life events like applying for a job or taking the leap into entrepreneurship, but we also shy away from asking questions in our daily lives that would otherwise save money.
How many times have you decided against calling your internet or cable provider to ask about a lower monthly plan, for fear of coming off as a cheapskate? Or maybe you dread haggling when shopping for a new car because of the potential conflict it might cause with a sales representative? Though minor, failure to negotiate in these situations can add to the financial obligations we face, when we could possibly reduce or eliminate the burden.
Ms. Dunlap says she regularly makes calls to negotiate her cable and phone bills, a habit she learned from her father during childhood. Sometimes she gets what she asks for, and other times she doesn’t. But the important part of negotiating, she says, is not so much about having the grant requested, but getting comfortable with making the request to begin with.
Working your rejection “muscle” is easier said than done. Whether you have a busy schedule that doesn’t allow you to spend hours on the phone negotiating bills, or you’re the family breadwinner and can’t jeopardize a steady paycheck to pursue new career opportunities, avoiding rejection might seem like your best option.
Ms. Barnes says the biggest factor to help ease the fear of taking risks is to prepare with what you have already. A healthy savings cushion can add a layer of much-needed comfort, should things not work out the way you hoped.
Along with that, Ms. Dunlap recommends participation in activities where money isn’t directly involved. Having a background in theater, she says the rejection in a safe space helped her to get acclimated to hearing no, which carried over to subsequent professional endeavors.
