Here’s how to recognize the signs of postpartum psychosis, a rare condition that strikes new moms.
Shortly after my daughter’s birth five years ago, a surge of energy washed over me. Even though I hadn’t slept much and was still healing from giving birth, I insisted on attending a 6 a.m. spin class. I felt like I was on top of the world. Excited about what I could accomplish, I imagined getting to inbox zero, color coordinating my daughter’s outfits for the next month and getting back into shape in record time.
Hours flew by in what felt like minutes each night as I held my sleeping girl in my arms, rocking back and forth, and formulating my plan to dominate the realm of motherhood. My heart was beating rapidly and my mind was working overtime. When I looked at the clock one evening, it was suddenly 3:43 a.m.
Most new parents need sleep, but I was born to be a supermom, I thought.
Before becoming a mother, I was known for my mental strength and upbeat nature. As fate would have it, I was an executive coach and keynote speaker helping Silicon Valley overachievers prioritize their well-being, practice mindfulness and avoid burnout.
And then I became the mindfulness teacher who lost her mind.
As medical records would later detail, I was a 31-year-old female brought into the emergency room for evaluation because of concerns about disorganized thinking, depression, paranoia and suicidal thoughts — all of which came on five weeks after giving birth to my first child.
Even though there were signs, I didn’t see them, at least not at first.
Along with hearing these messages, a blanket of cozy bliss unfolded over me and I hoped to remain in this enlightened state forever. However, I stayed silent about my newfound joy, because I was certain my family would not understand.
Still, they began noticing. “You’re not acting like yourself, what’s going on?” my husband asked. “I’m fine, just new mom stuff,” I answered. I kept the secret to myself as my family grew even more concerned about my erratic behavior.
Throughout those early days of motherhood, I’d travel in and out of a dreamlike state. At times, I felt normal and could vaguely sense that something “weird” had been going on.
Other times, the dream turned into a nightmare and I became convinced the walls were talking to me, my house was bugged and a SWAT team was on the roof preparing to take me away for a crime I did not commit.
“Should I jump off the Golden Gate Bridge?” I asked my husband. He looked at me, alarmed, and that evening I was admitted to a psychiatric hospital for 10 days.
I looked out into the hallway and saw an armed guard sitting outside of my room. “She’s f-ing crazy, she’s f-ing crazy,” I heard the doctors and nurses chanting in menacing tones.
A doctor stopped his refrain to instruct me to swallow a handful of blue and white pills. Convinced the pills were poison, I refused and tried to get up from the hospital bed. My husband held me down to stop me.
“If your wife doesn’t take the medication, we will have to put her in restraints,” the doctor told him. Immediately, I thought of the movie “One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest” and wondered whether staffers were going to put me in a straitjacket.
“Am I crazy?” I asked my husband for the 100th time. I can’t recall what he told me.
Before I gave birth, doctors warned me that pregnancy could cause gestational diabetes, high blood pressure and fatigue, among other medical issues. But no one told me it could make me lose my mind. Although I had never heard of it before, postpartum psychosis is a severe maternal mental health condition that occurs in about one to two women for every 1,000 deliveries.
According to Postpartum Support International, the onset of postpartum psychosis is usually sudden, and most often happens within the first two weeks postpartum. While postpartum psychosis is rare, maternal mental health conditions such as postpartum depression and postpartum anxiety are far more common, affecting 10 percent to 20 percent of new mothers in the United States. Despite the prevalence of perinatal mood concerns, many expectant moms and medical professionals are unfamiliar with them.
After several days in the psychiatric unit (and multiple unsuccessful attempts to sneak out), I regained lucidity and was formally discharged. Soon after, I began treatment at El Camino Hospital’s Maternal Outreach Mood Services, or MOMS, program — an intensive outpatient program designed for new moms diagnosed with serious maternal mental health conditions.
My self-worth and confidence were at an all-time low as I embarked on the recovery process from both the illness and the trauma of hospitalization.
During my five weeks in the MOMS Program, I learned about mother-baby bonding, how to read my baby’s cues, the importance of sleep hygiene, self-care and compassion, therapeutic support and improving communication within my family. I also learned that I had not done anything to cause the illness. When I truly believed that the illness was not my fault, I was able to let go of the shame and guilt associated with feeling like I was a bad mother.
My daughter attended the program alongside me so I could get feedback from therapists and regain my confidence as a mother. I also met another mom who experienced postpartum psychosis. Hearing her story helped me feel less alone and realize that my symptoms, even the seemingly bizarre ones, were not unheard-of.
As I continued to recover, I tried several therapeutic methods, including acupuncture, talk therapy, exercise, naturopathic medicine, anti-depressants and mood stabilizers — anything I could to end up stronger on the other side. After eight months, I slowly weaned off medication, returned to running my business and started feeling like myself again.
By the time my daughter was 2, I felt strong enough to think about having another baby and had a plan in place in case postpartum psychosis struck again. Thankfully, the psychosis did not return after my second daughter was born.
 But instead of letting shame silence me, I share my story with the hope that other mothers won’t feel alone like I did. Once I learned that suicide is the second most common cause of mortality in postpartum women and 5 percent of new moms with postpartum psychosis kill themselves, I knew sharing my story could help others before it was too late.
There is no prize for sucking it up and continuing to suffer. Even if struggling mothers feel isolated, help is available. And if you are supporting a new mom, don’t ask only about the baby — make sure to ask Mom how she’s doing, too. 
Lisa Abramson is a keynote speaker, executive coach and mindfulness teacher based in Silicon Valley.