NYT Parenting readers share stories about overcoming parental impostor syndrome.
By the 20th time Yoo-Lee Yea’s son threw up — sometimes in a bucket, sometimes on her bed — she knew the nurse was wrong. It was a continuous chain of vomit, she tried to explain to the nurse over the phone. Earlier in the day, she had taken her son to the doctor for his 105-degree fever; she was told to give him Tylenol and make him comfortable.
“When you put me in the car,” her son asked, his voice soft and slow, “can you hold me like a baby?” I’m not waiting, Yea thought to herself. She drove to the emergency room at 2 a.m. They didn’t get to the cardiology intensive care unit until 4 or 5 in the morning. If she hadn’t brought him in by 7 a.m., her doctors told her later, her son would have died.
Casey Wilson, the former “Saturday Night Live” actress, recently wrote a piece about motherhood impostor syndrome, and about how she learned to trust her instincts in the wake of her own son’s surprising diagnosis. NYT Parenting readers wrote in with stories about listening to their guts and realizing, with spit on their hands or vomit on their pillows, that they somehow had the answers.
There were nights when Asiya Shakir, 32, of Atlanta, would stay up and scratch her daughter, raking at her 18-month-old’s skin so the child wouldn’t claw at herself too violently. Her daughter had eczema, and the plan her pediatric dermatologist had prescribed — wearing wet pajamas after a lukewarm bath, taking antibiotics and daily antihistamines, and using topical immunosuppressants — wasn’t working. Shakir had scoured her house, removing scented candles and colored detergents; she Googled and Googled. The eczema continued, and so did her guilt. She shouldn’t feel so helpless, Shakir thought. She should know better. After all, Shakir and her husband are both physicians.
Shakir was in her second year as a pediatric gastroenterology fellow. Her clinic’s dietitian suggested, offhand one Friday morning, that she should try removing dairy from her daughter’s diet. Shakir was skeptical — the data on allergy testing wasn’t very clear, she said — but something told her to pick up plant-based milk that night. By Monday morning, her daughter’s oozing skin had started to heal. For the first time in months, everyone in her house had slept through the night.
“There are no role models in our culture for how to be a stepmom,” said Laura Berres, 28, of Louisville, Ky. And so when she became one, she wasn’t sure what the rules were, what boundaries to draw between herself and her husband’s toddler. Should she go with him to his doctor’s appointments? Should she read to him at bed time? The first year of dating was a series of constant calculations.
That changed one day when she saw a sticky glob on the 3-year-old’s face. Berres doesn’t remember what made the mess — jam, probably — but she remembers licking her thumb and rubbing it on his face, instinctually “spit-washing” the way her mother had done to her. She was acting like a parent, she realized. She was going to be just fine.
Sixteen days after she gave birth, Maureen Connolly, 36, took her new son on his first road trip from their home in Sydney, Australia, to her in-law’s house in the country. On the second night of the visit, the baby began to pant in the bathtub. Maybe it was gas, she wondered, or some kind of phase. She didn’t know if this was normal for a newborn. She didn’t know what normal newborn behavior was.
They spent the next six days in the hospital, while the baby fought off viral meningitis and tachycardia. He made a full recovery, and now is 3½. Connolly said pregnant friends often ask her for parenting advice. More than anything, she tells them: Trust your gut.