This story was originally published on April 23, 2019 on NYT Parenting.
Lights, camera, action! At 3 months, your baby is becoming more photo-ready. You may capture your baby giving you a smile and lifting her head to see the camera. She may seem to be more responsive, copying some of your expressions and trying to babble through a conversation with you. If you have had a trying first two months with your baby, in terms of sleep and fussiness, you may be in luck. Your baby may now sleep for longer periods (stretches of seven to eight hours) and, if she was fussy, she might even be beginning to calm down. Now that you’ve made it to 3 months, hopefully you and your baby can really come alive.
See the world differently. Your baby’s vision is becoming clearer. She can probably track you moving across the room and can recognize you and other familiar people, even if they are a bit further away. She is discovering her fingers and hands and may begin examining them like they are priceless pieces of art. Your baby may also enjoy looking at herself, so placing a mirror in her crib, car seat or on the floor during tummy time might really liven things up. Occasionally, when she is looking at things, her eyes may cross, but they shouldn’t remain crossed. And while she is not yet ready for a match of ping-pong, her hand-eye coordination is getting much better.
Smile. Your baby is starting to develop a “social” smile. This means that when he smiles, he is not just gassy; he is smiling intentionally and may smile in response to you smiling at him. He is starting to understand play and may try imitating your facial expressions and sounds. This is one of your baby’s main modes of communication — through his facial expressions and body movements.
Coo. At 3 months, your baby loves to hear your voice and she may try to talk to you. She is communicating in her own language of babbling and, most often, cooing. Her coos are full of “ohhs” and “ahhs” and may sound similar to this. When you talk to her, she can probably turn toward the sound of your voice. She can likely discern where sounds are coming from and can move toward them. Your baby’s senses are becoming keener. She knows when it’s meal time and may get excited when she sees that it is time to nurse or when the bottle is within her view.
Flex. Your baby is starting to really move. When she is on her belly, she can probably raise her head two to three inches off the ground. She might even be able to flex her muscles and push up on her arms while still on her belly. She is getting stronger and may impress you with her new moves. She is better able to open and close her hands, making a fist. If you hold her hands, she may bear weight on her feet and start bouncing. She may look like a flying superwoman stretching out her legs and then kicking when she is on her belly. Also, her hand may be her new pacifier. She may put her hand (as well as other things, like books and toys) into her mouth. She is curious and this is how she first explores the world. She is probably reaching for objects you place near her face, and can now grab and shake them (like this).
Babies use their eyes to decipher what is happening in the world around them, but they have to work on coordinating their eyes and interpreting what they are seeing. From birth to 3 months, your child’s visual abilities are developing rapidly. For the first two months of life, your baby could only see objects at close range. But now, while she cannot yet see as well as older children, she is likely able to recognize your face from across the room. Your baby’s color vision and eye coordination are also developing at 3 months.
Your baby’s neck, upper body and lower body muscles are starting to strengthen. When you hold your baby upright, she will wobble her head very little — or not at all. This muscle development along with growing muscle strength in her arms, legs and torso are crucial for more advanced movements such as sitting up, crawling and walking. This muscle development is even important for her ability to eat independently.
However, as she gains new skills, your baby also loses old ones that she no longer needs. For instance, her startle (or moro) reflex will start to disappear around 3 months. As this reflex continues to disappear, your baby will develop more body control and will be able to roll over. She will also find new ways to communicate.
By 3 months, crying will no longer be your baby’s primary form of communication. Your baby is likely learning how to coordinate her tongue and lips to make cooing sounds. As she approaches 4 months, you may begin to hear more babbling. These sounds are a precursor to language and may indicate a readiness to learn language, so it is important respond to your baby’s attempts at communication. Your response helps her to build those new sounds and words more quickly.
My child is not sleeping for stretches longer than 3-4 hours at night, what gives? Generally, a 3-month-old will sleep about 14-16 hours a day, including naps, and although many babies will begin to sleep through the night at 3 months, there is a range of normal sleeping behaviors for babies at this age. However, 3 months is a good time to help your child get used to a bedtime routine. For example, giving your baby a bath, offering a feeding and giving her a close snuggle may be the best routine to help get her to sleep at night. Still, many babies this age continue to have trouble sleeping for longer periods due to prematurity, weight, medical conditions or other risk factors. You can have a discussion with your doctor to see if it is appropriate for you to expect your child to sleep through the night.
My baby is still really fussy, what should I do?Your 3-month-old may still have periods of fussiness, particularly in the evening, but fussiness should begin to improve around this age. Try your best to be responsive to your baby’s needs. He should be able to trust that you will be there when he needs you. However, some babies remain fussy, even after you’ve addressed their needs. If your baby cries for an unusually long time, makes strange sounds, or changes color when crying (such as blue or purple), contact your pediatrician, who can help figure out the cause of the fussiness.
What’s the deal with “baby talk”? Is it O.K. to use when talking to my baby or does it cause language delays?“Baby talk” is a type of speech that may be described as high-pitch, sing-song, simple, repetitious or emotionally-excited. “Baby talk” overemphasizes the contrast between certain syllables and sounds. Talking to your baby this way is not associated with language delays and, according to Kidshealth.org, 3-month-olds respond better to higher-pitched voices. Baby talk may be important for a baby’s language development and, in fact, some research suggests that children who are spoken to this way may be better equipped to distinguish sounds and may learn new words more quickly.
