Two-year-olds have a bad reputation: they’re notoriously headstrong and prone to having temper tantrums in the snack aisle at the grocery store. But the “Terrible Twos,” on the whole, are not terrible at all. In fact, one of the great joys of parenting a 2-year-old is watching his knowledge expand every day. When his vocabulary doubles and then triples and, eventually, includes too many words to count, remember: You did that. You made those advances possible by talking with him even when you were tired, distracted or late for work. And as his communication skills explode, your child’s personality will become even more distinct. He’ll learn to sing along to your favorite songs and begin to laugh at jokes only the two of you understand.
Yes, 2-year-olds can be defiant, but the battle of wills likely started at around 18 months and will continue well past your child’s third birthday (or straight through her teenage years). Most 2-year-olds are still small enough to be safely picked up and carried over one shoulder when you need to move an ongoing tantrum from point A to point B, so take a deep breath and remind yourself that strong-willed children grow into amazing, accomplished adults someday.
Sprint and play sports. Your 2-year-old can likely walk and run with more confidence and agility now. She can probably stand on her tiptoes, purposefully kick a ball while standing, throw overhand and walk up and down stairs one at a time while holding on to the railing. She can likely get on and off furniture without help.
Manipulate smaller objects. Your toddler should be able to copy a circle and draw a horizontal line. He may also be able to string large beads, pull up a zipper with a large tab, open a door, pull down elastic-waisted pants and even might be getting ready to use scissors.
Speak fluently. Your 2-year-old is probably comfortable using at least 50 words, which a stranger should be able to understand at least half the time. She can likely combine two words into simple sentences and should be able to follow two-step commands and tell someone her name.
Solve problems. Your toddler can likely sort objects into groups, such as by shape, size and color. He’ll understand that pictures represent real objects, such as a dog, and be able to point at the picture and then the animal. He should be able to demonstrate how to use objects, such as a remote control or a toy.
Play in parallel. Your 2-year-old should be able to play with peers, either quietly side-by-side or cooperatively, such as by chasing each other. She may begin to mask her emotions when socially required, such as by not giggling uncontrollably when asked to help with a task at home or at school. She should be demonstrating greater independence and, of course, defiance.
 If she has any motor delays, her pediatrician should have assessed and possibly referred her for additional services, such as physical therapy, by now.
The chance to run and play is important at this age. Not only does physical activity improve strength and balance, studies also suggest it improves memory, attention and academic performance. It can be tempting to hand your child a tablet to keep him still and reduce the chaos, but moving around is how he learns and letting him do this is the best way to prepare him to succeed in the future.
As your 2-year-old’s “small muscle” motor skills improve, he will start manipulating smaller objects with more precision. This allows him to complete tasks involving dexterity, such as placing large beads on a string, taking off clothing, scribbling with a crayon or copying straight lines or a rudimentary circle.
When your 2-year-old begins combining words into simple sentences, she’s advanced into the realm of communicating her wants and needs. She is building on her previous language skills but also on her brain’s newfound ability to label, sort and understand objects in the world around them.
Perhaps the most notable social and emotional skills your 2-year-old is developing are centered around play. Your 2-year-old should enjoy being with and around other same-aged children and should engage in parallel play, in which the children choose to do the same activity (such as drawing or painting) next to each other, but without interacting significantly. 2-year-olds will also begin playing simple games like chase. Interestingly, this is the age at which some children begin to mask their emotions. They might fight back tears, for example, when being chastised for a spill or after sneaking a cookie.
It seems no matter how hard I try, my 2-year-old will not follow rules. How can I get her to behave without shattering her independence? It’s natural for your 2-year-old to assert her independence, but this can make it difficult to get her out the door on time. Choose your battles consistently. If you wish to enforce certain rules in your home (eating only in the kitchen, for example, or not wearing shoes inside), do so without fail. If it’s cold out but not in a life-threatening way, let her refuse her jacket but take it with you. By allowing her to make decisions, especially ones that will have fairly mild negative consequences (such as being cold), you’re offering important opportunities for her to learn.
My 2-year-old is constantly throwing tantrums. Do I have a bad egg?Of course not. Remember that defiance is different than a tantrum, but both are common at this age. When your child is being defiant, he is purposefully pushing the boundaries to find out what is and isn’t permissible. A child who is having a tantrum isn’t being intentional or rational in that moment and should not be thought of as misbehaving. The primary goal in dealing with both defiance and tantrums should be keeping your child safe while remaining as calm as possible.
My 2-year-old isn’t adjusting well to her new sibling. What can I do to ease the tension?Many children are faced with a new sibling at age 2. If your daughter has been an only child up until this point, this is likely to be as big a transition for you as it is for her. Having to share your attention can be challenging and can prompt her to regress to more immature behaviors (such as being overly attached to you or not sleeping through the night). Encourage your child to help with the new baby by fetching a pacifier or blankie, for example, so she feels useful and included. Ask a family member to hold the baby so that you can have one-on-one time with your toddler. Most days it will feel impossible to do it all, and that’s okay. Your child will learn as much from her new sibling as she does from you; and being forced to cope on her own, such as when you can’t help her get a toy or pick up a mess, for example, will make her more independent.
My 2-year-old is on the move. How can I keep him safe?Two-year-olds may start opening doors and baby gates. Work on teaching your child how to get up and down stairs safely, but keep the gates up for now. Avoid toys with strong magnets since they can be easily swallowed and can cause life-threatening damage to the bowels. Helmets should be worn whenever using scooters, tricycles or bikes. If your child can open any exterior doors, make sure they are locked and, if you have a pool, keep it securely gated. If your child is frequently around a pool or open water, consider finding an Infant Swim Resource (ISR) program in your area.
My 2-year-old has Down syndrome. How will her development be different from that of other kids? For children with Down syndrome, and many other genetic conditions, developmental milestones will progress in the same order as other kids, but often at a slower pace. For example, about 50 percent of children with Down syndrome will be walking by age 2, according to parent reports. Physical, occupational and speech therapy can be helpful.
Engage your child in conversation whenever possible.
If he does not attend daycare, make sure your child has playdates or time in the park to interact with peers.
Read to your child and on your own in front of your child (not from your phone) to foster an interest in books and reading.
Find a nearby playground and let her run and climb.
Let her make messes and allow enough time for your child to help clean them up.
Give positive feedback whenever possible.
Redirect attention without saying “no” whenever possible. By reserving that command for dangerous situations, such as when your child is hitting or biting a sibling or when they are near a busy road, you will increase the chances that he will listen when it’s most important.
The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends limiting screen time to no more than one hour each day. During that hour, children should be engaging with high-quality programming watched or played collaboratively with an adult who can reinforce what they are seeing or doing on the screen by talking about it with them.
If your child’s development stalls or if you notice he is losing skills, becoming more clumsy or communicating less than normal, see your pediatrician right away. This could signal an underlying issue, such as a problem with her muscle or brain development.
If your child speaks fewer than 50 words or is not using two words in combination (“want drink” or “go play,” for example), let your doctor know. If your child does not follow simple two-step commands or doesn’t use a spoon, hairbrush or other household tool correctly, alert your pediatrician.
Make sure your pediatrician has screened for autism using the M-CHAT or other screening tool, and alert them if your child has one of the warning signs, such as trouble making eye contact. Also tell your doctor if your child can’t point or to look at things you’re pointing to, or doesn’t respond to his name or wave goodbye.

Early Intervention, a free program that provides services such as physical and speech therapies to children with developmental delays, is available in every state and territory in the United States. Children with certain medical conditions that increase their risk of such delays (such as prematurity) may automatically qualify. Although it’s important to talk to your pediatrician if you have concerns about your child’s development, you do not need a doctor’s referral to access E.I. services in your state. Simply call to ask for a free screening evaluation.
