It’s also important to note that the flu season happens over a period of several months. Coronavirus has spread much more rapidly, infecting a concentrated number of patients — and resulting in tens of thousands of cases of Covid-19 — in a matter of weeks.
An estimated 25 percent of people with coronavirus feel perfectly fine and don’t know they are infected and could be contagious. And guess what? You could very well be one of them! That’s why you should wear a mask to protect other people from your stealth germs.
Without the masks, the infected people exhaled contagious droplets and aerosols, tiny particles that linger in the air, about 30 percent of the time they were tested. When the infected patients wore a mask, it blocked nearly 100 percent of viral droplets and some of the aerosol particles.
But the thing is, you don’t need a super-efficient mask if you’re practicing social distancing and washing your hands. And if you use a fabric with decent filtration potential — like two layers of heavy cotton or flannel — and you wear the mask properly, you increase your chances of avoiding the virus.
Always wash your hands first. Don’t touch the fabric part of the mask — that’s essentially the germ filter, and you don’t want to spread whatever germs it has trapped. Use the ear loops or ties to secure your mask and to remove it. The coverage area should go from near the bridge of your nose to down under your chin and stretch about halfway or more toward your ears. Pull the ties and loops so that it fits as snugly as possible against your face. If your mask has pleats, the folded side should be down.
To learn more, read our guide How NOT to Wear a Mask.
But the real worry about wearing a mask is that you start to believe it’s protecting you more than it really is. Behavioral economists know that when people begin to feel safe, they take more risks. It’s a phenomenon seen when federal regulations first made cars safer with added features like seatbelts, and people responded by driving more recklessly. When doctors wear decontamination gowns, studies show they may become more lax about safety protocols. When communities in Mexico began outdoor mosquito spraying to combat dengue fever, families were less likely to adopt personal prevention practices.
Do I need to wear a mask outdoors?
Do I need to wear a mask during outdoor exercise?
In general, outdoor exercise, with or without a mask, seems to be safe, according to most experts. Researchers cautioned that little is known about heavy breathing during aerobic exercise and how it affects viral spread. Phys Ed columnist Gretchen Reynolds has all the suggestions and cautions in Exercising Outdoors With a Face Mask.
What if my child refuses to wear a mask?
Mask or no mask, children should never go with you to the grocery store or to run essential errands during the pandemic. Community playgrounds are closed (or should be), so outdoor play should be confined to the back yard. If your children need to play in a public space, go somewhere you can easily keep your distance from other people, like an empty soccer field or a sparsely populated hiking trail so that their refusal to wear a mask doesn’t affect other people.
Wearing a mask can send warm breath to your glasses and cause them to fog. You can try to seal the top of your mask, try various anti-fog treatments for lenses or adjust the way you wear your glasses. You can learn all the tips and tricks for avoiding glass fog here.
N95 respirator masks: These masks fit tightly to the face and have the highest filtration efficiency, blocking 95 percent of particles of 0.3 microns or larger. An N95 mask protects medical workers who come into contact with high doses of the virus while visiting and carrying out medical procedures on multiple patients. The rest of us don’t need that level of protection, so these masks should be reserved for health care workers only. To learn more about how these masks work, check out this video animation from the Arizona State University Risk Innovation Lab.
Homemade fabric masks: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends we cover our faces with a scarf or homemade fabric mask when we are in public. The effectiveness of homemade masks varies depending on the fabric used, the style and the fit.
You can sew a mask using a number of mask patterns circulating on the internet or try a no-sew pattern. We’ve included links to both in this guide, under “How to make a mask,” below.
T-shirts: Most of us have an old T-shirt we could cut up into a no-sew mask. It’s one of the most convenient fabrics to use, but there is a lot of variability in how well T-shirt material performs in lab tests. At the Virginia Tech, a single-layer of an old cotton T-shirt captured 20 percent of particles down to 0.3 microns. It captured 50 percent of particles down to 1 micron. A 2013 University of Cambridge study tested two layers of T-shirt which captured about 70 percent of particles down to 1 micron.
Cotton quilting fabric: This is the high-thread-count cotton fabric preferred by quilters for its durability. In studies at Wake Forest Baptist Health, masks made with quilting fabric rivaled the filtration efficiency of surgical masks.
Tea towels: Tea towels became a popular source of mask material after an August 2013 study from researchers at University of Cambridge found the material compared well to a medical mask at the 1 micron particle size. The study authors did not note the brand. The towel used was not terry cloth, but the tightly-woven absorbent tea towel variety.
Pillow cases: Pillow cases are a good option for sewers who don’t have other fabric. In the 2013 study, 2 layers of pillow case fabric tested close to the efficiency of a surgical mask at the 1 micron standard, but in a study at Missouri University of Science & Technology, it took four layers of 600-thread-count pillow case material to achieve that level of protection at the 0.3 micron standard.
Coffee filters and paper towels: The C.D.C. suggests inserting a coffee filter into your mask for extra protection. Missouri University of Science & Technology scientists found that using three coffee filters made it difficult to breathe. Adding a layer of paper towel in between two layers of fabric could make your homemade mask more efficient. An engineer at an air purifier firm ran his own test and found a single paper towel filters 23 percent of 0.3 microns and two paper towels filtered 33 percent. We added a paper towel to our homemade T-shirt mask.
Scarves and bandannas: When it comes to ease of use, you can’t beat a scarf or bandanna to cover your face. But bandannas are thin and, even folded over four times, don’t offer much protection. Scarves may be better but can be thick and hot. Both are better than nothing.
Filters and vacuum bags: Scientists trying to find effective alternatives for medical workers have cut up layers of air filters and tested HEPA vacuum bags. Both can work quite well, but both have significant downsides. Air filters, when cut up, can release fibers that can be dangerous to inhale, so the filter material should be sandwiched between layers of heavy cotton fabric if used in a mask. Vacuum bags are good filters but not that breathable. Plus, some brands of vacuum bags may contain fiberglass so should not be used to cover your face.
Or check out The Times video showing how to make a no-sew mask using a T-shirt.
Can I reuse my medical mask?
How do I care for my fabric mask?
It’s much easier to clean a fabric mask than a medical mask. The C.D.C. says fabric masks should be “washed routinely.” The mask experts I spoke with wash theirs daily in a machine or a sink, just using regular laundry soap. You can use the dryer or let it air dry. Although it’s not necessary, you can also go over it with a hot iron for a full assault on any germs that might remain.
Just as with a medical mask, chemicals like bleach or hydrogen peroxide will begin to degrade the fabric fibers, making the mask less effective. Dr. Marr notes that a virus can’t replicate outside the body, and if virus particles have been trapped by the mask, they are pretty well stuck there and will decay or be removed during washing.
