The announcement of a team effort to ease restrictions that have halted most aspects of life coincided with hopefuls signs about the coronavirus’s spread.
The governors of seven Eastern states will cooperate on reopening.
‘The worst is over’ if New Yorkers remain resolute, Mr. Cuomo said.
Murphy bans halting internet and phone service for nonpayment.
New Jersey officials announce more arrests for flouting restrictions.
Over 20 N.Y.C. public schoolteachers have died of the virus.
The governors of New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island and Delaware said on Monday that they would work together to plan for reopening the region’s economies, schools and other important elements.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said that health and economic officials from the six states were starting work immediately on developing strategies for easing restrictions that have brought much of daily life to a halt.
Later in the day, Mr. Cuomo’s office said that Massachusetts would be part of the coalition. Of the seven states, it is the only one with a Republican governor.
“Let’s be smart and let’s be cooperative and let’s learn from one another,” Mr. Cuomo said.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said that some East Coast states would form a working group to develop a plan for reopening the region.
We should start looking forward to reopening quote, unquote. But reopening with a plan and a smart plan. The art form is going to be here is doing that smartly, and doing that productively and doing that in a coordinated way. Doing that in coordination with the other states that are in the area, and doing it as a cooperative effort where we learn from each other. Coming up with a plan that is consistent, if not complementary — one state to the other — and certainly not where one state does something that is counter to another state. Which could happen. And I’ve seen that in the past. So Governor Murphy for example, from New Jersey’s point that what you do in New York just pushes people across a bridge to another state if it’s not consistent. That is exactly right. His workforce is my workforce, my workforce is his workforce. All of these decisions affect everyone, and the entire region. What this virus says is all of your lines and boundaries make no sense. I can get on the Amtrak train and get off anywhere along that line, and if the person is positive, can infect scores of people.
The seven states together have recorded over 325,000 confirmed virus cases, more than half of the U.S. total, and nearly 14,400 deaths, around 63 percent of the country’s total.
The governors, speaking on a conference call, emphasized the importance of acting in concert so that the actions of one state did not inadvertently hurt another, or cause the outbreak to flare again.
“We can put together a system that allows our people to get back to work,” Gov. Ned Lamont of Connecticut said.
Asked whether the collaboration among the states was a rebuke to the President Trump, who has said the decision about businesses reopening was his to make, Gov. Philip D. Murphy of New Jersey said only that he was focused on making decisions based on facts and science, and he reiterated that an economic recovery was inextricable from a public health recovery.
Gov. Tom Wolf of Pennsylvania echoed Mr. Murphy’s comments in responding to a similar question.
Mr. Cuomo — interviewed on CNN before and after Mr. Trump said again at a White House briefing that the decision on restarting the economy was his — was more pointed in discussing who was responsible for pausing the rhythms of normal life and who would restore them.
The governor flatly rejected Mr. Trump’s claim that as president, his authority was “total.” Mr. Cuomo called the assertion “aggressive” and “hostile.” He also said that if Mr. Trump wished to be the one to restart the economy, he had to outline, in detail, how he planned to do it.
Mr. Cuomo said on Monday, for the first time, that he believed the most horrific phase of the coronavirus outbreak may have passed.
But the governor wavered on the pronouncement several times. Asked a follow-up question at the briefing about whether he was confident the worst was indeed over, Mr. Cuomo said he was not. He repeated that the state was experiencing plateaus in key categories, but that if New Yorkers did not continue to follow the current restrictions, the situation would worsen.
Even if the outbreak had reached its apex, the governor said, there would be weeks of suffering to come. He noted how many people were still dying of the virus.
The state’s one-day toll of 671 deaths, while still “horrific,” Mr. Cuomo said, was the lowest it had been in a week. The total has been below last week’s peak, 799, for the past four days.
The number of intubated patients — most of whom, he said, would never recover — had dropped in two of the past three days.
The number of newly hospitalized patients, 1,958, was the lowest it had been in two weeks.
The three-day average increase in the number of hospitalized patients dropped to 85, the smallest increase to date.
The number of people who tested positive for the virus on Sunday, 6,337, was the lowest it has been in almost three weeks. The state has 195,031 confirmed virus cases, 106,673 of them in New York City.
Mr. Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio have emphasized for the past several days that any return to a semblance of normal life in the city and state will proceed in phases, during which restrictions will be eased based on measurable progress against the virus.
The governor on Monday said that even if he were correct that the worst had passed, it could easily take 12 to 18 months for the state’s economy to return to normal.
Gov. Philip D. Murphy of New Jersey said the state had recorded 3,219 new virus cases from Sunday to Monday, bringing the total to close to 65,000.
There were 94 new virus-related deaths, Mr. Murphy said, bringing New Jersey’s total to 2,443. Twenty-nine of the newly recorded deaths involved people who had been residents of long-term care facilities.
Despite the growth in infections and deaths, Mr. Murphy said the rate at which the virus was spreading in the state was slowing, with positive cases increasing just 4 percent from Sunday to Monday, a new one-day low.
Mr. Murphy also said he was ordering that no state resident’s internet or phone service be shut off for a failure to pay until 30 days after the current public health emergency had ended, and banning almost all reductions in service or late fees. He also said that any internet or phone services that had been disconnected over unpaid bills after March 16 should be restored.
“This is no time for anyone to have their connection to the world severed,” he said.
Adding to the challenges confronting the state, the governor said, were gusting winds and rain that had prompted the closing of at least one virus testing site, at the P.N.C. Bank Arts Center in Holmdel, and resulted in more 47,000 power outages.
Early Saturday morning, the authorities in Paterson, N.J., responded to a call from the owner of a recording studio who said he been in injured in an attack.
The police did not find an assailant, but they did determine that the man who placed the call was actively operating his studio, officials said on Monday. As a result, he was charged with violating one of the emergency orders that Mr. Murphy enacted to slow the virus’s spread.
And it turned out that a second recording studio on the same floor at the same building was up and running, the authorities said. The operator was also charged, officials said.
The studio operators were among the latest group of people in New Jersey to be accused of breaking rules on social distancing and the closing of most businesses, as officials seek to punish and publicly shame those who risk the public’s health by flouting the measures.
If found guilty, violators face sentences of up to six months in jail and fines of up to $1,000.
In Newark, officials said, the police’s Covid-19 task force issued 85 summonses for violations of the restrictions and ordered seven nonessential businesses closed on Saturday and Sunday.
The attorney general’s office detailed more than a dozen other cases from the weekend. In one, a Pennsylvania man was charged with violating the emergency orders by opening his Hamilton nail salon and sneaking customers in through a back door. In a second case, a Jersey City woman was charged with renting out her Long Beach Island condominium for 10 days in violation of a prohibition on such short-term rentals.
“Our police officers are working bravely and tirelessly every day to protect us during this health crisis. Regrettably, they are being called upon far too often,” Gurbir S. Grewal, the attorney general, said in a statement.
Separately, the New York Police Department said on Monday that officers had made more than 303,000 “visits” related to social-distancing rules, but had issued just 76 summonses and had made only 15 arrests since March 17.
The virus has caused the deaths of at least 50 Education Department employees, including 21 teachers, in New York City, officials said on Monday.
The dead include Sandra Santos-Vizcaino, 54, a third-grade teacher at Public School 9 in the Prospect Heights section of Brooklyn, who died March 31, and Dez-Ann Romain, the principal at Brooklyn Democracy Academy in the Brownsville section. She died on March 23 at 36.
Among the other Education Department employees who have died, 22 were paraprofessionals who provided support for children with disabilities, and two were school administrators. The dead also included a guidance counselor, a member of the food staff, and two employees at the department’s central office.
In-person classes were halted starting March 16, but teachers and principals were asked to continue to report to schools throughout that week to prepare for remote learning. Many teachers were frustrated that city and state officials had not closed schools sooner.
The death toll reached 23 in N.Y.C.’s homeless shelter system.
At a homeless shelter in the Bronx, Christian Cascone described how a roommate confronted another resident who would not wash his hands.
“My roommate said, ‘Well, the good Lord also wants the rest of us to be healthy, too,’” he said.
While much of New York City is staying inside, a crisis has taken hold among a population for whom social distancing is nearly impossible.
More than 17,000 men and women, many of them already in poor health, sleep in roughly 100 group or “congregate” shelters for single adults. Most live in dormitories that are fertile fields for the virus to spread, with beds close enough for people sleeping in them to hold hands.
And rather than keeping people away from shelters, the virus has driven them in.
Some inmates released from the Rikers Island jail complex to control the outbreak among incarcerated people have wound up in shelters. And with the outdoor safety net falling apart, the nightly shelter population has consistently reached levels seen only a few times in the past decade, and usually only on the most frigid nights of winter.
As of Sunday, officials said, 23 shelter residents had died. The dead included 14 men and two women from assessment centers and shelters for single adults where multiple, unrelated people share rooms, according to the Department of Homeless Services.
And 371 people in shelters had tested positive for the virus, about 80 percent of them from the single-adult facilities, officials said.
Virus-related hospital admissions dropped in N.Y.C., the mayor said.
The number of virus patients admitted to hospitals in New York City dropped 17 percent from Saturday to Sunday, Mr. de Blasio said early Monday.
The mayor said that 383 people had been admitted on Sunday, down from 463 the day before.
In other encouraging news, Mr. de Blasio said that the number of people in intensive-care units in the city’s public hospitals had also declined, although only slightly, to 835 from 857.
The developments came as the mayor unveiled a new public effort to track the three measures he has said must move downward consistently and in unison for New York City to lift the restrictions that have shut down the city.
The measure are: the number of people suspected of having the virus who are admitted to hospitals; the number of people suspected of having the virus who are admitted to intensive care units; and the percentage of people who test positive for the virus.
“I’m pleased to report we do see all the important indicators moving in the right direction,” the mayor said. But as he has for several days, he emphasized that any change in the city’s restrictions was also contingent on more widespread testing than was currently available.
The suspension of alternate-side parking rules has been extended to April 28.
He called on the Rent Guidelines Board to enact a rent freeze.
He urged the state to let tenants who have lost income because of the virus defer the payment of rent and repay over a 12-month period.
People who see violations of social-distancing rules will soon be able to report them by sending a photograph, along with location information, to 311.
The governor and mayor are at odds over N.Y.C.’s school shutdown.
Mr. de Blasio and Mr. Cuomo, who have feuded for years, continued for a third day to tussle over the mayor’s decision to keep New York City’s schools closed for the rest of the academic year.
The mayor announced the closings on Saturday, but Mr. Cuomo subsequently insisted that the final decision was his and that it was too soon to make one.
“Nobody knows what we will be doing in June,” he added, in a seeming rebuke to the mayor.
Mr. de Blasio reiterated in television interviews early Monday that he and the city schools chancellor, Richard A. Carranza, had the authority to keep schools closed for the city’s 1.1 million students.
Mr. Cuomo also stuck to his position. In an interview on Monday on “The Howard Stern Show,” the governor repeated that the decision should be coordinated regionally.
“I can’t have things happen that are mistakes,” he said, before suggesting that Mr. de Blasio was a “local official” who had stepped out of line.
Bad weather prompts the closing of drive-through testing sites.
New York, New Jersey and Connecticut on Monday closed drive-through virus testing sites because of the harsh wind and rains that were lashing the region.
The New York State Health Department on Monday said it had closed all of the 10 drive-through testing sites it operates. The sites are expected to reopen on Tuesday.
New Jersey closed a number of its drive-through testing sites, including the one in Holmdel. At least seven testing sites in Connecticut were also closed.
Reporting was contributed by Jonah Engel Bromwich, Jacey Fortin, Michael Gold, Andrew Hinderaker, Andy Newman, William K. Rashbaum, Eliza Shapiro, Matt Stevens and Nikita Stewart.