Pregnancy|What Is a Midwife, and Do You Want One?
What Is a Midwife, and Do You Want One?
If you’re thinking about working with a midwife during your pregnancy and birth, you’re hardly alone. The percentage of births in the United States attended by certified midwives or nurse-midwives has risen annually since 1989, according to the National Center for Health Statistics. But it’s still a relatively small number, at just over 8 percent. That number lags significantly behind other parts of the world; in the Netherlands, for example, midwives attend 22 percent of births.
Midwives are often the caregiver of choice for women who are open to proceeding through pregnancy with minimal or no medical intervention or treatment. They are also usually chosen by women who want to give birth at a birthing center — a cozier alternative to a hospital, though often attached to or affiliated with a hospital — or at home.
If you’re setting off into your pregnancy in generally good health, and are open to the philosophical underpinnings of midwifery, a midwife might make a solid option as a health care partner. But what are all the factors to consider? I spoke to five women in leadership positions in reproductive health care, including three practicing midwives, to gain a deeper understanding of what the profession can and can’t offer pregnant women.
First, a word about terminology. The term “midwives” is typically used as shorthand for certified nurse-midwives; CNMs comprise the vast majority of the midwifery ranks in the United States. CNMs are registered nurses who have graduated from an education program accredited by the Accreditation Commission for Midwifery Education. Certified midwives hold a graduate-level midwifery degree. But there are also Certified Professional Midwives, or CPMs, who must pass a national certification exam that they prepare for either via apprenticeship or an accredited program. Unlike CNMs and CMs, CPMs cannot prescribe medications.
In the United States, most people think of midwives in connection with pregnancy and birth, but they provide a wide range of primary, gynecological and family-planning services to women of all ages.
In broad terms, midwives offer what they call traditional care, which in the context of pregnancy and childbirth means they eschew the tools of modern medicine, like ultrasounds and epidurals, and they don’t do procedures like cesarean sections.
Who should see a midwife?
If you face chronic health issues, however, expect to be nudged toward more conventional obstetric care. If you’re 38 years old, diabetic, have asthma, most practices are going to say you’re not appropriate for midwifery care,” said Dr. Regan Theiler, M.D., Ph.D., an obstetrician-gynecologist at the Mayo Clinic with a clinical focus on obstetrics.
The reasons for this largely have to do with regulations handed down by state medical boards. The further away you get from the hospital, the more stringent the protocols are, and the healthier you have to be in order to go through the birth process in that particular setting, Dr. Chetwynd said.
Midwives are generally covered in health insurance plans. People paying for health care out of pocket may find midwifery services more affordable than a hospital delivery. “Especially for a hospital system, if you’re not using the additional expertise of anesthesiology, a surgical room, a longer stay, that’s going to decrease the cost of maternity care,” Anderson said.
Hospitals and obstetricians often work with partner midwives with whom they can connect expectant mothers, said Vicki Hedley, a certified midwife and president and treasurer of MANA. And Bennett suggested asking for referrals from mother’s groups and birth circles. “For my practice, our best advertising is word of mouth as our families talk about their experiences,” she said.
Some states allow midwives to practice without certification from the national standards boards, so it’s wise to start an interview by asking about your prospective midwife’s qualifications. An affiliation with a local hospital is a strong indicator that a midwife has sufficient training, Dr. Theiler said.
If you have no chronic health issues or complications, prenatal care is pretty basic stuff. Your provider will take your blood pressure, conduct a urinalysis and assess the growth and wellbeing of the fetus through measurements and by listening to fetal heart tones. Midwives will spend what are usually hourlong appointments asking expectant mothers about their lives and overall health.
One significant difference is that midwives practice what’s called abdominal palpation — a process in which they assess the baby’s position and size with their hands, said Bennett. “One of the things a client will often say when they have transferred to us out of a more medical model is how much they enjoy that contact,” Bennett said.
If you decide to work with a midwife, that doesn’t preclude procedures like ultrasounds and genetic testing during your pregnancy. Some midwives study to offer additional services, such as basic ultrasounds to check amniotic fluid levels, Anderson said.
If a midwife can’t provide a procedure or test her client needs, she will generally provide a referral to an obstetric practice or hospital with which she has formed a relationship, Anderson said. These partnerships aren’t just one-way streets. Some obstetric practices will hand the birthing process over to partner midwives if expectant mothers express a wish for an unmedicated birth.
Giving birth involves a certain amount of risk regardless of the caregiver. About 700 women die every year in the United States from pregnancy or delivery complications, according to the Centers for Disease Control.
Bennett pointed out that research shows there is a benefit to using medical interventions when appropriate rather than routinely. “What we know is that the cesarean section can be a life-saving miraculous surgery that can improve outcomes when complications arise,” she said, “and can also have a negative impact on outcomes when it is done routinely or when interventions create the need for it.” Globally, women and newborns experience the best health outcomes when cesareans are done at a rate of about 19 percent, according to a recent analysis of childbirth published in the Journal of the American Medical Association. In the United States, about a third of all babies are born by C-section.
A study published in the journal PLOS One in 2018 found that states where midwives have been more deeply embedded into the system — the states with the highest percentages of midwife births included Washington, New Mexico, Vermont and New York — also reported better maternal care outcomes. Specifically, they were associated with significantly higher rates of spontaneous vaginal delivery, vaginal birth after cesarean and breastfeeding; and lower rates of cesarean, preterm birth, low-birthweight infants and neonatal death.
David Howard is a journalist and former story editor at Prevention magazine.