We found answers to some of the most pressing questions posed by expecting mothers.
This article was originally published on March 6 and last updated on April 14. This is a fast-moving situation, so some information may be outdated. For the latest updates, read The New York Times’s live coronavirus coverage here.
If you’re pregnant and trying to digest the daily fire hose of news about the new coronavirus, you probably have many questions.
Is it OK for family to visit after the baby is born? Should I consider a home birth? How worried, overall, should I really be?
While there’s still a lot we don’t know about the virus or how exactly it affects pregnant women and their babies, we asked experts to help explain the latest thinking about the new coronavirus and pregnancy, and answer some frequently asked questions.
What happens if I get the coronavirus while pregnant?
There is very little data on how the new coronavirus, which causes a respiratory illness known as Covid-19, affects people who are pregnant.
The research that does exist includes women who were in the later stages of their pregnancies. According to a review of studies on pregnant women who were affected by the new coronavirus, which was published on March 17, there is currently no data on women infected with Covid-19 during their first trimester.
Pregnancy alters a woman’s immune system, which puts her at a higher risk for severe complications if she catches a dangerous virus like the flu. Her risk for complications also increases if she has any underlying health conditions like diabetes or lupus, said Dr. Roxanna A. Irani, M.D., Ph.D., the medical director of outpatient obstetrics at the University of California, San Francisco.
Two pregnant women at Columbia University Irving Medical Center in New York City who had both Covid-19 and underlying health conditions declined rapidly after delivering their babies and were admitted to the intensive care unit, according to a paper published on March 26. Their babies did not test positive for the disease.
In past outbreaks of other coronaviruses like SARS and MERS, some pregnant women who were infected with these viruses have had miscarriage and premature delivery, research has shown.
We also know that severe infections, like the flu, can put pregnant people at a higher risk for preterm labor, but “we don’t know from this data if coronavirus is going to prove to be the same,” said Dr. Ilona Goldfarb, M.D., a maternal-fetal medicine specialist at Massachusetts General Hospital.
According to a review published on March 17, which analyzed 23 studies and was published in the journal Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology, 47 percent of the 32 women who were infected with Covid-19 delivered preterm. However it is important to note that the reasons for delivery weren’t reported for most of these cases. In addition, these women were hospitalized with Covid-19, which indicates that they were very sick.
Some pregnant women, however, will become infected and remain asymptomatic. Doctors at New York-Presbyterian Allen Hospital and Columbia University Irving Medical Center in New York City tested maternity patients for the coronavirus, regardless of whether the patient was experiencing any symptoms. Of the 215 pregnant women who delivered babies between March 22 and April 4, most of the patients who were positive for the coronavirus at delivery were asymptomatic, the hospitals reported on April 13.
Do I need to prepare for a home birth?
Dr. Irani said that she was not preparing her patients for a home birth either.
Experts have warned against women deciding at the last minute to give birth at home, which can require months of education, planning and preparation.
Should I consider an elective induction?
Doctors typically induce labor when the baby’s health or the mother’s health is at risk. But some women choose to have an elective induction for a variety of reasons — should coronavirus be one of them?
Right now the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists says on its website that inductions of labor “should continue to be performed as indicated,” and does not suggest that women ought to receive elective inductions out of fear over coronavirus (or worries that hospitals will see a sudden surge of patients stricken with Covid-19).
Dr. Irani said on April 13 that the labor and delivery floors at her hospital in San Francisco “have been very steady” and able to accommodate all of their laboring patients.
Although many hospitals offer elective induction of labor at 39 weeks or later for nonmedical reasons, doctors agree that inductions should not be done before 39 weeks unless medically necessary. According to A.C.O.G., babies born at or after 39 weeks have the best chance at healthy outcomes.
Elective inductions can be a safe option, but they don’t always work. In addition, there are risks associated with induction like overstimulation of the uterus, infection and uterine rupture.
Will labor and delivery policies change?
Yes, hospitals across the country are actively revising their policies on how many people can visit during labor and delivery.
Two of New York City’s leading hospital networks, NewYork-Presbyterian and Mount Sinai Health System, announced in March that they would bar all visitors from the delivery room as well as the postpartum recovery areas to protect mothers and their babies, and help slow the spread of the coronavirus. But on March 28, state officials announced that New York would order all hospitals to allow each mother to have one support person in the delivery room and in the “immediate postpartum period,” despite the coronavirus risk.
Other hospitals, including the one where Dr. Irani works, are allowing each pregnant patient admitted to the labor and delivery unit to have just one visitor. In other words, if you bring your spouse, you cannot bring anyone else, including a doula.
The rules are changing rapidly. Ask your ob-gyn about the latest policies at the hospital where you plan to deliver.
In addition to changing visitor policies, the length of stay in the hospital is starting to change, too, for maternity patients. After delivering their babies, some women are being discharged from the hospital earlier than usual and being asked to follow-up via telemedicine.
How will my prenatal care change?
Having a blood pressure monitor at home is helpful for these visits so that you can take a blood pressure measurement and report it to your provider, he added.
According to Dr. Jamieson, nobody knows for sure if a mother can infect her baby with the coronavirus while pregnant, during birth or while breastfeeding.
Other studies also have suggested that the virus can cross the placenta, but so far newborns have been mildly affected.
Can I breastfeed if I’m infected with coronavirus?
The W.H.O. and other organizations have said that an infected mother can breastfeed her baby and stay in the same room provided that she takes all necessary hygiene precautions.
But on April 2, the American Academy of Pediatrics said that the safest approach for a mother infected with the coronavirus is to temporarily separate herself from her newborn until she is no longer infectious, and pump breast milk rather than letting her baby feed at the breast.
The C.D.C. does not promote separation over breastfeeding for infected mothers, but it does say that in the postpartum setting, health care facilities should “consider” separating mothers and infants if a mother is infected with the coronavirus or suspected of having the infection.
Breastfeeding mothers who are infected should wash their hands before touching the baby and wear a cloth face covering over her nose and mouth, the agency says. It also says that if the mother is symptomatic, she can consider having someone who is well feed expressed breast milk to the infant.
Can my extended family visit at home when the baby is born?
According to the latest national public health guidelines, everyone should socially distance themselves from others by avoiding groups of more than 10 people, staying about six feet apart and avoiding nonessential travel.
“That includes most definitely avoiding visits to newborn babies,” Dr. Goldfarb said.
While it’s impossible to know what the situation will be a few months from now, it’s important for women who are delivering within the next few weeks to avoid having visitors in their homes after the baby is born, Dr. Goldfarb added.
Relatives should not fly in for the birth, given the latest recommendations about nonessential travel. It’s safer for everyone involved.
This will undoubtedly be challenging for families, Dr. Irani said, but it’s best not to risk anyone’s health. That’s especially the case for older relatives who might have underlying health problems.
Do I need to wear a mask in public?
On April 3, the C.D.C. recommended that everyone wear nonmedical, cloth masks in public, although President Trump said the rule was voluntary.
Several European nations and much of Asia also have recommended that people wear cloth face masks in public, even if they have no symptoms.
If you are pregnant and you start having symptoms like fever, dry cough or shortness of breath, call your ob-gyn. Do not show up unexpectedly at an emergency room or at your doctor’s office.
If you don’t currently have an ob-gyn, call the hospital where you plan to deliver and ask to speak to a triage nurse about what to do, Dr. Jamieson advised.
Various states and counties in the United States have set up hotlines to answer questions or concerns about the coronavirus. Check with your public health department to see if your area has one.
How many pregnant women have been infected worldwide?
The simple answer: We don’t know.
To learn more about the number of women infected, their symptoms and how Covid-19 might affect their pregnancy and delivery, experts at UCSF Health have created a registry of pregnant women in the United States with suspected or confirmed Covid-19.
The vaccine for the new coronavirus won’t be available for at least a year, if not longer, experts said.
In the meantime, make sure you get the flu vaccine. While a flu shot will not protect you from coronavirus, it will help protect you from the flu. Flu season generally peaks between December and February, but flu viruses are still circulating and they can make pregnant women severely ill.
You should also make sure you get the Tdap combination vaccine, which protects against tetanus, diphtheria and pertussis (also known as whooping cough).
Only about one-third of pregnant women in the United States receive both the flu and whooping cough vaccines, according to the C.D.C., but experts say that receiving both is important — not only for a mother, but for her baby, too.
Nearly 70 percent of whooping cough deaths occur in babies less than 2 months old, the C.D.C. said. And if a pregnant woman contracts any type of illness resulting in a fever — like the flu — it can pose rare but serious risks to the baby in the first trimester, Dr. Jamieson said.
Make sure you have a backup plan in place in the event that you (or your partner) contract the new coronavirus after you give birth.
“The key is you want the baby being taken care of by a healthy caregiver,” Dr. Jamieson said.
Spend some time thinking about who that person would be, she added, and also make sure that your chosen caregiver is fully immunized so that you don’t expose your baby to other infectious diseases.
It’s also wise for expecting mothers to keep a copy of their prenatal records on hand in case the health care system is disrupted by the spread of the coronavirus.
Stock up on nonperishable foods, cleaning supplies and necessities like toiletries and hand soap.
And as always, practice good hygiene, avoid people who are sick and stay away from large crowds.
Are You Pregnant and Concerned About Coronavirus?