The rate of cesarean section births in the United States has been declining over the past few years. Still, a full 31.9 percent of births were by C-section in 2016. Even among women who hadn’t had a previous C-section, the rate was almost 22 percent. Some women are prepared; they’ve had the surgery scheduled because of a medical complication or something else that is known in advance. But many will end up having a C-section only after a decision is made during labor that it’s the safest route for the woman and for the baby.
All that is to say that, even if you want and are planning for a vaginal birth, it’s worth brushing up on the basics of C-sections so you’ll be prepared if it happens to you. You’ll want to know what the surgery entails, how it might change your birth experience and how your postpartum recovery will be affected. For this guide, I spoke with two obstetricians, one obstetrical anesthesiologist and one obstetrical nurse practitioner.
Expect a quick procedure.
Be prepared for different circumstances.
Know your birth options.
Lean on others during your recovery.
Once a decision has been made to perform a C-section, the prep begins. You’ll get an IV, if you don’t already have one, to deliver fluids and an antibiotic. It’s no longer standard procedure to shave pubic hair, because it could permit unwanted bacteria into the body. (Nor should you shave or wax your own bikini area or abdomen right before a scheduled C-section, also due to the infection risk.) Any hair that might get in the way of the incision is clipped.
You’ll get a catheter inserted in your urethra and your abdomen will be washed with an antiseptic solution. During the surgery, you’ll be lying on your back, with your hands on armboards so that your blood pressure can be monitored and your IV adjusted, if necessary. And there will be a drape over your body, separating your upper body from the lower, to keep the surgical site sterile.
It typically takes only 10 or 15 minutes to get the baby out. Most of the time, the surgeon will make a horizontal, or transverse, incision that’s two fingers’ breadth above the pubic bone, cutting through the layers of skin and muscle and then the uterus, said Dr. Nazaneen Homaifar, M.D., an obstetrician and gynecologist at the University of California San Francisco Medical Center. (Less frequently a surgeon will use a low or central vertical incision, for example if the position of the baby is breech or sideways, if you’ve had multiple abdominal surgeries or during some emergency procedures.) You’ll likely feel pressure twice during the procedure: once when the layers of tissue are being stretched to get to the uterus, and once when the baby is delivered. It shouldn’t hurt, said Dr. Homaifar, who has had a C-section (because her twins were in the breech position) in addition to performing them, but you might feel pressure — “like a toddler sitting on your belly” or a pulling sensation. You may also have some nausea and vomiting during the surgery for reasons including cutting through the peritoneum (the membrane lining the abdomen), moving the uterus in and out of the abdomen after delivery or low blood pressure.
Once the baby is out, there will usually be 30 seconds or a minute before the umbilical cord is clamped and cut. The baby is passed to the pediatrician to be checked out, and if all is O.K., can often be brought to the mother for skin-to-skin contact and even breastfeeding. Closing the incision takes longer than making it, 30 minutes (or even less) to more than an hour based on anatomy, the incision and previous scars, said Dr. Caughey.
Some C-sections are scheduled ahead of time for reasons including multiple births, a baby in the breech position or certain medical conditions in the mother. (In a small percentage of cases, women will request a C-section for no medical reason.) In that case, you won’t wait to go into labor but will check into the hospital ahead of your due date, at a specific date and time. You’ll meet with the medical team, the baby will be monitored for 20 minutes or so and then you’ll proceed to surgical prep, said Dr. Homaifar.
If a C-section is unscheduled, and you’ve already been in labor, the surgery may be urgent but not an emergency – often because labor isn’t progressing, for example. In that case, surgery will usually start within 30 minutes or an hour from when the decision is made to operate.
But sometimes, when there is a serious and imminent threat to the mother’s or baby’s health, the C-section is an emergency. In that case, there will be a lot of people involved and things will happen fast, said Cheryl Roth, Ph.D., a nurse practitioner at HonorHealth Scottsdale Shea and Osborn Medical Centers and president of the Association of Women’s Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses. The team’s goal is to get the baby out in minutes. It can seem overwhelming for the woman, but it’s important to remember that to the medical personnel, it’s a “very established process,” said Dr. Roth. (Don’t be afraid to ask questions about what’s going on.) Depending on the circumstances, an emergency C-section may require general anesthesia, which means you’ll be unconscious.
Also part of this approach is incorporating in the operating room many of the things that have become customary for vaginal deliveries, such as a woman’s choice of music during delivery and skin-to-skin contact after birth.
After the surgery, you’ll be moved to recovery and then, depending on the hospital, possibly to another room for the rest of your stay, said Roth. The catheter will usually be removed the same day to reduce the risk of urinary tract infection, and the goal is usually to get women up and walking around the same day to prevent blood clots, said Dr. Homaifar. Once the narcotic from surgery wears off, you may get IV or oral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications for pain, such as alternating prescription-strength doses of ibuprofen and acetaminophen. (There’s been a move to limit unnecessary oral narcotic use.) If your pain isn’t being controlled, tell your health care team.
Physical recovery depends on many factors, including how long and difficult the labor was before the C-section was performed. In general, Roth tells her patients not to lift anything heavier than the baby for two weeks. Your physical activity can start with walking and ramp up as you feel up to it, though you should talk with your doctor or other medical provider before resuming vigorous exercise. You should also get the all-clear from your doctor before resuming sexual activity.
Also realize that just because you have one C-section you aren’t necessarily bound to have all future births that way. According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, a vaginal birth after cesarean, or VBAC, is an option for some women, depending on the type of incision made in the earlier surgery and the birth facility, among other factors. Studies have reported that about 60 percent to 80 percent of women who attempt a trial of labor after a cesarean (called a TOLAC), have a VBAC, and there are calculators available to help gauge a woman’s odds.
Most women recover fine from a C-section, but like any other abdominal surgery, there are risks, including infection, blood loss and blood clots. Your doctor will give you a complete list of symptoms that should prompt you to seek medical attention, including a fever, signs of infection in the incision, excessive vaginal bleeding and leg pain that could signal a clot. The bottom line: If something doesn’t feel right, speak up.
