Here’s how to keep diet culture off your family table.
It’s not just aggressively “clean” snack bars. It’s also Instagram feeds full of perfectly styled #eattherainbow bento boxes with tips on how to get your kids to eat raw red cabbage and purple cauliflower. It’s Weight Watchers’ recent launch of a “health app for kids,” as I’ve reported previously. And it’s the press release sitting in my inbox right now for a new brand of Paleo baby food, which I fervently hope represents the apex of this madness but is likely just the beginning.
“I see diet culture manifesting in kid food in so many ways,” said Christy Harrison, M.P.H., R.D., a dietitian and author of “Anti-Diet.” “Some of it involves direct marketing of dieting behaviors to children. But there’s also a lot that just makes parents feel bad about giving their kids sugar, ‘processed’ foods or anything fun.” And since it’s January, the month when all of our anxieties about weight and food tend to peak, it’s time to talk about why you don’t want to invite what Harrison calls the “diet mindset” to your family dinner table.
First, let’s establish that nutrition and diet culture are two different animals. Most parents want our kids to eat vegetables, for example. But it’s worth examining why: Chances are, you may be less concerned about preventing scurvy than you are about your child’s current or future body size, Fonnesbeck said. “There’s eating for health and nourishment, and then there is eating for weight ‘control.’ They are actually not one and the same.” And eating for weight control poses specific risks for kids: Research shows that dieting now can increase your child’s risk for developing an anorexia, bulimia or another eating disorder later on, which is why, in 2016, the American Academy of Pediatrics published a report advising parents and pediatricians to focus on creating a healthy lifestyle rather than weight and weight loss with children.
This is not to say you can’t help children learn to love vegetables or should stop encouraging them to be physically active. But in most cases, we don’t need to do much more than offer a variety of healthy foods on a regular meal schedule and then let kids decide for themselves how much to eat, as I explored last month. But parents need to remove the diet and weight loss piece of the equation — because kids will pick up on that pressure even if it’s largely unspoken. “When kids see diet culture messaging and absorb their parents’ worries about body size, it can instill a sense of guilt and fear around food that may impact their relationship with eating for years or even decades to come,” Harrison said.
This is also true, by the way, if you’re laid back about your kids’ food choices but are meanwhile launching yourself onto a January cleanse, detox, diet or lifestyle plan. A 2018 survey of 507 adults found that 64 percent recalled one or both of their parents dieting during their childhood; and those participants were more likely to recall parental criticism of their own weight and eating behaviors than adults who didn’t grow up with dieting parents. A 2016 study that followed 181 mother-daughter pairs for six years found that the girls with mothers on diets were significantly more likely to start dieting themselves before age 11. The study noted that dieting is generally associated with an increased likelihood of overeating, greater weight gain and chronic health problems.
You could also resolve to stop buying foods and other products that use diet-based marketing. But keep in mind that by the time your child is in preschool — and certainly once she learns to read — she’s likely to start bringing diet culture messages of her own home from the world. You don’t need to ban every protein bar or other diet culture pantry staple, but you can turn them into teaching opportunities and encourage your kids to think critically about the messages they see.
