Pregnancy|Are Fears of Inducing Labor Overblown?
Ten days past her first child’s due date, Linda Finkbeiner faced a reckoning: Her son, she surmised, was never coming out.
The then 35-year-old special education teacher had tried the usual tricks: taking long walks, eating spicy foods. And aside from a thyroid condition that increased her risk of miscarriage, her pregnancy had been trouble-free.
But now, at 41 weeks and three days pregnant, and in bed in the hospital, Finkbeiner was “massively uncomfortable.” She wanted to be induced. “My midwife did warn me that induced labor is a lot more intense,” said Finkbeiner. But she decided to go ahead with the procedure anyway and was confined to bed and put on continuous fetal monitoring to check her baby’s heart rate.
Soon after, Finkbeiner was hooked to an I.V. and given Pitocin, a synthetic version of the hormone oxytocin, which triggers labor contractions. Within minutes, she felt a surge of pressure grip her pelvis. The contractions came so fast and so hard that eventually she needed an epidural for the pain.
About 12 hours later, Finkbeiner’s baby — all 7 pounds, 7 ounces of him — slid right out. Though the birth wasn’t without complications. As Finkbeiner’s baby made his way through her birth canal, his shoulder got stuck and wouldn’t budge. Given the option of a C-section or a vacuum extraction (which involves attaching a cup to the baby’s head and gently using suction to pull the baby out) — Finkbeiner chose the latter.
Few subjects provoke as much uncertainty among expecting parents as the practice of induced labor. Until 2018, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists advised doctors that, unless mother and fetus were in distress, they shouldn’t induce labor until a pregnancy reached 41 weeks (39 weeks is considered full-term). At that point, they said, the risks of health complications for mom (like high blood pressure) and for baby (like brain injury or breathing problems) could rise.
But, the thinking went, inducing before 41 weeks could increase the likelihood of a C-section. “Ten years ago, the entirety of my training we were taught that induction increases the chances of cesarean,” said Dr. William Grobman, M.D., a professor of obstetrics at Northwestern University.
As it turns out, that deeply-held idea was not based on sound science. And a few new studies have found that, in fact, inducing healthy women at 39 weeks isn’t necessarily associated with an increased risk of C-sections, and could be associated with some advantages, too.
Do inductions cause C-sections?
Some of the earliest research suggesting that inductions increase the risk of cesareans was published in the 1970s and into the early 2000s. In one study, published in 1999 in the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, for instance, researchers analyzed records of 7,000 women who were induced at a Kansas City hospital between 1990 and 1997. They found that the first-time mothers who were voluntarily induced had double the risk of C-section than the group that went into labor spontaneously. Another study, published in Obstetrics & Gynecology in 2000, found similar results: Among the 1,135 women analyzed, the first-time mothers who were induced between 38 and 41 weeks were twice as likely to have a C-section as the women who weren’t.
Two recent studies have revealed something entirely different: that inducing healthy women at term was not, in fact, associated with more C-sections, and may even offer some benefits.
One study of more than 600 healthy women published in the New England Journal of Medicine in 2016, for example, revealed that inducing labor in women over age 35 at 39 weeks did not raise their chances of a cesarean. In 2018, Dr. Grobman and colleagues from several universities took that finding a step further with a randomized controlled trial — the gold standard of medical research — of more than 6,000 healthy first-time mothers, half of whom were induced at 39 weeks, and half who went through labor on their own. The results, published in the New England Journal of Medicine, revealed that the women who were induced had 3 percent fewer C-sections than those who weren’t.
Additionally, when Dr. Grobman and his colleagues compared the health of moms and babies in the induction and non-induction groups, the researchers were surprised to find that the women who were induced were less likely to develop high blood pressure and pre-eclampsia after their procedures than those who weren’t induced. In another twist, the moms who were induced also reported less pain during labor and felt more in control of their birth experiences. And their newborns needed less help breathing than those who went into labor without an induction.
Should you be induced?
Dr. Grobman’s 2018 New England Journal of Medicine study was so pivotal that ACOG changed its guidelines in 2018 to say that doctors can offer induction at 39 weeks to first-time mothers if both mom and fetus are healthy, and if she’s not having twins.
Still, this study needs to be interpreted with caution, said Susan Stone, D.N.Sc., president of the American College of Nurse-Midwives. Because it focused on healthy, first-time mothers, it doesn’t apply to all pregnant women, such as moms having their second or third child, or those with health issues.
“Women do need to know all the information so they can make their own decision,” said Stone. “But making sure you’re not extrapolating this group of women to all women is really important.” And as with all questions in medical science, more studies need to be done.
And even if you are healthy, there can be downsides to induction, including that it doesn’t always work, or that it can cause unpleasant side effects, such as more intense and frequent contractions, nausea and vomiting, sinus issues and even memory problems. “If you’re going to be induced, it involves Pitocin, you’re going to be in bed, on continuous fetal monitoring, so you’re talking about a very different experience,” said Stone.
Still, these risks may not outweigh the benefits for some.
After talking with her ob-gyn, Christine Escobar, an assistant professor of biology at Northwestern University, enrolled in Dr. Grobman’s study in 2017, when she was six months pregnant. “Many hospitals were part of the study, so the results were promising,” Escobar said. She and her husband also relished the idea of boosting medical research.
Escobar was 38 weeks along when she learned she was in the induced group. But she wasn’t disappointed. She’d made peace with the idea that she might have a birth with interventions.
While more studies are needed, Dr. Grobman said that his recent N.E.J.M. study is at least a start in helping moms who are eligible for induction to be more informed about the procedure, and better able to choose the birth experience they want. And while Stone praised the study for its rigor, she said that it’s still important to understand what the medical intervention means.
As for Finkbeiner, she did end up getting induced again when, five days past her due date, a test revealed her baby’s heart rate had jumped. But this time, her labor experience was dramatically better. Only an hour after she went on Pitocin, Finkbeiner delivered an 8-pound, 10-ounce baby girl. And unlike her son’s birth, her daughter’s was calm because only her midwife and a nurse had to be present in the delivery room. “Last time with the vacuum extraction, the doctor came in with his whole entourage, the pediatrician had to come in with all his nurses, so it was packed,” she said.
Mona Gable is a freelance writer in Los Angeles.