Meet the man behind the $5 billion toy juggernaut.
This story was originally published on Dec. 17, 2019 in NYT Parenting.
Isaac Larian, the founder and C.E.O. of MGA Entertainment, the American toy giant, was tossing and turning one night in 2015.
Larian was suffering from insomnia, and for good reason. The billionaire had spent the last decade in court battling Mattel, another American toy company, over the intellectual property of Bratz, the precocious line of dolls which were designed by a former Mattel toy designer who later went on to work for M.G.A.E.
M.G.A.E. had racked up hundreds of millions of dollars in legal fees to take on Mattel, the iconic brand behind Barbie, and Larian was also worried that Bratz had fallen out of popularity. The crop-top and platform shoe-wearing dolls were huge in the early aughts but had left the spotlight due to changing consumer tastes, as well as a particularly bruising report from the American Psychological Association that accused Bratz of sexualizing young girls.
Larian needed a win, and that night, he decided to browse YouTube and explore product-reveal videos he’d heard his kids talk about.
A lightbulb went off.
The M.G.A.E. creative team’s response, L.O.L. Surprise! dolls, are pint sized, candy colored and have impossibly huge eyes, which makes them look like something out of an acid trip. They come with stylish hairdos, as well as varying accessories, like a handbag, coffee cup or headband.
But the toy’s cuteness isn’t its only wow factor. L.O.L. Surprise! dolls come inside opaque packaging, so kids don’t know what they’re getting until the toy is fully unwrapped. Each accessory — which typically number seven to nine, but can go into the dozens — is also hidden in its own layer of packaging, making the unwrapping an experience. The dolls, which target the 4 to 14 age range, also have different functions like squirting water or secret skin designs that are — surprise! — revealed after being placed under water.
Larian’s late-night inspiration spawned a sensation — one of the most popular toys of the last decade.
Last year, M.G.A.E. reports, the company made more than $4 billion from L.O.L. Surprise! doll retail sales. It’s expecting to rake in $5 billion in 2019, not including revenue from licensing deals.
According to the NPD Group, a market research firm, L.O.L. dolls are outpacing the sales of Barbie, Pokémon, Nerf and Marvel action figures. Its products are even more popular than Star Wars toys.
L.O.L. Surprise! dolls seem to be everywhere: On the shelves at Walmart and Duane Reade; gracing Amazon’s best-selling toy list; and in private Facebook groups, where rabid fans buy, sell and trade them. On the Christmas wishlist of a 10-year-old girl that recently went viral on Twitter, L.O.L. dolls sat comfortably next to the new iPhone and Gucci slides. They usually sell for about $10 — cheap enough for kids to buy them using birthday or allowance money — although some L.O.L. editions can cost as much as $249.99.
L.O.L. Surprise! dolls are a fusion of toy trends that have dominated the decade. Specifically, they’ve risen to fame because of the toy’s remarkable ability to mimic a YouTube unboxing video IRL.
And for kids today who turn to social media to discover toys instead of roaming the aisles of Toys “R” Us, L.O.L. Surprise! dolls are a welcome trend to chase.
Larian, 65, is just as infamous in the toy industry as his Bratz dolls are.
An Iranian Jewish entrepreneur who moved to America when he was 17 to study engineering, Larian sold hand-held electronic games before going on to build M.G.A.E. Witty, blunt and a self-professed “kid at heart,” Larian is a legend for his enterprising spirit, as well as his chutzpah. He’s notorious for pulling stunts like sending out emoji-filled press releases that tease the toy industry for falling behind.
Larian’s tenacity is what initially helped get L.O.L. dolls moving. When Larian first took the product to Walmart, he said, the retailer initially declined to stock it.
From there, M.G.A.E. inked deals to sell L.O.L. Surprise! at larger retailers around the globe, and at smaller, independent toy stores.
Moms like Jackie Kotler say they love L.O.L. dolls because they’re a more wholesome toy than some of the souped-up offerings on store shelves.
The rise of L.O.L. Surprise! dolls dovetailed with the explosion of YouTube’s unboxing genre.
By the mid-2010s, tons of YouTubers were uploading videos of themselves unwrapping gadgets, beauty products — anything that could game the site’s formula that translated eyeballs to cash. Toys became a quick hit for unboxing, and kid influencers like Ryan’s World and EvanTubeHD soon rose to fame for earning millions of dollars by simply opening toys in front of a camera.
Jackie Breyer, the publisher of Adventure Media Group, which puts out several toy magazines, said L.O.L. Surprise! products have thrived precisely because they are YouTube bait. A mother of two, Breyer recounted her 10-year-old daughter opening L.O.L. dolls while performing a voiceover to an imaginary camera.
Larian, a dogged observer of toy trends, said that once he caught wind of toy unboxing, M.G.A.E. made sure to link up with toy influencers early on, sending free products to YouTubers like Cookie Swirl C, who has more than 12 million subscribers. This helped spread the word and let the toy get swallowed up and spit out by YouTube’s algorithm as well.
Not that M.G.A.E. has left marketing solely in the hands of influencers. The company launched a YouTube channel of its own when it debuted L.O.L. dolls in December 2016, and it’s amassed upward of 1 million subscribers (although some of its unboxing videos draw more than 6 million views). An unboxing experience on M.G.A.E.’s YouTube channel often includes brushing the dolls’ hair, petting them and other A.S.M.R.-heavy triggers that have become popular on social media.
“Kids are not watching Nickelodeon anymore; they are not watching TV anymore. They are on YouTube, so what we did is a whole line of unboxing on YouTube,” Larian said.
L.O.L. Surprise!’s YouTube play is a perfect example of how toy companies today sidestep marketing boundaries that the Federal Communications Commission put on children’s television programming in the ’90s. Unboxing videos, which are often created or sponsored by toy brands, are frequently how children learn about products.
Some parents despise the unboxing trend and the toys that have spawned from it.
Others, like Kotler, prefer unboxing videos to other trending YouTube content.
While L.O.L. dolls are stocked at major retailers globally, M.G.A.E. has been especially dogged about its distribution approach. Of the 30 different types of dolls it sells, a select few are rare and infrequently distributed. This scarcity sways children to constantly seek them out. It’s driving Yeezy sneaker-like hype, where there’s no shortage of sellers listing highly sought-after dolls like the Splash Queen or the Punk Boi for almost $200 on eBay.
Each L.O.L. Surprise! doll is also packaged with a booklet that shows all the dolls, and which ones are the rarest. It incentivizes children to collect the toys, as opposed to just being O.K. with owning one or two of them.
Other parents, who may have traded baseball cards or action figures in their day, are thrilled that collectibles are trendy to new generations.
Osborne, the owner of the South Carolina toy stores, has hopped on this train. Her stores now host L.O.L. Surprise! trading hours on Saturdays. Kids come in and barter with each other — or buy more L.O.L. dolls from the store, of course.
As anyone who’s ever been a kid knows, toy trends come and go.
“It can be Tickle Me Elmo or fidget spinners, but everything in the toy industry has a lifespan of about 10 minutes,” said Kodali, the Forrester analyst.
But Larian is currently hard at work to make sure the L.O.L. Surprise! legacy endures. In July, M.G.A.E. debuted L.O.L. OMG, a larger version of its iconic L.O.L. Surprise! doll that’s meant to rival Barbie (in an email, a spokeswoman for Mattel said that “Barbie has proven her staying power by remaining both timeless and timely, continuing to reinvent the fashion doll category through new product innovation, diverse doll options and the celebration of female role models”). M.G.A.E.’s plan includes issuing constant updates to L.O.L. dolls, like replacing plastic hair with synthetic, softer hair, and an expansion into a line of L.O.L. pets.
Meanwhile, M.G.A.E. has plans to move L.O.L. Surprise! beyond dolls. There are now licensing deals for bedding, shoes, board games and bathrobes. In November, M.G.A.E. debuted an L.O.L. Surprise! movie on Amazon Prime. Larian said fans can expect more from the line in the next decade.
Chavie Lieber is a journalist living in New York City who covers fashion, business and tech.