I’d counted on my mom, an expert on child development, to help me learn to parent my son. The thought of managing without her was terrifying.
This essay was originally published on January 7, 2020 in NYT Parenting.
I used to say it casually: “I feel like I’ve been hit by a truck.” I said it when I was tired, worn out, maybe coming down with a cold.
Then my mother was rear-ended by a semi truck and died. I don’t use that phrase anymore.
When the wreck happened, I was almost 19 weeks pregnant. I had talked to my mother a few hours before, like I did almost every morning. I had called her as I drove the winding road from my home to my office and complained, once again, about how tired I felt. I told her I had been feeling queasy lately. I could hear the smile in her voice. She told me she was sorry I didn’t feel well, but she was happy there were signs her grandson was growing.
I tried to call her again as I came back from lunch that day. A conversation with a new mom friend had left me wondering whether I needed a doula for the birthing process. I had never heard of a doula, and I wanted my mom’s thoughts on the idea. Her phone rang until it went to voice mail.
When my father showed up at my office a few hours later with the news, I didn’t believe him. “But I talked to her just a few hours ago,” I said, confused. I didn’t fully believe that it could be true until I saw her body, days later, after it had been released by the coroner’s office. Until that point, I kept telling myself there was at least some small chance that they — the police, the hospital, the media — had made a mistake.
But it wasn’t a mistake, as surreal as it was. I began to go through the required motions: shopping for a black dress that fit over my expanding belly to wear to the funeral; picking out bright, cheerful flowers to drape over the coffin; placing the “grandmother” necklace I had bought her for Christmas a few months before into her hand so that she could be buried with it.
I walked away from the cemetery, knowing that I was beginning a journey of letting go of my mother while trying to becoming a mother myself.
I felt as if all of the help and support I had counted on to be a good mother had been suddenly and unexpectedly ripped away. My mother was a baby expert, a retired director of a child development lab. She had been planning to come stay after I gave birth and to care for her grandchild once I went back to work. She had always promised me that, if and when I had kids, she would come over during the day and walk out the door as I walked in each night. “I’ll even have a casserole in the oven,” she had said, laughing. I had no experience with kids. How was I going to do this without her?
In the months before my mother’s death, I had written a book about her life. About how she had grown up in extreme poverty in the Appalachian Mountains and become the first in her family to go to college. About how she had me while she was a young college student and worked hard to graduate with me by her side. About how the value she taught me to place on education led me far beyond the eastern Kentucky hills to the halls of Harvard, Yale and the London School of Economics. I concluded that everything I knew and had was because of her, and other strong Appalachian mountain women like her.
My mother and I had always been close, but the writing process had brought us closer. We had talked for hours about her life, her memories and her unexpected life path. She traveled with me to the small mountain town she grew up in, and we spent days talking to our relatives. She was honored that her daughter wanted to write a book that told her story. A few months before she died, she read a draft and told me she felt like a “proud hill woman.” I finished the book the day before she passed.
In the first months after she died, I found myself picking up my cellphone and instructing Siri to “call Mom” — before remembering that no one was going to answer on the other end. I would take the dog for a walk in the park, and instinctively begin to dial her. My book editor sent me a list of follow-up questions, and I immediately thought, “I’ll have to ask my mom about that.” Some days I felt as if the hole created by her absence would swallow me.
To fill the void, I began to write letters to her, in an attempt to continue the conversation that had been abruptly cut off. I told her about my pregnancy, about how scared I was about becoming a mother without her by my side. I asked her questions about what her labor had been like and if she thought it was O.K. to get an epidural. I recounted the mundane details of my life, because I had never not shared those with her.
It’s hard to read those letters now. The early ones are full of grief, rage and uncertainty. Sometimes, the letters were nothing more than a stream-of-consciousness scream onto a blank page. I wrote them weekly, and I didn’t necessarily feel better afterward.
Then, I had my son.
Gradually, the tone and purpose of my letters began to shift. They became a way to tell my mother about her grandchild and to hope that, somehow, the message was getting through to her. I told her how I thought my chest would burst from pride the first time he rolled over and about how his tiny fingers rested against my chest when I fed him at night. I described his coy smile and complained about what a terrible sleeper he was. I wanted to document — for her and for myself — the ways he was growing. I was growing too.
I was becoming a mother, learning how totally and completely overwhelming it was to be charged with the care of a tiny human. “When does parenting get easier?” I typed into Google one afternoon.
But I was also feeling the indescribable love and joy that comes from being a parent. “I would actually fight a tiger for him,” I told my husband in awe. I had heard other moms express that sentiment before, but I was still surprised at how intensely and sincerely I felt it.
Becoming a mother made me feel connected to my mom in a new way. I understood how much she loved me, because I loved my son that much. I could almost hear her voice during some of those late-night feeding sessions: “I did this too. You’ll get through it, just like I did.” I felt comforted, finally understanding how deep her love for me had been. Becoming a mother — the thing that scared me most after she passed — ended up being the only thing that could bring me a sense of peace.
My son is now 5 months old, and I still write letters to my mother. Not quite every week, but frequently. There is more gratitude in them now. I thank her for the lessons she taught me and the things she did for me. I understand now how much love was behind those never-ending diaper changes and 3 a.m. wake-ups. I plan to keep writing letters to her throughout my son’s childhood. It makes me feel that she — somehow, someway — is still participating in the conversation.
