Despite improved awareness and screening practices, many women with perinatal mood disorders still go untreated.
A new mother recently told me that she was afraid to see a psychiatrist for her postpartum depression. “Breastfeeding is the one thing I can control, and I don’t want to stop if I need medication,” she said. Even though she knew she needed to see a mental health specialist, she worried that she might have to stop nursing her baby if she were prescribed antidepressants.
As a pediatrician with specialized training in breastfeeding medicine and postpartum depression and anxiety, I hear stories like this every day. Postpartum depression and anxiety are the most common and serious obstetric complications, affecting up to 25 percent of mothers within the first year of childbirth. And as breastfeeding rates in the United States continue to rise, with over 57 percent of women breastfeeding at the six-month mark, it’s not surprising that many nursing mothers will also be suffering from a postpartum mood disorder.
Though screening for postpartum depression and anxiety has improved in recent years — the American Academy of Pediatrics encourages pediatricians to assess maternal mental health during well-infant visits, and many states have passed legislation requiring Medicaid to cover screenings — up to 50 percent of women with postpartum depression and anxiety still go undiagnosed. And, even among those who are diagnosed through screenings, most do not get the mental health treatment they need.
Sometimes a lack of resources prevents new moms from getting the help they need; they may have inadequate insurance coverage, for example, or live in an area with few mental health providers. But many women avoid seeking treatment because they are afraid. Many fear that taking medication while breastfeeding could harm their babies, while others fear the stigma associated with a diagnosis of postpartum depression. Some believe that accepting a diagnosis will mean they are “bad moms,” and that perinatal mood disorders are something they are just supposed to “get through.” But would we ever ask a new mom to stop her medications for asthma or high blood pressure and tell her to “just get through it”? Of course not.
Motherhood begins when you carry that child for nine months. Despite the difficult and often strenuous act of giving birth, when the baby arrives, women may be filled with joy and love. But then new parents are sent home with a new human being to care for, and the baby is on a repetitive cycle of feeding, peeing, sleeping and crying. While caring for their infants, many mothers begin to feel unhappy or disconnected from their babies. The feelings of guilt can become overwhelming since women have often been told that this is supposed to be the happiest time of their lives. Though there is less stigma around maternal mental health than there was a few years ago, many mothers are hesitant to share their feelings of inadequacy, for fear of being judged. No woman wants to feel like she is not a good mother.
About eight years ago, along with a friend who is a perinatal psychiatrist, I began speaking about breastfeeding and mental health at various conferences, and meeting with faculty in psychiatry, obstetrics and gynecology and family medicine at various institutions. During this time, we realized how much misinformation was out there. Many physicians told mothers to stop breastfeeding before they would prescribe them antidepressants (often selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or S.S.R.I.s). One psychiatrist in an academic department told me: “After a month, I told my patient she had breastfed long enough. I told her to stop so I could restart her medications.” At that point, I was speechless.
Luckily, this approach is gradually changing. Obstetricians and psychiatrists are becoming more comfortable medicating breastfeeding women suffering from postpartum depression and anxiety, and increased screening by pediatricians means that mothers who are suffering from postpartum depression and anxiety are being identified earlier. The openness of celebrities like Chrissy Teigen and Serena Williams about their postpartum mental health struggles has helped to raise awareness while reducing stigma, and more breastfeeding mothers are asking for help.
I counsel mothers that the S.S.R.I. medications usually used to treat postpartum depression and anxiety are safe to take while breastfeeding; this class of drug has been around a long time, giving us a great deal of information on its safety profile. In fact, the Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine has published a protocol so that all physicians and health professionals have access to the evidence when treating postpartum mental health conditions in breastfeeding mothers. No one should be telling a mother who is suffering from postpartum depression or anxiety that she has to make a choice between medication and breastfeeding.
Unfortunately, I still see pregnant mothers who either stop taking or decrease the dosage of their psychiatric medications, for fear of harming their babies. Even though there is little scientific evidence linking these medications to any harmful effects on the fetus, pregnant women are terrified. Untreated depression and anxiety during pregnancy is the biggest risk factor for postpartum depression and anxiety, the effects of which are far-reaching: It can cause family dysfunction, prevent effective mother-baby bonding, cause early cessation of breastfeeding and adversely affect infant growth and brain development. Providers must weigh the potential risk of medication alongside the risk of untreated depression on the fetus and on the infant. But suggesting to mothers that they should just hang on and wait for these feelings to pass is not only irresponsible, but dangerous.
As a pediatrician, I am also in the position of supporting moms who decide to stop breastfeeding. What if breastfeeding is worsening her ability to sleep, increasing her anxiety and generally making mom’s mental health worse? There is no shame in feeding your baby formula. For many moms, receiving that validation that they are allowed to stop breastfeeding is a relief, and hopefully minimizes their guilt. As providers, we should empower mothers to do what is best for their babies, while also taking care of themselves. A happy and healthy mom equals a happy and healthy baby.
Natasha K. Sriraman M.D. is an associate professor of pediatrics at Eastern Virginia Medical School/The Children’s Hospital of the King’s Daughters who blogs regularly on maternal-child health and issues affecting mothers in medicine.