Her reaction baffled me. I could never understand why our culture perpetuates the evil stepmother cliché, implying that women are capable of loving only their biological children. Even before meeting my husband, Tony, I knew I wanted to date someone divorced, because he couldn’t hide his past, the same way I couldn’t hide my past since I’m a memoirist — my missteps are already public. Divorced people had been through an emotional ordeal, giving them a depth I found attractive. And if they had kids, even better, as I’ve always enjoyed the challenge of bonding with children who aren’t blood-related to me, and I love the perspective kids bring to the world.
Now that I’m a stepmom legally, I would argue that it’s a wonderful role: You learn how to parent with your partner before the stress of a newborn comes into the mix. When I met Louise, Tony’s daughter, she was 6, and we hit it off. Now that she’s 9, Louise lives with us three days a week during the school year, and in the summers a week on and a week off. So the conversations Tony and I have about how to discipline or manage chores aren’t abstract or hypothetical — they’re happening in real time.
As someone who was terrified of having to shoulder most of the emotional labor in a marriage, it was thrilling to meet a partner who was already trained in this kind of work. Tony jerks awake if he hears a cough from Louise’s bedroom, or if her feet pitter-patter down the hall. He knows the name of her dentist and notices if her nails have to be cut. He conditions, detangles and blow-dries her hair, and is both Santa and the Tooth Fairy. He does laundry bi-weekly, whereas I’ll let mine sit for a month. He’s the one who cleans the toilet, and makes much more creative dinners than me.
Over the years I have experienced many small joys of motherhood, without some of the downsides of raising a child from day 1 of her life. Suddenly, I could use the words “I have to pick up my kid” and people would move their cars from blocking my driveway. Strangers smiled at me more on the street; waiters were nicer and gave us crayons and stickers. Activities I wouldn’t dream of doing solo entered my life: kite-flying, jumping rope, Marco Polo, Judy Blume books, coloring Easter eggs, Trick-or-Treating and re-watching all five seasons of “The Brady Bunch.” Life became sweeter and richer, without the sleepless nights of breastfeeding or a kid blaming me for the pre-existing bedtime rules or sugar restraints in their life. I get to be more of a confidante, a role model, a parent without so much pressure.
Many of my friends in their mid- to late-30s are conflicted over having children. They want babies but also feel satisfied in their careers, creative work and friendships; they don’t necessarily want to put their ambitions on hold for child-rearing.
This is why being a stepmom gives you the best of both worlds: I can stay independent and still experience the heart lurch that comes from Louise asking me to lie with her until she falls asleep and spray rose water on her face and on the faces of her eight stuffed animals. And when she’s gone a couple of days later, I can binge-watch TV shows, get my writing done, go on dates with Tony, stay out late and even sleep in the next day. By the time Louise comes back, I’m just beginning to miss her and am thrilled to have her return. This benefits Tony, Louise’s mom and her husband, too — the four of us are full-time freelance artists, and our arrangement gives us the space to work unencumbered.
That’s not to say it’s all sunshine — step parenting can be heartbreaking, too. There are times when I feel unseen, as though I do all of the tedious stuff in the background — like a ghostwriter, or a bar-back. On the first Mother’s Day I was living with Tony and Louise, but before we were married, Tony gave his ex-wife flowers he picked outside. This was such a sweet gesture, but it ached. I remember being at a school picnic and all of the moms discussed their summer plans. Even though I had helped organize our camps and vacations, the moms didn’t include me in the conversation, because they didn’t consider me a “real” mom.
The following Mother’s Day, my mom gave me flowers, and Tony took me to eat Indian food and to a waterfall. This past year I learned Stepmother’s Day is observed the Sunday after Mother’s Day, and has been for years. I was given a handmade Happy Stepmommy’s Day card and poetry book. Louise and I celebrated our relationship, too, because it was important for me to acknowledge her role as being a great kid — the kid who made me a stepmom.
The first time Louise said “I love you” to me is as vivid as anytime a boyfriend did — if not more so. I remember it was March and she was leaving for D.C. She hung back in the stairwell, and said it quietly. “What?” I asked, and she sheepishly said it again, but looked me in the eye. “I love you too,” I said.
She’s also a witness to my and her father’s love. She remembers the courtship, “the first time we went on an airplane together” and “the first movie we all watched together.” To have a third party throughout it all makes our falling in love more real; it’s validating. And I get to witness her becoming: the training wheels coming off her bike, her hand squeezing mine as her ears get pierced, going underwater for the first time and passing her swim test. When we share a knowing glance, or a laugh, or finish each other’s sentences, our bond feels supernatural, and I feel the meaning of the word daughter.
When we’ve talked with Louise about her father and I possibly having a baby in the future, her response is: Please please please please! I can help! I can babysit! Please! And knowing her, she would help: She’s already emotionally supportive and loving, and she’d be another pair of hands to grab the groceries from the car, to hold the baby and to keep me company on the days I’m bored out of my mind at home with a newborn. I knew her first, after all.
The notion that a stepparent can’t love a child like a biological parent is lazy and dead-end thinking. It’s like saying your friends can’t be your family. I recall those women in their 20s, on the subway, who thought that stepmotherhood was a dreaded fate. I wish I had told them that I think it’s a perfectly sublime role, not only to be — but to desire.
Chloe Caldwell, the author of the novella “Women” and essay collection “I’ll Tell You in Person,” lives in Hudson, N.Y., with her husband and stepdaughter. She’s currently at work on a memoir about premenstrual dysphoric disorder.