Fertility|What Causes Secondary Infertility?
When the first pregnancy arrives with little effort, struggling to conceive again can come as a shock.
The doctor sketched a rough outline of my reproductive organs and nearby anatomy as she talked. The black lines on white paper seemed so sparse, when in reality they represented our hopes for the future. My husband and I had a healthy, smart, sassy, thriving preschooler; but we wanted another child. And with the relative ease of our first pregnancy — three months of trying followed by a clockwork 40 weeks (and three days) of pregnancy — we assumed the second would come easily.
“Why couldn’t we figure out the timing? Why wouldn’t our bodies do what they were supposed to do?” they wondered. Their diagnosis: unexplained secondary infertility.
More than 6 million women between 15 and 44 struggle to become or stay pregnant — whether they’ve previously had kids or not — according to the United States Department of Health and Human Services. Of those, one-third are estimated to have secondary infertility.
Dr. Jacqueline Ho, M.D., a fertility specialist and assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Southern California’s Keck School of Medicine, said that it can be challenging to give parents advice about secondary infertility, in part because it often isn’t researched separately from general infertility.
Dr. Richard V. Grazi, M.D., founder of Genesis Fertility and Reproductive Medicine in Brooklyn, said he often sees Catholic and Orthodox Jewish women — who already have had five or six children — coming to him because they desperately want more.
“The frustrating thing to me that we see quite often is somebody who is on their second life event — they’ve had a child, many years have passed, and either they’ve awakened to the fact that they want to have another child together or there’s been a breakup and they want to have a child with another partner,” Dr. Grazi said.
The trouble with secondary infertility diagnoses is that their causes are hard to pin down. For some couples, such as those over 40, it might simply be run-of-the-mill infertility issues because of age. But for others, it could be tied to previous health conditions or surgeries, such as scarring on the fallopian tubes or a previous cesarean.
Here are some common risk factors for secondary infertility.
Advanced age. While American women today are more likely to have children than they were more than a decade ago, according to the Pew Research Center, they’re also waiting longer to have them. That means that women trying to conceive for the second, third or fourth times are naturally older than first-time moms, and therefore more likely to bump against age-related issues.
But we can’t defy nature. Healthy couples have about a 25 percent chance of getting pregnant in any given cycle up until their early 30s, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. By 40, that chance dips to 10 percent for women, according to ACOG; while the American Society for Reproductive Medicine puts that likelihood even lower, at fewer than 5 percent for women.
“We think that age 46 is the natural end of a woman’s reproductive life span,” Dr. Ho said.
Weight gain. While no studies have been done that directly link weight gain with secondary infertility, Dr. Ho and Dr. Grazi said, it stands to reason that women who have given birth might be at least a few pounds heavier than they were before they gave birth. And evidence suggests that having more body fat can increase the risk of secondary infertility.
Recent studies have found, for instance, that women who are classified as overweight or obese can experience hormonal shifts, which might disrupt their menstrual cycles and ovulation patterns and increase their risk for infertility.
Scarring, adhesions and blocked tubes. Scarring or adhesions in or on the reproductive organs can make getting pregnant challenging. If such adhesions or scarring block one or both fallopian tubes, for instance — such as from complications of an ectopic pregnancy or a subsequent surgery — that blockage might prevent sperm from entering the tubes to fertilize an egg. In the uterus, adhesions or scarring can lead to issues with menstruation, such as light or missed periods, or can prevent a fertilized egg from implanting and becoming a pregnancy.
For some women, surgery to clear the adhesions might be enough to help them get pregnant. But according to Dr. Zev Rosenwaks, M.D., director and physician-in-chief of the Center for Reproductive Medicine at NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center, most women who have such internal scarring or damage might be better served going straight to in vitro fertilization, since that technique can implant a fertilized egg directly into the uterus, bypassing the blocked tubes. This option, however, may be cost prohibitive for some.
Previous infections. Pelvic inflammatory disease, or P.I.D., an infection of a woman’s reproductive organs, can also damage the fallopian tubes and uterus enough to cause infertility. The condition can be caused by previous sexually transmitted infections, such as chlamydia or gonorrhea; as well as from infection from a past surgery, such as from a cesarean.
Chronic endometritis is a condition where the lining of the uterus is chronically inflamed — typically from an infection — which can make it difficult for an embryo to implant in the uterus. This condition affects as many as 40 percent of women with infertility, can be difficult to diagnose and may worsen with age.
Other health conditions. While age, weight and scarring can account for many secondary infertility cases, other medical conditions can play a role, too.
Endometriosis — which occurs when uterine lining cells grow outside the uterus — can cause inflammation and scar tissue on the ovaries, fallopian tubes and other internal organs, and can lead to issues with egg quality or embryo implantation. All of this can make getting pregnant a challenge for some, Dr. Ho said.
Polycystic ovary syndrome, a common condition in which a hormonal imbalance causes irregular periods, weight gain, cysts on the ovaries and more, can increase the risk of infertility.
Uterine fibroids, which are noncancerous growths on or in the uterus that can grow larger with age, can also block fallopian tubes and crowd the uterus, making conception difficult for some. PCOS and fibroids can worsen with age, which may at least partially explain why an earlier pregnancy wasn’t as difficult to achieve.
Thyroid conditions, such as hypothyroidism or Hashimoto’s disease, can also shift hormone levels and interfere with the ovulation process.
Male infertility. While it’s often the female partner who is referred to a specialist and who makes the appointments, the reason for infertility may stem from the male partner, said Dr. Jeanne O’Brien, M.D., a urologist who specializes in male infertility at the University of Rochester Medical Center.
The most common issue is low sperm count, which can result from extreme temperature changes (like regular soaks in a hot tub), steroid use (including from some supplements) and being overweight.
Whatever the reason for your secondary infertility, the doctors I spoke with said that all hope is typically not lost. “Even if you have infertility for two years, you still have a reasonable chance of getting pregnant,” Dr. Rosenwaks said.
My family’s happy ending sits in her crib, pitching stuffed animals over the side as I write. I will never know exactly why we needed more than two years to conceive her, versus the three months we needed for her big sister. Was it because I was overweight? Or because I was 38? More likely, my doctor told me, blocked fallopian tubes from adhesions and scarring from my previous cesarean were to blame.
We’ll never know what happened with total certainty. 
Anne Miller is a freelance editor and writer who lives in Brooklyn.