Five days after giving birth to her second child, Lauren Lowrey woke up feeling cheerful. By the standards of a woman recovering from childbirth while caring for a newborn and a toddler, she was feeling energetic, too.
“I was a little tired and sore, you know, but basically I felt really good,” said Lowrey, 34, a news anchor for a Nashville television station. She had enjoyed an easy, uncomplicated pregnancy and expected to bounce back quickly, just as she had after having her first baby three years earlier. But by the next morning, Lowrey’s confidence and sense of well-being had evaporated. “I just didn’t feel right,” she said. At first, her malaise was nonspecific: intense fatigue, an aching back and a headache that wouldn’t respond to ibuprofen. But as the day wore on, Lowrey’s head and back pain became excruciating, and she had trouble catching her breath.
Instead of napping, Lowrey called her obstetrician, who listened to her symptoms and told her to come to the hospital immediately. “She was very calm, but she made it clear to me that it was urgent,” Lowrey said, noting her doctor’s request that she arrive at the hospital in 30 minutes. “I got off the phone and I just cried, I was so scared.” That night, a C.T. scan helped to confirm that Lowrey had severe postpartum pre-eclampsia, a condition that’s generally characterized by perilously high blood pressure and, usually, excess protein in the urine. Had Lowrey ignored her instincts and gone to sleep, she could have suffered a fatal seizure or stroke.
For centuries, pre-eclampsia was understood to be a relatively rare condition that could only affect a woman during pregnancy. But according to the National Institutes of Health, cases — while still rare — have risen steadily in the past three decades.
While the prevailing wisdom among obstetricians long held that the only “cure” for pre-eclampsia was to deliver the baby, recent research suggests that for some, the condition might actually worsen after delivery. And for reasons researchers don’t yet fully understand, an increasing number of women like Lauren Lowrey, who had healthy pregnancies and uncomplicated deliveries, are experiencing spikes in blood pressure and other symptoms for the first time days, or even weeks, after checking out of the maternity ward. Though the consensus on postpartum risk among pre-eclampsia researchers is changing fast, Eleni Tsigas, the C.E.O. of the Preeclampsia Foundation, a Florida-based nonprofit devoted to educating patients and supporting research on pre-eclampsia, said that an alarming number of medical practitioners still believe pre-eclampsia can’t develop after delivery.
Even seemingly authoritative organizations, such as WebMD, get it wrong. Google “pre-eclampsia,” for instance, and you are likely to land on the WebMD page for it, which makes no mention of the fact that pre-eclampsia symptoms may appear for the first time during the postpartum period.
When pre-eclampsia develops during pregnancy, signs of it usually occur after the 20th week; pre-eclampsia affects more than 4 percent of all pregnancies in the United States, according to the N.I.H. Pre-eclampsia that presents during pregnancy has well-known treatment protocols and risk factors — including obesity, advanced maternal age, a history of high blood pressure and conception via I.V.F. Postpartum pre-eclampsia, by contrast, is far less common, and there are few studies, little reliable incidence data and no conclusively established risk factors.
Perhaps, in part, because it is still so poorly understood, postpartum pre-eclampsia is often more dangerous than pre-eclampsia during pregnancy. Though pregnant women with pre-eclampsia are usually asymptomatic and only learn of their condition through blood pressure testing at a prenatal medical visit, postpartum pre-eclampsia tends to develop suddenly. Its characteristic symptoms — fatigue, swelling, nausea, shortness of breath, headaches and pain in the back or shoulders — can be difficult to distinguish from more run-of-the-mill maternal complaints. Since the condition can appear up to six weeks after delivery — when most women are sleep-deprived, preoccupied with infant care and no longer closely monitored by their doctors — these symptoms are frequently overlooked.
Untreated, postpartum pre-eclampsia can progress rapidly, and can lead to life-threatening complications, including seizures, strokes, blood clots, excess fluid in the lungs and permanent damage to the brain, kidneys and liver. In the United States, most maternal deaths linked to pre-eclampsia occur after delivery. Dr. Leslie Moroz, M.D., director of the Mothers Center at NewYork-Presbyterian/Columbia University Irving Medical Center, said the conventional approach to postpartum care in the United States made this period riskier for some mothers. “In the traditional American model, the next check-in with her doctor is six weeks” after birth, Dr. Moroz said. In northern and western Europe, by contrast, even women with normal pregnancies receive home visits by medical professionals during the days and weeks after their deliveries.
