Pregnancy|Do ‘Baby-Friendly’ Hospitals Work for All Moms?
Until her third child was born, Jennifer Bronsnick believed that exclusive breastfeeding was an obvious, even beautiful, choice. But everything changed with the birth of her youngest daughter, from the moment she first brought her to her breast.
“It was the most excruciating pain I had ever been in in my entire life,” she said.
Just hours after delivery, her husband needed to head home from the hospital to care for their two older children, leaving Bronsnick without some of the support she had had during previous stays. She initially hoped that the hospital’s nursery would take the baby off her hands for long enough so that she could recover from birth, but found that her hospital was implementing a new series of strategies aimed at promoting breastfeeding, an approach known as the Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative (B.F.H.I.). Bronsnick was encouraged to exclusively breastfeed (giving her baby no food or drink other than breastmilk except in cases of medical need). Her newborn was also required to stay with her 24/7 so that they could bond and get a successful start to their breastfeeding relationship.
This style of breastfeeding had come easily with Bronsnick’s first two children, but it felt impossible and overwhelming with her third. After a week, she began to experience symptoms of postpartum depression — a condition that Bronsnick felt was exacerbated by the hospital’s insistence that she prioritize breastfeeding over rest. Instead of feeling prepared to care for her new child, Bronsnick was left feeling frustrated and exhausted.
In 1991, the World Health Organization and UNICEF developed the Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative, a program that encouraged hospitals and birthing centers to promote breastfeeding in response to plunging breastfeeding rates worldwide. One of the major tenets of the initiative was the W.H.O.’s “10 Steps to Successful Breastfeeding” — a series of strategies that included skin-to-skin care in the first hours of life, rooming-in (where mother and baby stay in the same room for the entire hospital stay), no pacifiers (to prevent nipple confusion) and no formula except when medically necessary. Because the sinking breastfeeding rates were driven in large part by aggressive marketing of infant formula to mothers of newborns, hospitals seeking the Baby-Friendly designation in the United States were also required to ban formula freebies for new moms. To date, more than 600 hospitals have been certified Baby-Friendly in the United States, accounting for nearly 30 percent of all births.
Experts agree that the goals of promoting breastfeeding are noble, even lofty. Breastmilk is sometimes referred to as nature’s superfood for babies, with strong evidence suggesting that breastfed babies have lower risks of asthma, allergies, childhood obesity and gastrointestinal problems later on. However, a small but vocal group of pediatricians and nurses, led by the nonprofit Fed Is Best, has begun to criticize some of the strategies that Baby-Friendly hospitals use, arguing that not only do they unduly pressure mothers to breastfeed, but that the designation also may not improve breastfeeding rates in the first year of life as intended.
In October 2019, researchers from Massachusetts published a paper in the Journal of Pediatrics, analyzing the number of women across the country who breastfed in 2018. “We found Baby-Friendly was not related to breastfeeding initiation,” said Dr. Joel Bass, M.D., the study’s lead author and a pediatrician at Newton-Wellesley Hospital in Massachusetts, meaning moms in states with many Baby-Friendly hospitals were no more likely to start breastfeeding than those in places without.
But the study itself has created its own firestorm, with some epidemiologists and physicians questioning its methodology. Dr. Alison Volpe Homes, M.D., M.P.H., a pediatrician at Dartmouth, criticized the study, saying that measuring the impact of Baby-Friendly hospitals would require longer-term data, not a single snapshot from just one year.
“It’s not a good way to study the efficacy of Baby-Friendly,” she said. “I don’t know why anyone would set up a study that way,” especially when Baby-Friendly hospitals account for just over a quarter of all births.
In 1992, the United States Department of Health and Human Services convened an expert panel to determine whether the 10 Steps program was suitable for the American health care system. In 1994, the committee endorsed the approach and recommended creating an independent national authority to certify hospitals as Baby-Friendly, called Baby-Friendly U.S.A. (B.F.U.S.A.).
Trish MacEnroe, chief executive officer of B.F.U.S.A., said that numerous studies have supported the initiative’s “10 Steps” backbone in increasing breastfeeding rates. “If breastfeeding doesn’t get off to a good start, it’s hard to continue,” MacEnroe said.
But Dr. Christie del Castillo-Hegyi, M.D., an E.R. physician in Arkansas, said that the problem is less with the W.H.O.’s 10 Steps approach, and more with the program’s implementation.
Baby-Friendly U.S.A., for instance, requires each hospital to decide for itself how it wants to fulfill the 10 Steps. This means that hospitals may not have adequate staff or policies in place that would ensure that the B.F.U.S.A. accreditation guidelines are met safely, said Regina Cardaci, Ph.D., R.N., a nursing professor at New York University.
On the Fed Is Best website, parents and health care providers tell stories of babies who were dropped or nearly suffocated by exhausted moms trying to breastfeed. Dr. Cardaci said that she had seen moms in Baby-Friendly hospitals who were given shots of Demerol, an opioid pain medication that can cause drowsiness, and then immediately left alone in rooms so that they could have skin-to-skin time and try to breastfeed. If a mom requests formula, or if she’d like for her baby to be taken to the nursery, she must sign a consent form that acknowledges that she’s been advised of the dangers of her requests. Some families sneak formula into the hospital because nurses and lactation consultants won’t provide it.
Indeed, the 10 Steps program states that formula should be given if it’s medically necessary. This includes anything from a hungry baby, MacEnroe said, to a mom deciding she still doesn’t want to breastfeed after nurses have briefed her on the potential negatives of using formula. But according to Dr. del Castillo-Hegyi, Baby-Friendly hospitals will often still push for exclusive breastfeeding, even when formula is clearly needed. In February 2012, for instance, Landon Johnson, who was just 3 days old, went into cardiac arrest from malnutrition and dehydration because his mother, Jillian, wasn’t producing any milk. Instead of giving her son formula, Jillian said that nurses at the Baby-Friendly hospital where she gave birth had advised her to try various herbs to increase her milk supply. After Landon spent two weeks in the NICU, his parents turned off life support when it became clear he had suffered irreversible, deadly brain damage.
Dr. del Castillo-Hegyi, who gave birth to her son in a hospital that wasn’t then certified as Baby-Friendly but provided no education on the risks of underfeeding with breastmilk, had a similar experience. For the first week of her son’s life, she gave him only the breast. But because her milk hadn’t fully come in, she didn’t realize that her son wasn’t getting much, if any, nutrition.
Dr. del Castillo-Hegyi said that the staff at her hospital didn’t tell her to be concerned about her child’s decreasing body weight, constant crying and eventual lethargy. None of the providers, she said, had suggested supplementing her breastmilk with formula. Only after Dr. del Castillo-Hegyi’s son ended up in the intensive care unit, jaundiced and with high sodium levels and low blood sugar (all symptoms of severe newborn malnutrition), was he given formula. That formula saved his life, but the malnutrition permanently damaged his brain, leaving him, now 9 years old, with severe developmental disabilities. This led Dr. del Castillo-Hegyi to eventually found Fed Is Best, a nonprofit that advocates for safe breast- and bottle-feeding strategies.
To date, research on the Baby-Friendly tenets has produced conflicting results. Some studies have suggested that supplementation with formula — a no-no according to the initiative — actually bolstered breastfeeding, since less stress might lead to a more robust milk supply. Others have found no such benefits.
In 2018, Dr. Bass led a study that questioned the safety of some of the 10 Steps, including skin-to-skin care — a practice that has been linked to sudden infant death. But as with his 2019 study, it set off a firestorm that ended with accusations of conflict of interest on behalf of one of the study’s coauthors, Dr. Ronald Kleinman, who had received an honorarium from Mead Johnson, an infant formula manufacturer, in 2014. (Dr. Kleinman did not reply to repeated requests for an interview).
On the other hand, a 2019 Journal of Pediatrics study found that skin-to-skin care actually reduced the risk of suffocation. And in 2016, researchers from Yale published a systematic review of 58 studies, which found that 10 Steps improved breastfeeding initiation and exclusivity.
Dr. Casey Rosen-Carole, M.D., M.P.H., a breastfeeding medicine specialist at the University of Rochester who was not involved with this research, said that while she was initially concerned that enthusiasm for exclusive breastfeeding might be potentially harming patients, she felt reassured after reading these studies.
She mainly views the B.F.H.I. as a means of educating families on the importance of breastfeeding while keeping hospitals from interfering with the process. The 10 Steps aren’t meant to say all mothers have to breastfeed, Dr. Rosen-Carole said, but that they know the benefits of breastmilk for babies before making their decision. Indeed, according to Dr. Bass, allowing a mother flexibility in her approach to breastfeeding, rather than rigidity, is most important for breastfeeding success.
The debate over the B.F.H.I. is far from settled, but to Bronsnick, what is most needed is more support for new mothers, and a better understanding of how the initiative affects moms and families. When moms do well, babies tend to do well. “Why can’t we have mommy-friendly hospitals?” she asked.
Correction, Jan. 6, 2020: An earlier version of this article misstated which aspect of the Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative (B.F.H.I.) Dr. Casey Rosen-Carole was initially concerned about. She was concerned that enthusiasm for exclusive breastfeeding, not the B.F.H.I. itself, might be potentially harming patients.