Your 3-year-old is growing up quickly and can seem like a walking, talking mini-adult. One of the few reminders of his age might be that he is still in pull-ups. A 3-year-old is starting to get a better sense of the world and how things work within it. His newfound speech and movement skills are not fully refined, and frustrations may lead to more temper tantrums than you are used to, earning him the affectionate title of “three-nager.” Still, 3 is a wonderful age and you will be blown away by your child’s accomplishments.
Understand her relationship to others. Your child may start to play with other children and will even start to show affection for friends and family without prompting. She will become immersed in imagination and fantasy play and may start imitating her parents.
Show off new skill sets. Your preschooler is putting together his impressive problem-solving and fine motor (little muscle) skills. He understands how things fit and work together.
Master new concepts. Your 3-year-old is understanding notions like opposites (big versus small and old versus new), time of day and matching objects.
Get around in style. Your preschooler is continuing to develop gross motor (large muscle) skills. She is much less clumsy now, with fewer falls; she is on to more advanced movements such as climbing stairs with alternating steps.
Have deeper conversations. At 3, your kid is getting really good at expressing himself. He may know about 250 to 500 words by now and speak in sentences of five to six words.
Development is a spectrum and its domains — language, socioemotional, motor and cognitive — are interconnected. Although, a child’s development is complex, it is clear that the experiences children have can support or detract from their development. A child’s interactions with others can be an indication of her development. As your child is forming independent relationships with others, she is building her empathy skills. If her friend falls, she may go check on him and ask if he’s O.K. Your child will become immersed in imagination and fantasy play and may start imitating her parents. Now is an important time for parents to model healthy social interactions. When you play with your child, model taking turns in games and how to handle losing or sharing objects. Many children begin preschool at 3, when they are more easily able to separate from their primary caregivers. But be aware that unexpected changes to the family routine may send your kid into a major meltdown. Temper tantrums can become more commonplace. Many children at this age are unable to vocalize what is setting them off — frustration, anger, guilt or other feelings.
At this stage, your child’s fine motor skills are improving. He is getting better at solving puzzles with four pieces, stacking six or more blocks and twisting knobs to open the door. When you are reading a story with your child, he is able to turn the page for you. Your child is also ready for the challenge of buttons! He may be starting to wash his hands and dress or undress himself. Your preschooler is starting to develop early writing skills and may be able to draw a circle or even a picture of a parent.
Your child’s gross motor skills are kicking into high gear. She may be able to catch a ball, and she is refining her throwing and kicking skills.  At 2 years old, your child likely still needed to put both feet on each step before moving on to the next step, but now she needs only one foot on each step when climbing up. However, when she goes down steps, she might still need to put both feet on each step before moving on to the next. About 50 percent of 3½-year-olds can hop on one foot, and can climb and run easily. At 3, kids are often able to ride a tricycle, though coordinating all the skills it takes to make the trike go forward might cause some frustration.
While time is still a difficult concept for your child, he better understands that certain activities happen during the day and other activities at night. Your child may start to excel at matching objects, so challenge him to an age-appropriate matching game. He may also ask you more questions to understand what certain things are. Now is the time to start asking him more questions too. You can ask him to point to the part of the body that smells yummy food or to tell you what fruit has a yellow peel.
If a stranger had a conversation with your child, he could likely understand 75 percent of what she is saying. Your 3-year-old is probably speaking in sentences of five to six words, and is using pronouns in her sentences: “We like to play.” With her growing language skills and imagination, your preschooler may start telling simple stories and holding conversations of two to three sentences. She is also getting better at following two-step commands. For example, if you asked her to go get a toy and put it on the floor, she would understand you and be able to do it.
Here is a helpful video that goes through many of the milestones your 3-year-old might be reaching. In this podcast, Dr. Alison Gopnik further discusses the latest research on brain development in early childhood.
Should I be worried that my 3-year-old is not potty-trained yet?
Many parents expect that by 3, they will be free from the Diaper Genie. However, some still find themselves changing diapers or pull-ups, and early potty training doesn’t necessarily speed the process. One research study showed that potty training before 27 months was not associated with children being dry sooner. Successful potty training is contingent on a few important factors — your child’s readiness, her motor coordination, communication abilities and, occasionally, a parent’s cultural norms and expectations. Generally, parents either choose a parent-led or child-led approach. However, it may be best to discuss your child’s readiness with her pediatrician, especially if your child has autism, developmental delays or intellectual disabilities, because potty training may become more difficult.
My child stutters. What do I do?
Stuttering — the repetition of words, phrases or syllables — can be anxiety-provoking for both parents and children. Some parents notice their child beginning to stutter around 18 to 19 months, while other parents report that their child seemed to start stuttering overnight. Stuttering can be passed down in families, with more than half of children who stutter having a family member who stutters or has stuttered. Children who stutter may have some difficulty coordinating the muscles integral to speaking with the words they want to say. Parents can help by not panicking when a child stutters. Speak to your child with patience and don’t hurry him through conversations. Asking children to speak slowly or to say their words or sentences again will not alleviate their stuttering. However, parents can minimize disruptions, such as TV, in a child’s environment. Many children will stop stuttering without speech therapy by 5 years old. However, certain factors, like male gender, stuttering that begins after 3½ years old, having a family member who stutters or other speech concerns, may put your child at risk for prolonged stuttering. If your child’s stuttering becomes excessive or frequent, a conversation with your pediatrician may be warranted.
What can I do if I have a picky eater?
Many 3-year-olds are reluctant to try new foods. Your child might wish for macaroni and cheese and chicken nuggets to be on the menu every day. While you know it is important for your child to eat a wide variety of fruits and vegetables, you can’t force-feed her, so what do you do? Most 3-year-olds like to be included, so you can include them in meal planning, grocery shopping and easy cooking to get them excited about a new food. Also many kids need repeated exposure to a new food (perhaps as many as 10 to 12 times) before they will willingly gobble it up. Healthychildren.org has great tips to help quell food battles.
Help your child to build social skills and to learn.  This is a great age to seek out playgroups. Libraries, neighborhood centers, religious groups and listservs may have free offerings in your area.
Promote your child’s language development by asking about his day and waiting for him to describe it. You can help by offering hints about what happened if he gets stuck. If he has an older sibling, try to ensure your 3-year-old has his own time to flex his language skills.
Potty training is an exercise in patience. If you need help on where to start, try these tips at healthychildren.org and talk about it with your child’s doctor.
Try cooking together. Cooking with your child accomplishes at least two important goals: You will get to spend quality time with your child and entice her to try some new foods. If you are struggling to find recipes that fit the bill, try these out.
