Sibling conflict is normal, but these mediation techniques will build empathy and help them settle disputes themselves.
This story was originally published on Dec. 26, 2019 on NYT Parenting.
If this sounds familiar, I have good news: Your kids aren’t monsters. “It’s normal to have conflict,” said Laura Markham, Ph.D., a Manhattan-based psychologist and the author of “Peaceful Parent, Happy Siblings.” “Every human relationship has conflict because it’s two individuals with different needs.” Or, sometimes, two individuals who need the exact same stuffed animal at the exact same time. That one happens a lot in our house, too.
But the fact that sibling conflict is normal doesn’t mean you’re doomed to another decade of pretending you don’t hear your kids screaming at one another while you cook dinner. There are steps you can take to prevent conflict before it happens, and even things you can do to help your kids start resolving disputes by themselves. As I learned when I dug into the research on sibling conflict, I’ve been doing pretty much everything wrong — which, on the bright side, suggests that if I change my approach, I can look forward to less yelling and more hugging. Well, maybe not hugging. That’s asking a lot.
If you’re reading this when you have another child on the way, I’m impressed with your planning skills. Also, you’re in a great position, because research suggests that the way you talk to your child about future siblings can help set the stage for stronger, more loving sibling relationships.
First, talk about your future baby in humanizing ways. Do you think she is sleeping in my belly now? How do you think she feels? In other words, “talk about the baby as a person who has wants and needs and desires,” suggested Holly Recchia, Ph.D., a psychologist at Concordia University in Montreal who studies how relationships shape kids’ social and moral development. In a 2017 study, researchers at the University of Michigan and the University of Toronto found that when young children can better perceive others’ feelings and needs — what is known as having better theory of mind skills — they play better with their siblings down the line.
You may have heard that your eldest is going to feel jealous and resentful of her new little sibling. This idea has been around since Freud, but the fact is, “the science doesn’t support it,” said Brenda Volling, Ph.D., a psychologist at the University of Michigan. In a 2017 analysis of the research literature, Dr. Volling and her colleagues concluded that “most children experience little to no disruption after the birth of their infant sibling.” Many kids, she said, feel quite excited about their new little siblings. This doesn’t mean the transition won’t be difficult — a baby is a big change for everyone — but typically, Dr. Volling said, families feel somewhat back to normal after a few months.
Still, older siblings notice that they are no longer getting all the attention, so set aside time, if you can, to spend with them one-on-one. (This can be tough for breastfeeding moms, but it may be possible if you have a partner or grandparent who can help.) Praise your older child, too, when he does something kind or helpful. “Bring some of the attention back to him so he can feel this moment of pride that, ‘Yeah, I’m a big boy and a big brother and I’ve been helping out too,’” Dr. Volling suggested. And when your older child gets frustrated with his sibling — as will inevitably happen — acknowledge his feelings, but also set limits. You’re mad that the baby grabbed your teddy bear! But she doesn’t understand that it’s yours, and no matter how upset you feel, it’s not O.K. to hit.
It’s also important, researchers say, not to show favoritism to one child over the other. This doesn’t mean things have to be equal all the time, but try to make things seem fair. If you took your older child out for ice cream after basketball practice today, tell your younger one you’ll take her for cupcakes tomorrow (and actually do it). Also, “younger kids often notice the privileges of an older sibling, and it feels painful,” Dr. McHale said, but you can counteract this imbalance by highlighting the extra responsibilities your firstborn has, too. Teddy may get to stay up later, but he also has to do more homework.
Psychologists used to advise parents to stay out of sibling conflicts, thinking that this helped kids learn how to solve problems by themselves. But starting in the late 1990s, research began to suggest that this approach largely backfires. When left to their own devices, siblings rarely resolve conflicts respectfully and constructively; often, the older or more dominant child “wins” through strength or coercion, leaving the other child deflated and angry. Research suggests that siblings who are left to resolve conflicts on their own use compromise or reconciliation only 12 percent of the time. Ultimately, these experiences can teach kids that coercion and bullying are the best ways to resolve conflict — not exactly the conclusion you want them to draw.
This doesn’t mean, however, that parents should “arbitrate” sibling fights, either. For instance, I shouldn’t storm into the room and demand that my 8-year-old hand his little sister the toy flashlight because I’ve decided he’s been hogging it, which I absolutely did not do a few weeks ago. There are several reasons you shouldn’t play judge and arbiter: First, you won’t always know who’s “right” and who’s “wrong”; second, even when you do, the minute you take one child’s side over the other, the losing child feels a sense of resentment that degrades the sibling relationship and fuels further conflict. “The kid who won feels like ‘I won, and Mom loves me better,’ and the other kid feels like ‘I lost — wait till I get my hands around my sibling’s neck,” Dr. Markham said.
Research now suggests that the best way for parents to intervene is to act as mediator — not to decide who’s right or wrong or how the conflict should be resolved, but to instead stay calm, treat siblings equally and help them answer these questions themselves. “Slow it down and help them hear each other, as opposed to deciding how it’s going to end,” Dr. Recchia explained.
1) Lay down ground rules that prevent further fighting as the issue is being worked out. Obtain consent to move forward. You two sound so upset! We’re going to take some deep breaths, and I’m going to take the bear you’re fighting over and put it up on the cabinet. Then we’ll talk about this, with no interrupting. O.K.?
2) Ask each sibling to describe what happened, and identify points of contention and common ground.  Jayden says he asked for a turn, but Connor, you said you didn’t hear him? 
3) Foster mutual understanding and empathy between the siblings by encouraging them to discuss their feelings and asking each child to repeat what the other said. So Connor, why did Jayden say he got so mad? Jayden, why did Connor start yelling when you hit him?
4) Help the siblings brainstorm solutions to the problem (and if their ideas are far-fetched, try to rein them in). What are some ways you two could fix this? What could you do differently next time? Hmm, but if we buy 600 more of these bears so you never have to share, what might happen?
Later, the researchers invited the families into the lab and watched the sibling pairs as they tried to resolve a recurring conflict on their own. Compared with the kids of parents who weren’t taught mediation, those who were could better recognize their siblings’ perspectives, and their resolutions were more “equal” in that they were less likely to be chosen by the older sibling. A month later, the researchers called the mediation parents and asked them whether they’d kept on using the approach. Eighty percent had, saying they continued to see improvements in how their children engaged with each other.
In a 2014 follow-up study, researchers confirmed that when parents were taught to use mediation techniques, their kids became better at talking about their and their siblings’ feelings, discussed more potential solutions, and arrived at compromises that more often empowered younger siblings. As the study concluded, mediation seems to “empower the children to do the future-oriented planning that will enable them to resolve their differences.” When I used this approach last week to resolve a fight that transpired after my 5-year-old threw my 8-year-old’s Uno cards across the room, I was amazed at how well it worked: They each (willingly!) apologized to each other and cleaned up the cards together afterward. My head nearly exploded.
The downside of mediation is that it can take time and effort, especially at first. But with practice, you’ll get better at it, and things will move faster, Dr. Markham said. Think of it as an investment in your sanity — and in your kids’ well-being. By helping your children learn how to compromise, you’re building skills that will last a lifetime.