Lice, pinkeye and pinworm can spread easily from child to household, but thorough cleaning and good hygiene can help fight them off.
This article was originally published on June 3, 2019 in NYT Parenting.
There’s a particular sinking feeling almost all parents will experience in the course of raising their children when they hear the words, “It’s head lice.” Or pinkeye. Or hand, foot and mouth disease. Or … shudder … pinworm.
Ramsey Hootman, a novelist from El Cerrito, Calif., knows firsthand how awful pinworm can be.  Then it happened to her.
“We’d just been through a round of lice, so I was breathing a sigh of relief when I gradually began to notice that I had a persistent itch … down there,” she said. “My mind instantly went to pinworms.” After asking her husband to check her rear end (“I just about died”) to confirm that, yup, there were worms in her butthole, she knew that her two sons had them as well. “It certainly explained why their sleep patterns had been so restless,” she quipped.
Not only are many childhood afflictions associated with symptoms that can make your skin crawl just thinking about them — like itching, oozing, sores and, well, worms that come out of the butt — they’re also highly contagious. So it’s quite likely that your children will pass the itch or the ooze on to you.
If you suspect your kid has picked up one of these common contagions, consult your pediatrician for treatment options. But there are some extra steps you can take to reduce the risk that your child passes a plague on to you and to other members of your household.
One of the keys to tackling these illnesses is understanding what they are and how they’re spread, so let’s dive in.
What it is: A viral infection.
Typical symptoms: The first symptoms you might notice are fever, sore throat and runny nose, which can progress to include small red spots or blisters on the hands and feet and sores in the mouth.
How to contain it: Teach — and remind! — your children to cover their mouths and noses when they sneeze or cough, ideally with a tissue or into their sleeves, and to wash their hands thoroughly after they come into contact with mucus. Children tend to be most contagious during the first week of their symptoms, though they can remain contagious for weeks after they become symptom-free. Ensure that any items that have touched your child’s mouth (including food, drinks, utensils, cups, toothbrushes and towels) aren’t shared with anyone else. If your child is still in diapers when she contracts H.F.M.D., wash your hands with soap and water after changing diapers. 
What to clean and how: Clean surfaces and items your child has touched — especially those that come into contact with your child’s saliva, such as eating utensils and toys — while he is symptomatic and afterward. You can clean plush toys in a washing machine; hard toys can be washed by hand with soap and water, in the top rack of the dishwasher or wiped with all-purpose cleaner and rinsed.
What it is: Head lice are small, parasitic bugs that can infest the head, eyebrows and eyelashes, and feast on human blood. Adult lice can lay and attach their eggs (or nits) to the base of the hair shaft.
Typical symptoms: Itching is the most common symptom of head lice, typically on the head, behind the ears and at the back of the neck. Itching can persist even after the infestation has been treated and the lice are gone.
How to contain it: Head lice can spread easily from child to child with direct head-to-head contact or via anything that has touched an infected person’s hair (such as towels, pillowcases, brushes, combs, hats, bandanas, headbands, ribbons and barrettes). Therefore these things should not be shared. If there’s a lice outbreak at your child’s school and he or she has long hair, it’s a good idea to style it in an updo or braid to minimize contact with other children’s infested hair. Examine all members of your household for nits or lice and treat any infestations with over-the-counter shampoos that kill lice. Because some lice are resistant to insecticides, using the comb-out method in conjunction with prescribed medication may also be necessary.
What to clean and how: First, some good news for parents who hear the word “lice” and have visions of boiling all of their child’s belongings: According to Dr. Audrey Brewer, M.D., a pediatrician at Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, “extreme environmental clean-up does not appear to lessen the spread of lice.” Items that come in direct contact with hair, however, should be cleaned. Combs and brushes can be soaked in hot water (130 degrees Fahrenheit) for 5 to 10 minutes; and sheets, pillow cases, clothing and towels should be laundered in hot water and dried using the highest heat setting on the dryer. Clothing and items that are not washable can be dry-cleaned or sealed in a plastic bag for two weeks.
What it is: Conjunctivitis, more commonly known as pinkeye, is an inflammation of the mucous membrane covering the white part of the eye. It’s typically caused by viruses, bacteria or environmental irritants.
 Bacterial conjunctivitis, which can be especially painful, can cause a thick green or yellow discharge.
How to contain it: Bacterial and viral conjunctivitis are very contagious and can easily spread from one eye to the other, and to other people, by touching, so teach your children to avoid rubbing or touching their eyes. Good handwashing is critical when someone in your household is suffering from pinkeye, as is cleaning surfaces that the infected person has touched.
What to clean and how: Because pinkeye is spread so easily by touch, it’s important to clean everything that’s come into contact with an infected child’s hands and face. This especially includes pillowcases, blankets and stuffed animals that a child may sleep with. Other high-touch items include toys, tables and chairs, cellphones and tablets, handles and doorknobs.
What it is: An infection caused by ingesting a roundworm by mouth, which then travels through the intestines to the anus.

How to contain it: Pinworm eggs are typically spread when infected children scratch their rear ends, or touch bedding or undergarments that have been in contact with the eggs, so good handwashing, especially after using the bathroom, is the best way to prevent it. Keeping fingernails short and cleaning toys that are shared can also help. Bathwater contamination can easily spread the infection, so if your child is old enough, bathe her in the shower if she has an active infection instead.
What to clean and how: Wash all clothes, especially underwear, that have been worn by a child who has pinworm, as well as bed linens and towels. Toys that the child frequently plays with should be washed, either in a washing machine or by hand with soap and water.
Implement these best practices for disinfecting surfaces, doing laundry and washing hands to prevent the spread of illness.
Disinfect surfaces, but don’t go crazy.
In a world filled with antibacterial soaps, hand sanitizers and medicated tissues, it’s all too easy to overthink methods for disinfecting when an illness sweeps through the house. But Dr. Aaron Carroll, M.D., a professor of pediatrics at Indiana University School of Medicine, advised keeping it simple: “Soap and water work great for just about anything.” The pediatricians I interviewed for this article all agreed with Dr. Carroll but added that if soap and water aren’t available, hand sanitizers are a good alternative to clean hard surfaces in a pinch. Disinfecting sprays like those made by Lysol can also make cleaning surfaces that have been touched by someone who is highly contagious quick and easy when used as directed.
Step up your laundry technique.
When it comes to laundering clothing, sheets and towels that have come into contact with a highly contagious person, it’s fine to use regular detergent — but some tips and tricks can ensure those items come out of the wash as clean as possible. First, don’t overstuff the machine; aim to leave half to a quarter of the drum empty, which will allow water and detergent to fully penetrate and clean the textiles. Also use the hottest water and dryer settings that the fabrics can tolerate. Nonwashable items that have come into contact with head lice specifically can be sealed in a plastic bag for 2 weeks, which will kill the bugs and break the cycle of infestation.
Towels and rags that have been used for cleaning contaminated surfaces should always be washed in hot water.
Wet your hands with clean, running water (warm or cold), turn off the tap, and apply soap.Lather your hands by rubbing them together with the soap. Be sure to lather the backs of your hands, between your fingers, and under your nails.Scrub your hands for at least 20 seconds. Need a timer? Hum the “Happy Birthday” song from beginning to end twice.Rinse your hands well under clean, running water.Dry your hands using a clean towel or air dry them.
“There has not been any science to suggest that antibacterial hand soap is better than regular hand soap, outside of health care,” said Dr. Jennifer Kusma, M.D., a pediatrician at Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago. “There has also not been data to suggest that using warm or hot water is better for handwashing. Cold water is more comfortable and should do just fine!” As a general rule, washing your hands with soap and water is better than using hand sanitizer, she said, but if hand sanitizer is the only option available, it’s better than nothing.
