If you’ve been pregnant, you probably know this routine: Every few weeks, you clear a couple of hours on your schedule for a prenatal checkup.
You sit in a waiting room. Maybe you scroll through a pregnancy app on your phone, but you probably don’t strike up a conversation with the woman next to you. Maybe you make a list of your questions: How risky is deli meat, really? What’s that stabbing pain in your side? Finally, a nurse calls your name and takes your blood pressure and weight. You wait some more. Another medical professional measures your belly, checks the fetal heart rate and, if all is well, you’re done. That list of questions? Make it snappy.
Even if everything is fine, prenatal care is seldom satisfying or particularly informative. But could prenatal care evolve to be more patient-centered — and maybe even more medically effective? That’s the way some researchers and providers describe a new model called group prenatal care.
It works like this: Last August five pregnant women gathered in a small room on the 14th floor of a BronxCare hospital. They were between 23 and 28 weeks pregnant, and two of them brought their partners along. Late afternoon sunlight slanted through a window and a circle of folding chairs took up most of the room. The women fanned away the heat of a 90-degree afternoon and helped themselves to Caesar salad and wraps from a small buffet while taking and recording their own blood pressures and weights.
One by one, they slipped into padded reclining chairs at the far end of the room while Abbe Kirsch, a certified nurse midwife, spoke quietly to them individually. Kirsch covered each woman with a drape and then ran a Doppler wand over her belly to find the rapid gallop of a fetal heartbeat. Meanwhile, Sasha Mendoza, a patient care technician, turned on some easy listening and helped a participant chug her glucose drink in preparation for a diabetes test.
The group settled into the circle of chairs for a conversation about breastfeeding. First, they played a guessing game: A basket was passed with everyday objects inside, each representing some aspect of breastfeeding. For instance: a marble represented the size of a newborn’s stomach. Kirsch held a newborn-sized doll in a sling around her torso to show how you can breastfeed without showing your breast.
“You can use a blanket as a cover, too. But listen, you can whip your boob out anywhere you want. It’s the law! It’s your choice!” She laughed, and the atmosphere in the room loosened up.
Four weeks later, the group gathered again, all their bellies slightly bigger. They repeated the vitals and checks, taking turns while the others helped themselves to food. This was the fifth session; everyone knew each other now, and the room filled with a low hubbub. Then they sat down to talk about labor — what to expect, when to worry about preterm labor, what contractions feel like.
It’s like an online pregnancy discussion board, but with real, in-person connection and accurate medical information. It’s routine prenatal care, childbirth class and group therapy, in one package.
The 10 sessions are part of an established curriculum — at BronxCare they use a model called CenteringPregnancy — facilitated by a medical professional that replaces standard checkups. There are set topics for each week, but the participants can talk about whatever they want: about miscarriage, body fluids and breasts, mothers and partners, other babies or even their hopes and fears.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recognizes group prenatal care as a safe alternative to traditional prenatal care, saying this model is at least as effective. It is now available in almost every state and the U.S. military offers it to pregnant service members.
CenteringPregnancy was the brainchild of Sharon Schindler Rising, a midwife who noticed that, no matter what their circumstances, many pregnant women had similar questions and concerns. If she took the time those questions deserved it resulted in a backed-up waiting room.
By gathering patients in a group and covering the frequently-asked questions, she could be more efficient, and leave more time for discussion and deeper questions. Rising created CenteringPregnancy in the ’90s. Since then, others have begun their own versions, most notably researchers at Yale University School of Public Health, March of Dimes and funders at United Health Group.
But, according to some studies, group care is also more medically effective than individual care, potentially leading to healthier moms and babies. Could the simple presence of more people improve health outcomes in measurable ways? And if so, how does it work?
The data on improved outcomes has been mixed. A 2016 survey analysis showed group care didn’t reduce preterm birth or intensive care admissions, with the notable exception of black women, whose risk of preterm birth decreased. Black women are 50 percent more likely than all other American women to give birth early, a risk that is increasingly linked to the experience of racism.
Recently, the findings have been more positive. One of the largest-to-date studies on group prenatal care, published in 2019, showed that people who attended Yale’s Expect with Me sessions were 37 percent less likely to give birth early; if they went to five or more sessions, they reduced their risk by 68 percent. And South Carolina researchers found that people who went to CenteringPregnancy were significantly less likely to give birth early when compared to counterparts who got individual care.
Proponents say one reason it works is that social support reduces stress. Dr. Amy Crockett, M.D., a maternal fetal medicine specialist in South Carolina who has researched CenteringPregnancy’s track record, said that many of the pathways that lead to preterm birth are inflammatory pathways, and that inflammation is also associated with psychosocial stress.
Dr. Monica McLemore, Ph.D., a professor of nursing at the University of California San Francisco and a board member of the Centering Healthcare Institute, hypothesized that group care is effective because it provides peer-to-peer learning, more surveillance of providers and longer appointments that lead to deeper knowledge. This is particularly important given that medical systems often fail people from marginalized communities.
Back at the CenteringPregnancy group at BronxCare hospital, Kirsch talked about how alone she felt when her first daughter was born. There were murmurs of agreement around the room. “You’ll be giving birth in November,” Kirsch said. “It might be cold. Is there someone who can pick up groceries for you? Is there someone who will just listen to you if you need to cry?” she said, suggesting that group members become those people for each other.
After the session, Jazmyne Swett sat next to her pregnant sister, Diamond Hardy. Both had been relatively quiet during the discussion. Asked about it, the sisters said that they preferred group care to individual care. “It brings everyone together, so they’re not alone,” Swett said.