Parents who struggle with food and self-image can inadvertently pass along unhealthy behaviors. Here’s how to avoid it.
My own sugary grape moment came when my older daughter was about 18 months old. I was bemoaning the fact that none of my pre-baby jeans fit and said to my husband, “I just don’t like my body right now.” My toddler overheard and started patting herself with delight, announcing, “This is MY body!” I was relieved that she merely seemed pleased to discover that we both had bodies, and hadn’t absorbed my negativity, but I also knew I’d gotten lucky.
Precious few of us show up to parenthood with a glowing relationship with our bodies intact. And for moms, especially, who have been through the physiological wringer of conception, pregnancy and childbirth, the question of how to work through our own body-image and food demons without passing them on to our children can feel especially fraught. One new study by British researchers found that 15.3 percent of women will have had an eating disorder by the time they get pregnant. In an earlier study of 739 moms-to-be, the same researchers found that while only 7.5 percent met criteria for a current eating disorder, nearly one in four reported high levels of concern about their weight and body shape. So how can you manage your own body-image struggles — and protect your kids from inheriting them?
This is especially true for how you talk about your child’s body and eating habits. Researchers surveyed 581 parents of children ages 9 to 15 about the different kinds of “fat talk” they used around their kids and then collected data about their children’s weight and relationship with food. They found that 76 percent of the parents denigrated their own bodies in front of their children and 51.5 percent talked more generally about the dangers of obesity, but that 43.6 percent talked about their children’s bodies, taking note of weight gain or commenting on “flabby arms,” for example. And this last group was the most likely to have kids who engaged in binge eating, secretive eating or other disordered behaviors, according to the results published in a 2018 issue of the International Journal of Eating Disorders. “At the very least, don’t comment on your child’s body in a disparaging way,” Dr. Sonneville said.
The American Academy of Pediatrics released a 2016 report advising both parents and pediatricians to avoid discussing weight loss or body size with children. And as I’ve previously reported, putting children on diets may increase their risk for developing an eating disorder in the future. Instead of imparting your body and food anxieties to your children, think of this as an opportunity to teach resilience.
“We don’t want our kids to learn to change themselves anytime they’re teased or feel like they don’t fit in,” Dr. Millner said. “We want them to stand up to that kind of stigma.” You can make a point to show body diversity in the art, books and other media you bring into your home. Even toddlers can start learning that bodies come in different shapes and sizes, all of them equally valuable. And as kids get older, you can start to point out when you encounter body shaming in their books or TV shows and encourage them to rewrite such stories.
 It may feel as if you’re giving your kids permission to enjoy their treat, but you’re also reinforcing the message that treats need to be earned, or that eating carrots is a punishment. Instead, try your best to share meals and snacks with your children. And consider whether following a diet that makes it difficult for you to embrace family meals is healthy for you, as a parent and as a person.
Scritchfield suggests evaluating any potential diet or workout plan by asking two questions: “In the long run, will this plan allow me to have a flexible, positive and joyful connection to food and movement?” And, “Is this advice I’d happily teach my kids?” If the answers are no, it might be time to reframe your health goals in a kinder, more body-positive light. “Forget calories, and focus on enjoying your food — even the ones you think of as ‘bad,’” Scritchfield advised.
Virginia Sole-Smith is the author of “The Eating Instinct: Food Culture, Body Image and Guilt in America,” and co-host of the Comfort Food Podcast.