An art director for the yoga retailer shared a link on his personal Instagram account, prompting waves of condemnation.
The white, long-sleeve T-shirt was retailing for $60.
It featured a small red image of chopsticks with bat wings on the front, and a larger design of a Chinese rice box with bat wings and the words “No Thank You” written on it on the back. “No Thank You” also appeared on the right sleeve.
Soon after Trevor Fleming, an art director for Lululemon Athletica, posted a link to the T-shirt in the bio section of his personal Instagram account, waves of online condemnation followed, and he was fired by the Canadian athletic apparel company. By a Reuters count, more than 1,000 comments were left on Lululemon’s official Instagram account criticizing the company for Mr. Fleming’s post.
“Should I burn all my lululemon now?,” one asked. “As a brand, you should be well aware of the people you hire because they in fact represent your organization,” read another.
In replies to the comments, the company was quick to say the T-shirt was not one of its products.
The World Health Organization has said that the evidence shows the coronavirus may have originated in bats. Scientists believe it may have jumped from bats to another animal in a wet market in Wuhan and then infected humans.
The episode was the latest in a long line of racist tropes and attacks against Asians since the coronavirus emerged in the Chinese city of Wuhan. Unfairly blamed for the outbreak, Asian-Americans in the United States have been spat on and yelled at, and Asians have been physically attacked in European cities like London.
Mr. Fleming has since deleted his Instagram and LinkedIn accounts. He said in a statement through a spokeswoman on Wednesday that he had nothing to do with the T-shirt’s design. But he apologized and said he made the wrong decision by sharing a link to the item.
“It is something I deeply regret, and my eyes have been opened to the profound ripple effect that this mistake has had,” said Mr. Fleming, who worked at the company’s Vancouver headquarters as a full-time employee for two and a half years.
“I commit to standing up against racist or discriminatory behavior and will work hard to ensure that my personal and professional contributions in the future are kind, inclusive and supportive,” he said.
The T-shirt has since been removed from the website, and Mr. Sluder, too, has apologized.
“As an artist I often toy with pushing boundaries with satirical work and I simply crossed the line,” he wrote on Instagram on Tuesday. “This situation has taught me to be more conscious of the impact of my work and I am deeply sorry to anyone who was offended or hurt by my actions,” he added.
The T-shirt was the latest in a string of controversies that the company has weathered. In 2013, troubles arose when some of its yoga pants were found to be too sheer. This started an avalanche of complaints, ridicule and, eventually, a costly recall and a shareholders’ lawsuit accusing the company of concealing the problems.
While trying to explain quality problems in an interview, the founder, Dennis J. Wilson, incited backlash when he said that some women’s bodies “just actually don’t work” in yoga pants. He later stepped down from the company.
In 2018, Laurent Potdevin, the chief executive of Lululemon Athletica, resigned because of his behavior. The company gave few details but said he fell short of the company’s standards of conduct.
It closed stores in North America, Europe, Australia, New Zealand and Malaysia. It said it would continue to pay store employees at least through June 1, while company leaders were taking a 20 percent reduction in salaries, the chief executive officer, Calvin McDonald, said.
