Some starters never die, they just get filed away here.
In these housebound times, Americans have gone stark baking mad. Shut-ins are channeling their anxieties into pandemic pastries and quarantine cookies, some with icing piped in the shape of surgical masks, others frosted with the face of Dr. Anthony Fauci. Baking essentials such as yeast and flour are in short supply, and Google searches for bread recipes are on the rise, so to speak.
Like Norway’s Svalbard seed vault, which safeguards crops against disasters, and the Ice Memory project in Antarctica, which protects glacial ice cores threatened by climate change, the sourdough library is essentially a preservation center. Besides showcasing geographically diverse varieties of yeast, it conserves a burgeoning stockpile for future generations to study.
“The samples serve as backups for bakers and bakeries that might lose or damage their own supply,” said Mr. De Smedt who spoke by video from his home in Brussels. Although the library, created in 2013 by the Belgian bakery supply company Puratos, is not open to the public, its online database offers detailed notes on the colors, flavors and textures of all the starters.
Sourdough is the oldest form of leavened bread. Last year Seamus Blackley, father of the Xbox, baked a loaf using what was purportedly 4,500-year-old yeast scraped off ancient Egyptian pottery. All modern recipes begin with a starter, basically a flour-and-water slurry colonized by bacteria and wild, airborne yeasts that eat, breed and exhale carbon dioxide, which helps the bread rise. The tangy taste and brightly acidic smell derive from lactobacilli, cousins of the bacteria that curdle milk into cheese and yogurt. Starters are bespoke to the environments in which they were created; no two sourdoughs taste exactly alike.
He has harvested starters from 25 countries, including Slovenia, Peru and Singapore. Starter No. 1 is from Altamura, Italy. The bread is traditionally made of semolina flour, the ground form of durum wheat, and dates at least to 37 B.C., when the Roman poet Horace praised it as the best he had ever eaten.
“Number 100 is special because it’s Japanese and made with cooked sake rice,” Mr. De Smedt said. “Number 72 is from Mexico and has to be refreshed with eggs, lime and beer.” Number 43 is a sentimental favorite. “It’s a San Francisco starter, and was my first one I ever saw,” he recalled. “When I became a test baker for Puratos in 1994, one of my tasks was to refresh 43.” Indeed, he baked his first loaf of sourdough with it.
Mr. De Smedt hit the mother lode in Whitehorse, the Yukon capital, where he met up with Ione Christensen, the 86-year-old former mayor. Her starter was passed down from her great-grandfather, Wesley David Ballentine. “It’s a family pet, if you will,” she said. Back in 1897, Ballentine stowed the starter in a flour sack and trekked over the Chilkoot Pass on his way to the Klondike gold fields. On cold nights, he and his fellow stampeders would cuddle with the sacks to keep their contents warm and alive.
Mr. De Smedt shipped one chilled sample of Ms. Christensen’s starter, labeled “106,” to the library and another to researchers at the University of Bari in southern Italy for DNA sequencing.
A collaboration with biologists Rob Dunn and Anne Madden at North Carolina State University led to a surprising discovery about the microbial interaction between bakers and sourdough. “The assumption was that the microbes on the bakers’ hands influenced the flavor of the bread,” Mr. De Smedt said. Bakers from 16 countries were asked to make starters from a common flour and recipe, and nurture them. On July 4, 2018, the bakers and their mothers converged at the Puratos facility in St. Vith to make bread.
Mr. De Smedt, like many of his countrymen, has spent the lockdown fermenting at home. He has occupied his time by baking bread, writing blog posts for the various Puratos websites and reviewing the French and Dutch translations of a book by Anita Sumer of @Sourdough_mania.
