A weekly guide to maintaining a social life while social distancing.
A month into life under mandated social distancing, New Yorkers have been adjusted to this new reality by moving their social lives online.
From virtual dance parties with live D.J. sets to dinners and recipe-sharing over Zoom, they’ve shown that social distancing doesn’t mean giving up social interaction. In fact, it can be a reminder that we are all in this together, and participating in online events can help support local businesses that are now economically vulnerable.
Follow the hashtag #FeministAntibodies for the conversation and visit the collective’s Twitter page for more details.
Are you low on groceries and stumped on what to cook? Send over five pantry ingredients to Eric Kwan, the chef at the Museum of Food and Drink, for his weekly Pantry Challenge, and he might whip up a recipe for you to try at home. At 3 p.m., watch a cooking demonstration with a recipe inspired by ingredients in a viewer’s kitchen. For more information on how to submit pantry ingredients, go to the event page.
Visit the museum’s Instagram page for the live stream.
Bandits on the Run, a Brooklyn-based trio used to busking in subway stations, is trading its usual venue for the great indoors. At 7 p.m., the acoustic, indie-pop group will perform a concert live on its social media accounts.
You can access the performance on the group’s Instagram and Facebook pages.
Elsewhere, a live-music venue, nightclub and art space in Brooklyn, is hosting a music festival — in a video game.
Starting at 6 p.m., participants can enter the world of Minecraft and attend Nether Meant, a virtual music festival. The event will be headlined by the band American Football and will include performances from Anamanaguchi, HANA and others.
Staged in a digitally scaled replica of Elsewhere, Nether Meant is free, but participants can purchase V.I.P. passes to access special areas and in-game merchandise. All proceeds from the passes will benefit coronavirus relief efforts at Good360, a nonprofit organization. Those who can’t join the game can watch the festival on the Twitch live stream.
For more information on how to participate, visit the event page.
Diaspora Co., a company that aims to create a more equitable spice trade, will host a cooking demonstration with Rachel Gurjar, a New York-based chef and writer, at 2 p.m. This week’s theme is “Indian-ish,” and participants will learn how to make cabbage poriyal and carrot, ginger and cauliflower pickle. The recipe will be on Diaspora Co.’s blog before the demonstration so you can follow along.
Watch the live stream on Diaspora Co.’s Instagram page.
Mira Jacob, the Brooklyn-based author who wrote the graphic memoir “Good Talk: A Memoir in Conversations,” will join Lupita Aquino (also known as @Lupita_Reads) for a Q. and A. at 6:30 p.m. Attendees can listen to the interview on Zoom.
To register, visit the event page. All attendees will receive a copy of Ms. Jacob’s memoir.
If you’re looking for one last dance party before the start of the week, another Brooklyn-based venue is keeping its virtual doors open for a D.J. set. Starting at 8 p.m., Nowadays will host the “party-starting masters,” Optimo, for four hours of dancing in your living room.
To catch the live stream, head over to Nowadays’ website.