Immersion, even just thinking about it, is the balm we need right now.
He calls our attention to the crowds of dreamy water gazers gathered along the shores of Manhattan on a Sabbath afternoon. They prove him right: The ocean’s liquid fingers have a way of transfixing us in thought. Ishmael points out that the ancient Persians call the sea holy, that the Greeks give it a powerful deity of its very own. A maiden voyage sings with a kind of “mystical vibration.” But what exactly is the magic of water, and what does it do to us? It’s a mystery.
When we peer into a lake, river or ocean, we find that water encourages a particular kind of reverie. Perhaps its depths can enhance our consciousness even more if instead of just looking, we get in and swim.
We jump into that water and find ourselves in a curious liminal space. Here we are, suspended, yet moving; floating, yet ever in danger of sinking. And if we swim with the current, instead of fighting against it, we find a momentary state, one of motion and yet paradoxical stillness that is flow.
The focused immediacy of swimming encourages a mind-set that reminds me of how my young children think: It’s an ever-presentness. Every past moment is immediately replaced by a new one: a constant stream of now, and now and now that doesn’t allow much room to dwell too long on things past or what’s to come. Living in the now is a state of being that my busy brain finds challenging — but I desire it. Swimming is an antidote for the existential anxiety from which I suffer.
What is it like inside Ms. Cox’s head when she’s swimming?
“It’s a state between a dream state and an awake state,” she told me. Maybe, she said, we can call it “sea-dreaming.” The rhythm of swimming lulls your body — which, well trained, seems to keep moving on its own — and your brain is allowed to go wherever it wants.
“Maybe you smell the coffee someone is drinking on the pier,” Ms. Cox told me. “There’s this awareness of the ripples of water, the pelicans sliding right by. Maybe your heart stops as you see a wave of silvery anchovies swimming below you.” In the hushed oceanic roar, you can choose to filter some things out and to focus on others.
Cognitive scientists have shown that water sounds — the rhythmic hum of the ocean, the rush of a waterfall — are calming to the human brain. We experience a drop in heart rate and blood pressure and an increase in alpha-wave activity — those brain wavelengths associated with relaxation and boosted serotonin — as well as creative thinking. While tooling around on the Spotify music-streaming service one day, I found that white-noise water sounds are some of the biggest hits there; a track called “Rolling Ocean Waves” has been played nearly 60 million times.
Walks in the woods are all well and good, as Thoreau illustrated in his transcendentalist classic, “Walden.” But during the two years, two months and two days that he spent living in that cabin at Walden Pond, he also got up early every morning to swim; he described it as “a religious exercise, and one of the best things which I did.” Each of his swims stimulated body and mind. Each day’s routine of rousing early to do so was a way to enact his desire to “live deliberately” in the New England forest.
Much has been made of the walk as the instrument for big thinkers: Charles Darwin; Albert Einstein; Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, who famously rambled together and revolutionized our understanding of the psychology of decision-making. Less has been explicitly made of swimming — a similar kind of aid, more medium than tool — for channeling the inner life and improving the flow of thoughts.
The physical action matters just as much as the environment does. “The way we move our bodies further changes the nature of our thoughts, and vice versa,” the science journalist Ferris Jabr notes in an essay titled “Why Walking Helps Us Think.” It follows that the pace of swimming, because of its fluid continuity, encourages a specific kind of thinking. There are the same changes to our body chemistry in swimming as there are in land exercise: faster heartbeat, increased circulation, more blood and oxygen to muscles and brain.
In his detailing of Stanford University research experiments on the relationship between walking and creativity, Mr. Jabr writes that walking set “the mind adrift on a frothing sea of thought.” For Mr. Jabr, Woolf and others, the choice of words betrays them. They talk of “ideas bubbling up,” the tumbling of them, the “wrinkling water” in a current of thought. Walking is conducive to thinking, but swimming is just as true a conduit.
As human swimmers, we can never really be the fish. You and I, we know that. We don’t have to remind ourselves that it’s water around us.  We get flashes of forgetting the water. In the forgetting, we can drift. Daydreaming is critical to problem-solving and creativity. Scientists now know that when our minds are wandering without any particular external focus, the brain’s “default-mode network” is active. It’s what makes fresh, unexpected connections possible. And it’s the reason you get some of your best ideas in the shower.
The marine biologist and author Wallace J. Nichols is an evangelist for achieving what he calls “blue mind,” which emphasizes the importance of drifting to discovery, and water as a way to enable that process. “Being around water provides a sensory-rich environment with enough ‘soft fascination’ to let our focused attention rest and the default-mode network to kick in,” he writes. In these times of stress and social distancing, he emphasizes that water is essential medicine more than ever.
“Use your wild waters if you can safely and legally,” he told me. “Make sure you have a daily ritual involving domesticated waters” — pools, tubs, baths, spas, showers — “and embrace all types of virtual waters.” Even looking at water will take you to a better, calmer place.
To live deliberately as a swimmer means that you are a seeker: a chaser of the ocean’s blue corduroy, a follower of river veins. The science writer Florence Williams notes that “place matters” — something that poets and philosophers from Aristotle to Wordsworth have been telling us for ages. “Our nervous systems are built to resonate with set points in the environment,” Ms. Williams writes in her book “The Nature Fix.” “Science is now bearing out what the Romantics knew to be true.” And because “our brains especially love water,” we seek out blue spaces.
The Romantic poet Lord Byron knew it; he swam after this feeling and wrote about it whenever he could. We want to be near the ocean, the lake, the river. We build houses on the beach despite hurricane warnings and sea-level rise because that view does something to us. In a fast-moving world that encourages hyperconnectivity without meaning, we dare to risk for the reward of regaining moments of self — fading, water-stained postcards from the solitary, slow-paced thinkers we once were and dearly miss. In doing so, we hold on to Stegner’s geography of hope — the idea that we will one day find our way back.
Bonnie Tsui (@bonnietsui) is the author of “Why We Swim,” from which this essay is adapted.