Need some flour? Try the local wine bar.
Where there was once a collection of plants and a dart board above the wooden counter at Glou + Glick, a wine bar in Prospect Lefferts Gardens, Brooklyn, there is now a shiny new shelf stocked with pancake mix, kosher salt, tomato paste and hand soap.
The items are for sale.
Glou + Glick is not alone. Many restaurants in Brooklyn, most of which have ended full-menu takeout services, are continuing to order raw ingredients and pantry items from their suppliers to resell them to locals.
It is a pandemic pivot that makes sense when grocery stores have long lines and dwindling selections.
“I saw firsthand the experience of needing one staple, waiting in line and then they don’t have the hand soap, they’re out of yeast and flour, they don’t have any eggs,” said Jef Diesel, the owner of Glou + Glick. So, Mr. Diesel has continued to purchase many of these staples wholesale, even though his business is otherwise only offering baked goods, a few prepared foods and wine.
Rebecca Beeman, who lives in Bedford-Stuyvesant and works in education, recently bought a produce box from the nearby Mexican restaurant, Boca Santa. “Avoiding the grocery store brings peace of mind right now,” she said.
Boca Santa, which is still offering a limited menu for pickup, has also been stocking C.S.A. (community-supported agriculture) boxes. In addition to local vegetables, boxes include staples that are popular on the restaurant’s menu: corn tortillas, dried beans, salsa and dried hibiscus flowers.
Many restaurant owners said they were torn about how to move forward during the coronavirus outbreak. While staff members pleaded to be called into work, owners had to weigh the risks of spreading the virus and to question whether their cooking was really an essential service. This is what led some of them to sell supplies, along with a desire to keep skeleton crews working.
“It makes me feel better in a way doing pantry items, because I understand that those are staples that the community needs, whereas doing our chicken wings — I don’t really know if that’s a necessity,” said Amanda Bender, director of operations at Mo’s Original. The ramen joint in Prospect Lefferts Gardens is offering contactless pickup for everything from all-purpose flour to ramen noodles, homemade miso and stock.
Some of these sales are aimed at helping unemployed restaurant workers. From his Ditmas Park pizzeria, Wheated, the owner David Sheridan is selling off the restaurant’s 1,000-bottle whiskey collection, with most bottles selling for between $28 and $60. The first $10,000 of the proceeds went directly to his staff.
Some restaurants have reported seeing an uptick in new customers only interested in the groceries. “We’re just seeing this amazing growth from people that never tried us, people who can’t spend three hours a day trying to get a delivery time on Fresh Direct, and they’re looking for other ways to get food,” said Mr. Donnelly, the chef at Colonia Verde.
Most restaurants are keeping retail margins low on pantry items, so a customer surge doesn’t necessarily translate into profits. “I just don't think it’s right to overcharge for staple items right now, especially if they’re not labor-intensive,” Ms. Bender said. For her business and others, loans and bills are piling up.
