U.S.|The Pentagon Released U.F.O. Videos. Don’t Hold Your Breath for a Breakthrough.
On Monday, the Department of Defense formally released three Navy videos that contain “unidentified aerial phenomena.” Enthusiasts were encouraged, though there was nothing new.
The Pentagon’s release cheered enthusiasts in the search for extraterrestrial life, even though experts caution that earthly explanations usually exist for such sightings — and that when people don’t know why something happened, it does not mean it happened because of aliens. When the videos were published in 2017 and 2018 by The New York Times and a company called To the Stars Academy of Arts & Sciences, they gave new hope to those looking for signs of extraterrestrial life.
Navy pilots spoke about objects that seemed to defy the laws of physics. Details emerged about a mysterious, five-year Pentagon program and claims of metal alloys said to have been recovered from unidentified phenomena. The former Senate majority leader Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada, spoke about his long push for more research on unidentified flying objects.
For Mr. Reid, the officially released videos are only a glimpse of what the public might learn about U.F.O.s and other mysteries of space.
In 2017, Mr. DeLonge and several former government employees founded To the Stars Academy of Arts & Sciences, a private company that collects and researches documents and materials related to unidentified aerial phenomena.
“We are fueled by the Pentagon’s significant actions and hope this encourages a new wave of credible information to come forward,” he added.
The U.S. government has periodically looked into reports of unidentified aerial phenomena since at least the 1950s. In 1954, President Dwight D. Eisenhower told reporters the Air Force had assured him that flying saucers were not invading the Earth from outer space. For decades, NASA has searched for conditions that could allow life beyond Earth, and for evidence of any life itself. And for at least as long, bands of astronomers, scientists and enthusiasts outside the government have looked for signals in the silence and the noise of space.