Baseball and soccer leagues carry on in Nicaragua, whose public health officials report relatively few coronavirus cases. Many others have doubts.
Nearly two weeks ago, a national boxing tournament in Nicaragua began as planned. A couple weekends ago, a marathon was run in Managua, the country’s capital. Last week, after an important game in the country’s popular semiprofessional baseball league, fans participated in a caravan that ended with a rally in the town of Jinotepe’s main square. Nary a mask was in sight, nor was social distancing followed.
And the five scheduled matches last week in the country’s top professional soccer league were played, albeit in stadiums closed to the public. Despite protests by some players and teams, La Liga Primera is the only professional soccer league still in action in the Western Hemisphere.
The continued mass gatherings in Nicaragua, one of the few countries, along with Belarus and Tajikistan, that are fully carrying on with professional sports, has worried international health officials and sports figures alike.
“There aren’t any sports at a worldwide level, but all eyes are now looking at the four corners of the world where there is sufficient authoritarianism to keep exposing their soccer players,” he said.
The continuation of sports is part of Nicaragua’s contrarian response to the coronavirus. Although President Daniel Ortega has been absent from public view for a month, his socialist government has told the public to carry on as normal. It has pressed its citizens to visit festivals and the beach. It has kept public schools open.
As of Monday, the authorities in Nicaragua, the poorest country in Central America, had reported only one death and just nine confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus — all imported from abroad. They have also said that their efforts, like follow-up phone calls with recently arrived travelers or campaigns to promote hygiene, have been successful.
“We don’t have local community transmission, infinite thanks to God,” Murillo said during a speech on Thursday.
Still, Nayib Bukele, the president of El Salvador, which had 137 confirmed cases as of Monday, has publicly questioned the veracity of Nicaragua’s low numbers and suggested that the country’s insufficient measures could make the outbreak worse in the region. Nicaragua’s neighbors, Costa Rica and Honduras, have nearly 1,000 cases and 30 deaths combined, according to the World Health Organization.
Murillo, the government’s lead spokeswoman, did not respond to a request for comment.
Sports are “a bit like giving bread and circuses to the people,” Velásquez said.
Carlos Reyes, the commissioner of the national baseball league, said in a telephone interview that the coronavirus outbreak wasn’t yet a problem in the sport, that fans were constantly reminded to wash their hands, and that the already hard-hit economy needed to carry on. He noted that the 18-team league was following the lead of the country’s health and sports officials.
A 20-team national basketball tournament recently suspended play until after Easter because the parents of youth players — guided by “fear and disinformation,” the director of sports for the municipality of Managua, Noel González, said in a text message — didn’t allow their children to attend games. González expressed confidence in public health officials and said that preventive measures had been shared with all teams.
Other parts of society have pushed back. There have been grass-roots campaigns to inform the public about the benefits of staying home. Some businesses have shuttered on their own. Traffic has slowed. While attendance at baseball games is down in Managua, fans in more rural areas, at the government’s urging, have still filled stadiums.
“They should have stopped the games already,” said Edgar Tijerino, a longtime Nicaraguan sports journalist and broadcaster.
One baseball player paid dearly for his refusal to play. According to local news reports, Robin Zeledón informed his team, the Brumas de Jinotega, on March 25 that he no longer wanted to play because he was worried about becoming infected with the coronavirus and spreading it to his family. The team suspended him for a year and stopped paying his monthly salary of nearly $200 a month.
Reyes, the league’s commissioner, disputed reports about Zeledón’s departure, saying the player had left the team for other reasons and been punished for snapping at a coach. Zeledón didn’t respond to a Facebook message seeking comment.
One group of players made its protest very public. After learning that a case of the coronavirus was found near their home stadium, players on Diriangén, the oldest and most successful soccer club in Nicaragua, decided not to play their March 21 match. The management of Diriangén, the only team to push for a suspension of the season in the league’s weekly meetings, supported the players.
Velasquez said that while every team in the league receives some government funding, Diriangén is the rare team whose management isn’t linked directly to the authorities.
Soon after that game, the 19-year-old forward Sebastián Barquero, a Costa Rican, said he had told Diriangén officials that he wanted to return home, which the team allowed. A few other foreign players have done the same.
Frances Robles contributed reporting from Miami.