Stigmatized as vectors of contagion in some countries, health care workers have been assaulted, abused and ostracized.
MEXICO CITY — The senior nurse went on national television to make a plea on behalf of her fellow health care workers: Please stop assaulting us.
Nurses working under her auspices had been viciously attacked around Mexico at least 21 times, accused of spreading the coronavirus. Many were no longer wearing their uniforms as they traveled to or from work for fear of being hurt, said the official, Fabiana Zepeda Arias, chief of nursing programs for Mexico’s Social Security Institute.
In many cities, doctors, nurses and other health care workers have been celebrated with choruses of applause and cheers from windows and rooftops for providing the front-line defense against the pandemic.
But in some places health care workers, stigmatized as vectors of contagion because of their work, have been assaulted, abused and ostracized.
In the Philippines, attackers doused a nurse with bleach, blinding him. In India, a group of medical workers was chased by a stone-throwing mob. In Pakistan, a nurse and her children were evicted from their apartment building.
Dozens of attacks on health care workers have been reported in Mexico, where intense outbreaks among hospital staff of Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, have unnerved residents and members of the medical community alike. Scores of doctors and nurses have fallen ill in several hospitals around the country, and widespread demonstrations have erupted among health care workers complaining about inadequate protective equipment.
Nurses in the state of Jalisco reported being blocked from public transportation because of their occupation. A nurse in Culiacán, the capital of the state of Sinaloa in Mexico’s northwest, said she was drenched with chlorine while walking along the street.
In Merida, a city on the Yucatán Peninsula, a nurse said he was hit with an egg thrown by someone passing on a motorcycle.
Ms. Zepeda Arias, who spoke last week at a news conference, said 21 of her Social Security Institute nurses had been attacked in the past month.
The attacks against medical workers seem to be rooted in fear and ignorance fed by misinformation, said Edith Mujica Chávez, the president of the Inter-Institutional Commission of Nurses in the state of Jalisco.
Mexico moved more slowly than other countries in the region to require social distancing and encourage people to stay home, and the number of coronavirus cases has risen sharply in recent weeks. On Sunday night, government officials reported 14,677 confirmed cases in the country and 1,351 deaths.
The authorities have said that the confirmed cases include more than 500 health care workers.
Mexican officials have condemned the aggression against doctors and nurses and characterized the episodes as isolated.
Scattered accounts of hostility have circulated around the world.
In the Philippines, a nurse in the southern province of Sultan Kudarat was attacked by five men who thought he was infected with the virus because of his work. They poured bleach on his face, leaving him with what his doctors said could be permanent damage to his eyesight.
In a televised speech this month, the country’s president, Rodrigo Duterte, warned that people who discriminated against health care workers would be dealt with swiftly.
In India, health care workers have reported being physically attacked, spat at and threatened with sexual violence for treating patients with the coronavirus.
Doctors in protective gear were chased by a stone-throwing mob early this month in the central city of Indore after they tried to screen a woman for Covid-19.
Reports of health care workers being blocked from their homes by fearful neighbors — or evicted altogether by landlords — have proliferated in several countries.
Ghazala Bhatti, a nurse in Karachi, Pakistan, and the mother of three children, said her landlord had asked her to vacate their apartment because of fears that she would infect others in the building after treating Covid-19 patients.
“The landlord told me that he is worried about the health of his 72-year-old father battling cancer, who also lives on the first floor of the building,” said Mrs. Bhatti, who moved in with her brother because she was unable to find a place to rent with the city on lockdown.
A doctor at a government hospital in the state of Odisha, in India, filed a police complaint against residents of her apartment building after they accused her of spreading the virus. In her statement, the doctor said one resident threatened her with rape if she did not move out.
Reporting was contributed by Paulina Villegas from Mexico City, Jason Gutierrez from Manila, Zia Ur Rehman from Karachi, Pakistan, and Kai Schultz from New Delhi.