Health|Why Are Some People So Much More Infectious Than Others?
Solving the mystery of “superspreaders” could help control the coronavirus pandemic.
Just as important are those at the other end of the spectrum — people who are infected but unlikely to spread the infection.
“The tricky part is that we don’t necessarily know who those people are,” Dr. Zelner said.
“There has to be a link between people in order to transmit an infection,” she said. But, she added, a link “is necessary but not sufficient.” The second factor is how infectious a person is. “We almost never have independent data on those two things,” Dr. Morris said.
Yet there do seem to be situations in which a few individuals spark large outbreaks. With Covid-19, it is not yet known whether those highly infectious people include individuals with silent infections who do not realize they are sick, said Dr. Thomas Frieden, former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and chief executive at Resolve to Save Lives, an initiative of Vital Strategies. 
No matter what the cause, public health measures, like avoiding crowds, and what Dr. Frieden calls cough hygiene, can prevent a superspreading event, he said.
There is Mary Mallon, a cook better known as Typhoid Mary, who spread typhoid fever to more than 50 people in the early years of the twentieth century. She herself was not ill but was asymptomatic — silently infected with typhoid.
Superspreading also played important roles in outbreaks of two other coronaviruses, SARS and MERS.
“The MERS-CoV outbreak in South Korea was driven primarily by three infected individuals, and approximately 75 percent of cases can be traced back to three superspreaders who have each infected a disproportionately high number of contacts,” wrote George F. Gao, an immunologist and virologist at the Chinese Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Beijing, in a recent paper.
The outbreak in South Korea began in 2015 when a 68-year-old man became infected with MERS during travel to the Middle East. He returned to South Korea where he directly infected 29 people, two of whom infected 106 people. The total number of cases in South Korea at that time was 166 — that superspreading event accounted for most of the outbreak.
In the Ebola outbreak in Africa between 2014 and 2016, 61 percent of infections were traced to just 3 percent of infected people.
One event occurred at the end of February when 175 Biogen executives gathered for a conference at the Boston Marriott Long Wharf Hotel. At least one was infected with the coronavirus. Two weeks later, seventy five percent of the 108 Massachusetts residents infected with the virus were associated with Biogen. The infections rippled out from there, to other states and other Massachusetts residents.
Then there was the March 12 birthday party in Westport, Conn. About 50 people attended. Half ended up infected. The cluster of cases expanded so fast health officials gave up contact tracing.
At a funeral on Feb. 29 in Albany, Ga., someone unwittingly spread the virus among the 200 mourners. At Illinois’s current hot spot, the Cook County jail, at least 400 are known to be infected.
At the other end of the bell curve of infectiousness are infected people who do not seem to infect others. During the MERS outbreak in South Korea, 89 percent of patients did not appear to transmit the disease.
In the Covid-19 pandemic, there is a striking example from the far end of uninfectious — a couple in Illinois.
On Jan. 23 the wife, who had returned from a visit to Wuhan — became the first laboratory-confirmed case of Covid-19 in the state. On Jan. 30, her husband was infected. It was the first known person-to person transmission in the United States.
There is a good chance that a cluster of infections would be attributed to a superspreader when, instead, public health officials missed some transmissions by other people, Dr. Zelner said. And there are social consequences to superspreader stories.
