Facing parental burnout? Use the magic word.
Self-care has become the panacea for an over-exhausted, workaholic American culture. And if there’s one job that spells constant fatigue, it’s being a parent. But how does self-care happen in a country where more than half of married couples with children have two parents working full time, and mothers are not only spending more time at work but also more time taking care of children?
It doesn’t help that the images we’re sold of self-care include meditation apps and Peloton binges. For mothers in particular, with self-care just an app click or exercise class away, there is a haunting sense that if you feel burnt out, you must not be taking care of yourself. Cue more stress and guilt.
For parents, a healthy approach to self-care does not mean adding more tasks to your family to-do list — it means firmly deciding what you will not do and setting boundaries. As a psychiatrist specializing in women’s mental health and perinatal psychiatry, I take care of new moms who are struggling with the transition to motherhood and suffering from perinatal mood and anxiety disorders. I’m seeing more mothers who feel an overwhelming pressure to live up to not only the crushing expectations of motherhood but also the obligations of performative self-care.
This pressure originates within the fabric of our society and has become internalized. We live in a system where maternity leave is not mandated and child care costs are prohibitive, with some families forking over one-third of their yearly income for care. We’ve made up for this lack of structural support by placing the burden on families — largely mothers — to do it all.
The demands placed on parents to protect, teach and entertain their children have risen tremendously in the past 50 years. According to the American Academy of Pediatrics, it’s now up to parents to make sure that baby is breastfed and sleeps in his parents’ room until age 1, has no screen time before 18 months, and that up until age 6 his one hour a day of approved screen time is supervised by a parent in the role of “media mentor.” As a physician, I am all for evidence-based recommendations, but these guidelines feel draconian, especially for perfectionist mothers plagued by guilt that they are not doing enough.
Particularly vexing for parents is that it’s impossible to follow all the rules simultaneously. Your psychiatrist tells you to get more sleep to reduce your risk of postpartum depression, but your pediatrician wants you to pump every hour to keep up your milk supply. There is no way to reconcile these demands, and no amount of self-care can make these decisions for you.
Our consumerist and convenience-obsessed culture will try to convince you otherwise. You really can do it all for your baby! New gadgets like in-home infant pulse oximeters and bath-temperature monitors inundate parents. While on the surface these products are easy to brush off as superfluous, they are symbolic of the idea that as a parent, 100 percent of your attention should be spent on your child. Do you really need to measure your baby’s oxygen level while she sleeps? Unless you have an infant with a respiratory condition, the answer is no.
Some have described this philosophy of domestic simplification as doing less is more. As a psychiatrist, I prefer recognizing limits and setting boundaries because it calls attention to the internal struggle parents face when making difficult decisions. Baby wipe warmers and gluten free diapers play to our fantasy that the more we do for them, the better off our children will be. It’s tough to reconcile this with healthy boundaries, which are a natural consequence of internalizing that you’ve done enough.
The backbone of healthy boundaries is the capacity to tolerate difficult feelings like uncertainty, guilt and fear. It’s easier to pencil in a manicure than to think critically about which tasks can be taken off the to-do-list, and to acknowledge that no parenting manual can guarantee your child will be safe and successful. To be fair, this business of resisting the parenting industrial complex is daunting, partially due to a growing income inequality that has American parents feeling like every advantage is critical.
In my clinical work treating women suffering from perinatal depression and anxiety, I see mothers fight an even more tortuous battle against the tyranny of intensive parenting. The problem with self-care as an antidote to the demands of parenthood is that in becoming part of the parenting to-do-list, it still requires an already empty adult to give more. This is particularly true for mothers who have internalized our cultural meme of mother as martyr and for whom the transition to motherhood can feel like an erasure of womanhood. Making yourself smaller and smaller in the service of your child may feel noble at first but ultimately can lead to resentment, bitterness and mental health issues of your own.
Pregnancy-related mood and anxiety disorders themselves also wreak havoc on a mothers’ agency. Postpartum depression has my patients feeling like no matter what choices they make, they’re terrible moms. Postpartum anxiety robs my patients of perspective, leading to difficulty with decision-making. Pre-existing mental health issues like childhood trauma or neglect cause adults to struggle with regulating uncomfortable feelings that arise when setting boundaries. For these parents, the idea of saying no feels existentially untenable. Over the course of treatment my patients slowly reclaim parental agency. I tell them that saying no is like growing a new muscle. It hurts in the beginning, but the more you train, the easier it gets.
Imagine a country where women were guaranteed paid maternity leave and families had affordable, high-quality child care options. In this world, setting boundaries as a parent would not require a steely force of will, because American families would have support in raising their children. But as it stands, if you’re a parent who’s at your wits’ end, instead of beating yourself up for your failure to self-care, try shortening your family to-do list and setting some boundaries.
