A basic spreadsheet can help new parents save more and get on the same page about their finances.
I had one of those irrational, rational parent moments around 2 a.m. recently. It was just after my newborn fell back asleep, but before my spouse shot me daggers as I rammed my leg against the nightstand on the way to the bathroom. I wanted to scream: How are we going to pay for all this?
This being the super-expensive co-sleeping robot; the constant Thai take-out; the fancy bouncy chair; the college savings funds; the extra ticket charged to my airline credit card; the doctor bills and higher health insurance premiums; the school trips; the car seats; and, most pressingly, a home of our own.
My flash of fatherly agita was a result of everything seeming to pile up at once after my baby’s birth. The never-ending credit card swipes made me feel as if I’d never again have control over my finances.
“Big events — getting married, having a kid — trigger couples to look up from their lives and say, ‘Wait a second, where is [the money] all going?’ ” said San Francisco-based certified financial planner Sarah Behr.
And with a newborn, when you may be on parental leave and earning a reduced income (or no income at all), keeping a hawk’s eye on your spending in the weeks and months you’re away from your job will help you avoid credit card debt or depleting your savings.
We needed a plan. The immediate goal was to get a handle on our expenses when our brains were especially sleep-deprived. Beyond that, though, I wanted us to become more conscious of the million places our paychecks were going, and to see if, through some slight nudges, we could put those dollars toward a goal we actually cared about.
Given my chosen profession (i.e., writing about money all day), my ever-practical wife told me to give her a concrete number: How many dollars can we spend and how many can we save in a month without going into debt?
She was onto something. When figuring out which spouse does what with the family finances, it turns out that you’re better off sticking to a role that actually brings you satisfaction rather than splitting the tasks evenly, according to Kristy Archuleta, a University of Georgia associate professor of financial planning, housing and consumer economics. One of you is probably more naturally fiscally oriented than the other.
But assigning roles is just the beginning. You still need to be on the same page. “The caveat to this is that both partners need to know what is going on financially,” Archuleta said.
Whatever I came up with, then, would have to pass muster with my wife.
I started a spreadsheet with two tabs. The first one listed how much money we expected to earn that month along with all of the costs we knew we were going to endure (from rent to streaming services to ideal savings for the down payment on a home of our own). A quick scan of credit card and bank statements gives a good inventory of where all the money is going. That left me with a “spending number,” which was, frankly, a little depressing.
So over the course of the month we had the perverse pleasure of watching our “spending number” cut down like switchgrass and wither away toward nothing. The goal was to hit the end of the month before our “spending number” dropped completely to $0. (Anything left unspent goes into the house fund.) It was like a doomsday clock for our finances.
I can see your collective eyes rolling. This may seem like the worst time in the world to set up some makeshift budgeting system that won’t help you feed your baby or put her down for a nap. A spreadsheet isn’t clearing out the diaper genie. Manually entering actual spending (including cash!) is certainly more unpleasant than letting your charges pile up on a statement you never read.
But that’s a feature of this process, not a bug.
One positive aspect of using cash or a check compared to a credit card is that you can feel the money leaving your bank account. Research shows that not only will you spend less with cash, but you’ll actually reap more pleasure from what you buy. The pain is what makes it memorable.
 Using my spreadsheet echoes the pain you would have felt using a wad of cash.
Try my plan for a month and see how it fits. If you can do it before your kiddo is born, even better. Use my spreadsheet in the short-term to get a sense of how much is coming in and going out, over a few months to help curb bad spending patterns, or permanently to help you reach a savings goal.
You might think my plan sounds too complicated, but I found it more straightforward than using You Need a Budget, Wirecutter’s favorite budgeting app. Despite Y.N.A.B.’s excellent customer service, I just didn’t have the time or mental wherewithal to set up an account, link all my credit cards and bank account, and then categorize hundreds of transactions.
I also didn’t want to pay for a subscription ($80 a year), at least not right now. The point of this is to not spend any more money than you have to. But we’ll likely switch to a budgeting app after our reset is done, once we’re meeting our savings goals, and our kid is sleeping more than three hours at a stretch.
I’ve found communication and empathy to be key. My wife didn’t want me grilling her over lunch dates with friends, and I didn’t want any guff when I spent way too much money on an espresso machine. So we agreed to reserve judgement under the condition that both she and I spent no more than we had allotted for the month.
We both want to live in a house of our own one day, and we know every dollar saved isn’t being spent frivolously by the other person, but rather is laying the foundation for our house fund. We’re on the same team.
This ad-hoc nerdy spreadsheet system has helped us save a few hundred dollars extra each month. But it also, unexpectedly, bound our family more tightly together.
