Baby|Why Is My Baby So Hairy?
Why Is My Baby So Hairy?
And other newborn oddities — like acne and excessive sneezing — demystified.
A few weeks after my daughter was born, she woke with a bumpy rash on her right cheek. For days, I watched in horror as it spread across her flawless skin — from her jowls, to her back, to her eyelids — my panic increasing with each angry, white-headed, red bump. These unsightly pustules didn’t appear to cause her discomfort, but her inflamed skin seemed to telegraph otherwise. I felt like I was doing something wrong.
A quick trip to the pediatrician revealed a diagnosis: baby acne, an unsightly scourge that, turns out, can tarnish the skin of up to 20 percent of newborns. Who knew babies could get acne? It’s unclear exactly why they do, but many experts believe it stems from the hormones that babies absorb into their bloodstream from their mothers during pregnancy. I was alarmed when I spotted these imperfections on my daughter, but they weren’t serious. I resisted the urge to do anything other than wash her face gently with water, and the acne disappeared after a few weeks.
It’s never a bad idea to call your pediatrician if you notice anything that seems weird with your newborn, but most such things are completely normal. Here is a (non-exhaustive) list of other common, yet odd, things you might encounter.
Babies aren’t born with perfect eyesight, so for the first four months or so, their eyes might move independently or cross as they gain muscle control and learn how to focus and move in sync with each other. For most babies, this is normal. But you may want to seek an evaluation from a pediatric ophthalmologist if their eyes are still crossed at four months, since this could be a sign of a neurological, rather than an eye muscle, problem called strabismus. Strabismus affects up to 5 percent of children and can impair visual development.
A separate but similar-seeming condition, called pseudoesotropia, is an optical illusion caused by excess skin that covers the inner corner of the eye, making it seem like the eyes are crossed when they’re actually not. This is a frequent cause of trips to the eye doctor, but most cases of pseudoesotropia resolve on their own within a couple of years as the baby’s face grows.
That soft peach fuzz covering your new baby’s back, shoulders, arms and feet may be shocking, but it’s also normal. Officially known as lanugo, it is the first hair made by the body and it plays a vital role in protecting the baby’s skin and regulating her body temperature in the womb. Lanugo will most likely fall out within a week or two after birth, but it could last longer (and still be completely normal), especially if your baby was born premature.
This is another effect of Mom’s hormones during pregnancy. High levels of estrogen circulating in the bloodstreams of both girl and boy babies can cause breast swelling and milky nipple discharge in one or both breasts after birth. In newborn girls, this hormonal surge can also contribute to swelling of the labia, as well as vaginal discharge or bleeding. While such hormonal effects are understandably a concern for new parents, they are normal and should slowly diminish within the first couple of months. Resist the urge to touch, poke, pinch or squeeze the enlarged breast tissue as much as possible, since doing so can cause irritation or even infection.
As many as 70 percent of infants develop an oily, yellow, patchy, scaly — and totally normal! — scalp rash within the first month of life. Formally called infantile seborrheic dermatitis, this crusty coat of dry or dead skin cells is probably caused (again) by Mom’s hormones. Luckily, it’s not contagious, itchy or painful, and it doesn’t require prescription medication to get rid of it. Wash your baby’s hair with a gentle shampoo, massage the scalp with a soft brush and be patient. Most cases of cradle cap will resolve within the first year of life. But call your pediatrician if the rash develops a yeasty smell, as this may indicate an infection.
Babies poop — a lot. And with all of that poop comes a wide variety of colors and consistencies that can leave parents wondering what’s healthy and what’s normal. There are entire books and websites devoted to answering all of your newborn poop questions (including our own), but here are the basics: All babies pass dark, tarry-looking stool called meconium immediately after birth, and what’s normal after that varies widely but depends largely on whether your baby is breast- or formula-fed. Most often, breastfed babies have loose, even watery, poop that is mustard-like in color, while formula-fed babies tend to have soft, more formed stools that are pale yellow or brown. Some newborns poop seven or eight times per day; others poop once per day or less. Sticky, seedy, orange, green, yellow, brown — expect the appearance and frequency of your baby’s poop to fluctuate. But if it’s black several days after birth, bloody, white or suddenly more or less frequent, it may be a good idea to call your pediatrician.
In adults, excessive sneezing can indicate allergies or an impending sickness, but in newborns, excessive and dramatic sneezing is typically nothing to worry about. Sneezes help babies clear congestion and airborne particles from their nasal passages, and because these passages are tiny compared to adults’, they are more easily clogged and need to be cleared more often. Unless these fits are accompanied by other symptoms like a fever or loss of appetite, sneezes are a healthy and important sign that your baby’s nervous system is working properly.
Having an underdeveloped neurological system means that newborns often shake, startle, twitch and aggressively flail their limbs. Some even have seizure-like rhythmic movements. While these motions would be alarming in adults, they are all typically normal in your newborn and will give way to more purposeful movements as your baby’s nervous system begins to mature.
Babies are born with soft, open areas of their skull called fontanelles. Although it might be nerve wracking to see these spots pulsating with your baby’s heartbeat, they actually serve an important role. During birth, they allow the bones of the skull to shift, helping the baby’s head pass through the birth canal. After birth, they stay open long enough (generally between 7 and 19 months) to accommodate your baby’s growing brain. In newborns, soft spots are found on the top, back and sides of the head and they are protected by a thick membrane, so it’s O.K. to touch them gently. Watch for soft spots that are sunken or swollen, as they may indicate issues like dehydration or head trauma and could require medical attention.
Yes, it’s creepy: Some babies sleep with their eyes open, a result of a medical condition called nocturnal lagophthalmos. The reason babies can sleep with their eyes open is unknown, but it may be related to their unique sleep cycles and spending more time in REM sleep than adults. But while certainly unsettling, it’s harmless, fairly common and not indicative of a sleep problem.
Erika R. Cheng is an assistant professor of pediatrics at the Indiana University School of Medicine.