Divorce can be taboo among South Asian-Americans, but it may open a portal to new friendships.
This story was originally published on Sept. 6, 2019 in NYT Parenting.
In late 2016, I separated from my then-husband after 12 years of marriage. My initial feelings ricocheted from wondering why I stayed for so long — I was profoundly depressed toward the end — to worrying what others would think when they found out, because divorce, especially when there are children involved, while not unheard-of, is relatively rare and highly stigmatized in South Asian-American communities.
Mostly, however, I worried about single parenting, nurturing relationships with my soon-to-be ex-in-laws and experiencing the world as a single woman again in a subculture where I had few role models. As it turns out, I was far from alone in navigating these spaces, and my circle of supporters drew even closer in this time of trauma and transition. I remember sitting in a state-mandated parent education seminar, seeing many brown faces like mine and feeling relieved. “The idea that one is not the only one is so liberating, empowering and destigmatizing,” Priyanka Upadhyaya, a licensed clinical psychologist and clinical instructor in the Department of Psychiatry at NYU Langone Health with practices in both New York City and central New Jersey, told me. Upadhyaya is also a South Asian-American single parent with a 10-year-old son.
Since my separation nearly three years ago and divorce one year ago, I’ve found community, online and off, from a fun social media baking project that has brought like-minded people into my life to a veritable “army of aunties,” as my 7-year-old daughter refers to my friends, who provide all sorts of material and emotional support to me and her.
There are no hard numbers for divorce rates among South Asia-Americans specifically, but experts say divorce in the demographic is relatively rare compared with the overall divorce rate in the United States. Still, splits among South Asian-Americans are on the upswing, even while American divorce rates are declining overall. Crude statistics are misleading, however. Upadhyaya indicated that many South Asian women live separate lives from their partners, but choose not to legally divorce, as there are many advantages to staying married — social, emotional and economic. Parijat Deshpande, a clinically trained therapist who mostly works with East Asian and South Asian families in California, uses the term “invisible divorce” to describe such arrangements. Upadhyaya has counseled South Asian American clients who, because of their divorces, now receive far fewer social invitations or, worse, have been shunned by family members or experienced a shrinking of their professional networks.
I generally had an easy go of things, largely due to my financial situation, which allowed me access to competent legal representation and adequate therapy, and a very progressive and accepting family. But I also wondered how other South Asian women managed such a life transition within this cultural context.
We South Asian women are not a monolith by any means: Our families originate in a number of countries, and one could write a dissertation on the ways in which immigration, class, gender, religion and intergenerational status — and culture — intersect in the aftermath of a divorce. I reached out to friends and acquaintances: Some declined to speak to me on the record. “The stigma is real,” one said. Everyone, however, appreciated the opportunity to chat about divorce and co-parenting in the context of our cultures, and all agreed on the invaluability of creating community in the face of changing family dynamics in the diaspora.
Shivani Desai, 41, an Indian-American physician from Naperville, Ill., was married for seven years and has been divorced for about a year. Her family and close friends supported her through her initial transition, as did the parents at her 5-year-old daughter’s school. “But one of the things that helped greatly was social networking,” she said. “On Facebook, specifically, I found moms in my situation. There were several other South Asian women just like me, in the same profession, in the western suburbs of Chicago. And through this network, I met another mom, with two similar-aged children, who I recently went on a Disney cruise with.” Desai stressed the importance of having her child interact with other children going through the same experiences, to build normalcy around their family.
Satya Chheda’s separation and divorce were hard on her son, who was in fourth grade at the time. (He is now 12 years old.) “Both his father and I were a mess, emotionally, and we couldn’t find the right therapist for him,” said Chheda, 45, a career coaching manager for a coding bootcamp who was married for 13 years. “But a friend reached out to him, and said, ‘Hey, my parents aren’t together either,’ and they bonded over that.” She also credits her son’s school in Brooklyn, N.Y., for creating an in-school support group for families in transition. She tried to find culturally specific groups for herself and her son, both online and off, but had limited success. “I went to a New York City-specific group meeting, but felt very disconnected as all the women there were white and well-off,” she said.
Vikaas had relocated from the East Coast to the West Coast, and was far away from her support network, which made the transition “a lot more difficult,” she said. “At the time, the only personal network I had was my professional acquaintances. I spent a lot of time with my mother, who did move to the West Coast, and she was very supportive,” despite having initial reservations about Vikaas’s choices, she said. “It took a couple of years to build up a community that was really supportive in an emotional and spiritual way,” the latter of which she found in a new church.
Bangladeshi-American artist Farhana Akhter, 50, found community in her professional networks. With her then-toddler daughter, who is now 10, she moved back to the same New York City neighborhood she had lived in before marrying. “My old friends and new friends supported me, both as a mother and an artist,” she said.
Difficult life transitions inherently bring about a potential for social and emotional disconnection — every person I spoke to lamented the bittersweetness of losing friends and family in the divorce process, but also took great pride in the new models of human connectedness they had created. I have become more vulnerable, accepting and loving than I ever thought was possible, even though many aspects of this life change remain challenging.
Pooja Makhijani is a New Jersey-based writer and editor.