At 30 months, your toddler is starting to turn into a person. She likely knows hundreds of words. She’ll sing songs. Instead of one-word demands, she’ll be putting words together in phrases. She’ll also have opinions, which will often differ from yours. She can be a handful, physically, and will be more than able to explore the world on her own.
Move around. Most 2½-year-olds are becoming pretty independent. They can help get themselves dressed.  They can (with help) brush their teeth and wash and dry their hands.
Play with others. Children at this stage likely are engaging in what we call “parallel play.” At play dates, they will play alongside others, but independently. Soon, however (or maybe even now), they will begin engaging in “social play” – where they start to interact with other children.
Communicate in more sophisticated ways. Kids this age may be developing a sense of humor.  Some kids this age will also be able to tell you when they need to go to the potty and are ready to use the toilet.
By 2½, kids are pretty much in control of their bodies. They can do so much, including jumping, running, climbing stairs and more. They don’t need your help as much as they used to, and they’re going to value and push for independence. There’s a reason that many refer to this age as the “terrible twos.” They will at times resent your intrusion, because they want to push the envelope of what they can do on their own. That’s natural, so don’t take it personally.
Because they’ve got the basics down, they’re going to try to do more sophisticated things. Instead of tossing a ball underhand, they’re going to throw it overhand. At least, they’ll try. They’ll want to go down stairs in addition to going up. Unfortunately, this leaves them at higher risk for injury, so be careful not to leave them alone around even a little bit of water. Drowning is the leading cause of death and injury in kids this age.
At this point, you’d likely have picked up on any hearing and vision issues, but it’s still a good idea to watch what they do. Most kids by this age have pretty good hearing and vision. They hear normally (but may choose to ignore you). They also see well, and should be able to sort objects by color and shape.
Your child will likely stun you on a pretty regular basis. Kids’ language skills are simply phenomenal at this age. They’ll be picking up words at a rapid pace and putting them into phrases. Until you’ve seen a small child learn to speak, you simply can’t fathom the process. If you’ve tried to pick up a second or third language as an older child or an adult, you know how hard it can be – even with professional help. Kids this age just do it naturally.
Some of this is likely because they have little else to do. But there’s compelling evidence that the more words kids hear, the more they’ll learn. So, talk to your child. A lot.
Your child will also start to notice that people exist outside of himself. This will be represented in his language as he starts to use pronouns like “I” and “you.” He will also increasingly enjoy the presence of other children. He’ll enjoy playing alongside them, and at times mimicking them. He may be engaging them in social play more than he did at 2. But he’ll also recognize his playmates as “others” and may become possessive of toys or people. That’s normal, so don’t be concerned.
Kids will also inevitably become attracted to screens and video. They’re amazingly enticing to kids. Much of the available evidence says that watching videos and playing games on devices is not helpful to kids and potentially detrimental, so try to limit the time that kids spend alone watching and playing with screens.
My mother says that, at this age, I could speak in full sentences that everyone could understand. Is my child behind?
No. You may understand much of what your child says at this point, but that’s because you’re around her all the time! At this age, most people outside the family can understand around half of what a child says. This will get better in the future. Don’t stress.
I keep arranging play dates, but my child doesn’t seem interested in playing with the other kids. She plays by herself. Should I worry?
No. Kids this age often engage in “parallel play,” where they play alongside, but independently from, others. That’s totally normal. That will change over time.
My son has no interest in potty training. Is he behind?
Not necessarily. Trying to make a child learn to use the toilet can backfire. You’re usually much better off waiting until you see signs of readiness – both emotional and physical. It’s never a bad idea to talk about this with your doctor, but some kids get out of diapers much later than this.
My daughter is behind where my son was at this point. Does that mean something is wrong?
No. My first child seemed to have only one word forever. It was “ugh” and he pointed at everything and used it. We used to joke that it was like “smurf” in the old cartoon. My third child seemed to have a dictionary’s worth of words by age 3. They’re both in honors language arts classes today.
No one knows your baby better than you do. You’re the expert! If you have any concerns, discuss them with your physician, even if she doesn’t ask about them. This is known as “surveillance,” and it’s one of the main ways pediatricians pick up on developmental delays in children.
I can’t stress enough the importance of making sure your child is never left alone near water. Drowning happens far more often than you think, and it takes very little standing water to pose a danger to your child.
Encourage play with other children. It will take time, but your child will learn a ton from watching and engaging with other kids.
Continue to talk, read and sing to her. Her language skills are blossoming. The more you expose her to language, the more she will learn and use.
Kids should be progressing in language skills at this time and, given that this is a critical period, we don’t want them to miss out. 
Your child should also be “pretending” at this point. If you don’t ever see that kind of behavior, you should bring that to your doctor’s attention. Similarly, if your child doesn’t appear to recognize emotions in others – simple ones like happy and sad – or doesn’t ever laugh, this should also be brought up with your doctor.