Less than a year after I held my son, Karl, for the last time, I became a mother again.
The first night I spent with my daughter in the hospital, her doughy, swollen newborn face looked so much like her brother’s had, I felt confused. It had been less than a year since I had held my son for the last time, and my labor with his sister was so quick that, within 45 minutes, I had somehow become a mother again. In the disorientation of fitful hospital semi-sleep, I looked over at her, thinking I finally had him back — a year had not gone by, a day had. After all, it was in another hospital that I had last seen him.
“Is he cold?” I thought, before correcting myself. I went across the room to the bathroom to turn on the light, to see her, to make sure she still breathed, and I stared, wondering: who was this, if not him?
Of course, it was simply that I didn’t know her yet; he was all I had known. When I had held Karl for the first time in the hospital that I couldn’t bear to return to for my daughter’s birth, he was the child that had existed. He was my only child until 11:11 p.m. the night of the Strawberry Moon, which glowed pink outside my hospital window as I tended to my daughter.
Now, as she grows, I can’t help but look for Karl in my daughter, but she looks very different from him. My searching eyes scan all of her perfect features, yet are left feeling raw, with an ache. I am so deeply grateful to have her, this wonderful child. Yet sometimes I feel angry at the lack of choice I had in the matter. Other people did not have to accept one child over another. When they had two children, they had both.
With Karl, everything was joy. There was no shadow of grief to carry with him through life; there was no dread of what could happen. If he was to be an only child, he would have been the only child. There was no haunting, no unseen sibling.
My daughter, on the other hand, is an only child, but isn’t. How will she answer the question through life: “Do you have brothers and sisters?” How will she draw the picture of her family? I feel heartbroken for her, because I too know the despair of having to pause and decide how to answer each time someone asks, “Is she your first?” People ask this question more than you think.
I want my daughter. But I want my son, too. Another child does not replace the one lost. Another child made it possible for me to live again, to return gratefully to motherhood again, to survive losing him. I know that many who lose children aren’t as lucky as me, to have another. But the gnawing abyss that is the absence of my son is still there, every morning, every holiday, every birthday, every time I am around a child born around the time he was, children who have grown up, without him.
In the day or night when my mind wanders, it always wanders to him. And, when it does, it doesn’t wander to the baby he was when he disappeared from my arms, that day when I went home to clothes that still smelled of him, sheets he had slept on that morning, unwashed bottles in the sink, the last diaper I had changed still in the bin. It wanders to him now: 2 years old, then 3 years old. Now 4 years old. Walking, talking, going to school, eating breakfast with me, tying his shoes.
You cannot fast forward through grief to get to the other side; there is no other side when it’s your child.  I look at his sister, who now wears the big-kid winter jacket I had bought for him on sale, and imagine him now, a few inches taller than her—after all, he’s only 15 months older. I see them giggling, fighting, playing together. I must find somehow the creativity and the courage to conjure him up, to recreate him over and over each day, because my mind won’t not.
I keep up a brave front for my daughter. But what will happen as she grows? Recently, my 5-year-old niece, Karl’s cousin, asked me out of the blue at the dinner table, “What did Karl look like when he was dead?” If there is someone out there who knows how to answer this question, please tell me. Because I do know what he looked like when he was dead. And therefore know of no other way to answer this, other than to describe something no one should ever have to know, and no one except a 5-year-old wants to know.
I have walked with my daughter through Soho, near the place where Karl died, but I still cannot enter a two-block radius of where it happened, on Greene Street. It has been nearly four years, and I can only just barely beat back the images that flash to my mind from that day. I hold my daughter’s hand tight, and she has no idea that I am taking unnecessary turns of avoidance. I am chatting with her lightly, because to be a mother is to put on a calm mask, to wear confidence for your child. 
For now, I show my daughter pictures of her brother, and I talk about him. I tell her she has a brother, and that his name was Karl. I tell her he is her older brother, but she is confused because, in the pictures, he is so much smaller than she is. I tell her that Karl was determined. He was the most curious baby I have ever met; he had eyes that sparkled. She’s still not quite 3, so she hasn’t yet learned to ask the questions that I don’t know how to answer.
One day last summer, when we were moving, I placed the box that held Karl’s ashes on the floor for a moment as I unpacked some things onto a shelf. I turned around and, as 2-year-olds do, she had pulled off the baby blanket that covered it and was trying to open the box. I panicked, taking the box back and said, “Oh no, honey, we can’t open that.” She asked me why not. I didn’t know what to say, but I had promised myself I would never lie to her about Karl. “Because Karl is in there,” I said, awkwardly, not sure how else to say it.
“But I want to see him,” she said, imploringly.
So do I, sweetie. So do I.
Amber Scorah is a writer living in Brooklyn. Her first book, “Leaving the Witness: Exiting a Religion and Finding a Life,” was published by Viking. More of her recent writing for The Times can be found here.