NYT Parenting asked readers for stories about pumping at work, and you shared a diversity of experiences.
The ice rink beckoned from across the street. Erica Matos, 34, could see it from her office window in New York. She needed to pump breast milk for her baby during lunchtime, but she also wanted to skate. Her solution: tucking a mobile Freemie breast pump under a bulky coat, and pumping while ice skating.
NYT Parenting asked for readers’ experiences of pumping at work. You responded with stories about getting semi-naked in glass offices, spending hundreds of dollars on fancy pumps and, most often, the struggle to find a space to pump in privacy.
Six weeks after Allison Dewar, 37, of Calgary, Canada, gave birth, she went back to work, using her pump bag as a purse. “There’s nothing quite like sterilizing your pump equipment in the company lunch room while talking to your male C.F.O.,” she said. While she shelled out for an expensive electronic pump (“basically the Cadillac of pumps”), she hated the sensation and dreaded each time she had to pump. Part of Dewar felt guilty — shouldn’t nourishing her daughter feel something like a religious experience, she wondered?
While she had her own office to pump in, the walls were glass, and the office was next to the company’s board room. Two months after she returned to work, her male boss told Dewar that her pumping was disruptive, she said. They came up with a “pump schedule” together. “I still feel guilty about how much I despised it,” she said of her pumping experience.
Plus, she worries about her patients. She once came back from a pumping break to find other doctors preparing to intubate a patient who was experiencing a severe asthma attack. The patient was on the verge of dying. The emergency department staff hadn’t called Chen — they knew she couldn’t get back from her office in time. Now, she tries to find empty patient rooms to pump in. “It seems safer,” she said.
On her first day back, she sat down in the lactation room, crying, and started pumping. Ten minutes later, someone came into the room to change clothes; soon after, another employee used the room to take a nap on the couch. There were signs designating the room for lactating mothers only, but they were ignored. “I was mortified, angry and sad all at the same time,” Belli said.
She spoke to her supervisor, who was shocked. The lactation room got a deep cleaning, plus new furniture and a keypad to lock the room. Now, even though Belli still misses her baby, she can pump in peace.
Temperatures in Alaska could plunge to 50 degrees below zero. Reinking would take breaks from measuring snow to pump by making sure all her layers were bundled and slipping an all-in-one pump inside her bra. The trip was a reminder of how supportive the men in her life were, she said, from her husband, who cared for their baby while she was gone, to the male researchers, who understood when she needed to take pumping breaks. Plus, it was so cold that she didn’t have to worry about storing her milk — it would freeze on its own within minutes.