Fertility|What’s the Deal with Mail-In Sperm Start-Ups?
What’s the Deal with Mail-In Sperm Start-Ups?
Experts say these mail-in kits cannot replace in-office visits.
This story was originally published on Dec. 31, 2019 on NYT Parenting.
An equal number of infertility cases are caused by male factors as by female ones, according to the United States Department of Health and Human Services. But that’s not the perception: Many couples who have trouble conceiving assume the woman is at the root of any problem, and that’s how they go about seeking help. “I have a long list of anecdotal stories of people who went forward with fertility treatments only to recognize later that the guy had a significant issue that explained his sperm count and their difficulty getting pregnant,” said Dr. Joseph Alukal, M.D., a urologist at Columbia University Irving Medical Center. Several start-ups are trying to address the sperm side of things — and to rebalance responsibilities around family planning.
What’s the main draw?
Convenience and cost. Dadi charges $99 for the testing kit and $99 for annual storage. Legacy’s pricing starts at $199 for clinical fertility analysis; optional cryogenic storage is $149 a year. Traditional sperm banks can cost around $1,000 for semen analysis and a year of storage.
Experts say these mail-in kits cannot replace in-office visits. Neither Dadi nor Legacy is able to offer what would be legally considered medical advice, and in cases of results that indicate a problem, they refer customers to fertility specialists — who will most likely redo the test and ask more comprehensive questions, said Dr. Alukal. Some of the start-ups’ tests could also be falsely reassuring or falsely alarming without the necessary context, added Dr. Zev Williams, M.D., Ph.D., chief of the Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility at Columbia. When it comes to sperm-freezing, doctors we spoke with agreed that anything that makes a man consider his fertility is a boon: There is no demographic that sees a doctor less than men between the ages of 18 and 45. But they weren’t convinced that banking was necessary beyond specific populations — like men with cancer or other diseases that could affect fertility, those in the military or trans patients. “I still think it’s overkill to recommend that everyone bank their sperm in their 20s,” said Dr. Bobby Najari, M.D., a urologist and the director of the Male Infertility Program at N.Y.U. Langone Health.
Lauren is a project manager for NYT Magazine Labs and freelance journalist in New York.