At 6 months, your baby is probably starting to show some situational awareness. She knows the difference between a parent and a stranger, and enjoys seeing herself in a mirror. She can respond to her name, have “conversations” with you consisting of sounds, and is probably rolling over and sitting without support (or at least getting close to doing so).
Understand the difference between parents and strangers — and prefer the former. He might be more emotionally aware, enjoy playing with others and be intrigued by mirrors.
Prop herself up. Most 6-month-olds have mastered rolling over from stomach to back, and vice versa. If you support your baby’s balance, she can likely support her full weight in a standing position. She can probably also sit without support if you place her in that position.
Explore. Some behaviors, such as curiosity and bringing objects to the mouth (which likely started around the 4-month visit), are continuing to intensify. Your baby is starting to become interested in and trying to grab things that are out of reach. She also may be starting to use her hands together and pass objects from one to the other.
Communicate. Your baby is continuing to develop language skills, responding to sounds by making them and maybe even having “conversations” with you, if you respond to their sounds with your own. He might be starting to learn consonants, such as “m” sounds.
Most 6-month-olds are continuing to get better at using their “equipment,” both mentally and physically. Not only can they make sounds, but they can use those sounds to interact with others verbally. Not only can they see faces, but they can discriminate between parents and strangers. They’ve mastered some sounds, but can also use them to communicate their moods and feelings. If 4 months was about software development — when babies begin to lay down neural pathways in the brain to use their bodies — 6 months is about demonstrating that the software is getting more sophisticated with time.
Your baby’s vision is also getting pretty good, almost 20/20. Their eyes should work together well enough to give your child proper depth perception and the ability to see in three dimensions. You’ll notice them getting better at picking up objects in fewer tries, as they can adequately judge distance when using their arms and hands. But, as always, practice makes perfect. By 6 months, experts believe that babies have pretty good color vision, although that will continue to improve over time.
By now, it should be obvious that your baby can hear. But pediatricians are still interested in the quality of that hearing. The best evidence that babies are processing sounds correctly is in their language development: are they responding to tones and learning vowel and consonant sounds?
A 6-month-old baby is also developing stronger muscles — head control is a must at this point. He should also be eating solids (if you haven’t introduced them yet, talk with your doctor about it). Babies this age have increased control of their trunks, which allows them to sit on their own, often in a tripod position using their own arms in front of them for support. They likely can’t get to a sitting position by themselves, but they should be able to hold that position once there. Babies at 6 months of age are also typically able to roll between stomach and back — but don’t panic if they’re not. It won’t be long now until they’re mobile. Many mammals can walk soon after birth. Humans can’t. We develop those skills slowly over time.
Your baby is also mastering her hands. She might not have a full “pincer” grasp using a thumb and forefinger, but she should have better control over her fingers than she did at 4 months. She should be able to transfer objects from one hand to the other. As she reaches new parts of her body, she may become fascinated by the sensations she feels.
Now that my baby is rolling over, do I still need to put him on his back to sleep?
Yes. To reduce the risk of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS), 6-month-old babies should still be put to sleep on their backs.
If my baby rolls onto her stomach after she’s asleep, do I need to roll her onto her back? Do I need to monitor her all night?
No. If your baby rolls onto her stomach while she’s asleep, that’s fine.  It’s also still important that she doesn’t have any soft objects, toys, loose bedding or other harmful items in her crib.
You seem to be hedging when you talk about when babies sit up on their own. Is my baby behind because he can’t sit up without support yet?
No. I’m hedging because many babies develop that skill fully between their 6- and 9-month visits. Lots of babies still tripod (use an arm for support) at this age, or need help in general. Your baby should get to sitting on her own before your next visit to the pediatrician.
Nobody knows your baby better than you. You’re the expert! If you have any concerns, discuss them with your physician, even if she doesn’t ask about them. This is known as “surveillance” and, besides screening at the doctor’s office, is one of the main ways pediatricians pick up developmental delays in children.
You still need to provide much of the “material” necessary for babies to learn. Talk to your baby. Read to him. Interact with him. He can’t learn language from a book; he needs to hear you use words in the context of daily life in order to develop these skills himself.
Practice makes perfect. Your baby will need your support and a safe environment in order to work those muscles. Give him a clear area in which to learn to roll over. Give him toys and safe objects in order to work those hands. Allow him to feed himself small, safe bites of food in order to work those fingers. Encourage and reward him with love and cheers when he tries and succeeds.
Your baby should be pretty interactive at this point. If he refuses to cuddle, doesn’t seem to like being around people, doesn’t respond to visual or auditory cues, or isn’t easily soothed, bring them up with your doctor.
While your baby might not be sitting alone yet, you should be concerned if she can’t sit with help, or if she can’t control her head and neck or roll over. Do not hesitate to raise these concerns with your doctor. Data show that early identification and intervention for developmental disorders is key to future health and functioning.