A queer couple pursuing assisted fertility discuss the judgment and self-doubt they’ve encountered along the way.
I was 23 years old when Nikki and I met; she was almost 29. She had already established herself in corporate America and was shooting up the ladder, while I had taken my time in undergrad and was barely preparing to graduate.
There was no way I was ready for the relationship that she was ready for, or so she believed. But I had navigated a couple of serious relationships, one with someone who was a parent, and was more mature than she had expected. So while age has always been a factor in our relationship, it had never interfered with our moving forward.
Our baby journey was the first time the calendar proved to be a potential hurdle. Nikki was facing down what medical professionals sometimes call the “last fertile year,” which motivated us to decide that she should carry our first child. Below is the fourth part in an ongoing conversation between Nikki and me about our journey to motherhood: We’ve talked so far about how we, a queer couple, chose a black sperm donor, the intrauterine insemination process and why we opted for IVF.
As we waited to find out whether our first embryo transfer was successful, we decided to discuss how our life experiences would influence our parenting choices. The conversation has been condensed and edited.
B.A.: So, this is a big year for you.
Nikki: Yeah, I just turned 34. Now I feel a huge sense of urgency because I don’t necessarily want to be 35 and pregnant and have the pregnancy be labeled geriatric.
Nikki: Well, yeah, 35 feels so young to me. And I know that geriatric pregnancies get more testing and attention, which is beneficial, but I would still rather not have that type of pregnancy. Ironically enough, if I want to carry a second time it will inevitably be a geriatric pregnancy.
B.A.: Which is probably going to be the case since we want more than one child. And unfortunately, at the moment, I’m battling with deciding if I still want to carry a child in the future, because of my body dysmorphia, family history with postpartum depression and my androgynous presentation. It feels like pregnancy could be extremely stressful for me, you and our child.
Nikki: Well, you have time to make that decision.
B.A.: It doesn’t feel like it, especially hearing that there’s this daunting fertility clock. The longer I wait, the higher the risks to a healthy pregnancy.
Nikki: And that’s crazy because to be honest, I haven’t felt ready to have a baby until recently. And that might have something to do with us not owning a home until last year. For some reason I wanted to be a homeowner before bringing a child into this world.
Nikki: I just thought we’d have more stability. I felt like we needed a home for the kids to grow up in. We could track their height on the walls. You know, like in the movies?
B.A.: Movies are not real, and homeownership is not needed for stability. Coming from a family where a small percentage of the members own property, but the majority still managed to have kids and raise them just fine, I’ve never associated homeownership with stability or parenthood.
Nikki: In retrospect, I agree it’s a false sense of preparedness.
B.A.: So many people that want to be parents are apprehensive because they’re “not ready” in these ways you’ve mentioned, being a homeowner or having savings. I mean, most of the United States lives paycheck to paycheck, so how does this make room for people to pursue their dreams of becoming parents? Especially queer folks who need to search for alternative methods to become pregnant. And most times that requires having good health insurance that covers specialty doctors. Then you add in the expenses of I.U.I. and IVF, and purchasing sperm or eggs.
Nikki: Speaking of specialty doctors, our experience being black and queer in waiting rooms has been isolating. We haven’t seen other black people.
B.A.: I’m not surprised or bothered by it. I don’t really take stock in who is in there, because I’m just focused on us. So, since you brought it up, how does it make you feel?
Nikki: I feel like we stick out. We get a lot of interesting attention. It just takes me back to being in college or at work and being the only black person. At times I’ve felt misunderstood and judged.
B.A.: The only time I’m aware of being the only black person in the room is when I have to speak. So, I often police my vocabulary and pitch and tone. I’ve been working really hard on not codeswitching because I don’t want to bring up our children with that anxiety.
Nikki: I just know that sometimes I think about people’s potential thoughts when seeing two black, queer women trying to have children. We have read online comments from people asking why we’d bring children into this world without a father — and asking is that fair to the children? And I wonder if some of the people in the waiting room share that sentiment.
B.A.: Why does that matter?
Nikki: It doesn’t, but you asked me how I felt and sometimes I just feel like we’re in the spotlight. And to expand on the fatherless children comment, our children will have two parents who’ll balance each other out and give them support.
B.A.: It’s important for our children to also have male and nonbinary perspectives in their lives. They won’t only have two women telling them how to function. We’re interested in men, cisgendered and trans, and nonbinary folks stepping up to provide different perspectives on life that we have no insight on.
Nikki: And for those who are asking, “Why aren’t you adopting? There are so many kids without parents”: Just because we’re queer doesn’t mean we don’t want to experience childbirth. We’re open to adoption in the future, but I think it’s unfair to expect us to only pursue that option.
B.A.: When I hear comments about adoption, I start ruminating about the whole point of being a parent. Isn’t it simply to take care of a child? Why am I so fascinated with having a child that looks like me or my partner? I feel really bad about not pursuing adoption since I would challenge anyone straight or queer to consider it; I feel like a hypocrite. So, you and I have two different experiences with that question.
Nikki: You were raised by your grandmother and not your mom. How do you think this will influence your parenting?
B.A.: I’m in therapy now filtering out what I need to take and dispose of from that upbringing. I can try to create a foundation for how I want to parent our children, but at the end of the day, each child is going to dictate how we parent them because they’ll be individuals. There is no one good way to do it. All I know is that I will be a consistent, transparent, honest and affectionate parent. What about you? 
Nikki: It’s going to encourage me to check myself and make sure that I’m not overcompensating because I’ve only seen an example of one parent doing it all. I’m married to you, and you are a great partner and will be a great parent. I don’t need to overcompensate.
B.A.: I don’t want to ever make our kids feel like I’m all over them, especially when it comes to their feelings and thoughts. Those are private and they can keep all that to themselves as long as those thoughts or emotions aren’t harmful. Hopefully, I’ll establish a relationship with them where they trust me with their thoughts and feelings.
Nikki: I want our children to know that I respect their individuality, decisions, thoughts and emotions as well. I’m currently practicing this respect by acknowledging that I have no control and calmly waiting to see if this embryo decides to implant and results in a positive pregnancy test!