The nurse said that the doctor could make a small incision from the back of her vagina toward her anus, a procedure called an episiotomy. This would widen the vaginal opening and perhaps make the delivery happen faster. “Hell yes!” Landy thought, and gave the go-ahead. Her doctor made the snip, Landy pushed, and the baby came out. Unfortunately, the force of the delivery caused the tissue at the back of the incision to rip.
This is exactly the kind of trauma and damage that obstetricians hoped to prevent when they began routinely performing episiotomies in the 1920s. Advocates of the procedure argued that a prophylactic cut in the perineum, the delicate tissue between the vagina and anus, would prevent the kind of severe tear that Landy endured. They also argued that a neat incision would be easier to repair and would heal better than a jagged natural tear. Despite little evidence for these assertions, the argument proved persuasive. Doctors began routinely using episiotomies to deliver babies. “In America it actually became really common practice,” said Dr. Dana Gossett, M.D., chair of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of California, San Francisco. By 1979, 63 percent of all deliveries included an episiotomy, and the rate was even higher among women giving birth for the first time.
Doctors now recognize that episiotomies, especially the type most commonly performed in the United States, can do more harm than good, Dr. Gossett said. The procedure doesn’t prevent severe tears, and some studies suggest that it actually increases the risk, especially when combined with tools such as forceps or a vacuum. Imagine trying to rip your shirt by pulling the hem apart, Dr. Gossett said. It would be nearly impossible. “But if I make a little nick in the hem and you do that again, you’ll be able to rip it all the way open,” she said. There is no evidence that episiotomies heal better than natural tears either, and the procedure has been linked to long-term problems like fecal incontinence. That’s why the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has recommended against routine use of episiotomy since 2006. As a result, episiotomy rates declined dramatically in the United States. According to a data from 2012, about 12 percent of all vaginal births included an episiotomy.
Still, episiotomy rates vary widely, from less than 1 percent to more than 40 percent of vaginal births at some hospitals today, according to The Leapfrog Group, an organization funded by large public and private health care purchasers. That variation suggests that some doctors still perform the snip even when it may not be necessary.
While organizations like ACOG now advise against routine episiotomy, they stop short of saying the procedure shouldn’t be used. But when it comes to deciding whether an episiotomy is warranted, there is precious little guidance. That’s because high-quality data doesn’t yet exist, so doctors and midwives have to rely on their clinical judgment.
Many will at least consider an episiotomy under certain circumstances, for example when the baby is on the cusp of being born and its heart rate slows. If the heart rate doesn’t recover, the baby needs to come out immediately, said Kelly Gallagher, Ph.D., a certified nurse midwife and chief of the midwifery division at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque. And snipping through that tight tissue at the back of the vaginal opening can speed up delivery. “With that resistance gone, usually the baby will just come,” she said.
That’s what happened to Ilana Seidmann when she had her first child in 2017. She pushed and pushed, but her son wouldn’t budge. Labor “felt like a hundred marathons,” she said, yet Seidmann refused the doctor’s requests to consider a C-section. “I really wanted to do this the ‘natural’ way,” she said. After more than four hours of pushing, her son’s heart rate fell dramatically. Her doctor performed an episiotomy and pulled the baby out. “As far as I’m concerned, they probably saved my son’s life,” she said.
A doctor or midwife might also perform an episiotomy when the baby’s shoulder gets stuck behind the mother’s pubic bone during delivery, a complication called shoulder dystocia, said Dr. Rebecca Rogers, M.D., a professor in the department of women’s health at the University of Texas in Austin and one of the authors of ACOG’s guidelines on episiotomies. An episiotomy can give the doctor more room to dislodge the baby.
Some providers will also use an episiotomy to create more space for implements such as forceps or a vacuum, but Dr. Justin Bohrer, M.D., an obstetrician and faculty member at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health in Madison, said the procedure isn’t necessary most of the time. And combining these tools with an episiotomy increases the likelihood that severe tearing will occur.
Not only do doctors and midwives have to decide when to perform an episiotomy, they also have to determine how to make the cut. In the United States, clinicians tend to cut in a straight line from the vagina toward the anus, a procedure known as a midline episiotomy. That kind of cut seems to increase the risk of severe tearing. But another option is to make the incision so that it is angled away from the anus, a mediolateral episiotomy. Some research suggests that this kind of cut can protect against tears involving the anus, but the evidence is mixed. In the United States, mediolateral episiotomies have a reputation for being more difficult to repair and more painful as they heal, but Dr. Rogers hasn’t seen much in the scientific literature to support this idea.
As of 2012, the episiotomy rate in the United States had fallen to less than 12 percent, and data from The Leapfrog Group, suggests the rate is even lower today. The group, which collects performance data from some American hospitals via a yearly survey, found that the episiotomy rate declined from about 10 percent in 2016 to about 8 percent in 2017.
Still, rates vary widely: In the greater Los Angeles metropolitan area, for example, one hospital’s episiotomy rate was 0.5 percent and another’s was a whopping 47 percent. Rates also vary widely by provider. A 2008 study published in the Journal of Reproductive Medicine found that the longer an obstetrician had been practicing, the higher her episiotomy rate tended to be. That same study also reported that women were more likely to get an episiotomy if someone other than their primary physician attended the delivery. One concern is that some providers are doing episiotomies out of impatience, said Dr. Gossett, a co-author on the study. “Then you’re condemning some women to an episiotomy who might’ve had a lesser tear or no tear at all if left to their own devices,” she said.
Cassandra Willyard is a freelance science journalist and mom of one very opinionated 3-year-old.