Babies who soothe themselves with their fingers are champion sleepers, and dental problems often self-correct.
After the arrival of a new baby, there are few concerns that manifest themselves as immediately as the quality and consistency of the child’s sleep. “How is the baby sleeping?” remains a standard question for beleaguered new parents. Withstanding sleep deprivation during a period as taxing as a newborn’s first weeks can feel like a cosmic joke. Being subject to constant questioning about it, however, can feel downright cruel.
The first few weeks of my daughter’s life were no exception: She hollered, indignant, in the bleakest watches of the night, impervious to our rocking, singing, shushing and swaddling. Life took on a gauzy, technicolor haze. Her father and I gazed bleary-eyed at the ticking clock, dutifully switching off to allow the other to sink into a fitful, brief rest before the shift changed again. 

When my friends complained about their baby sleep trouble, I usually fell silent, aware that my relative success in this area was wholly unhelpful, would be interpreted as bragging and, most importantly, was probably just a roll of the genetic dice. The months passed, our babies grew, and my daughter continued to sleep remarkably well. But during a dental appointment shortly after her second birthday, the dentist brought our attention to the slight misalignment of her lower and upper jaws, the crossbite that had begun to form. We were advised to try to break her self-soothing habit before she turned 3, a task that we failed completely.
The adverse effects of non-nutritive sucking can show up pretty quickly. Dr. Amr Moursi, the chair of the department of pediatric dentistry at New York University, said that dentists can see changes to a child’s jaws and teeth within weeks. “And it’s not so much the actual finger or pacifier” that is causing the damage, Dr. Moursi explained. “What they’re doing is using their muscles to kind of purse, and that pressure pulls in the jaws and teeth, and that’s basically what’s causing those changes. Instead of those front teeth touching where they should, there’s kind of a gap there, and there’s a bit of an overbite — what we call a crossbite.” The problem usually self-corrects if kids give up sucking their fingers or pacifiers by age 3, Dr. Moursi added (already a moot point as far as my daughter was concerned).
Maybe expensive orthodontia is inevitable, but I can’t deny that our daughter’s sleep habits have been a blessing. Not just the fact that she can slumber the night away peacefully, but her ability to fall asleep quickly is nothing short of a marvel. And there is no secret formula: We read a story (or three, three times each), sing a song, she lays down, her fingers go in and her eyes close. Lights out. But it turns out there is a term for this pattern, and it’s a vital concept for every parent whose child struggles to go gently into that good sleep, night after night.
Kandra Becerra, owner and founder of Rocky Mountain Sleeping Baby, is a certified pediatric sleep specialist based in Denver. The key, she says, is figuring out the child’s “journey into sleep.” This looks different for every baby: Some shimmy to a certain corner of their cribs, others flip onto their stomachs, some suck thumbs or sing quietly to themselves. Becerra encourages parents to simply observe what the child does a few nights in a row, taking note of what comes naturally. “By the time I come along, what it looks like is most of the time Mom or Dad is rocking or feeding baby to sleep, and laying them down asleep,” she said. Giving children the time and space to learn how to soothe themselves to sleep is paramount — and if that sleep is going to be consistent and reliable, it cannot begin with parental intervention.
Pacifiers are a no-no when it comes to sleep, according to Becerra. Night wakings, which typically occur four to six times a night for everyone, regardless of age, are a real issue for children who rely on a binky to self-soothe. “What happens is that becomes incredibly disruptive to their quality of sleep because they wake up and they either have to search around their crib or search around their bed for this pacifier and then put it back in,” she explained. And while taking it away may seem hard, she finds that after just a couple of nights (older children require a bit more time), the pacifier is forgotten. When it comes to finger-sucking, however, Becerra is much more permissive.
From that angle, it’s not surprising that some sleep-deprived parents may actively try introducing restless children to their own fingers. Dr.  Enduring a baby’s tireless screaming night after night is uniquely agonizing, so is it any wonder that a dentist would introduce a potentially detrimental habit to his daughter in exchange for consistent sleep?
Certainly, some parents are more anxious than others about the optics of pacifier- or finger-sucking, especially past toddlerhood, when it’s less socially accepted. Becerra relayed a story of a client who abruptly ended their relationship when her child abandoned his pacifier in favor of his thumb. “She said she’d rather wake up with him multiple times a night than have a thumb-sucker,” Becerra recalled. Becerra noted that it’s typically “pressure from society” that dictates how parents will react to their child preferring a pacifier or finger to self-soothe.
Coming to terms with a child’s autonomy is one of the most difficult aspects of parenthood; it is a relinquishing of control that can often feel premature, alarming and sometimes downright dangerous. But it is also one of the greatest gifts we give our children: the space to navigate their ever-expanding world on their own terms. When it comes to sleep, this freedom is crucial for baby and parent alike. 
Carla Bruce-Eddings is a book publicist, freelance writer and mom to a fiery and opinionated 4-year-old girl.