Parenting|I’m Jealous of the Attention My Wife Gives My Son. Am I a Monster?
It’s embarrassing to admit I envy their relationship, but it turns out I’m not alone.
This story was originally published on March 10, 2020 in NYT Parenting.
He’s got dreamy green almond-shaped eyes, a head of golden blond locks and a dazzling smile that crinkles the corners of his eyes and transforms him from handsome to beautiful. The guy I’m competing with in the battle for my wife’s affection is so out of my league that it isn’t even a fair fight.
He’s also my 2-year-old son.
I’m not proud of it, but sometimes I’m jealous of my wife’s “little boyfriend.” She actually calls him that. Some mornings, I’ll walk into my son’s room and find that my wife has already gotten him out of his crib and transported him to the recliner where both of us have spent so many sleepless nights. On these mornings, she clutches our sleepy toddler like he’s still her helpless little baby and rocks him in that recliner until he’s awake enough to begin his daily pillaging of the home we just restored from his rampage the previous day.
Most days, the feeling I have when I look at my fully content wife and my semi-sleeping son is pure love. But other days — days when I’m moody, irritable and eager to find something to complain about — I’ll feel a pang of something else. Something sharp, uncomfortable and completely unexpected. I’ll feel jealousy.
It took me a while to recognize the green-eyed monster for what it was because I had so many other competing and contradictory feelings. When I found out that my wife and I were expecting a son, my mind immediately conjured up high-definition images of the two of us hiking challenging trails in remote natural parks, screaming at the refs over blown calls at Sixers games and singing our hearts out to Stone Temple Pilots songs from the ’90s. Surely, I, a dad who was overjoyed at the prospect of raising a boy, couldn’t be jealous of the kid I’d always wanted. Could I? Yes, yes I could.
The shifting dynamics in my relationship with my wife are key to these pangs of envy. Before we had kids, I was the one my wife needed to look after. I’d always operated under the notion that my brand of helplessness was endearing, adorable even.
It seemed like an unspoken agreement between the two us: I promised to provide constant laughter, endless adventure (one of our first dates involved jumping off a 40-foot high railroad bridge into the murky waters of Pennsylvania’s Schuylkill River) and a steady stream of ridiculous stories to keep her entertained well into our golden years.
All she had to do in return was accompany me on my many soul-crushing stand-up comedy gigs in exotic locations like Scranton, Pa., and Poughkeepsie, N.Y., and help me limp through my adult life without accidentally killing myself or winding up in jail.
But when a baby comes along, those spacey, idiosyncratic behaviors like, say, putting the lunch meat in the cabinet under the kitchen sink, aren’t quirky fun things to tell your girlfriends about — they’re infuriating.
