You might notice that at 9 months, your baby will likely be establishing herself as an independent human being. She will have preferences and opinions. She will begin understanding that there’s more to the world than what’s in her line of sight at the moment. She is likely mobile, too, crawling and getting ready to stand. While you’ll be excited by all of this, your child is about to enter toddlerhood, which can be an even more demanding time for parents.
Discriminate socially. Your baby may start becoming clingy with you and others she knows well, and may have stranger anxiety. She will have preferences for more than just people, though. She will likely have favorite toys, too.
Move around. Most 9-month-old children can get into a sitting position by themselves, and can then sit without support. Most can also crawl and pull themselves into a standing position and remain in that position if they have something to hold on to for balance. They should also be able to pick up objects with thumb and forefinger.
Perceive objects in space. One of the biggest changes by 9 months is known as “object permanence.” If you show a 9-month-old baby an object and then hide the object while the baby is watching, she will understand that the object is still there, and search for it. She will also watch an object fall when you drop it.
Communicate. Babies understand the word “no” by this point (even if they don’t always like it). They will copy gestures as well as sounds, and point to things they want. They also may have mastered “mama” and “dada” by now, even if they don’t necessarily use the words correctly each time.
Up until this point, you may have felt that your baby was learning to understand the world. Now, they’re showing that they’re getting ready to master it. A 6-month-old is usually pretty stationary. His entire world consists of what is in his line of sight, and within his reach. By 9 months, however, babies are learning that there’s a world out there that they can’t see, and they’re getting mobile enough to get there on their own. This is all normal, of course, because animals (humans included) need to be able to get around and take care of themselves by the time they are mature.
Your 9-month-old baby is on the move. She will probably have long since mastered sitting. Now she will likely be crawling, pulling herself to a standing position, and then standing on her own — as long as she can hold on to something. This is evidence not only that she’s getting stronger, but also that she has more control of her arms and legs. Most mammals can do these things very soon after birth. Humans need to learn these things for themselves, and your baby is working on walking.
Babies at this age are also mastering fine motor control. They can use their thumbs and forefingers alone to pick up small objects, like Cheerios. They may not do it quickly, and they may be very deliberate about it, but that’s because they’re still practicing.
Hearing and vision are continuing to develop, but much more gradually and you probably won’t notice any major differences. You will notice, however, that your baby’s brain is continuing to develop in ways that allow her to use her eyes and ears to communicate better. Many babies have learned to say words like “mama” and “dada” by this point, even if they don’t understand what they really mean; they will repeat these words on command, and even say them spontaneously, but they won’t necessary know that they represent mom and dad. They are also learning whom they know and trust, and may become anxious around strangers. This may be an innate instinct that helps to protect young humans.
One of the most amazing developments in babies’ brains at this age is an understanding of “object permanence.” Before now, when people or objects were removed from your baby’s line of sight, he assumed they no longer existed. Now, your baby understands that there is much beyond what he can see and hear. If you hide something, he will look for it. Many parents notice their babies having more trouble getting through the night without waking and crying. This is partly because they now understand that their parents are likely close by, even when they can’t see them.
My baby can stand holding onto something, but can’t walk alone. Should I get her a walker to practice?
Absolutely not. Walkers do not help babies learn to walk any earlier. If anything, they may slow that process down. Additionally, walkers are associated with many injuries each year. The American Academy of Pediatrics, and every pediatrician I know, recommends that you avoid walkers.
My baby doesn’t crawl, but she can pull herself to stand. Is that a problem?
No. My oldest son never crawled. He just skipped that step. Some babies do. What we’re looking for is progress in development in general, and as long as your baby continues to show us development in other areas (such as standing and sitting), everything is likely just fine.
My 9-month-old was sleeping through the night like a champ before, but now is waking and crying out for us more. Is something wrong?
Not necessarily. This is pretty common, and likely happens because your baby is getting smarter. He knows that you’re there now, even if you’re not in the room. He may need to learn how to soothe himself, even though he knows you could help. But by now you should be able to tell if your baby is screaming because he’s in pain or if something is wrong. If that’s the case, do go check on him. You’ll both figure this out over time.
Nobody knows your baby better than you. If you have any concerns, discuss them with your pediatrician, even if she doesn’t ask. This is known as “surveillance” and, besides screening at the doctor’s office, it’s one of the main ways pediatricians pick up developmental delays in children.
Up until this point, the dangers your baby has faced have been pretty minimal. You’ve had to make sure she wasn’t going to fall off a table and that there was nothing in arm’s reach that could hurt her. But things are about to get a lot more difficult now that your baby is mobile. You’ll now need to baby proof your entire home, and worry about stairs and the safety of things they can grab.
As your baby begins to explore the world, you need to be there to protect her. She is much more aware than she used to be. When you bring her out with you, she’ll be able to trot out new skills and will see that there’s more to the world than she had imagined.
Continue to talk, read and sing to her. Her language skills are about to blossom. The more you expose your baby to language, the more she will learn and use it.
Most babies have pretty good strength at this point. If they can’t sit on their own, discuss it with your pediatrician. The same goes for supporting themselves on their legs without your help. They might not have the balance to walk yet, but they should be developing enough strength that they’re getting close.
A lack of awareness or interest in others might also be cause for concern. If your baby doesn’t look where you point, doesn’t respond to his name or recognize people with whom he should be familiar, discuss it with your pediatrician. The same goes for language. If he isn’t babbling by this point and using repetitive sounds like “mama” and “dada,” discuss this with their doctor.