Parenting|Why Do Kids Love Terrible Music?
Why Do Kids Love Terrible Music?
It turns out there’s a good reason my children request songs that are repetitive, silly and lowbrow. I’m trying to get onboard.
“Baby Shark” is torture.
Don’t take it from me — a dad who, on a recent Sunday, listened patiently as his 2-year-old son twirled about, warbling “Do-Do-Do-Do-Do” maniacally at 6:15 a.m. Take it from city officials in West Palm Beach, Fla., who literally used the song as torture, blasting it (and “Raining Tacos”) on repeat to deter homeless people from sleeping on a city-owned patio this summer.
For kids, of course, the tune is anything but torture, racking up nearly 4 billion YouTube views and counting. But the song’s ubiquity, and inanity, raises an important question: Why do children love such terrible, horrible, no-good, very bad music?
I’ve started to think of such songs as junk food, even candy — sugary-sweet, decidedly one-note, light on nutrients. And just like I wouldn’t let my kids subsist on Dum Dums and SweeTarts, however tempting that might be, I’ve tried to sneak a little good music into their cultural diet, much like a parent might slip peas and broccoli into a plate of mac-and-cheese. It hasn’t always worked — as the old adage goes, the parent provides, and the child decides — but it has helped rein in the “Baby Shark” reign of terror.
It turns out, I needed to be more creative. Mere exposure wouldn’t suffice. In my quest to figure out how to improve my kids’ appreciation of good music, I consulted a few working musicians with children, some of whom even perform music explicitly for kids. Here’s what I learned.
I learned that they might enjoy kid-friendly classics as much as their early-millennial dad. Corin Tucker, of punk-rock stalwarts Sleater-Kinney, mentioned a beloved TV theme song. “I would go back to my own childhood, and find things like ‘Scooby-Doo’ that I loved, and play that for the kids, to make sure they have a bit of that in their brains somewhere,” she told me. She also introduced them to favorites like Patti Smith, Kate Bush and Talking Heads. At least one of them stuck; she took her now 18-year-old son to a David Byrne show last year.
This was all great advice. My family keeps a ukulele and some drums around the house in case inspiration strikes. (Sadly, I don’t play.) But I also needed an understanding of why kids like the music they do, terrible or otherwise.
I talked with child psychiatrist Dr. Eugene V. Beresin, M.D., executive director of the Clay Center for Healthy Minds at Massachusetts General Hospital — who also happens to be a guitar player with a deep love of folk music. He helped me identify a few key pillars of songs kids like.
Kid-friendly tunes tend to be upbeat and catchy. There’s usually some degree of adaptability, where a kid can, say, suggest a new animal sound during “Old MacDonald Had a Farm.” Repetition is key, which will come as no surprise to any parent who has sung endless versions of “The Itsy Bitsy Spider,” or contributed to the billions of “Baby Shark” views on YouTube. Finally, the songs tend to be about relatable, familiar topics.
It started to make sense. I spoke with musicologist Dr. Louis Epstein, assistant professor of music at St. Olaf College, who performs original children’s songs with another professor as part of Louis and Dan and the Invisible Band. (He’s Louis.) It turns out I was missing a critical pillar, Dr. Epstein told me: “transgression.” Kids’ songs often have a little bit of silliness, naughtiness, obnoxiousness or some mix of the three. “It’s something that kids are really interested in,” he said, mentioning songs with bathroom humor in the lyrics, or songs that are obviously irritating to their parents.
I looked back at a Spotify playlist I made of my daughter’s favorite songs. It starts with some tunes she regularly requested — “Roar” by Katy Perry, “Thunder” by Imagine Dragons, a healthy selection from the “Frozen” and original “Mary Poppins” soundtracks — and slowly morphs into grown-up-approved songs she knows (e.g., The Mamas and the Papas’ take on “Dream a Little Dream of Me,” which my wife often sings to her at bedtime).
I’ve started putting together a new playlist with songs mentioned by the artists and academics I spoke with. I haven’t road-tested it yet, but plan to this weekend. We’ll see what sticks.
Check out a Spotify playlist of the music Paul plans to explore with his kids.