Parents go in and out of the work force depending on their caretaking needs.
NYT Parenting asked readers to submit stories about the decisions they made around work when they became parents. Our inbox flooded with responses — stories about pumping in closets and endless emails, prohibitively expensive daycares and punishing commutes, twinges of guilt and moments of clarity. Here are your choices, in your words.
With three kids who are so little, I feel like going back right now would be punishing everyone. It would be difficult and expensive to have all three in day care. And then there’s the knowledge that any job I did have would not get my full attention or time: Kids get sick, kids have doctor’s appointments, a tree falls in the front yard, the car needs an oil change. My husband has an all consuming job, and it is so helpful to have someone at home to take care of everything else.
I gave up my career as a military officer to seek the glitz and glamour of a corporate America. Then I jumped off the ladder because I had a baby, and my husband’s career increased in responsibility and time away from family.
After our second child was born, I attempted to re-enter the workforce after staying home for four years. I thought Old Steph was in that office building somewhere. But the meetings were arduous, the emails were endless and as my bank account bloated, my soul was drained by gray cube walls, fluorescent lighting and polite client lunches. I missed my kids!
I went back to school to pursue a masters degree in education and believed that I found the mystical and elusive “work/life” balance in pursuing a career in teaching. But honestly, I’m having a hard time nailing down employment. It hit me hard today as I sat across from a substitute teaching agency worker today who is half my age and clearly still lives with her parents. I’m afraid I made a mistake in leaving behind two great paying jobs in favor of my kids and my family’s sanity.
There seems to be an unspoken war between stay-at-home moms and working moms. I’ve been on both ends of the spectrum. But if I were to choose one side, I would choose to be a working mom. I enjoy working, not just out of necessity and the feeling that I am independently making my own money, but also because my mother was a working mom in a time when it wasn’t socially acceptable. I grew up in Vietnam in the early ’90s, and most women in our family stayed at home and took care of children. For my mom, it wasn’t a choice. She worked because my dad was not a very consistent laborer — he couldn’t keep a job long enough. He was more of a “starving artist.” So for her, it was necessary to work to keep us clothed and fed, but it really created a distance between us — our relationship isn’t as good as it would be if she had stayed at home and was more maternal.
My wife and I adopted a baby girl, Alexa, from China in 2001. At that time we were living in Fremont, Calif., and I was a software engineer in Palo Alto. I was just laid off when we went to China to pick up Alexa and take her home. We could hardly afford the hotel and airfare, but we did it!
I stayed home and took care of Alexa. I wanted to return to work, but I could not take care of a baby and look for work at the same time. When she got a little older, I tried going to a county-sponsored work placement program but was unable to invest the hours attending the classes and workshops.
I am one of the deeply ambivalent moms. I work because I have to — but do I, really? I work to give my daughter the opportunity to navigate the world with more tools in her kit than I had in my youth, right? I work to make consistent contributions to her college savings plan, to provide her with top-notch health care, to afford fun and enriching family vacations. I want to make my daughter proud by making a positive contribution to the world. I want to be helpful and respected, and to show her the value of an education by putting mine into action. And it’s worth it. It’ll be worth it. It has to be. This narrative keeps my tears at bay most days when I leave my daughter for 12 hours a day, five days per week. My daughter is the joy of my life. She is everything. I hope she knows I go to work because I love her.
I became a mother when I was a grad student. I didn’t mean to get pregnant with either one of my kids, but sometimes that’s just how it goes. My oldest was born when I was halfway through my doctorate, and my youngest was born quite literally the day I finished. In fact, I had to postpone the official “document drop” at the graduate office because I went into labor.
I “chose” to stay home because the cost of childcare was far more than I could earn. Then the recession hit when my youngest was just 1 year old, and we mostly counted ourselves lucky that my husband had a good job and didn’t lose it. I still taught piano and picked up gigs when I could, steadily increasing the work as my kids got older and started school.
Still, more than 10 years into trying to balance parenting and running a household with freelance work, I burned out big time. Now I’m back in school and getting another masters degree in urban planning. Yes, it is a 180 from what I was doing before. I want to have a career that is interesting and creative and contributes something to the world that also comes with regular hours and a stable salary.
I write this while pumping breast milk in what is basically a closet with a sink. I had my second child in January, and the decision to go back to work was much more fraught the second time around than the first. Maybe it was because the first time, I hadn’t connected with my son as much during the 12 (mostly unpaid) weeks of maternity leave, or because work was the one ray of sunshine I had in those dark postpartum days. I longed for adult interactions, the freedom to pee and eat on my own schedule and the chance to use my brain for more complex reasoning, rather than drumming up yet another “hack” to get my very awake baby to please, please, please nap already.
