My daughter started asking for her daddy, so I turned to Lesléa Newman’s classic picture book and it changed everything.
Three years ago, when my daughter Marty was born, a queer friend gave me and my spouse a copy of Lesléa Newman’s iconic lesbian children’s book, “Heather Has Two Mommies.”  At the time, I threw the gag gift on a bookshelf to gather dust, only to realize later how valuable its lessons would be for my family.
To a modern reader, the book will seem benign and quaint, however it was anything but when it hit bookshelves in 1989. Newman, who’s since written several other children’s books with L.G.B.T.Q. themes, including “Sparkle Boy,” “Mommy, Mama, and Me” and “Daddy, Papa, and Me,” received 50 rejections before a friend who operated a desktop publishing company agreed to publish “Heather” with financial assistance from Newman and funds raised by friends. Standard publishers found it too risky. “There was one publisher who said something like, ‘I know there is a need for this book, but I wouldn’t touch it with a 10-foot pole,’” Newman told me.
There was good reason for all the apprehension. In the years following the book’s release, there were numerous attempts to ban it — the American Library Association ranked it the 9th most banned book of the 1990s — and it became a lightning rod for conservative activists rallying for traditional family values.
While the academics I spoke with collectively agreed that the book represents a critical milestone in the steady trudge toward greater lesbian awareness and visibility, some shared concerns about the ways in which it maintains the status quo. Dr. Nathan N. Taylor, Ph.D., an assistant professor of education at Robert Morris University in Pennsylvania, who wrote a paper on L.G.B.T.Q. representations in children’s picture books, said the story traffics in homonormativity, a concept formulated by Lisa Duggan, a professor of social and cultural analysis at New York University. The book “allows some people to be a part of the American Dream — in this case, upper middle class, cis-gendered, partnered white women,” Dr. Taylor said, to the exclusion of other, more marginalized, races, classes, genders, sexualities, family configurations and ways of being.
While we undoubtedly need to multiply the number and kinds of queer narratives in children’s literature, the value of “Heather” to my daughter and family unit has been immeasurable.
Dr. Pitman echoed a similar sentiment, offering her picture book, “This Day in June,” which depicts a fun, joyous and celebratory Pride festival as another example. While there were numerous attempts to ban it — in Texas, Illinois and Colorado, to name a few — nothing was as terrifying as watching a conservative pastor in Iowa stream on Facebook Live a rant full of “fire and brimstone,” while burning her book and other L.G.B.T. titles.
Which is why, despite “Heather’s” less-than-radical trappings, it’s a book that’s still important 30 years later. I was reminded of this a few weeks ago, when the children at our day care commenced working on gifts for Father’s Day. A little girl, unfamiliar with families like ours, kept pressing Marty about her paternal absence. “But you have to have a daddy,” she kept saying. All Marty could muster was, “I don’t want a daddy,” but a teacher said Marty looked like she was about to cry.
To help diversify the concept of family for Marty’s little peers, I thought of buying a dozen copies of “Heather Has Two Mommies” as a gift for them — and for us. My hesitation makes me realize that even now, post-marriage equality, the repeal of Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell, greater trans visibility and awareness, it’s still a controversial — and vital — book.
Stephanie Fairyington is an NYC-based journalist who writes on gender and sexuality.