Men could easily freeze their sperm since the 1970s. So why did it take so long to figure out how to successfully freeze a woman’s eggs?
In 1989, Dr. Debra Gook had just started working in in vitro fertilization at the Royal Women’s Hospital in Melbourne, Australia, when a close friend received a cancer diagnosis. “One of the things she regretted was that she could never have a family,” Dr. Gook said. At the time, there was only one fertility-preservation possibility for women who faced sterility from damaging treatments like chemotherapy and radiology: to freeze embryos beforehand. For single women, that meant a flurry of rushed decision-making. They’d have to choose donor sperm in the short window they had leading up to cancer treatment. Men, on the other hand, could freeze their sperm easily, an option widely available since the 1970s. “Why is it that she couldn’t have this when it was available to men?” Dr. Gook recalled thinking.
She went to her boss, Dr. Ian Johnston, an I.V.F. pioneer, asking if she could study the mechanics of egg-freezing, but found him resistant. He thought it was a waste of time, because although three women had successfully given birth after using frozen eggs — in 1986, 1987 and 1988 — no other doctor trying this procedure was able to reproduce those results with the described methods. Many researchers had abandoned the project, thinking that eggs were just too vulnerable to be frozen. Determined, Dr. Gook eventually persuaded Dr. Johnston to let her pursue egg-freezing by limiting her research to a year — if she couldn’t achieve success after 12 months, she’d move on. She got to work.
The trouble with eggs is that they’re so fragile. It’s easy for ice shards to shred them or damage their machinery during freezing and thawing. Dr. Gook overcame the challenge when she finally found a liquid with antifreeze properties that wasn’t toxic to the cell (many researchers had sought the same thing). This liquid would replace some of the egg’s water; the egg could then be safely frozen — slowly. After this point, though, she was stalled again. In order to fertilize the eggs to make sure they were viable when thawed, she’d have to work around the state of Victoria, which outlawed some forms of embryonic research. She had no choice but to move her work to Sydney, and then to California, where her experiments were completed with success.
On another continent, Dr. Nicole Noyes, who learned the egg-freezing technique from Dr. Porcu and is responsible for gathering the world’s fertility doctors to discuss egg-freezing at the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology in the early 2000s, also noticed the silver lining to this limiting law. “Part of the secret, or the success of egg-freezing, is in numbers,” she said. By freezing all the extra eggs retrieved for I.V.F., the Italians gathered a lot of data on this new science as they worked to perfect it.
In 2003, Dr. Noyes and other doctors throughout the United States started their own clinical trials. They offered existing infertile I.V.F. patients a free cycle, freezing the eggs with both slow freezing and a new rapid-freezing method called vitrification. They then thawed the eggs soon after to try for pregnancies. Both methods were successful, and that meant Dr. Noyes could offer egg-freezing to all her patients — those with cancer and those who wished to defer reproduction. “It really took off once the technique was reproducible,” Dr. Noyes said. In 2012, the American Society of Reproductive Medicine lifted the technique’s “experimental” label. By that time, there had been more than 500 reported births.
Molly Elizalde is a freelance writer and editor. She was most recently the editorial and creative director of Lenny Letter. She lives in Brooklyn with her dog, Otto.