Baby|Are Sleep Regressions Real?
Are Sleep Regressions Real?
A popular theory suggests that young children go through exactly 10 difficult periods of fussiness followed by leaps in growth, but the evidence isn’t quite so tidy.
For many weeks, Lindsey Smith’s infant daughter slept well. She’d randomly wake up hungry in the middle of the night, as many infants do, but after nursing she’d doze right off again. The night before Smith returned to work, however, her then 4-month-old woke up wide-eyed at 1 a.m. and was impossible to console. For three hours, Smith bounced her on an exercise ball, desperate to induce sleep.
When the awakenings continued, a perplexed Smith turned to parent friends, who comforted her with memories of similar experiences. Between their input and Google’s, Smith surmised that her daughter was experiencing what many parenting books and websites refer to as a “sleep regression” — a stretch of days or even weeks where babies suddenly don’t seem to sleep or nap in the same ways they used to. For many, it feels like a frustrating backpedal on the road to the parenting Valhalla known as Sleeping Through the Night.
“The words ‘sleep regression’ make me want to cry a bit,” said Smith, now a mother of two.
The concept of infant sleep regressions has been bopping around developmental psychology circles since the 1940s, though the evidence on when and why they occur is shaky. Some psychologist supporters claim that sleep regressions happen at predetermined times within the first two years of life, and that each time they happen, you can expect your baby to conquer a new stage of development. A bout of clinginess and poor sleep at week 4 or 5, for example, might precede a burst in your baby’s developing senses. A panoply of parenting websites, mommy blogs, apps and books have latched on to this theory, aiming to calm frustrated parents with the soothing reassurance that sleep regressions, while aggravating, should be welcomed because they’re actually a sign of growth. Most notably, a book called “The Wonder Weeks,” which has sold 2 million copies across 25 languages, has laid out a timeline of exactly when your child will regress and in turn make big leaps in development during her first 20 months of life.
But while experts (and parents) agree that sleep patterns can vary wildly throughout a baby’s first two years, no rigorous data support the notion that nap and nighttime changes happen at predetermined times or are linked to specific developmental milestones. And it’s tough to say whether a bout of crankiness is due to a “sleep regression,” or simply a baby being a baby. Exhausted parents taking comfort in thoughts of their baby’s upcoming leap may just be dreaming.
In 1974, Robert Horwich, an animal researcher at the Chicago Zoological Society, noticed that several infant members of 12 different primate species from two Chicago zoos tended to change their nursing habits (sometimes by nursing more, sometimes by nursing less) at roughly the same times as each other. He called the phases of heightened nursing “regressive periods,” defining them as a time during which infants reverted to a level of neediness and clinginess that they had previously outgrown. More than a decade later, in the mid-80s, a husband-and-wife psychologist research team from the Netherlands — Dr. Frans Plooij, Ph.D. and Dr. Hetty van de Rijt, Ph.D. — were studying chimpanzees in Tanzania and noticed that these same periods occurred just before some chimps left their mothers and started taking care of themselves independently. Each regression seemed to beget progress in their development soon after.
Wondering if human infants did the same, the Dutch psychologists then performed a study which seemed to confirm that they did. Babies, they found, seemed to cycle through 10 so-called “timed regressions,” which appeared to arise every few weeks between 5 and 75 weeks of age. Each regression, whether it was more crying and clinginess or less sleep, seemed to precede a unique developmental change, such as the ability to recognize patterns, follow sequences or understand relationships between objects.
In 1992, Dr. Plooij and Dr. van de Rijt published that study in the peer-reviewed Journal of Reproductive and Infant Psychology. That same year, they debuted their new book, “The Wonder Weeks,” which cataloged exactly when each of the 10 leaps would occur and the difficult behaviors and developmental milestones they would coincide with; and the activities parents should do with their babies to coax those skills to develop or to help them feel secure while they explored in new ways. For example, if you want to help your baby feel secure in the midst of her bout of clinginess, shorter sleep stretches and developing senses at week 4 or 5, the book suggests cuddling, rocking and singing to her. At week 37, poor sleep and neediness go hand-in-hand with a baby’s newfound ability to categorize objects (such as toys, food and clothes). At this time, “Wonder Weeks” suggests asking infants to identify and handle objects from specific groups — “pass the toy,” “pass the food” — to help with this stage.
Today, “Wonder Weeks” is a cottage industry replete with apps, diaries and audiobooks. And other parenting sites have followed suit, offering exhausted moms and dads a list of sleep regressions to anticipate along the unfamiliar road to toddlerhood. Many parents across the United States and Europe consider timed sleep regressions as real as an ill-timed dirty diaper. But a deeper look at the data raises questions.
The problem, according to some psychologists, begins with Dr. Plooij and Dr. van de Rijt’s 1992 study, which largely relied on 15 mothers to accurately fill out questionnaires about their baby’s behaviors for each week of their baby’s first 20 months of life. The researchers also asked the mothers to record their infant’s behaviors for every half-hour of every day (when the mothers were awake) for the duration of the study — including when and where their babies cried, slept, ate, bathed and played. Dr. Plooij and Dr. van de Rijt called or visited the mothers periodically — in some cases to talk with them if they noticed mothers expressing negative feelings about their babies, such as frustration or exhaustion; or to make sure they were keeping up with the written recordings. The purpose of those visits was not specifically to confirm the accuracy of the mothers’ reporting, though they did directly observe two of the childrens’ behaviors for four hours per month for 10 and 18 months, respectively.
In a video on the Wonder Weeks website, Dr. Plooij claimed that subsequent research has confirmed the timed leaps. In the early 2000s, researchers from universities in Spain, England and Sweden did try to replicate the 1992 results in three different studies with a total of 66 babies. Dr. Plooij argued that these studies produced similar findings to his own. But only the Spanish study was published in a peer-reviewed journal, the gold standard of scientific publishing. And while it did claim to have found specific periods of regression within the first 14 months of life, it did so using a less-than-rigorous mix of weekly questionnaires and periodic check-ins on a total of 18 babies.
Those numbers aren’t substantial enough to support an entire hypothesis, said Dr. Mindell. “You need a large cohort to see all the nuances,” she said.
On the book’s website, Dr. Plooij doesn’t acknowledge these claimed shortcomings. And while infants’ brains do seem to go through periods of explosive growth during their first two years, no other studies seem to have solidly identified which specific changes happen in which specific weeks, and whether those changes are linked to specific types of growth spurts. “I seriously have never heard of anything that is that prescriptive,” said Dr. Kathy Hirsh-Pasek, Ph.D., a psychologist who studies infant language at Temple University in Philadelphia.
In the early 1990s, Dr. Plooij did attempt a more intensive investigation of his own, when he was a professor of psychology at the University of Groningen in the Netherlands. He supervised a study carried out by one of his Ph.D. students, Dr. Carolina de Weerth, who directly observed four babies each week for 15 months total in addition to asking mothers to complete detailed questionnaires. Dr. de Weerth found that each baby did seem to have periods of regression and of rapid development, but they weren’t necessarily in sync with each other. Additionally, they weren’t confined to 10; instead, they ranged from 8 to 26. “There was a lot of variability,” said Dr. de Weerth. She saw no consistent pattern, which she admitted could have been due to the small sample size.
Dr. de Weerth, who is now a professor at Radboud University in the Netherlands, said Dr. Plooij rejected her data when it didn’t support his findings. “He put some pressure for me to find these regression periods and transitions,” she said, “and couldn’t accept that they were not coming out.” As a result, said Dr. De Weerth, he left the project. (She subsequently asked for his original data to see if she could find the same pattern he did, but according to Dr. De Weerth, he refused.) After her research was published in the British Journal of Developmental Psychology in 1998, Dr. Plooij publicly denigrated her findings, saying that the results had been skewed, at least in part, since two of the babies were often left in playpens, and therefore weren’t behaving naturally because they had limited access to their mothers. He also violated privacy ethics by saying publicly that one of the mothers was under psychiatric care, and that it could have influenced her infant’s behavior. “That is not science,” Dr. Plooij told me.
So are sleep regressions real — or not?
In other words, timed leaps may be real, but the evidence hasn’t proven if or in what capacity they exist.  “We really are at the infancy of infant brain knowledge,” said Dr. Hirsh-Pasek, the psychologist at Temple University. Some pediatricians, though, believe Dr. Plooij’s theory is correct. Dr. Pamela Hops, M.D., a pediatrician in New York City, said that during her 20 years of practice, she has anecdotally seen and heard about changes in babies that perfectly align with the 10 leaps Dr. Plooij described. “I think he’s spot on,” said Dr. Hops, “shockingly so.” But telling parents to look for leaps at certain times can be anxiety-inducing, said Dr. Mindell, even if there is a connection between sleep and milestones.
The important question for parents, according to Dr. Shalini Paruthi, M.D., co-director of the Sleep Medicine and Research Center at St. Luke’s Hospital in Chesterfield, Mo., is not when regressions happen, but what to do about them. When parents ask her what method they should use to help their babies sleep more, she emphasized consistency in their approach over a particular approach. Parents might always give their baby a bath before bedtime, for instance, or spend time cuddling in a cozy chair with the lights dimmed. Dr. Hops, similarly, tries to discourage parents from switching routines too quickly out of frustration. Her advice? Stay firm on your routine. “You just have to choose one and stick with it,” she said.
Jessica Wapner is a science journalist based in New York.