Pregnancy|Can Pelvic Floor Therapy Relieve Postpartum Pain?
Can Pelvic Floor Therapy Relieve Postpartum Pain?
Maybe. Here’s what to know.
Before having a baby, I spent approximately 10 seconds of my life considering my pelvis. Then I had a baby, and I was suddenly not only scrambling to understand my pelvis, but I also learned that it had a floor and that this floor was dysfunctional. Specifically, my pelvic floor was forgetting to tell me when I had to urinate and was making sex incredibly painful. That’s how, eight weeks postpartum, my dysfunctional pelvis and I ended up in the office of a pelvic floor physical therapist.
 When those muscles are tight, weak or injured (as is common in childbirth), they can cause havoc throughout your body. Pelvic dysfunction can be responsible for incontinence, painful intercourse or sexual dysfunction, athletic injuries, back pain, digestive problems and chronic pain in the feet and legs.
The purpose of pelvic floor physical therapy is to manipulate the pelvic muscles and help them return to normal function. According to the International Society for Sexual Medicine, this can include exercises and manual therapy as well as biofeedback and electrical stimulation.
“For postpartum patients, pelvic floor therapy can clear pelvic congestion, balance the muscles that control continence, aid tissue repair and, in the case of a cesarean section, help with the internal portion of the scar,” said Bryan Baisinger, a chiropractor and pelvic floor physical therapist.
The appointment began with an evaluation of my pelvic muscles, from which the pelvic floor therapist concluded that one side of my pelvis was tighter than the other. The treatment for that was an uncomfortable massage of my pelvis, which the pelvic floor physical therapist reached through my vagina and rectum. It’s a little like getting a Pap smear and a deep-tissue massage at the same time. In short, it was awkward and uncomfortable, which I suspect is one reason pelvic floor physical therapy is not more mainstream.
During the treatment, I was surprised by how much pain I could feel in my hips and how uneven the tension was on either side of my body. The slightest pressure on the right side of my pelvis caused me to flinch, but the same pressure on the left side was barely noticeable. Despite the physical discomfort and the total awkwardness of the treatment, it worked. Both of my complaints — sharp pain during sex and uncomfortable urgency when I had to urinate — were resolved after six sessions.
In fact, the more mothers I spoke to, the more I became convinced that pelvic floor physical therapy was some sort of magic pill to fix all postpartum woes.
Anecdotal success stories aside, however, there isn’t much clear data showing that it works. In part, this is because of a shortage of quality studies and poor consistency between studies (such as which technique was used). An analysis of 31 trials showed that patients with urinary incontinence were five times more likely to be cured of their symptoms with pelvic floor physical therapy than without treatment, but the researchers noted that there was so little consistency between the treatments and the quality of the trials that it was hard to know why people improve.
“I feel like this work is understudied and overpromoted by people who don’t know what they’re doing,” Baisinger said.
Dr. Amy Benjamin, M.D., a gynecologist and the director of the Center for Chronic Pelvic Pain and Vulvar Disorders at the University of Rochester, said that one of the biggest challenges for women during pregnancy and postpartum was the “myth of normalcy,” the idea that because the female body is designed to carry and give birth to babies, physical side effects are normal.
Providers often ignore common issues like sciatica and incontinence, and women disregard dysfunction and pain, believing that they are a normal (and therefore untreatable) part of pregnancy and postpartum.
“Education in gynecology and obstetrics is woefully inadequate in addressing musculoskeletal dysfunction, even of the pelvic floor in relation to pregnancy and postpartum,” Dr. Benjamin said.
There are women who have had negative or disappointing experiences with pelvic floor physical therapy as well. After Victoria Venturi, 35, of Portland, Ore., gave birth, she started to have issues with incontinence when she coughed, laughed or sneezed. She was referred to a pelvic floor physical therapist.
“It was a fairly invasive session, the therapist didn’t give me an action plan or any suggested exercises and she felt there wasn’t a need for further visits,” Venturi said. Discouraged by the experience and without any improvement to her symptoms, she never went back.
Dr. Benjamin pointed out that because pelvic floor physical therapy is such an intimate treatment, it is important to find the right therapist and to make sure you are comfortable with the therapist. The American Physical Therapy Association and the International Pelvic Pain Society are credible places to get a recommendation for a pelvic floor physical therapist.
Baisinger emphasized that during your first appointment, the therapist should explain in detail the anatomical basis for the work he or she is going to do, which might include showing you on a life-size model of a pelvis before actually doing any hands-on treatment.
Perhaps the biggest point in favor of pelvic floor physical therapy is that there aren’t a lot of other options. Millions of women (and some men) suffer from a pelvic floor disorder, and one in nine American women will have pelvic floor surgery (which has mixed data supporting it as well).
Emma Pattee is a writer based in Portland, Oregon.