Your 4-year-old is likely making great strides toward independence as he learns to complete certain tasks solo. As he masters new skills, it can be difficult not to hover and offer assistance, especially since a five-second chore all too often transforms into a 10-minute endeavor when young kids are left to their own devices. While there are likely times when you will be rushed and just need to put their shoes on for them (for the love of all that is holy), let your child help out whenever you can.
The skills your child learns at home are essential for school readiness. While many 4-year-olds attend preschool or have even been in structured day care from infancy, children who have not yet adjusted to being dropped off and left with “strangers” will likely benefit from school-like activities.
Run, jump and catch: Gone is the awkward gait of the toddler.  She should begin to catch a ball bounced to her partway through this year.
Get ready for bed: Your 4-year-old’s increasing dexterity allows her to help out in ways not possible before, by undoing buttons, opening toothpaste and even going to the toilet unassisted.
Tell stories: Your child’s speech should now be understood most of the time, even by strangers. She will be able to organize her thoughts to tell stories, even describing how an event made her feel.
Recognize letters and numbers: Though your child may not be ready to read for a few more years, she will likely start to recognize symbols such as letters and numbers, or even the sign at your family’s favorite restaurant.
At this point, your pediatrician will still rely heavily on your own observations of your 4-year-old’s development, since many children will not reliably perform a task when asked until closer to 5 years of age. When watching your child play, you’ll likely notice he is starting to run faster and climb higher on playground structures than he did even a few short months ago. His newfound agility stems from increased muscle strength and improved balance. The right and left sides of your child’s brain have formed connections that allow him to walk up and down stairs with alternating feet more quickly than at 3 years of age. His daring on the playground also stems from increasing confidence and comfort separating from parents and caregivers for longer periods of time.
At home, your child’s nimble fingers have started to help with tasks like unscrewing the cap on the toothpaste tube and (slowly) buttoning or unbuttoning clothes. The increased detail in her drawings is thanks to this new control over the small hand muscles, allowing her to manipulate a pencil or crayon with greater precision, as well as her ability to concentrate and recall details of things she has seen. For example, when asked to draw a person, your 4-year-old should include more body parts than she did at 3 years of age, usually around four to six (head, body, arms, legs, mouth, eyes).
As your child spends more time drawing, you should notice a preference for which hand she uses when holding a crayon (or fork or toy). In fact, some children display signs of handedness even as infants. When children were followed over time, those who showed a consistent preference for holding a toy in their right hands during infancy had more advanced language skills at 2 years of age than those who developed handedness later, possibly due to enhanced development of the left side of the brain.
Your 4-year-old should be able to speak fluently and be understood by strangers. He can tell true stories about something that happened to him, but only some 4-year-olds will be able to make up a story when shown pictures of characters. The latter skill becomes more fully developed closer to 5, when children can typically tell a story with a beginning, middle and end. Children this age process stories told orally differently than those read to them from books and seem to understand stories better when they are told rather than read aloud, suggesting that some exposure to both books and made up storytelling is likely beneficial.
Though some children read and recognize words at a very young age, most will not be ready to do so until closer to 6 or 7. Nevertheless, early literacy skills are certainly present in your 4-year-old and you should see him start to recognize letters, numbers and signs, all of which are tools he will need in kindergarten and first grade as he begins to read. Children who are more frequently read aloud to at home demonstrate an increased vocabulary in first grade, while those whose parents spend more time teaching them letters, words and how to write their name prior to entering school demonstrate greater ability to read sight words and spell when they reach grades 1 and 2, suggesting that both activities are important to school success.
I can’t drop my child off at preschool without triggering an epic meltdown. What do I do?
Many children have difficulty separating from their caregivers at this age and some tears are to be expected. While it may seem cruel to walk away from your screaming child, prolonging the goodbye process often makes leaving more difficult, both for your child and for you. When you say your goodbyes, do so quickly and remind your child that you will be back shortly to pick her up. Give a hug and walk away. Once you are out of sight, it will be easier for your child to calm down and start playing with friends. If your child has greater difficulty separating from one parent than the other, consider adjusting your drop-off routine accordingly.
I’m worried my child is turning into a bully. How do I help her get along with others?
As your 4-year-old starts to engage in more imaginative and structured play with peers, there is bound to be some conflict. When the rules at home differ from the rules at a friend’s house or at preschool, your child may lash out in response to feeling confused and threatened. Time outs are an excellent way to give your child a chance to calm down. If the fighting continues to get out of hand even after taking a break, try discussing the rules for a given game with your child and her playmate before they start, so everyone is on the same page.
My child can’t sit still. How can I help him get ready for school?
At this age, you’ll likely find your child can concentrate on a task like coloring or building with blocks for longer than before, but all 4-year-olds, and boys especially, need to move around. Your child’s teachers understand this. Integrating movement into lessons and activities helps concentration and improves behavior. Rather than expecting your child to sit still for longer than is developmentally appropriate, acknowledge when he’s feeling fidgety and encourage him to get his sillies out by dancing or jumping. Let your child’s teachers know what strategies work at home to redirect his energy and let your child know it’s O.K. to ask for a break when he needs one.
If your child has not been attending day care, consider signing him up for a preschool program for a few hours a day a few days a week to acclimate to separation from his usual caregivers. This will make the transition to kindergarten easier and will allow your child to grow in independence and make friends.
Though public school won’t start until kindergarten in many districts, the educational services provided by Early Intervention stop when your child turns 3. If your child qualifies for additional help at age 4, it may be provided by the school system. This can be confusing to access, especially for parents whose child is not yet in school. Talk to your pediatrician about what services your child needs and how to maximize your resources.
Continue to encourage your child to play outside whenever possible. Local parks often have nature programs for preschoolers that provide a structured learning environment and can help with school readiness.
 At this age, parents are usually not required to be in the water, so your child will also have the opportunity to learn from an adult who is not a family member.
Read to your child daily to promote a love of books and increase his vocabulary. Consider labeling common household items such as “door,” “table” and “chairs” when your child begins to demonstrate an interest in words.
At this age, your child’s friends and adult strangers should be able to understand her when she talks. If your child is unable to communicate with playmates or preschool teachers, this is likely to be frustrating for her and may even lead to behavioral problems if not addressed. 
Your child should be able to follow instructions with several steps (take your shoes to the closet, put them inside and bring back your boots). Let your pediatrician know if your child has difficulty with this, as it may signal difficulty understanding and processing language.
If your child has difficulty scribbling and holding a crayon, alert your doctor.
If your child cannot run or jump from standing, let your doctor know.
Meghan MacLean Weir, M.D., is a mother of two and a pediatrician with a degree in medical anthropology from Oxford University.