NYT Parenting readers say bonding with other parents can take perseverance and luck, but real connections are priceless.
This article was originally published on July 23, 2020 in NYT Parenting.
Grose asked readers about their experiences making and maintaining friendships after having children. Parents wrote in about rejection, random connections and reliance on the peers they met both before and after welcoming kids.
Tina Walha, 38, of Seattle went “overboard” when her daughter was born, she said. She joined three mom groups: one led by a nurse educator, one for couples and their newborns and one just for new moms. She had moved to Seattle shortly before getting pregnant and knew hardly anyone in the area; the groups helped her find a community. When her second child was born three years later, she joined a group comprised of mothers of color. It was as part of that group, cradling her newborn son in a new friend’s kitchen, that she first felt truly comfortable discussing how to prepare her children for the world and how to handle a first grader who had heard the N-word on a playground. “I found the connections I didn’t know I was missing earlier,” Walha said. The friends she’s made have proved helpful through the newborn stage and beyond. “I think sometimes the connections in organized groups are random, but isn’t life?” she said.
Katie Kirk, 30, of Pelham, N.Y., literally stumbled into a mom group nine days after giving birth to her daughter. Wearing maternity leggings and a shirt stained with breast milk, she wobbled into a local bakery for an in-person meetup with members of the new-mom email chain she had largely ignored. The first few minutes were awkward and stilted, until she tearily blurted out, “I just gave birth.” The six women around her gasped. Over the next few months of their maternity leaves, the group grew closer and closer. “We’re just kindred spirits,” Kirk said. They met weekly to drink rosé and swap tips. “It was only afterwards that I was like, ‘Oh, I’m really glad I joined this,’” she said.
Carina Aleckson, 42, of Minneapolis found herself overwhelmed by the flurry of new-mom Facebook groups and “the ability to get emotionally wrapped up in the lives of people I’ve never met.” Her newborn daughter had Down syndrome, and she became frustrated with what she saw as other parents’ “regular” problems with baby gas, and debates over the virtue of allowing Amazon to deliver diapers. Her existing bonds were strong: friends from college brought soup to the NICU; another friend who was seven months pregnant came with her three children to care for Aleckson’s newborn while she recovered from mastitis. “We continue to be caught, held and cared for by friends from various parts of our lives,” she said. Aleckson focused on finding local connections and joined a Down syndrome family group. The support goes beyond doctor recommendations and therapy questions; the parents talk about gardens and biking and their marriages, about their favorite snacks from Trader Joe’s and the latest show they’re watching on Netflix. “I often say that our Down syndrome family group is my favorite club that I never wanted to be a part of,” Aleckson said.
Stein has a masters in early childhood education and previously worked as a school admissions director; she knew a play group would have developmental benefits for the children. But she also thought a play group would be fun, a chance to re-create the bonds she had forged as a young parent. “I wish more stay-at-home grandparents could join,” she said. Her group now is “just as important” as her old one. She hasn’t heard of any other grandma groups, but she thinks there should be more.
Allison Canter, 32, and her husband moved to Charlottesville, Va., a month before her daughter was born two and a half years ago, and they’ve struggled to find their people there. Most parents they meet seem to have established friend groups “from pre-kid days,” she said, and despite seeing parents in passing and occasionally getting together with other families from their daughter’s school, the connection isn’t really there. “You wouldn’t think it would be that tricky,” she said. She and her husband miss the adult friendships they had before their daughter was born; they talk about how they don’t have “heart-to-hearts” with anyone besides each other. While Canter is part of a group text with parent friends who don’t live nearby, she craves in-person communication with people she can relate to. “We’re really feeling the void,” she said.
Sara Zasowski, 35, has quit trying to make parent friends. She joined a moms group when her son was born two years ago; one of the women tried to reach out through email for wine nights after the group ended, but between nap schedules and work schedules — plus not sharing many common interests beyond their children — connections just fizzled. Zasowski lives next to a popular playground in Chicago, and she sees clusters of parents when she takes her son to the park, but she hasn’t found a way to break into any of the seemingly established groups for longer than a passing, “Hi, there!” “You feel a little rejection,” she said.
The mom friends she does have are women she knew before, who just happened to have kids at the same time she did. She meets up with one friend regularly for “dates” Zasowksi cherishes. She and her husband have tried to meet people through her son’s activities — music classes, swimming — without much success, but they’re hopeful for when he turns 3 and they can enroll him in half-day schooling. “We are excited to see if we will finally have our kindred group,” she said.
