A form of pain relief that is popular around the world is finally gaining traction in the U.S.
Few topics occupy pregnant women’s minds in the months leading up to birth more than devising a plan for pain management during labor. In the United States, the options during delivery have long been pretty limited.
On one side of the dichotomy is a completely unmedicated childbirth, where visualization and breathing techniques offer a mind-over-matter approach to labor pain. On the other side, epidurals are the pain-eliminating gold standard — but can come with plenty of trade-offs. Across the world, though, nitrous oxide (yes, “laughing gas”) has long been standard — dating back to the turn-of-the-century — in delivery rooms, allowing women to help mitigate the pain of labor while remaining present and, perhaps best of all, maintaining their sense of control. Now, this low-stakes form of delivery room relief is finally taking hold in the United States as women seek out a wider range of options for their birthing experience.
Because of the relative obscurity of nitrous in American childbirth over the past few decades, there are a limited number of clinical studies about its potential pitfalls. Those that have occurred indicate only a handful of minor potential side effects, such as dizziness, nausea and drowsiness. What’s more, no study has indicated any adverse effects on babies born to mothers using nitrous. “It is very, very safe, and is probably the most commonly used anesthetic in history. The low concentrations that we use in labor make it very safe and the self-administration makes it really safe for moms,” said Dr. Bolster. “And while there aren’t specific studies on safety for babies, the volume of worldwide use for labor gives tons of experiential data that it’s safe for babies.” There’s also great potential for smaller hospitals to use nitrous as a cheap, effective tool when they don’t have easy, or affordable, access to anesthesiologists. Since nitrous is not technically anesthesia — it’s an analgesic, or painkiller — an obstetrician, midwife or nurse can set it up and oversee the system for women to self-administer. This can cut down on both hospital and patient costs, as nurses at the Texas Health Cleburne have found in studies since 2014.
“The thing with our nurse-managed model, with anesthesia not being involved, is that the patient doesn’t get that anesthesiology consult fee,” explained Toni Pinyan, R.N., a charge nurse for women and infant services at Texas Health Cleburne. (If you choose to use nitrous, however, it’s a good idea to review any potential excess charges your hospital might bill beforehand.) My own experience with nitrous came at the very end of my labor, after about a dozen drug-free hours of pacing hospital halls, bouncing on balls and wiggling my hips in a figure eight to make the baby’s head dance out from behind my pelvic bone. I was looking for as close to an unmedicated delivery as possible in Kentucky, a state with a sky-high (roughly 78 percent) epidural rate, so I lunged at the opportunity to give birth in a hospital where I could be attended by midwives and have access to their freshly arrived nitrous system — if desired.
Sarah Baird (@scbaird) is an award-winning journalist and author whose work has appeared in the Washington Post, GQ, The Guardian and The Atlantic. A 2019 Knight Visiting Nieman Fellow at Harvard University, she lives in Kentucky with her husband and infant daughter.