My daughter has cheerfully outgrown her ‘My Little Pony’ obsession, but I’m finding it hard to move on.
I am not a Brony, one of the unanticipated adult male fans of “My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic.” But for a couple of years I could have passed for one. Between the ages of roughly 3½ and 5½, my daughter nursed an intense passion for the show, so intense that my wife and I became accidental experts in the kingdom of Equestria in general and the goings-on of Ponyville — home to Twilight Sparkle and her friends — in particular.
Today, this vast store of “My Little Pony”-themed knowledge rusts away unused; our daughter moved on over two years ago and has never looked back. Where once she appeared to regard the series as indispensable, even integral to her identity, within the space of just a few weeks, it seemed, she came to shun it as “little kids’ stuff,” to be avoided alongside sippy cups, booster seats, and other reminders that she wasn’t always the relatively independent 8-year-old she has become.
For my daughter, leaving My Little Pony behind was easy. But I’ve been finding it hard to let go.
Developed for Hasbro, which sought to breathe new life into an old franchise, animator Lauren Faust’s “My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic” offers warmly-realized characters, appealing visuals, and easy-to-digest lessons about kindness, cooperation, tolerance and friendship. Faust left the show over creative differences with its producers early in its run, but not before creating a model for others to follow.
Inspired by her own childhood obsession, Faust filled “My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic” with endearing characters, dreaming up fresh storylines that went far beyond those found in the ’80s cartoon. There were gags cleverly aimed at parents, too, like characters named Diamond Dogs (introduced as poachers hiding behind trees) and Jeff Letrotski (a pony modeled after Jeff Bridges’ character in “The Big Lebowski”).
The show’s rich, Tolkienesque universe fueled many a conversation in my household. My wife and I talked to our daughter about what could be learned from the stories and which characters would make the best friends in real life. We often speculated about what might happen in the next episode.
I quickly came to admire “My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic,” though that admiration was wrapped up with my daughter’s love for it. It was not a program I’d watch on my own, but I looked forward to watching it with her, and to talking to her about it. Not to mention watching her play with the “My Little Pony” toys that became her constant companions (especially Applejack, who even found her way into some professional family photos we had taken) and reading “My Little Pony” comic books with her. And so on, for years.
Then, suddenly, my daughter’s interest in “My Little Pony” dropped with the dramatic downward trajectory of a crashing stock. One day, I noticed her attention wandering as we watched a new episode that had just turned up on Netflix. And that was it. We never watched “My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic” again. For her, ponies were over. The girl who would cry if she discovered we’d discarded even the most minor crayon drawing had no trouble throwing away the world that had taken over her imagination for more than a third of her life.
She doesn’t miss it, but I do. Not that I’d want her to stay stuck in Ponyville forever. I’ve enjoyed watching her pop cultural interests develop as she’s gotten older. While moving on has meant the occasional bizarre stopover like the nightmarish “Yo-kai Watch,” it’s also meant discovering “How to Train Your Dragon” and allowed us to introduce her to Peanuts, Star Wars, and Harry Potter, fictional worlds that may remain with her into adulthood (as they have for my wife and me).
But, as every parent knows, watching kids grow up means taking the bitter with the sweet. It’s impossible to separate memories of my daughter as a preschooler from the ponies that were at her side or on her mind during those years. I’ve come to think of “My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic” as a special show, but even if I didn’t, I’d probably still feel sentimental about my daughter’s obsession. For her, it’s just one of the stages she’s passed through on her way to adulthood, without a second glance.
But before Princess Celestia sends her back to Ponyville, she sings a wistful song, “Celestia’s Ballad,” filled with lines about how she’s watched Twilight as she’s grown up and found new ways to make Celestia proud each step of the way. “It’s time now, for a new change to come,” she sings, as images from previous episodes flash behind her. “You’ve grown up and a new life has begun.” For Twilight Sparkle, that doesn’t mean leaving her pony friends behind. My daughter’s pony friends, their magic exhausted, now live in a plastic tub in our basement. I see them sometimes when I’m putting items into storage, but I think of them far more often.
Keith Phipps, a freelance journalist who writes about film and television, lives in Chicago with his wife and daughter.