As my wife and I explore reproductive treatment options, we’re not putting all our eggs in one basket.
This piece is part of a series of articles following B.A. and Nikki’s baby journey. Read more installments here.
My wife, Nikki, and I have been trying to get pregnant since December. We didn’t know much about our options for conceiving in the beginning; all we knew was that we wanted to be mothers. Don’t get me wrong, we searched the internet to get a basic understanding, but the medical jargon and the acronyms — intrauterine insemination (IUI), in vitro fertilization (I.V.F.), reciprocal I.V.F., hysterosalpingogram (H.S.G.) — threw us for a loop. So, we looked for doctors who would guide us through the process.
Luckily, we received direction not only from professionals but from peers who had gone through their own baby journeys. Once we started sharing our story, other queer couples shared their experiences. The nuances of our situation became clear after we didn’t get pregnant on the first try with intrauterine insemination, which involved injecting donor sperm directly into Nikki’s uterus. We needed an H.S.G. test to tell whether Nikki’s reproductive system was structurally ready for pregnancy.
In preparation for the test, we connected with a couple who had gone through fertility assistance and knew what to expect. In that conversation, we learned that intrauterine insemination has a 20 percent success rate on the low end, and that using frozen sperm like we did makes conception less likely. Meanwhile, we were slowly learning about how expensive I.V.F. really is. One couple shared that they spent $30,000 on I.V.F. procedures and medication.
After the failed IUI round, Nikki and I knew that we really had to weigh the pros and cons of trying IUI again or moving on to I.V.F.; how would we make the best decision that wouldn’t hurt our pockets but would help us beat the fertility clock?
Below is the third part of an ongoing conversation between Nikki and me about our journey to motherhood. It has been condensed and edited for clarity. Read the first part, about how we found our sperm donor, and the second, about our IUI experience.
Nikki: After getting that negative pregnancy test, but having felt all the pregnancy symptoms, I just wanted to make sure my body was O.K. We knew almost immediately after the H.S.G. test that we had no blockage, that my fallopian tubes were clear, and my uterus had healed with very little scarring after surgery to remove fibroid tumors two years ago. So IUI was still on the table.
B.A.: Yeah, but as we walked to the car, we started the conversation about I.V.F. I knew that it made the most sense, especially after having conversations with other people. I didn’t want to keep spending $1,000 per sperm vial, especially when we only had a 20 percent chance of getting pregnant with IUI versus a 50 percent chance with top-tier embryos, according to our doctor.
Nikki: We were both skeptical about doing IUI again. We sat in the car and revisited our medical insurance benefits. It made more sense financially and physically to move forward with I.V.F. We were excited about the decision we had made, so when our doctor called to confirm the H.S.G. results, we told him that we wanted to freeze some of my eggs and use I.V.F. for our next go around. He recommended freezing embryos instead of eggs because embryos have a longer “shelf life.” This sounded like the perfect way to proceed. Our doctor was pleased and recommended a fertility doctor immediately!
B.A.: He sounded so excited about us not only deciding to go with I.V.F. but about the doctor he was encouraging us to meet for the process. At this point, we felt so safe and taken care of. Our voices had been heard. I have to remember how fortunate we are in this entire journey. We have great health insurance and we live in Los Angeles. We have access to some of the top doctors in the world.
Nikki: So we had our consultation, and the doctor was amazing. He wanted to know what our expectations were and where we were in the process. Then he did a great job of articulating what we should expectB.A.: He did an effective job at balancing expectations versus reality for us. Very shortly after that conversation, he took us to an examination room, where you had a transvaginal ultrasound. He checked your ovaries to make sure they were in good shape, well-positioned, and to know how many follicles you had. There were about 8 or 9 follicles in both ovaries. That was a good thing. He could even see that there were several more smaller ones that would have the opportunity to grow big enough to remove eggs from.
Nikki: The doctor was straightforward, funny and informative. As he was explaining the I.V.F. process, he used Starburst candies as embryos. I will never see a Starburst in the same way. He was great. The entire office and staff were helpful and made me feel safe. It was reassuring to have established that trust so quickly.
B.A.: After the transvaginal ultrasound, you got your blood drawn. What was that for?
Nikki: To make sure I was ovulating. If I was in fact ovulating, then they would alert me that it was time to start all the medications to prepare for the egg retrieval. They called that same day to tell me it was time. I started an estrogen pill and prenatal multivitamins and was instructed to call the doctor’s office on Day 1 of my menstrual cycle. Once I called, they made an appointment for us to come back on Day 3. On Day 3, I had another transvaginal ultrasound and blood test to make sure I was ready to introduce the hormone injections. I started with a follicle stimulating hormone, or F.S.H., and a luteinizing hormone, or L.H., in the evening to stimulate egg development. I added a baby aspirin, to prevent blood clotting, to my morning routine.
Throughout the two weeks of this routine, I saw the doctor about every other day for transvaginal ultrasounds and blood tests so he could closely monitor how fast the follicles were growing and if they were growing at the same rate. Toward the end, I introduced a third injection, cetrorelix, to rapidly suppress the production and action of F.S.H. and L.H., which I was instructed to take first thing in the morning. I noticed this injection caused itchy skin at the local site for a few minutes, unlike the other two injections. Then, two days before the egg retrieval, I injected two gonadotropin releasing hormones to trigger final egg maturation, timed precisely to coincide with the surgery.
B.A.: I knew how much it meant to you that I be a part of this process, but honestly I’m terrified of needles! So the first night of your injections, we had my sister give them to you. After that, I did them all. It was intense. Sometimes there would be blood. You even started to bruise toward the end. 
Nikki: But you weren’t. Most times, I felt nothing. The most I ever felt was a little prick. So many people warned me that the injections would hurt. But what was worse than the injections was all the bloating from the hormones. Especially toward the end when the doctor kept changing the dosage to make sure all the eggs were growing at the same pace, because at one point the follicles in the left ovary were growing faster than the ones on the right. So that meant more appointments, but when we finally got word that we were ready for the egg retrieval, I couldn’t have been happier.
B.A.: People gave us a heads up that the medications would be expensive, adding to our out-of-pocket costs.
The IUI, H.S.G. test and I.V.F. (as of now) have cost $17,074, but insurance has covered the bulk of it.
B.A.: The day of the egg retrieval surgery, I was nervous and excited. I knew we had done everything perfectly. The nurse, anesthesiologist and our doctor came in to break down every step. I couldn’t go into the surgery, so I left and grabbed some coffee to stay busy. They said it would only take an hour. You were finished in an hour and 20 minutes.
Nikki: The thing I remember the most was feeling really sleepy. There was no pain. I didn’t start to cramp until we got home. I used a heating pad, took some over-the-counter pain meds and rested. The doctor removed many eggs, so I was encouraged to rest more than usual. And in order to avoid ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, which can cause rapid weight gain, severe abdominal pain, vomiting and other symptoms, I was on a very strict no-carb diet and could only drink 48 ounces of water a day.
B.A.: My job was to make sure you were comfortable and eating well. I wanted you to know you had all the support you needed. You had already done all the hard work.
Nikki: We got a call the next day. The embryologist explained that they retrieved 17 eggs; 12 were mature. Of the 12 eggs, eight to nine became fertilized when combined with sperm in the lab. The clinic let them grow over the course of three days. By Day 3, they told us five had a good chance of being viable embryos. By day six, we learned that three reached blastocyst stage. We now have two 6AA embryos (the best grade you can get) and one 3BB (a pretty decent embryo).
B.A.: For now, they’re all frozen. Next step: embryo transfer.
Editor’s note: This is the fifth in a series of articles following B.A. and Nikki’s baby journey. Read the first, second, third and fourth Q&As.
Find out more about IUI, I.V.F. and when to seek fertility advice.
