I felt like a fraud as a new mom, until I looked at my literary idols for inspiration.
I was scheduled to attend a work conference six weeks after my daughter’s due date.
I agonized, and ultimately, before giving birth, I decided to go. After my daughter was born, in the haze of new motherhood, I clung to this decision in an attempt to remind myself of my old life. It took on outsized importance — if I could make this trip, I could convince myself that motherhood would add to my life of ambition, not subtract from it.
How Motherhood Changed My...
Does My Child’s Name Erase My Identity?
I’m Darker Than My Daughter. Here’s Why It Matters.
My husband and I packed the car at 7 a.m. on a Friday in September for a conference that began at 10. The drive was only 90 minutes, but I was anxious. It was my daughter’s first trip farther than a mile from the house. At first, she looked out the window with trepidation. She was silent, taking it all in, until we got lost for a bit near Newark Airport. That place has such torturous energy, perhaps even an infant can sense it. She screamed until we found our way past it, and then she was quiet again.
The conference was a training for a fellowship that I have this year. Attending were all the artists who worked in the university — people I deeply admired, people who write the novels and short stories and plays, dance the dances and compose the songs that try to make sense of modern life.
With the baby, I discovered I could not do what I usually do when faced with a room of artists, which is to stand in the corner and imagine that everyone thinks I am an idiot. Depending on the room and the temperament of the other writers there, that anxiety is sometimes based in reality. Writers are perhaps the only people so self-obsessed and so full of self-loathing that when one writer meets another they are as likely to react with hostility and jealousy as with openness.
But a baby is conspicuous.  I didn’t account for the fact that the knapsacks are never big enough and feel really heavy when you are also carrying a baby and 30 pounds of molded plastic car seat.
I couldn’t slink into corners or quietly wait for the event to end without being noticed.
I was lucky. People at this event loved a baby. I was welcomed into the band of working parents. I would see their faces soften when they spotted her. People peeled away and told me about how they did the same at 2 weeks, at 5 weeks, at 2 months. No one spoke of those decisions with regret.
I had worried about their judgment, but their kindness made me realize that I was the one judging myself. I stood beside these parent-artists and felt like a fraud: not as an artist, but as a mother.
In college, I worked at a day care center. I would notice how some of the parents spoke to their children in an exaggerated sing-song voice, slightly louder than normal. They only spoke this way when another adult could overhear, I was certain. They were engaging in the performance of parenthood — calibrated to be especially adorable or whimsical. I pitied them for this performance, even as I found myself doing the same thing as a childcare worker.
I had thought I wouldn’t do that when I became a parent. But here I was in a hall full of people who were my intellectual betters, and I found myself slipping into acting the mother’s role. I am still performing being a mother, both in public and privately for my daughter, who looks up at me and sometimes seems fooled. At other times, she cuts her eyes at me as if she sees through the act.
So which kind of motherhood was I impersonating, as I held my daughter and tried to sip lukewarm tea from a paper cup? The tradition of mother-artists shifts depending on whom you are looking at. There are the horrors: Anne Sexton, an abusive poet whose cruelty, for a certain type of admirer, crystallizes her brilliance. There are the women who feel the monotony the most — Shirley Jackson imagining the darkest corners of humanity while pushing the baby carriage to the post office in Bennington, Vt., loving her children enough to write dazzling essays about their care while filling her journals with her anxiety and anger toward her husband’s abusive behavior, which made domestic life unbearable.
I feared I would join their ranks, that the only way to be a writer and a mother was to be miserable. In desperation, I kept reading for other lives. I found Grace Paley, describing the other mothers of toddlers she knew in Lower Manhattan, organizing for the next protest while passing babies from lap to lap. And I found Toni Morrison, who spoke of the freedom to be found in motherhood.
I aspire to be like Paley and Morrison, planning rebellion and crafting perfect short stories on a park bench while my daughter plays on the swings. I wish I could say I have reached this place of motherhood, but I have not. I worry about which self I bring to my child.
My mother self when I am alone with my daughter is still unclear — a fuzzy approximation of all the other mothers I know and imagine. But it also reflects my sister, a playwright and a mother of two children, who I used to accompany on so many of these writing work trips when her children were small.
One of the earliest trips took place when her first child was 6 months old. The three of us flew from Boston to Madison, Wis., for a production of one of my sister’s plays. I remember how I tried to stop my niece from licking the airplane windows, and how both my sister and I looked apologetically at our fellow passengers as we carried the baby onboard.
My niece had never spent an hour away from my sister. At the first day of rehearsal, she and I sat for a moment behind my sister’s chair as she talked to her director and actors. And then a woman working on the production said, sadly, “It’s time, I’m sorry,” and I watched as my sister reluctantly hugged her daughter, handed her over to me and sat back down at the table while I took the baby away.
“I’ve had to do it, too. It’s the hardest thing to do,” I heard the woman say. She looked at my sister with empathy and nostalgia and understanding. But it was also a look of “We have work to do.” And my sister turned away from her baby and sat at that table and worked on that play.
I wouldn’t understand that look for a long time. But I thought about it often in the decade after, as I questioned that impulse inside me that told me I wanted to have a child. Outside, in the hallway, I looked at my niece and she looked at me — eyes wide with surprise at this turn of events. I took her out of her carrier and sat her up on a stair in the lobby — and she promptly fell out and over and down into my open arms. We were both shocked. But we survived.
The very first call I received on the morning of the conference was from my sister. “I know you can do this,” she said. I felt the burn of tears in my eyes.
I still do not know which version of motherhood I am stepping into. I hope it is one of my own making, one that can borrow from those parents that came before me and allow for what I need and what my daughter needs to have a full creative life. There were so many unknowns. There are still so many unknowns. But maybe the only thing that we need to know — that there is faith, and many ways forward.
Kaitlyn Greenidge is the author of the novel “We Love You, Charlie Freeman.” She lives in Brooklyn, NY.