Opinion|Does China’s Propaganda Work?
Does China’s Propaganda Work?
The Communist Party’s messaging is both more agile and more fragile than it seems.
Not long after it publicly recognized the seriousness of the coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan, the Chinese Communist Party declared war — a “people’s war” — against the epidemic. Since then it also appears to have declared war against any narrative it thinks challenges that endeavor.
The party’s persuasion efforts are sometimes dismissed as a rigidly ideological top-down affair or a clumsy spectacle, but the government’s handling of the Covid-19 crisis has revealed just how agile China’s propaganda operations really are: They are interactive, and they readily engage with public opinion — the better to co-opt it.
This, however, is a risky strategy. The party’s sophisticated messaging also exposes it to greater demands and more criticism, from the Chinese public and internationally.
At home, one of the party’s predominant techniques has been to respond, yet only selectively, to people’s grievances with both symbolic gestures and practical policies.
Take the treatment of Li Wenliang, the Chinese doctor turned whistle-blower who was reprimanded by the Wuhan police in early January for sounding the alarm about the novel coronavirus and then whose death, from Covid-19, sparked outrage online. After initially censoring discussions about Dr. Li’s plight, the authorities tried to appease the public, first by firing provincial officials for mishandling the outbreak and later by exonerating Dr. Li and issuing an official apology to his family.
On the other hand, calls for free expression by Chinese academics and the general public have been left unanswered. As with other national crises, local officials have been made to take the fall for mishandling the epidemic at first; no questioning of central-level decisions can be tolerated. The property tycoon Ren Zhiqiang was placed under investigation recently for writing an essay pointedly blaming President Xi Jinping. This followed the silencing of other prominent critics: the law professor Xu Zhangrun and the legal expert Xu Zhiyong.
The Chinese government has also been quick to address (some) international criticism. For example, in response to the unfolding controversy about the quality of testing kits, face masks and other gear that China has been shipping to the West in recent weeks, Chinese officials have deployed both defensive rhetoric and practical measures. The government swiftly put in place stricter approval measures and tighter inspections for exports of medical aid, partly to pre-empt opportunistic private companies from hurting the country’s image.
But China has brokered no international criticism suggesting that it is in any way responsible for the spread of the coronavirus to the rest of the world. Instead, it has stressed again and again that its strict lockdown and quarantine measures bought other countries time to prepare for the pandemic.
Turning the stories of ordinary people into a narrative of national unity and resilience isn’t a new strategy for China. I observed it in previous propaganda campaigns, notably in the aftermath of torrential rains in 2012 that caused at least 77 deaths and 65,000 evacuations in Beijing and sparked much public anger over the authorities’ mishandling of the disaster. Back then, People’s Daily filled its pages with stories about local heroes, like restaurant employees who pulled cars from flooded roads.
Similarly, when Chinese media address global audiences, they delegate the lauding of China’s performance to Western experts. An April 2 video report from the state news agency Xinhua that characterizes China’s management of the coronavirus crisis as “timely and transparent” is told through foreign voices: the president of Cyprus, the chief scientist at the World Health Organization, the deputy minister of health of Venezuela. Chinese news outlets also routinely employ foreign journalists to communicate China’s vision to the rest of the world.
And the two tactics cross-fertilize: Stories about the resilience of Chinese citizens are directed to international audiences, and foreign leaders’ praise of China’s generosity in providing medical aid is transmitted to audiences in China.
But does all this work, especially with Chinese people?
Partly because openly expressing one’s views on political matters is a sensitive matter in China (as in any authoritarian regime), it is a persistent challenge for social scientists to gauge the public’s views there. Much research about public opinion in China has found strong support for the government, particularly the central government. Yet a recent study published in China Quarterly, a flagship journal of China studies, cautions that these findings might be exaggerated because they don’t take account of high rates of nonresponse to politically sensitive questions, especially among people from marginalized groups.
What does seem clear, though, is that by providing only partial responses to public concerns, the government has prompted some people to ask for more. Some commentary on Chinese social media exudes cynicism about the belated, official response to Dr. Li’s death. “Is that it?” read one post in reaction to the official report blaming Wuhan police officers for reprimanding Dr. Li. The comment attracted around 160 million views.
Likewise, internationally: While some foreign officials have praised China’s aid efforts, others have found it lacking. “Does China expect Kenya to fulfill its debt obligations in the wake of unparalleled disruption to our economy?” an editorial in The Standard, a popular Kenyan newspaper, asked last week.
Official attempts to appropriate people’s views also seem to have invited scrutiny. One post — which was later censored — criticized the government’s decision to declare April 4 a national day of mourning for the victims of Covid-19. The author argued that the timing was inappropriate because the epidemic was still underway and many questions about accountability remained unanswered.
Other people seem to push back against the state’s official narrative of strength and heroism by sharing intimate accounts of their searing losses and run-ins with administrative hurdles that scuttled their attempt to grieve with dignity. Consider this post by a resident of Wuhan who lost his father to Covid-19: “Wuchang morgue just called to verify information with me and relayed the message that I have to wait for a notice from Wuhan’s epidemic prevention command post before I can pick you up, Dad. When I think of you alone in the morgue, unable to be buried in peace, I cry uncontrollably.” Since early April, residents of Wuhan have been required to pick up the ashes of their deceased relatives and loved ones accompanied by local officials.
The co-optation of foreign voices in the service of China’s persuasion campaign hasn’t gone unchallenged either. The World Health Organization has been accused of kowtowing to China in various ways, and the hashtag #TedrosResign, referring to the institution’s director-general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, is gaining traction on Twitter.
Some of this, of course, is the result of self-serving counter-propaganda by the Trump administration. (On Tuesday, President Trump announced that the United States would stop funding the W.H.O.) But other states are pushing back as well. China’s so-called mask diplomacy has sparked suspicion that it is seeking to extend its political influence abroad. Taiwan and Vietnam have tried to offset that possibility by exporting face masks as well. And so even as some analysts argue that the coronavirus crisis is helping China emerge as a global leader and serious contender against the United States, others claim that the payoff will be limited.
While conducting research on public perceptions of China in Ethiopia and Russia over the past two years, I have found many people in both countries who held conflicting thoughts and feelings toward China. One can respect China’s might and achievements, while being vigilant about its intentions, especially when it comes to material assistance. Just last week, a Lithuanian journalist asked me about the political risks of accepting Chinese medical aid.
China’s propaganda has matured — but so have its targets. Instead of delivering diktat and defensiveness, the government now engages in selective dialogue with its audiences and their criticisms, featuring those views in its own storytelling, or its retelling of them. So far, this seems to have played to the Communist Party’s advantage, partly by forcing it to keep adapting its messaging. But the public, in China and abroad, in turn is reinterpreting the propaganda, and further testing the party’s agility.
