Middle East|Iran Says U.S. Sanctions Are Taking Lives. U.S. Officials Disagree.
Iran Says U.S. Sanctions Are Taking Lives. U.S. Officials Disagree.
Iran, devastated by the coronavirus, is asking the U.S. to lift sanctions on humanitarian grounds. U.S. officials say sanctions aren’t to blame; Iran is.
The issue has raised questions about the collision of punishing American sanctions with a deadly pandemic, including whether Iran is trying to exploit the crisis to achieve a long-held goal of lifting sanctions, whether the United States is using the virus to squeeze Iran beyond what sanctions alone could do, and what responsibility the United States has for a disaster caused at least partly by Iran’s own inept response.
If anything, the United States has doubled down, imposing fresh sanctions as recently as two weeks ago, even as it offered Iran medical aid to help combat the pandemic, aid Iran has refused.
The United States frequently reiterates that the sanctions exempt the sale of medicine and medical devices. However, American secondary sanctions on financial institutions and companies that do business with Iran have made it nearly impossible for Iran to buy items like ventilators to treat coronavirus patients.
The sanctions “have largely deterred international banks and firms from participating in commercial or financial transactions with Iran, including for exempted humanitarian transactions, due to the fear of triggering U.S. secondary sanctions on themselves,” Human Rights Watch found in a report last year, months before the coronavirus emerged.
Now the need for such equipment is urgent.
Iran’s leadership also bears a share of the blame for its fumbling response to the crisis.
The virus was first detected in Iran in late February, but the government, ignoring the advice of its own health experts, took no action to enforce social distancing or lock down affected areas until this week, allowing the virus to spread unchecked and turning Iran into a regional hub for the outbreak.
The government came under fire for underreporting the number of cases and playing down the threat, while rivalries between the government and the military left the country wondering who was in charge of containing the pandemic.
On top of that, Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, rejected the American offer of humanitarian assistance, claiming that the virus was “created by America.” Analysts said that accepting American aid was also seen as politically untenable — it would not fix the economy or end sanctions but would have the undesirable effect of making the United States look benevolent.
Turning the focus to American sanctions diverts attention from Iran’s own failings and aligns with Iran’s policy objectives.
But some analysts say that the Trump administration also sees the virus as an opportunity, an additional tool that in tandem with sanctions could force Iran to capitulate to American demands, including a renegotiated, tougher nuclear agreement and a curb on its regional activities.
Most small businesses, restaurants and hotels and other service industries have been closed for over a month during what is usually their most lucrative season, around the Persian new year. Factories have scaled down production and unemployment has spiked, with economists saying Iran is losing at least a million jobs per month.
“When government has no access to its resources, it can’t bail out businesses, it can’t quarantine and it can’t provide economic support for people to not work,” said Pooria Asteraky, a tech entrepreneur who occasionally consults for Iran’s M Telecommunications Ministry.
In a sign of desperation, Iran requested a $5 billion loan from the International Monetary Fund, the first time it has applied for such a loan since the 1960s. The European Union has said it would support the loan, but the United States is expected to block it.
Whoever is to blame, the sight of overflowing hospitals, mass graves and doctors pleading for medical supplies has won some international sympathy, especially among countries already opposed to the Trump administration’s unilateral withdrawal from the Iranian nuclear agreement and imposition of sanctions.
On Tuesday, 33 American senators and representatives sent a letter to the Trump administration, urging it to suspend sanctions as “a humanitarian gesture to the Iranian people” and to “find a way” to deliver direct aid.
