Gov. Ron DeSantis said the decision corresponded with the “national pause” effectively recommended by the White House.
MIAMI — Florida’s coronavirus cases kept ballooning, especially in the dense neighborhoods of Miami and Fort Lauderdale. Hospitals in Fort Myers and Naples begged for donations of masks and other protective equipment. Young people started to die.
And still, Gov. Ron DeSantis resisted. The man entrusted with keeping many of the country’s grandparents safe did not want to dictate that all Floridians had to stay at home.
What it took for Mr. DeSantis to change his mind on Wednesday and finally issue a statewide order were a phone call with President Trump and a grave reckoning. A day earlier, the White House had projected how many American lives might be lost — up to 240,000 — without a national commitment to immediate, drastic action in every state.
The number of coronavirus infections in Florida had jumped by more than 1,000 on Tuesday, its largest 24-hour increase, to reach nearly 7,000, giving rise to worries that the infection was already dangerously out of hand.
For Mr. DeSantis, a 41-year-old first-term Republican governor considered a contender for higher political office, relenting was an acknowledgment that the Florida economy, so reliant on tourism, would inevitably grind to a halt because of the virus. Without statewide measures, recovery from the pandemic might only take longer.
Thirty-seven states have adopted statewide orders for people to stay at home, including most recently Georgia and Mississippi. The full scale of the virus threat delivered by the White House was a powerful new message to conservative governors who have been following the president’s lead.
Texas, where Gov. Greg Abbott expressed a preference for leaving such initiatives to local authorities, remains the largest state in the country without such an order; it has about 4,000 coronavirus cases, significantly fewer than Florida.
At least 101 people have died in Florida, and testing, especially of younger and asymptomatic people, remains insufficient.
Photos of crowded beaches and megachurches shared on social media over the weekend prompted national outrage directed at Florida, which has blamed its outbreak in part on outsiders. The sheriff in Hillsborough County, which includes Tampa, had a Pentecostal pastor arrested on Monday for recklessly endangering hundreds of parishioners he beckoned to church.
So Mr. DeSantis’s stay-at-home order, even though it lists many exceptions and does not close public beaches, came as a relief to public health officials and hospital administrators who had been clamoring for stronger efforts to keep people home.
The coronavirus poses a unique risk for Florida because a quarter of the state’s population of more than 21 million is older than 60, a percentage surpassed only by Maine. The economy relies in large part on an $86 billion-a-year tourism industry fueled by 125 million annual visitors, including young spring break visitors who may have helped spread the virus.
“Obviously in Florida, the tourism is totally shot right now,” Mr. DeSantis said.
The governor has been reluctant to break with Mr. Trump, according to Republican officials, after the president helped him win the Republican primary and then the governorship in 2018. Their close relationship has weighed on the president throughout the federal response to the coronavirus threat: A newly declared Florida resident, Mr. Trump sees the state as vital to his re-election, and he has been responsive to Mr. DeSantis’s requests for such things as drive-through testing sites and protective equipment for health care workers. They have spoken by phone four times in the past week, according to the governor’s public schedule.
As the Trump administration has put a spotlight on the spiraling number of coronavirus cases in New York and New Jersey, Mr. DeSantis has until now tried to frame the state’s outbreak as primarily a problem for Miami, Fort Lauderdale and West Palm Beach.
Those areas are home to more than half of the state’s infections, including six deaths at a single assisted-living facility. The governor repeatedly pointed to the fact that millions of visitors arrive to South Florida from abroad — and from New York.
His initial plan was to flood the hardest-hit region with testing sites and a field hospital, and try to limit new travelers. The White House listened. Florida has received material for three testing sites and four shipments from the federal stockpile of supplies, including 500,000 N95 masks, 250,000 face shields, 714,000 gloves, 1.2 million surgical masks and 200,000 gowns.
Last week, Mr. DeSantis imposed a quarantine on travelers from the New York area. Then, on Saturday morning, he phoned Mr. Trump and complained that New Yorkers flocking to Fort Lauderdale and other nearby cities were still bringing the virus with them. Mr. Trump responded on Twitter, saying that he was considering a quarantine of the New York tristate area, a statement that flummoxed officials in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
People in Florida and elsewhere continued to travel widely during the week of March 23, potentially exposing more people to the coronavirus, phone data shows.
The president’s aides — some of whom have tired of Mr. DeSantis’s special requests and believe he takes advantage of the relationship with the White House — tried to explain to the president that it would be almost impossible to enforce such a quarantine. Mr. Trump has also resisted a broader national stay-at-home order, which his advisers see as at odds with years of Republican orthodoxy about states’ rights, and unfair to states that are not experiencing major outbreaks.
On Sunday, the White House dropped its earlier, rosier suggestion that stringent social-distancing measures could be lifted by mid-April, and extended national guidelines to combat the coronavirus until April 30. And on Tuesday, Mr. Trump sounded a distinctly somber note, as he acknowledged for the first time that the next two weeks will be “painful” and allowed that predictions of more than 100,000 deaths were realistic possibilities.
Still, when Mr. DeSantis on Monday signed a more limited stay-at-home order for four counties from Key West to Palm Beach, he insisted that it would be needed only through April 15. Because most of the affected cities and counties, like other large jurisdictions in the state, had already enacted their own orders, the governor conceded his own action was of little consequence.
Cellphone location data showed that people in places like Jacksonville and Daytona Beach in northeast Florida, which were not on lockdown, were frequently traveling across county lines. Commissioners in southwest Florida’s Lee County, which likewise had no stay-at-home order, maintained that they did not need one, in part because the governor had not suggested it.
“It seems like he’s listening to the Florida Chamber and Associated Industries and business interests more than he is to medical professionals and health care professionals, which is incredibly disappointing,” Mayor Rick Kriseman of St. Petersburg said before the governor’s latest order. He added that neither the governor nor his staff had called at any point to ask about the city’s needs.
On Monday afternoon, Dr. Scott Rivkees, the Florida surgeon general, spoke with Dr. Ali H. Mokdad, a professor of health metrics sciences and chief strategy officer for population health at the University of Washington, Dr. Mokdad said. Dr. Mokdad, who keeps a home in Daytona Beach, said he recommended that Florida issue a statewide stay-at-home order.
On Tuesday, shortly before Mr. Trump’s grim coronavirus news briefing, Mr. DeSantis said one reason he had not extended the order statewide was because the White House coronavirus task force had made no such recommendation.
By the time Mr. DeSantis and Mr. Trump spoke on Wednesday, Mr. DeSantis, now under intense public pressure from local officials, Democrats and a growing chorus of national commentators, had come to the conclusion that he needed to do more. When he had decided initially that it would be necessary to focus only on infections flaring in South Florida, he said, the president had backed him.
Patricia Mazzei reported from Miami, and Maggie Haberman from New York.