Although many have weathered racist remarks and some physical attacks over the virus, Chinese-Americans are tapping their deep social networks to procure medical supplies.
Dr. Peter Lee, an emergency room doctor from Montville, N.J., was close to an emotional breakdown by the time he took to WeChat, the social media app, last month.
He was under siege on all fronts. At work, he was constantly dodging exposure to the coronavirus. At home, he was worried about infecting his pregnant wife and young daughters. And in his everyday life, he was suddenly navigating a new bias against Chinese-Americans.
But his March 20 post on WeChat was about the most imminent danger facing him and his co-workers: a lack of personal protection equipment, particularly masks and gowns.
Three days later, Dr. Lee’s desperate plea for protective gear had worked. Members of the Millburn Short Hills Chinese Association, based about 20 miles from Montville, saw his post and took action, raising more than $50,000 and obtaining 10,000 masks, gowns and other pieces of equipment from a Chinese company with a warehouse in Queens. The gear was distributed to Envision Physician Services, Dr. Lee’s employer, as well as to other organizations.
At the same time in New York State, the Long Island Chinese American Association was delivering more than 10,000 masks to three hospitals and nearly 8,000 surgical masks to the Visiting Nursing Service of New York.
Throughout New York and New Jersey, small groups from the Chinese-American community are uniting to fight the pandemic in this country even as they face racist remarks and some physical attacks. Using mostly WeChat, they are creating vast networks and rallying their contacts here and in China to procure supplies for doctors and nurses in need.
Some of the equipment has come directly from China, from companies like Dasheng in Shanghai. A few companies require bulk shipments, which can be too much and too expensive for one local group, but networking with multiple groups on WeChat has helped with that issue, said Tingzhou Wu, a spokeswoman for the association in Millburn. “We’re saying, ‘Let’s chat. Do you guys want to buy this together?’” she said.
The organizing on WeChat — which many Chinese-Americans prefer because their friends and relatives in China can use the app — is not unusual, said Mae Ngai, a professor of Asian-American studies and history at Columbia University.
The Coalition of Asian-Americans in Private Practice, a New York group with more than 1,000 members, has raised close to $250,000 since January and expects to get 80,000 N95 masks to New York hospitals this month. A group of Chinese-American professors at Rutgers University raised $12,000 and collected more than 4,000 masks to support a hospital in New Brunswick. A church in Parsippany donated thousands of masks to hospitals and even to local gas stations, where attendants are still required to pump gas by law.
Shen Tong, a Tiananmen Square massacre-era dissident who is now a writer and impact financier in Manhattan, has leveraged his various friend groups on Facebook — including Burning Man and Occupy Wall Street — to raise money and find supplies.
His college alumni group, for example, has so far raised about $100,000, first to help China and now the United States. The group donated medical supplies to SUNY Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn, Lenox Hill in Manhattan and other city hospitals. “We’ve quickly allocated more than 10,000 masks with that money,” he said.
As bigots blame them for the coronavirus and President Trump labels it the “Chinese virus,” some Asian-Americans now live in fear for their safety.
Jiayang, do you remember the first time that you started thinking about the backlash in this country against Asian-Americans in response to the coronavirus?
Yeah, I mean, around, I guess, this is the beginning of March. I had seen on Instagram a friend and a fellow writer documenting an incident in Manhattan, where — I think he is Korean-American, and he was told by a stranger to get away. But I remember reading about that incident and thinking, “yeah, I mean, that’s really terrible that this has happened,” but wondering, is this a singular incident, or is there a trend?
As a journalist and perhaps by my own personal temperament, I’m pretty cautious. I don’t like to make sensational generalizations that go well on a headline. I feel like I need very convincing proof that something is happening before I call it. And especially as a Chinese-American, I wanted to make sure that I was not crying racism before I had the full evidence. I wonder if it’s because if I don’t make too big a deal out of it, it won’t be fully real.
I get to the gate at LAX.
In an Uber Pool.
A grocery store, Wegmans.
We were walking from the gym to get in our classrooms.
I got some milk, a little pasta. Most everything’s gone.
And at that moment, there was this guy, looked like a regular guy. He was staring at me.
— Who say that they are being blamed for the pandemic.
A person at the White House used the term “kung-flu.” My question is, do you think that’s wrong?
Kung-flu. And do you think using the term “Chinese virus,” that puts Asian-Americans at risk, that people might target them?
No, not at all. No, not at all. I think they probably would agree with it 100%. It comes from China. There’s nothing not to agree with. I’ll have the last question.
When the president asked, I don’t think they would mind it being called the Chinese virus, I mind!
It did make me feel different, and didn’t really want to be Chinese because of the coronavirus.
Jiayang Fan, a writer for The New Yorker magazine, shares her story.
It’s Friday, April 10th.
Jiayang, can you tell me a little bit about your childhood? Where did you grow up?
I was born in 1984 in Chongqing, China. My mom was a doctor. My dad was a researcher. And he was one of the first batch of scholars sent to the U.S. to bring Western knowledge and technology back to China. So he leaves when I’m about two, so I have very little memory of him. But for my mom and I, life in China feels very serene and comfortable.
Whatever sense I have of the outside world, the world beyond China, is very, very vague and incredibly hazy, like I’m not quite sure it exists. But I think if one place were to stand out, it would be the United States.
I remember my mom and her friends talking about the show Dynasty, which did telegraph the glamor of the U.S.
I like that one. It’s a rather expensive fur. I like the mink. That is mink?
The sense that this is what an everyday Joe would inhabit.
And this of course, is a soap opera about an incredibly wealthy oil family living in a crazy gorgeous home, and driving along oil fields. So it’s actually quite exceptional.
My name happens to be Mrs. Steven Carrington. I’m not used to haggling over what suits me, or what it costs.
Well, it was the show, and it was also at the time in China what was very popular were these calendars of American families, where every member had golden hair, sparkling blue eyes and perfect bone structure, and they were always smiling with their perfect white teeth. They always were sitting by a perfect colonial house, or just out in nature, but in front of a park that they looked like they owned.
And I remember the food that really encapsulated America to me were Cheerios.
It’s the big yellow box that everyone knows.
Yes, Cheerios. I had no idea what they tasted like, but the company did fantastic branding in China.
Cheerios number one. We love it! Toasty oat goodness.
I remember the picture of the perfect baby on these ads for Cheerios. You know, the round cheeks, the blue eyes. That baby got to have this superior breakfast food that I, in all likelihood, would never get to taste.
Cheerios number one!
So there’s me, drinking my Chinese porridge, and eating my pickled vegetables, and having fantasies about Cheerios, which I learned years later to not be very tasty at all there. They’re actually tasteless.
To be like the definition of blandness, but in your mind, they are this superior food for this blond haired, perfect group of people.
Yeah, for superior people, to put it bluntly.
That was astounding to me. It was like my mom was superwoman, that she knew how to say this language that did not sound like a language to me. “Happy birthday.” I still remember the way the syllables came out of her mouth, and the image, which was of a tsunami.
There was this tidal wave of one syllable consuming the next one that, to me, was very incomprehensible. And I remember at the time thinking, “I will never learn this language. I have no hopes of ever learning this language.” Which is probably OK, because I only need one language, right? And it’s Chinese.
But essentially something happens in the June of ‘89 that changes my father’s fate as well as that of my mom and I forever.
The noise of gunfire rose from all over the center of Peking.
The Tiananmen massacre.
So the U.S. government immediately makes provisions for Chinese scholars, who might need to flee from China.
And that was when my mother and I joined my father in the U.S.
What do you remember about first arriving in the U.S.?
We land in J.F.K., and my father is living at the time in New Haven, Connecticut. And that drive from J.F.K. to New Haven, it is gray and drab, like tones that are not at all what I had imagined. So I keep waiting for the real America to reveal itself to me. So it is a rude awakening when my dad leads us to his second floor studio. There’s just a mattress on the floor, and I think it takes me a good minute to realize that this is my new home. And the loss of a language is pretty traumatic for me.
School started a few months later, and I could not understand my teachers, my classmates. And repeatedly my new American teachers ask me, why aren’t you talking more? Why aren’t you engaging? And those expectations, I think, are hard for me to fully understand. And I feel like I’m walking blind into a game, where I don’t know the rules.
I mean, not only do I not speak the language, I’m bringing pickled fish and rice, and that’s not sitting well with the other kids at a lunch table. All I feel is defeat.
Hm. It sounds very lonely.
Yeah, retrospectively, I think what made me feel most lonely was that I couldn’t share those feelings with my mother. And I think for my mother, who worked very low paying menial labor jobs in the U.S., a drastic step down from her position as a doctor in China, she must have felt as marginalized and as embarrassed by her immigrant status as I do, but in an adult way, but similarly lacking in an emotional vocabulary to express those feelings.
Like, I remember going to the mall for the first time with my mother. And my mom’s favorite pastime was window shopping, just looking at things that she couldn’t afford. And I remember one time someone trying to hand her maybe a flyer for some store, and she said, no, thanks. But she couldn’t pronounce it correctly, so this young man said “No sex? Did you say no sex? No sex?” And I think I was like 11 or 12 at the time. I remember that my mother actually just in this embarrassed way laughed, like out of anxiety, like she wanted it to be OK. She wanted to respond in a way to indicate that she was not offended. But I remember the way that my cheek just felt hot and red, they grew, and how I felt so humiliated on my mother’s behalf. And that experience feels seared into my brain, not just because of the insult, but because my mother had to swallow her own humiliation.
Did you understand, given your age, that this was racism? I mean, how did you process it in that moment?
What was that? Exactly. I think as an 11-year-old, in my head, I didn’t want to be different. I didn’t want to be the one lashing out at others for being racist because inevitably that would make me seem even more different. And I think my mother, my mother was the closest person in my life. But if she had a religion, it would be survival. I learned from my mother not to rock the boat, not to shake the existing system, to basically understand how the existing system works, and then to ascend it in some way, to climb the ladder. As long as you fit in better, you will live a more comfortable life here. And that should be the goal.
And did things start to get a little bit better, eventually?
I start speaking better English. I start really enjoying and then falling in love with the English language, something that I thought would never happen. That’s really important for me, I have to admit. When that language, English, came to feel like a part of my body, I have to say that felt like a homecoming to me.
Hm. And how old are you at this point, where you’re starting to fall in love with the language?
I think around maybe 12 or 13.
And I’ll never forget the first time in sixth grade, when I said the phrase “come on.” Like, this sounds silly, but it was only sixth grade when I could comfortably say “come on” to a schoolmate, and I felt very triumphant.
That would have totally defeated its purpose, but I remember it, because it felt like a real Americanism. And it just rolled off my tongue.

Exactly. But I still see myself predominantly as a visitor, and that my existence is pretty probational on good behavior. And if I behave well, I will be able to minimize the number of times that I stick out as someone who doesn’t belong.
But then I started to realize, that’s not exactly how it works.
So, Jiayang, I wonder if you can tell me about what happened to you recently.
So this was in mid-March, when there were rumors that New York City would be put under lockdown because of coronavirus. And I wanted to make sure I had enough food in the house, if I had to stay in for an indefinite period of time.
And I was also really worried about my mother, who has a neurodegenerative disease and lives in a nursing home close by. I knew that I wouldn’t be able to see her for a while, and I had several errands lined up.  One was to mail my rent check. And one was to go a few blocks away to my neighbor’s house, to pick up a sack of rice.
It was around evening time, and I had just left my apartment building, and I was on the phone, talking to my mother’s health aide in Chinese. And as I was turning around after putting the trash in the trash bin — this is right in front of my apartment.   But it all — I don’t think I fully believed what I was hearing. And when I made eye contact with him, he kept speaking.  And I realized that that I was comprehending that what he was saying did not stop him.
That was when in my ear, my mom’s aide paused and said, “Are you OK? Is something happening?” And I couldn’t really speak. I found myself walking down the street. I think I was still really set on, “I need to get rice,” but then I found it really hard to continue walking, because my legs just felt leaden. Like, I really, really wanted to continue walking. It would have only been a 10 minute walk away for me to fetch that rice, but I found myself coming to a halt. And even, I thought, if I just kept talking on the phone with my aide, but then I thought, “I’m talking in Chinese. Who else am I going to offend?” And then I just got off the phone. And once I got off the phone, I felt even more scared, because I was so aware of being alone.
So this is not embarrassment or even shame in this moment. This is just terror.
This is a very real sense of fright that I’m not going to make it to my friend’s house to get my sack of rice.
Jiayang, we started this conversation with you saying that your instinct, and maybe it’s because you’re a journalist, maybe it’s as an Asian-American, maybe it’s both, is to minimize these incidents, and to be slow to see them as part of a larger phenomenon. But it sounds like this was different for you. Am I right to think that?
 But what was different about this incident was that this man seemed to really mean it. And I wondered.
I mean, in retrospect, right, I wondered at the relationship between the sense of conviction in the man’s voice, his certainty that he was in the right to point out my Chineseness and to call me a Chinese bitch.
And I think about the things that were going on in his day, like did he lose his job earlier in the day because of this virus? I mean, does he work in the service industry? Does he have a loved one who has also become a prisoner in a nursing home or hospital? And I think about the way that all those anxieties, and rage and sadness, might have hardened into something like an instrument, almost a weapon.
And I think about me being a surface onto which he could use that weapon and lash out.
And I think about the probational nature of my Chinese-American existence, in a sense that, in better times, in normal times, there are certain stereotypes that are cast upon me when I walk down the street. But in a moment of crisis, when it seems plausible that the country where I was born could be responsible for an unprecedented pandemic, that I become a person of suspicion, and I become someone who is quite easy perhaps to target all your ire and anxieties, and that maybe it gave him temporary relief to be able to identify someone or something as the cause for his hurt and for his anxieties.
So I go home, double lock my door, pull out my phone and get on Twitter.
OK, yes. I describe what happened, and I tweet. I wasn’t offended. I was afraid. I was worried he knew where I lived. For the longest time, I’ve been telling friends in China that although racism against Chinese exists in this country, that’s not what I feel in a pandemic. I’ve never felt like this in my 27 years in this country. 
I want to believe what happened is anomalous, and that we’re living in extraordinary times, and fear can deform us. I wonder now if I should have taken his picture.
I wonder what your mother would make of this incident. And I wonder what she would think of the fact that you decided to share what happened to you so publicly.
And what would you say in this imaginary conversation with your mother?
I think I would try in English, because I think it would be hard for me to find the words in Chinese to explain the significance of it, not on my physical well-being.
Because for the longest — I mean, I think my mom and I both lived with this fiction that if we could be perfect versions of ourselves, for example, if my mother could pronounce “thanks” the way that it’s supposed to be pronounced, and for me, if I could say “come on” naturally, that had always been the goal of our American existence, was to somehow bend ourselves to a shape that America could accept. I never dared to believe that I could actually help to make America better. That was something I never dared to think was possible. But in experiencing this, it made me rethink my role as an American and how even me, even someone who is probationary, that I was in some very, very small way contributing to this country by pointing out the ways that it’s failing itself, making clear the way in which this country still makes me feel ashamed, is possibly one way in which I can make it better.
And also, that’s the best version of America. Like in all the conceptions of America that exist in my head, I actually think this ability to call out the worst parts of America to itself, my freedom to do so, this feels to me the most miraculous part of America.
But I think all of that would be, frankly, a bit too abstract to my mother. I think her quest for survival has been so concrete and lived, I’ll never be able to repay her for the way that her very concrete existence has paved the way for my more luxuriantly abstract one, but that maybe that’s a boundary between us that I’ve been able to cross, and that no matter how many ways I try to explain it in what language, if she’ll fully understand. But I really needed to make sure that, for my own sake, I could know that this did happen, that this was not a figment of my imagination, or that in an hour’s time, or in 12 hours’ time, I would try to minimize it in my own mind.
Thank you very much for your time. We really appreciate it, Jiayang.
I’m so sorry that you had the experience you had.
I am, too. But I’m sure it will be a small experience in what is hopefully a very long and a much bigger one of living in America and being American.
Our nation continues to battle the coronavirus pandemic. More than 400,000 Americans have tested positive. Nearly 15,000 have lost their lives. And important public health measures are creating an economic catastrophe.
On Thursday, the Labor Department said that another 6.6 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits in the past week.
That means. Mr. President, more than 16 million Americans have lost their jobs in only the last three weeks, a tragedy that is hard to even comprehend.
Economists now believe that the U.S. unemployment rate is the worst since the Great Depression. The latest figures put even deeper pressure on Congress to adopt a new round of economic relief for workers. But on Thursday, that legislation hit a roadblock in the Senate. Democrats want to double the size of the bill by adding hundreds of billions of dollars for hospitals and local governments, which are facing major financial shortfalls.
We don’t have to divide along the usual lines so soon after we came together for the country. To my Democratic colleagues, please, please do not block emergency aid you do not even oppose just because you want something more.
But Republicans, led by Senate Majority leader Mitch McConnell, say that money can wait.
Let’s continue to work together with speed and bipartisanship. We will get through this crisis together.
“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Stella Tan, Alexandra Leigh Young, Jonathan Wolfe, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges, Luke Vander Ploeg, Adizah Eghan, Kelly Prime, Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, Jazmin Aguilera, M.J. Davis Lin, Austin Mitchell, Sayre Quevedo, Neena Pathak, Dan Powell, Dave Shaw, Sydney Harper, Daniel Guillemette, Hans Buetow, Robert Jimison, Mike Benoit and Bianca Giaever. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Lauren Jackson, Julia Simon, Nora Keller, Mahima Chablani, Sabrina Tavernise, Yowei Shaw and Adriana Balsamo.
Mr. Shen noted that donations had come from both Americans and Chinese nationals, but many Chinese companies are secretive about being named. “One of the reasons is compliance and F.D.A. certification, or lack thereof,” he said.
The foundations of business leaders including Jack Ma and Joe Tsai, co-founders of Alibaba, recently pledged to send one million surgical masks and one million N95 masks to New York state. Over the weekend, the Joe and Clara Tsai Foundation and the Chinese government coordinated a shipment of 1,000 ventilators to Kennedy International Airport in New York. Li Lu, the chairman of Himalaya Capital Management, has also spearheaded major donations, and the Committee of 100, a Chinese-American leadership organization, has raised $1 million.
Deep pockets help. But Mr. Shen noted that the grass-roots efforts of smaller groups and individuals had produced significant and immediate results.
Eight hospitals have asked the Millburn association for help since it began its initiative. At last count, close to 50 Chinese manufacturers of masks and other protective gear had been screened by about 100 volunteers.
“Our volunteers can tell what’s fake and what’s not in one second,” said Maria Wu, another spokeswoman for the Millburn association. Once hospitals sign a waiver, the masks are theirs.
By mid-April, the Millburn association expects to receive at least 5,000 more masks and 650 coveralls directly from China.
“There’s been a few attacks against Asians, and patients are very cautious around Chinese doctors,” said Sun-Hoo Foo, a neurologist at NYU Langone Medical Center’s Tisch Hospital, who is also a member of the Coalition of Asian-Americans in Private Practice.
Dr. Ngai, of Columbia, said Dr. Foo’s attitude is the prevailing one. Some individuals’ bias toward Chinese-Americans would not prevent the community from helping to end the crisis, she said. “Hopefully, when people see what Chinese groups are doing, they’ll dial back some of this attitude,” she said.
