Meet a few of the millions of people in New York — a day laborer, production assistant and catering business owner — who have seen their freelance and events-based work dry up.
In New York, the epicenter of the nation’s coronavirus outbreak, the lucky ones work at home.
Over the last few years, Josh Taylor has found steady work as a production assistant in movies and television, part of that army of 20-somethings with clipboards and radios who watch over equipment or shoo pedestrians away from location shoots. That changed a few weeks ago when production after production in the city closed down.
While he always had side gigs to earn extra money, he now has recourse to only one: riding a bike through empty Manhattan streets delivering for Uber Eats in the evenings. The tips have been good, but they’re still not enough to make up for the anxiety he feels when he returns home near Yankee Stadium, where he has been living with his 80-year-old grandmother to save money.
When Jen Abbate divorced her husband four years ago, she kept the two-bedroom apartment they had shared in Park Slope. Ms. Abbate, an educator at a nearby private school in Brooklyn, knew it would be hard to make the $3,000 monthly rent, so she took in a roommate. Then she started side gigs tutoring and babysitting to make ends meet. Finally, she took in a second roommate.
“Even sharing with one person wasn’t enough if you’re trying to live in New York City,” said Ms. Abbate.
Then, a week ago, one of Ms. Abbate’s roommates moved out with little explanation, taking the Clorox wipes she had purchased for the apartment, though she later contributed her part of April’s rent. And while Ms. Abbate is grateful that her school continues to pay her salary, her anxiety over an uncertain future was jarring, especially since her side gigs dried up.
Even before Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo ordered residential and commercial construction sites to shut down, Boyvi’s boss began scaling back. First, he gradually cut hours; then, he told the crew they were no longer needed at the site. Now Boyvi and other workers wait to resume construction on the 30-floor residential building in Manhattan. But his finances cannot wait until then.
Boyvi, who is undocumented and was paid in cash, worries about not being eligible for any federal aid. He spent the remainder of his savings on groceries that are supposed to last him a week. After that, he is unsure how he will eat and pay his share of the rent of the four-bedroom apartment he occupies with four other family members in Brooklyn. Altogether, his monthly bills add up to $2,000.
And if he were to get sick with Covid-19, he has no idea how he would pay for the hospital bills. Boyvi, like most undocumented immigrants, has no health insurance.
After five years of running dineDK, a high-end catering business, from his Hoboken home, David Kirschner thought this would be his breakout year. He and a roster of experienced freelance chefs worked with clients to create unique culinary experiences from intimate at-home dinners for two to receptions for 200 people. Business was so good, he was negotiating a lease for an 1,800-square-foot space in downtown Jersey City that would have had a culinary studio with a large kitchen, as well as an event space under one roof.
Although 85 percent of his clients are across the river in New York City, his company cannot tap into small business relief the city offers.
He’s been looking into federal small business loans, though he’s worried about taking on debt with no idea when he can reopen. He just set up a GoFundMe page to raise $100,000 that he said would help the business move forward and support his staff, whom he still employs.
In addition to her gig at the museum, she had been supplementing her income by working as a D.J. Under the moniker SHYBOI, Ms. Grant played techno, house and soca music at Brooklyn nightspots and toured overseas where she also played festivals. But as clubs were forced to close, festivals canceled or postponed and global travel restrictions enacted, she lost another source of income.
Ms. Grant was supposed to be touring in Europe until April, for which she would have earned $5,000.
