Opinion|Prisons Breed the Coronavirus. We Can Safely Free Thousands of Inmates.
Prisons Breed the Coronavirus. We Can Safely Free Thousands of Inmates.
Nonviolent offenders, the medically vulnerable and those near the end of their sentences should be released. Those who remain deserve much better medical care.
I’m sure this will reach you at the appropriate time, and hope not to disturb you at such an hour. As someone with a loved one who is currently incarcerated, and at a camp where the sick aren’t quarantined properly, I do not get much sleep. Each day and night, I email and research and no one has been willing to listen to me or help us. Alabama state prisons are, in the past, notorious for being in the most horrific conditions, this on the best of days. I’ve recently contacted the CDC, in an effort to save lives at Kilby Corrections, where there are two cases, just a dorm away from my loved one, who, unfortunately, does have underlying health conditions. The “isolation” unit consists of plastic sheeting. If there’s any way you could possibly just draft a letter, I’d be willing to pay. I’d pay nearly anything. I have been at my wit’s end, trying to get someone to move, explain to the governor, the commissioner of the Al DOC, and more than you’d want to know, to make responsible decisions here and with haste, all to no avail. One letter from you could change the outcome of our lives, and so, I firmly believe you are my last hope. Please consider helping. I thank you for your time, as I realize you have to be a busy woman. I appreciate all you’ve already done for others, truly.
My son is a nonviolent inmate at a Federal Correction Institution. He has high blood pressure. He was sentenced to 6 years for a drug charge but yet he wasn’t caught with drugs neither any weapons but was caught through by a phone call. At the time my son was a substance abuser using drugs habitually.
I didn’t know exactly who to contact for filing forms and to get help for him to be released under the Covid-19 conditions. Do you know if there’s anyone in South Carolina that’s handling similar actions as you are? Is there any information that you can provide me with concerning this situation., or can you tell me who to directly contact please?
America, in the midst of this terrible pandemic, has a chance to do something it hasn’t been able to do in nearly 150 years.
We can break our addiction to locking people up, often for minor offenses, and throwing away the key. We can release people from jails and prisons who don’t need to be there. We can save lives.
There are nearly 175,000 people being held in federal prisons across the country, and many hundreds of thousands more in state and local prisons and jails. Already, hundreds if not thousands of inmates are sick with the coronavirus. Corrections officers who work in the facilities are also falling ill.
Allowing the virus to spread unchecked in jails and prisons is not only likely to lead to deaths and suffering inside the facilities, but also in their neighboring communities. Across the country, public health experts, jail officials, doctors, defense lawyers and even some prosecutors have been clear about what we need to do.
We can release medically vulnerable people, including those who are elderly or pregnant, and those with chronic conditions like cancer, asthma, H.I.V. and heart disease.
We can release people locked up for nonviolent offenses, and those in pretrial detention.
We can release people held in federal immigration detention facilities for nonviolent offenses, and stop making immigration arrests.
And we can do everything we can to ensure that those who remain incarcerated and do become sick have the medical treatment they need.
America’s jails and prisons aren’t equipped to protect the people who live and work inside from a fast-spreading contagion. Amid this pandemic, the conditions, horrendous even in normal times, are darkening by the hour.
On Tuesday morning, Tiffany Gaines, who is incarcerated in New York City’s Rikers Island jail complex, called a reporter, Courtney Gross of the local news station NY1, and said she had tested positive for the coronavirus after too few precautions were taken at the facility. Ms. Gaines, in a powerful, if surreal moment of television, said she was five months pregnant and suffers from asthma.
About 950 people have been released so far from the city’s jails, according to city officials. Gov. Andrew Cuomo has ordered the release of over 1,000 parole violators. When it comes to protecting those who live and work in the jails and prisons, both men can do much more.
At the Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn, public defenders said that the federal facility had failed to adequately screen or separate inmates with coronavirus symptoms, and that some inmates were even without access to bars of soap. Lawyers for four high-risk inmates filed an emergency petition last weekend asking the federal Bureau of Prisons to release them along with more than 500 other medically vulnerable people from the facility.
The Metropolitan Detention Center has had problems for years. In 2018, a lieutenant was convicted for repeatedly raping a woman incarcerated there and threatening her with solitary confinement if she reported the attacks. Last winter, inmates spent days in the frigid cold and darkness, often with no hot water, after a partial power outage.
With the lives of so many Americans upended, it’s tempting to look away, as we usually do. But this is something we can still get right. If we act quickly, we can potentially prevent thousands of senseless deaths.