Opinion|‘I Do Fear for My Staff,’ a Doctor Said. He Lost His Job.
‘I Do Fear for My Staff,’ a Doctor Said. He Lost His Job.
Health care professionals are being punished for protecting themselves, and us.
Doctors and nurses responding to the Covid-19 pandemic are the superheroes of our age, putting themselves at risk to save the lives of others.
At least 61 doctors and nurses have died from the coronavirus in Italy so far. Already, in New York City alone, two nurses have died and more than 200 health workers are reported sick at a single major hospital.
These superheroes are at risk partly because we sometimes send them into battle without adequate personal protective equipment, or P.P.E. This should be a national scandal, and now hospitals are compounding the outrage by punishing staff members who speak up or simply try to keep themselves safe.
In Bellingham, Wash., an E.R. doctor, Ming Lin, pleaded on social media for better protections for patients and the staff at PeaceHealth St. Joseph Medical Center, where he had worked for 17 years.
The hospital responded by terminating Dr. Lin.
Dr. Lin told me that he had no regrets, but he asked supporters not to circulate petitions on his behalf for fear that such an effort would distract from managing the pandemic.
Charles Prosper, the C.E.O. of the hospital network, wouldn’t take my call, although he said in a statement that he regretted losing “such a longstanding and talented member of our medical staff.” The PeaceHealth board should recognize that its hospital has more need for an experienced E.R. doctor than for a bungling C.E.O.
Hospitals sometimes discourage staffers even from bringing their own protective gear, for fear of scaring patients or leaving other employees feeling unprotected. In New York City, Dr. Ania Ringwelski, an E.R. physician, was concerned by what she felt was insufficient P.P.E. supplied by Weill Cornell Medical Center, so last week she obtained her own.
The hospital refused to allow this and sent her home. Her future is unclear.
Weill Cornell told me in a statement that it issues “appropriate” P.P.E. and that it can’t allow doctors to bring their own “of unknown provenance and safety.” That’s a pretty patronizing way for hospital executives to treat professionals who are risking their lives.
In Chicago, a nurse, Lauri Mazurkiewicz, warned colleagues that standard face masks distributed by the hospital were not safe. She brought in her own higher grade N95 mask — and was fired by Northwestern Memorial Hospital. She is now suing the hospital, which declined to comment except to tell me that its practices are safe.
In Texas, my colleague Matt Richtel reported on an anesthesiologist, Dr. Henry Nikicicz, who in effect was suspended without pay because he wore a mask in public places in the hospital. The hospital relented after it was asked for comment.
Tension arises not only because of shortages of P.P.E. but also because of uncertainty about how much protection is optimal. No one knows. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have given conflicting advice, and other countries have varying standards. Singapore avoided infections with modest P.P.E., while Chinese doctors and nurses now use full-body coverings much more substantial than the protective clothing in America.
Meanwhile, American health workers see colleagues falling sick. At Weill Cornell, a former E.R. doctor is now fighting for her life on a ventilator.
It’s baffling that the richest country in the history of the world fails so abysmally at protecting its health workers, especially when it had two months’ lead time. And for hospitals now to retaliate against health workers who try to protect themselves — ousting them just when they are most needed — is both unconscionable and idiotic.
On websites like allnurses.com, nurses wonder aloud whether they can refuse to work because of inadequate P.P.E. or even whether they should quit the profession.
The doctors, nurses, technicians and cleaning staff members on the front of this pandemic deserve our eternal gratitude. Instead, we’re betraying them: They have our back, but we don’t have theirs.
“We still don’t have enough masks, we still don’t have enough gowns,” said a resident at a New York hospital who asked not to be named for fear of being punished. “Our necks are exposed, our hair is exposed and our colleagues are getting sick.
