U.S.|The Census Needs to Count Women. The Pandemic Makes That Harder.
After noticing a gender gap in intention to participate, the Census Bureau kicked off a campaign this year to encourage more women to take part.
Last week, the Census Bureau announced a four-month delay in collecting 2020 census data, and asked Congress to postpone its deadline for reporting results.
A spokeswoman for the bureau said she almost had to laugh: After a decade of planning for what was expected to be a census with record high participation, especially among traditionally undercounted populations, the coronavirus knocked it right off track.
America has been counting its residents since 1790. For the first national census, local enumerators visited every home to record the name of the head of household (spoiler: almost always a man), and a tally of its free white children, women and slaves.
Today all residents are asked to fill out the form themselves and submit it — by mail, phone or, for the first time, online.
If only everyone would do it.
A 2018 survey from the Census Bureau showed that fewer women than men intended to participate in the census. And it found that Hispanic, black and Asian-American women were even less likely than white women to say they’re “extremely likely” to participate, with Asian-American women the least certain about their intent to participate.
Researchers were troubled by the gender gap because census data is used to determine nearly $1 trillion in federal spending, including numerous services geared specifically toward women like grants for the prevention of gender-based violence, grants for the prevention of family violence and nutritional programs for women.
That kicked off a campaign to encourage female participation in the census, including a video showing women of all racial backgrounds participating in the census and explaining its importance for federal funding and apportioning of congressional representatives.
In other words, participation means money — for day cares, hospitals, food services and more.
Dr. Yazmín García Trejo, a researcher for the bureau, said the findings came as a surprise to her team. Originally, they hypothesized that women would be more certain about their intent to fill out the census. Historically, women have participated at higher rates than men — in 1990, 57 percent of census respondents were female. It’s also possible that men say they’ll participate when surveyed, but leave the actual work of filling out the census form to women, Dr. García Trejo said.
One explanation for the gender gap, at least in the survey, may be something both simple and relatable: American women are busy.
Dr. Catherine Harnois, a sociologist at Wake Forest University, said that women’s intent to fill out the census could be affected by their lack of discretionary hours in the day. Outside of their careers, she said, women working a “second shift” as family caregivers for children and the elderly may simply not have time. That may be compounded today by the pandemic — with children home from school and family members falling ill, many women feel as if they’re working multiple jobs.
But Dr. Harnois sees census participation as especially important because so many aspects of citizenship historically excluded women, like voting and running for office. And she hopes that the more women participate, the more they’ll be able to push their communities to do the same.
“Women are often community leaders, especially in disadvantaged populations, so they can encourage census participation more broadly,” Dr. Harnois said.
That effort to reach disadvantaged communities was at the heart of the Census Bureau’s efforts this year. Typically, those who could benefit most from funding determined by the census were most likely to be missed, researchers said.
Dr. William O’Hare, a demographer who leads the nonprofit Count All Kids, said low-income women and children who live in other people’s households rather than their own might not realize that they’re supposed to fill out the census. That means their communities lose out on funding for day cares, school lunch programs and more, not to mention full representation in Congress.
“The kids who typically need it the most are the ones most likely to be undercounted,” he said.
Today’s In Her Words is written by Emma Goldberg and edited by Francesca Donner. Our art director is Catherine Gilmore-Barnes, and our photo editor is Sandra Stevenson.
