Jewish groups and leaders reacted to the mayor’s warning with outrage.
Jonathan Greenblatt, the head of the Anti-Defamation League, said the mayor’s remarks were unfair to the more than one million Jewish people who live in New York City.
Other people noted the size of the crowds that had gathered earlier in the day across the region to watch a military flyover by pilots from the Navy’s Blue Angels and the Air Force’s Thunderbirds honoring essential workers.
But he rejected the suggestion that his comments unfairly singled out members of the Jewish community or reflected a double standard in enforcing social-distancing rules.
The pandemic has hit Hasidic residents of New York with devastating force, sickening and killing people at a rate that local leaders and public health data suggest may exceed that of other ethnic and religious groups.
Hundreds of Hasidic people have died of the virus, community leaders said, including influential religious figures like the Rabbi Yaakov Perlow, who led the Novominsker Hasidic dynasty and Agudath Israel of America, an umbrella ultra-Orthodox organization.
Most of the Orthodox Jewish leaders who have died amid the pandemic have not had big crowds at their funerals, but some have been mourned at large public gatherings like the one on Tuesday in Williamsburg.
The persistence of such events has drawn wide news media coverage. It has also generated deep unease among Hasidic groups, who feel they are being singled out for opprobrium and worry about anti-Semitism. And in any case, they argue, public health violations in their neighborhoods endanger them most of all.
Dermot F. Shea, the New York City police commissioner, said on Wednesday that the department learned of Rabbi Mertz’s funeral on Tuesday and made plans to monitor it. Videos posted on social media showed that members of the neighborhood Hasidic safety patrol, known as shomrim, were there as well.
Mr. Shea said the department had thought it was “unlikely” a large crowd would gather for the funeral.
Mr. Shea said 12 summonses were issued for failure to disperse. And he criticized events such as the one on Tuesday for “putting members of my department at risk” and said they would be met with “stern consequences."
Gatherings of any size have been banned in New York State for more than a month as part of the sweeping orders enacted by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo to slow the spread of the coronavirus.
The Police Department has assigned hundreds of officers to enforce social-distancing rules, responding to calls of overcrowding at stores, parks, and other gathering spaces. Officers have made 11 arrests and issued 134 summonses to people accused of violating emergency rules, according to the department’s daily enforcement reports.
Almost half of the summonses issued and two of the arrests made stemmed from a birthday party at a barbershop attended by nearly 60 people in Brooklyn. The police also broke up a speakeasy in Brooklyn and a marijuana party in Manhattan.
Ashley Southall, Edgar Sandoval and Michael Gold contributed reporting.