Dr. Agrawal is child abuse pediatrician.
People who are concerned about a particular family can help by doing small things to ease the stress that comes with this time. Small acts of support — whether in the form of food, toilet paper, coloring books or just an empathetic ear — can make a difference and ease parents’ stress. Make use of technology for virtual check-ins. Look for signs of distress and remember that anyone can report concerns to child protective services, but also simply serve as a reassuring, reliable presence. Remember that social distancing doesn’t have to mean emotional distancing.
Community organizers, faith-based leaders and elected officials should coordinate with mental health clinicians, social workers and counselors to conduct virtual check-ins with high-risk families, something that’s already being done to some extent in New York City. They should form parent groups to conduct remote learning for children under 5, because those kids are at highest risk for abuse. They can work with recovery groups such as Alcoholics Anonymous provide online and video support. They can use social media to distribute help line numbers and to send the message to children that they aren’t alone.
As part of virtual visits, child health providers should routinely ask families how they are doing and offer help. Just as fever is a warning sign of infection, physicians must recognize the warning signs of abuse. As doctors, we can share information on parent support, domestic violence, suicide hotlines with those who we think might be at risk and make sure to follow up by phone to see whether parents have questions. The American Academy of Pediatrics offers guidance to pediatricians on identifying, diagnosing and treating abusive head trauma and a tip sheet for parents dealing with the stresses of the coronavirus crisis.
This pandemic has brought with it additional challenges in protecting young people from abuse and revealed gaps in our existing approach. We have an opportunity to use new tools to ensure that children are safe — tools that will serve them during this crisis and long after.
Nina Agrawal is a child abuse pediatrician and an assistant professor of pediatrics at Columbia University Medical Center.