People got sick — and some died — after attending crowded parties and theme parks in Florida as the coronavirus spread.
Within days, reports started popping up on Facebook about a D.J. and several partygoers who were suddenly terribly ill. By the end of the month, two people who attended the festival had died.
As of last week, 38 people had reported that they were symptomatic or had tested positive for the coronavirus in the weeks following the event, according to the organizer, the National L.G.B.T.Q. Task Force. Ms. Diaz was among them.
The exact number of people who returned from leisure trips to Florida with the coronavirus may never be known. Cases as far away as California and Massachusetts have been linked to the Winter Party Festival, a beachside dance party and fund-raiser for the L.G.B.T.Q. community held March 4-10. Another California man died after going to Orlando for a conference and then to a packed Disney World. Two people went to Disney and later got relatives sick in Florida and Georgia.
A video by the data analytics and visualization company Tectonix showed how cellphones that were on one Fort Lauderdale beach at the beginning of March spread across the country — up the Eastern Seaboard and further West — over the next two weeks.
The first festivalgoer to die was Israel Carrera, a 40-year-old Lyft and Uber driver who spent several days in the hospital in Miami Beach before his death on March 26. His boyfriend, who also attended, got mildly sick and is now making plans to deliver Mr. Carrera’s ashes to his surviving family in Cuba.
The decision to hold the festival five weeks ago came at a different point in the crisis, before a single person had tested positive in Miami-Dade County, said Rea Carey, executive director of the National L.G.B.T.Q. Task Force. The event ended the day before the World Health Organization declared the virus a pandemic.
Ms. Diaz, 42, got a fever on March 15. The next day her girlfriend was also sick. By the time Ms. Diaz was confirmed positive for Covid-19, she had been grocery shopping, gone to the pharmacy and spent time with her employer’s 80-year-old father and 14-year-old daughter.
“I understand that was my choice to be there — I take full responsibility for that,” Ms. Diaz, who lives in Wilton Manors, Fla., said of the Winter Party Festival, which drew about 5,500 people and has been a fixture in the L.G.B.T.Q. community for more than 25 years.
Loc Nguyen, a software developer, felt exhausted from the time he returned home to Los Angeles from the festival on March 9. He went to work the next day but had to call in sick after that, feeling shortness of breath and such terrible shivers that he wrapped himself in three winter jackets to go to the doctor.
Mr. Nguyen knew the risk of attending, but said he did not want to lose the money he had spent on tickets. He did not blame organizers for holding the festival, and pointed to mixed messages from local officials.
On March 6, the city of Miami, which is separate from Miami Beach, canceled the Ultra Music Festival, a marquee electronic dance music event that draws tens thousands of people. Other local leaders criticized the action as too drastic: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention was not yet recommending mass closures. Florida announced its first confirmed coronavirus case on March 1, but it was in the Tampa area.
“We should live our lives normally,” with public-health safeguards in place, Mayor Carlos Gimenez of Miami-Dade County said on March 5.
A photo provided by Courtney Sheard showing her daughter, Journey, at Disney in early March 2020. Both Ms. Sheard and her daughter became sick after returning home.
Further north, near Orlando, people streamed into the six Disney World theme parks before they closed on March 15. Courtney Sheard recalled that the weather was beautiful and that a new ride at Hollywood Studios, Mickey & Minnie’s Runaway Railway, was especially crowded.
After she got back home to Naples, Fla., on March 12, she awoke with a terrible headache and a sore throat. Her 3-year-old daughter, Journey, ran a fever and vomited.
By the time she received a positive test result, Ms. Sheard, 30, had been around her sister, her sister’s children, a friend, her parents, beachgoers and diners at a Bonefish Grill.
When Ms. Sheard learned that Jeffrey Ghazarian, 34, had died on March 19 in California after visiting the theme park, she figured that the coronavirus had been circulating in Disney while he, and then she, were there.
Mayor Jerry L. Demings of Orange County, home to Orlando, said local officials had insufficient guidance to act consistently to slow the spread.
Nicholas Hickman started feeling ill three or four days after returning home to Ringgold, Ga., on March 11. He had spent five days at Disney with friends who were on spring break. They were also celebrating Mr. Hickman’s 20th birthday.
Back home, Mr. Hickman came down with a fever, chills and chest pains, but struggled to get tested because no one else in his county had received a coronavirus diagnosis.
Mr. Hickman has since recovered, but only after getting his mother, and likely his father, sick. He does not blame Disney for his infection.
Patricia Mazzei reported from Miami, and Frances Robles from Key West, Fla. Susan C. Beachy and Kitty Bennett contributed research.