Screaming children, worried employees, sick parents and anxious grocery shoppers: This is a peek inside our new world.
So I am standing outside of the Safeway supermarket in Erie, Colorado, and it is toilet paper day. There are three people standing out here in the cold around 6:30 in the morning, and I’m going to go talk to them.
Hello, how are you guys?
Never thought in my whole life, in 63 and a half years, I’d be crawling my butt out of bed at 5:30 looking for toilet paper.
[LAUGHS] And did you have the intel that this place got its toilet paper shipment in?
We were here Saturday, and one nice young lady, when Marty asked about toilet paper, said, our truck is coming Monday, and we’ll be open at 7:00 a.m.
And I said, honey, guess where we’re going tomorrow morning?
I’ve been rationing two squares a trip for a couple of weeks now.
The T.P. calculator on Facebook said I had three days worth, and I’m like, no, this doesn’t work for me.
Here we go. The magic moment. Run, run.
How are you feeling physically right now? Are people trying at all to stay away from one another? Or is that not even possible?
As much of America enters its second month of lockdown to contain the coronavirus.
So I guess, are there other patients that are there today that you are thinking about today? Is there something about them that really sticks in your mind?
My colleagues speak to people in Pittsburgh, Kansas City, New York and Seattle about their new realities.
It’s Monday, April 13.
I’m sorry. Did you say — did you ask me a question?
Just saying, how are you doing?
Take me around, and as we’re going, you can tell me about your day so far.
I’m Campbell Robertson. I’m a national correspondent based in Pittsburgh. I spoke with a neighbor of mine, Tanying Dong. Well, just show me where people are stationed at the moment.
I don’t really want to deal with them right now, because they’re just, you know — they’re just them.
She works in public law, and she’s been working at home for the last few weeks. Her husband works at a hospital here, so she’s basically been the lone caregiver for their three boys. They’re two, five and eight years old.
I don’t know. What else do you want to see?
So tell me about today. How’s it going today?
Do you want more scrambled eggs?
It was a relatively calm morning, actually.
I’m getting your cereal, buddy.
Hey. Yan? Yan?
I had Yan do some homework. I had the other two just watch TV.

My oldest one had one major tantrum where he was just screaming, because he couldn’t find his sweatshirt.
It’s like his favorite sweatshirt. It turned out it was on one of the strollers outside.
Why would you leave it in the stroller? It’s your sweatshirt. You’re responsible for it.
Did he have schoolwork today, your 8-year-old?
Yeah. So we’re on Google Classroom. I’ll show you. They post classwork here. This is math, reading, creative writing. And then apparently, they were supposed to play the Oregon Trail game, but I wasn’t able to get it to work. But at one point during his homework, he had a big mug of milk, and he spilled it all over the table.
That was a lot of [EXPLETIVE] from me.
— it’s divisive, yeah. Exactly. [LAUGHS] Yeah.
Oh, uh, no.
So how were the 3 and 5-year-old today?
I can, yes. But we’re working on you right now.
The other two, I have been just generally letting them float along and whatever they want to do. Occasionally they’ll get sick of the TV, and they’ll want to just come upstairs and do something non-TV related, and it’s good and bad. It’s like, oh, that’s nice, you’re using your imagination. But on the other hand, it’s like, please just go watch TV and don’t destroy the house.
Yeah, so the little one just likes to kind of run laps around the house, which is great, because that kind of wears him out a little bit.
Or — hold on a second.
What? What’s wrong? What?
You want milk? You want milk?
Here, I’ll get you milk. Sorry.
Here you go. Want to say hi to Campbell?
Hi. How are you? Are you having fun?
You’re a baby?
[LAUGHS] Yeah. Apparently he’s a baby again.
OK. We all get there eventually.
Just having a hard time accepting that, oh my god, all three of my kids are going to be home all the time, and I’m going to be pretty much by myself with them the entire time. And oh my god, how am I going to handle this? Because I haven’t had to do this in — I have never had to do this. I think by now, they’re used to being at home. They’re used to this. Whatever this is, so.
Well, there’s not really a choice at this point.
Listen, thank you, Tanying.
Donna? Hey, it’s John.
With The New York Times. How are you doing?
I’m John Eligon, a reporter based in Kansas City. So how are you doing? How was today for you?
A few weeks ago, I spoke with Donna Danahy. Sleeping sometimes is a good thing, right?
Yeah. I needed it.
Yeah. I can imagine. Who lost her job when the economy slowed down in the wake of the virus. So I guess, take me back to the beginning. Just tell me how you got in this position that you are in.
I was working at Steak ‘n Shake. I had been working there for nine months. And a couple weeks ago, they told us at midnight that night they were shutting down except for the drive-through. And my friend, which I was staying with, she went to stay with her boyfriend, which moved to Iowa. And she was going to go anyway, but she just — we lost our job, so she just went ahead and went. And that put me in my car with my cat.
And so how long were you staying in your car for?
Two weeks. It’s been two weeks today, I think.
And what was that like, being in the car?
It was rainy, it was cold. Some nights wasn’t so bad, but the worst thing was going to the bathroom. Because in the beginning, I could walk into, like, Walmart and go to the bathroom or the gas station. I stayed at Flying J a couple times. I parked there, and I don’t even know if they’re still offering showers, but I could pay to take a shower for $12.
So you were going to a truck stop to shower for $12?
Yeah, at first I was staying there. But like today, most the bathrooms are closed. There’s just no place to go. And sometimes when I went to sleep, I just wanted to stay asleep, because I didn’t know what to do with myself.
I don’t know. It was just scary. A lot of things ran through my head. I called for resources and talked to this lady. She said, well, maybe we could put you in a hotel for a day or so. And I was happy with that. She called me back and she told me that they had me a room, and I came in, and I checked in.  It’s awesome. It’s great to have a place to go. And my cat, just like — you should have seen her when she went into room. She was in heaven.  And nobody can take care of her but me, and I’m not doing a very good job. I don’t know. I leave here Friday, and I don’t know what’s going to happen.  I’m having a hard time with that.
But last week, I found a job. My friend, she worked for Cosentino’s for years.
Yeah. And so me and her went down there together and spoke with him. And we had to go back a couple of days later because we had talked to corporate. It took me forever to get ready. It’s hard to do in the car, especially when it’s raining. When your clothes are in your trunk, getting ready and dressed in the backseat, washing your hair out of a milk jug, water jug, brushing your teeth, trying to find something to wear out the trunk of my car. But I don’t know where my birth certificate is or my social security card. I thought that I could use my passport. My passport expired so she couldn’t accept that, but it’s just pinning my birth certificate.
And my friend that got me the job, she’s worked seven days straight right now.
And so, I just see her go to work every day. I’m like, dang. I want to go. I want to go.
I’m Alan Feuer. I’m a reporter for The New York Times metro desk. A couple of weeks ago, I had spoken to an inmate named Foster Thompson. Foster is a 55-year-old New Yorker who was arrested and sent to prison for a murder on Staten Island in 1992. He’s been in the state prison system ever since. And recently, he’s been at Sing Sing for the last three years, where there have been, according to state officials, at least two cases of the coronavirus in the prison population. So anyhow, we’re expecting a call from Foster in the next few minutes, and he’s going to tell us about conditions in Sing Sing right now.
Hello? Can you hear me, Foster?
Yeah. I can hear you, yup.
Great. So it’s Monday morning, and I just wonder if you could describe for me where you are now and what’s around you.
Well, right now I’m in a little phone booth room, and it’s the fourth floor in building eight.
Got it. Now, how long have you been in the state prison system?
How did these last couple of weeks compare to other crisis times in your time in prison?
People was more panicked in here. Dudes was yelling last night and a few this morning. They’re not testing nobody, but it’s corona.  But yeah, last night, you had — at least it sounded like from four different areas — coughing and sneezing all night, literally all night. You know, I got asthma. I had it all my life. I also had a collapsed lung, so I worry about it all the time. I clean my cell thoroughly constantly to wipe the bars down and the gate. I wash my hands and stuff thoroughly, probably like, 50 some times a day. I mean, this is literally, seriously, not just exaggerating. Use the Dove soap and that Ajax dishwashing liquid because it does kill bacteria. That’s the best I could do. When I’m in the yard, I try to stay my distance. But when I’ve got to go to the phone, I mean, you’ve got no choice. I’ve got a couple of socks that I wash out that I use. I use the sock to cover the whole phone when I’m talking on the phone. You can’t avoid nobody here. It’s totally, totally impossible.
How many people have been using these phones recently?
The ones in the yard, everybody every day they use the phones constantly. You know, it could be 400 guys out there at a given time.  
Have the phone calls increased because of the decision to cut of prison visitation?
Yeah, most definitely. Most definitely. But they do have some bleach and water solution that they squirt on a rag, and they wiped the phones off.  So they is doing that.
Now, you said you have washed your hands compulsively. You’re worried.
And yet you go out to the yard phone to use that phone. Why do those calls matter to you so much at this point, Foster?
Because it’s to let my wife and my kids know that I’m all right. And I can’t even express how they feel if they don’t hear from me, especially my wife and my daughters. They’d be in a panic, honestly. They need me to call. I got a need to hear from them just as much. It’s just crazy, man. I am really feeling it, man. The way it’s going in here, it just seems like it’s just a matter of time before it gets spread all through this place.
Well, look, Foster, we really appreciate your taking time to do this. And please stay safe. OK?
Yeah. Yeah, I’m trying, man. That’s number one, try to stay safe and stay healthy in this place, man.
Thanks, Foster. Bye.
I’m Mike Baker, a reporter based in Seattle. And a couple of weeks ago, I spoke to Tammy Wiatrowski, a nurse at the hospital that faced, really, the initial brunt of coronavirus cases and deaths in the United States.
So at the end of a night that’s hard — like an the end of a 12-hour shift — I can get my pad, get my journal, and then just sit there and kind of process stuff.
And this hit, and it was like, [GROANS], I have this deep sinking. I just want to get this stuff out.
Tammy began a new journal to chronicle what was happening. So I asked her to read from it.
That evening, we received the first two Covid-19 positive results in two of our patients, one whom had just succumbed to the virus. As the evening nurses were making their way in for their shift, our infectious disease director, Dr. Riedo (ph) came to let the staff know that the virus was here, and that we had more patients that we needed to test.
I get emotional when I think about that night. We all glanced across the room with a very blank look of shock on our faces. It was very surreal.
I immediately thought about my four grandsons that were supposed to have their monthly slumber party with granny in two weeks. Knowing that I would have to make that call, letting them know that I wouldn’t be able to have this month’s slumber party, or maybe even the next, that my newest little granddaughter of just a year and a half would look and act so much bigger in those next few weeks while I was unable to see her.
Looking around the room at my other co-workers, I could tell they were probably thinking of their loved ones as well. Then we all nodded our head as if saying, yes. Without a word said, it was just understood. Let’s do this.
The next several days and weeks at work became planned maneuvers like a well-oiled machine. The nurses and doctors working so close together to isolate and treat these patients, yet the art of nursing changed.
As a nurse, I’ve always felt that if I couldn’t help save a life and that patient dies, that I could help the family through the worst day of their life, and I still would go home feeling rewarded. I might cry all the way home, or for weeks or months to come, but if I comfort the family and guide them through the process of grief, then I still feel like I’ve done something good. That I have cared, and that I’ve helped.
Now with how we have to isolate these patients, we are not able to have the families be with their loved ones as they pass. They don’t get to spend the last few days of their life with them. They don’t get to hold their hand as they take their last breath. As a nurse, I can’t convey my sympathy and put my arms around them.
At this point, I got mad.
What can I give them? What last memory did we just change by having to protect them, both the family and the community? These changes are needed under these circumstances, but they are changing the way a nurse provides the care and compassion during this time. Now we find ways to show our care and our hearts through the phone, by telling them that we remind the patient that their family sends their love. That they called, that they checked in, and that they love them.
And then later on March 20, I wrote, “My life changed.” I realized probably for the first time in my career, to help others has distanced me from the ones I love. Life is on pause. At times, I’m jealous for some of the doctors and nurses that get to go home to their families and small children.
As I walk by the kids’ playroom, one of the bedrooms in my house with the bunk beds and toys and video games, it’s quiet.
I don’t hear the laughs and screams as the three youngest chase each other with Nerf guns. Several times on my day off, I’ve walked by and looked into the room just to see their bunk beds empty, the pillows that say “relax” and “love,” and nobody’s little head on them. It makes me sad for a moment, but then I have to think when this is over, we’re going to have the biggest slumber party ever. And they always know granny loves them. For that, I’m grateful.
Here’s what else you need to know today. A former Senate aide to Joe Biden has filed a criminal complaint over an alleged incident in which she says Biden sexually assaulted her in 1993, an allegation Biden denies. The Times reports that a friend confirmed that the former aide, Tara Reade, told her the details of the allegation at the time, and that Reade told a second friend about it in 2008.
But three former Biden staff members, who Reade said she reported the incident to, said they have no memory of such conversations, and a complaint that Reade said she filed to the Senate at the time has not been found. And over the weekend, the United States surpassed Italy in the total number of confirmed deaths from the coronavirus — more than 20,000. Meanwhile in Britain, Prime Minister Boris Johnson was released from a London hospital after being treated in an intensive care unit for his infection. Finally.
In Italy, Pope Francis led an Easter Vigil inside an almost empty St. Peter’s Basilica, calling on his followers not to succumb to fear during the pandemic.
Most of America is entering its second month of lockdown this week in an ongoing effort to contain the coronavirus. Still, our reporters are — as safely as they can be — still spread across the country, doing their best to document this unique, and at times scary, moment in our lives. Today, we listen in as they ask people in Pittsburgh, Kansas City, New York and Seattle about their new realities.
Campbell Robertson, John Eligon, Alan Feuer and Mike Baker, reporters for The New York Times.
Campbell Robertson, John Eligon, Alan Feuer and Mike Baker contributed reporting.
“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Stella Tan, Alexandra Leigh Young, Jonathan Wolfe, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges, Luke Vander Ploeg, Adizah Eghan, Kelly Prime, Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, M.J. Davis Lin, Austin Mitchell, Sayre Quevedo, Neena Pathak, Dan Powell, Dave Shaw, Sydney Harper, Daniel Guillemette, Hans Buetow, Robert Jimison, Mike Benoist and Bianca Giaever. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Lauren Jackson, Julia Simon, Mahima Chablani and Nora Keller.