Opinion|Their Calling Was to Lay Hands on the Sick. Then Came the Coronavirus.
How the pandemic transformed the lives and ministry of eight Manhattan friars, and what their example can teach the rest of us.
Ms. Bruenig is an Opinion writer.
He spends the rest of his time making phone calls to residents and their relatives, praying the rosary or stations of the cross on the closed-circuit chapel channel and sometimes sharing poetry, recorded concerts or films. Signs on doors demarcate the rooms of patients suffering from the coronavirus. Father Dyer visits these patients only at a safe distance, clad in the white habit of the Dominican Order and a pale surgical mask. He tries to help residents and the staff maintain hope, even as death has become an increasingly regular occurrence.
A few weeks ago, the apocalypse didn’t feel so near. Before the coronavirus began its sweep through the nation, Father Dyer spent roughly 20 hours a week at the nursing home. He lived in a community of eight Dominican friars at the St. Catherine of Siena religious house, on Manhattan’s Upper East Side. There, the brothers lived much as Dominican friars have since the order’s founding in the 13th century: praying, eating and ministering together.
For this particular community, that ministry has primarily entailed chaplaincy at local hospitals and nursing homes since the 1940s. On any given day, the brothers could expect to offer Mass at on-site chapels, anoint the sick, administer last rites to the dying and pray with patients and their families. Then they would return to their community, where they found peace, solidarity and spiritual sustenance in their brotherhood.
The brothers also made the difficult decision to send three elderly friars away, concerned that they, too, might fall ill living in such proximity with active chaplains. In all, the number of brothers living at the residence is down to four — half of what it was in early March.
The friars no longer gather for communal prayer or meals. Father Wagner used to be a substitute chaplain, making hospital runs when the other friars were occupied. But since medical facilities have vastly restricted entry, his visits have stopped. Father Wagner also celebrated Mass as the pastor of St. Vincent Ferrer and St. Catherine of Siena on Sundays, but with all public Masses in the Archdiocese of New York canceled, he has found himself often alone. He fills his hours with work: live-streaming Mass and prayers on Facebook, recording audio messages to his parishioners, writing letters of encouragement. “It’s been this moment of trying to figure out, How do you live the gospel when you don’t have some of the fundamental means of living it?” he said.
John Devaney, 44, another of the brothers, has continued to venture into the city’s hospitals. Where he had once been able to stand near his patients and lay his hands on their bodies in a final gesture of solace (“Christ always laid his hands on the sick,” he reminded me), coronavirus protocols now require that he adopt gloves, gowns, masks — and usually a great deal of distance.
Yet these sacrifices make up the core of the faith. The Gospel of John recounts that after arising from his tomb, Jesus Christ appeared to Mary Magdalene, who had come to tend to his body. He called to her by name, and recognizing her beloved teacher, she rushed to embrace him. “Do not touch me,” he said. How jarring that must have been to hear, and how painful to refrain — impossible, perhaps, save for the belief, held close in her heart, that the time would soon come to touch him again.
