New York|29 Dead at One Nursing Home From the Virus. Or More. No One Will Say.
State officials, who regulate nursing homes, said the department would provide information about the death toll and the extent of the coronavirus’s spread inside Sapphire and all 613 nursing homes as soon as it was able to validate the data.
Since the first outbreak at a nursing home in Kirkland, Wash., in late February, which killed at least 37 people, nursing homes have proved grimly efficient places for the coronavirus, bringing overworked caregivers in constant contact with frail, older residents.
The work can readily spread disease: When changing a diaper or helping someone into bed, there is no such thing as social distancing.
Factors repeat with deadly regularity: not enough staff, not enough protective equipment and not enough testing, which would enable homes to isolate infected people.
New York State has no minimum staffing requirement for nursing homes, which often means that overstretched workers move from one vulnerable resident to the next, with no time to change into fresh masks and surgical gowns, even if the homes had them.
In New York and New Jersey, funeral directors have been unable to keep up with the death toll at one nursing home after another. Few involved more disturbing circumstances than Andover Subacute and Rehabilitation Center I and II in northern New Jersey, where at least 57 residents and workers have died, 17 of them discovered by the police acting on an anonymous tip.
In Suffolk County, on Long Island, nearly half of all deaths from the coronavirus involved nursing homes or assisted-living facilities.
Families are caught in a vacuum of information, barred from visiting, and nursing homes have a financial incentive to provide only the most benign view of what is happening behind their closed doors.
On Thursday, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, responding to the outcry of families, promised an executive order requiring nursing homes to inform relatives about Covid-19 infections and deaths in the facilities.
He also pledged to release information for each nursing home, “to the best we have,” something the state had previously declined to do.
Mr. Kim, the state assemblyman, said he had a heated exchange with Mr. Enella outside Sapphire on Wednesday afternoon. Mr. Enella, he said, defended the quality of care and told Mr. Kim that there were 29 deaths there, one of the highest totals in the region so far.
On Thursday, State Health Department officials were on the site doing a survey and evaluating conditions at the home, said Michael A.L. Balboni, a former state senator who is a consultant for the Sapphire Care Group.
“Determining the cause of death is never that simple in the middle of a pandemic,” he said.
Workers at the home maintained that the toll at Sapphire was higher than 29 deaths.
This information was not shared with families debating whether to remove their relative from the home.
Berna Lee, the daughter from Rhode Island, said on Thursday that her mother was weakened by a fever and pneumonia, but was hanging on.
“I just want her to get better and I can go home,” Ms. Lee said.
Robin Kim, whose mother was in the home after brain surgery and the onset of dementia, said that in March her mother’s nurses disappeared without explanation. She only later learned they were out sick. Yet on April 6, she said, a Sapphire social worker told her she did not know of any cases in the building.
Ms. Kim stopped asking about the coronavirus for fear of alienating the workers. But it did not save her mother.
Ms.  On her last visit to the home, Ms. Kim saw a haunting image that will stay with her, of three figures wrapped in sheets on a table in a supply room, the air-conditioner turned on high.
Other family members of residents have also struggled to get basic information.
Andy Liao, whose mother, Qun Xiao, has been in the nursing home since 2018, said he used to visit his mother multiple times a week. But after families were barred from visiting, a nurse helped him to video chat with her regularly.
“Are you sure it’s not Covid-19?” he said he asked.
“They don’t know because the patients in that center are not allowed to get tests,” the nurse told him.
Then the nurse fell ill, and Mr. Liao said he did not speak to his mother for days. He made repeated calls to the facility, desperately trying to reach any available nurse.
But the phone just rang and rang. Finally, on April 8, he got through. A social worker helped him video chat with his mother, 84, who was very weak. It was the last time he’d speak to her. His mother died later that evening, he said.
He doesn’t blame the home, but he worries about the patients who are left inside.
“This is completely unacceptable,” Mr. Murphy said.
Medicare and Medicaid officials were also sending surveyors to do a full review of Andover Subacute, New Jersey’s largest nursing facility, the state health commissioner, Judith M. Persichilli, said.
“The back up, and after-hours holiday-weekend issues, plus more than average deaths, contributed to the presence of more deceased than normal in the facility holding room,” he said in a statement.
Pat Wiegand’s brother, Raymond, has lived at Andover for 15 years. She said she had gotten no information about the outbreak from the owner.
But she said she had called regularly and was grateful to the overworked staff members who have updated her on the condition of her brother, who is 70 and developmentally disabled. His roommate, she recently learned, had a fever.
Michael Rothfeld, Jesse McKinley and Jeffrey E. Singer contributed reporting. Susan Beachy and Kitty Bennett contributed research.