Two hopeful moms-to-be set out in search of a sperm donor with African origins and find the pickings slim.
Nikki and I did something often considered too good to be true. We stumbled across each other in a humid, dark, loud nightclub in West Hollywood during the 2014 Los Angeles Pride weekend; it was love at first sight.
Fast forward to 2018, when we got married and bought a house within the same week. But our dream wouldn’t be complete without one more miracle: motherhood. The medical recommendation is that women have children before the age of 35, so we decided that Nikki should carry first since she’s 33 and I’m 28. But like many folks who seek out fertility help, we had no idea how difficult it would be to find the perfect sperm donor, let alone a black donor.
Nikki is an extrovert who works as a global partnership senior manager for a top technology company.  Nikki would describe me as a super creative, solutions-oriented introvert. I’m the person everyone comes to for advice, but I was at a loss when it came to finding a suitable sperm donor for our needs.
Even before we started looking, I was under the impression that there was a limited supply of black donors. Maybe that’s because I don’t know any black donors. Maybe it’s because buying sperm or conceiving a baby in this fashion isn’t considered a “black thing.” As it turns out, I was correct. Though private sperm banks are not required to share the ethnic origins of their donors publicly, as we started our search we found the number of black donors to be vanishingly small.
Below is a conversation between Nikki and me about the start of our journey to motherhood. It has been condensed and edited for clarity.
Nikki: I searched for a gay-friendly sperm bank, because I figured that sperm banks function like most institutions or companies.
B.A.: How do most institutions function? Are you saying that you expected sperm banks to be less prepared to assist customers who weren’t white, straight and married?
Nikki: Yes, potentially. So, I felt like I needed to specify gay-friendly sperm banks. I came across a blog that listed about 10 sperm banks with each bank’s contact information, a little blurb on why to choose that bank and how they accommodated LGBTQAI+ families. The bank we ultimately decided on offered extensive genetic testing and data, and the website had a little rainbow heart confirming their support for families like ours.
B.A.: Yes, that was super important. I remember you showing me that blog. And I was curious about all the other banks listed, too. I wanted to make sure we exhausted all possibilities. So, we clicked on each link. We were both underwhelmed and confused with a lot of the interfaces. Their search functionalities weren’t user-friendly. They didn’t look diverse. But, honestly, the biggest thing for us was that the bank we chose had the most black donors out of all the other banks we looked at in December 2018, with 23 out of 450.
Nikki: And that’s with us doing a regular search for donors of African descent. Not even advanced search.
B.A.: Can you speak to the process of setting up the access plan?
Nikki: There were three different types of plans. We both wanted as much information as possible. So, we paid $300 for the account type that would give us three months of full access. This account type included an audio recording of a 15-minute interview with the donor, the staff’s first impressions, photos, genetic testing, extensive health information on the donor family and a personality/behavioral test.
B.A.: Once we had access to all the donor profiles, we had to get tested for CMV (a common viral infection passed from mother to child during pregnancy that may cause some birth defects, although symptoms are rare) and sickle cell anemia to better refine our search.
Nikki: When I saw the CMV-positive or CMV-negative search options, that’s when I knew getting blood work done was important. So, I got my results back and they came back negative for both sickle cell and CMV. The negative CMV really hurt our donor options. Apparently CMV is a prevalent pathogen and a lot of the general population is positive. So, because I was negative and it was best that I stick with a CMV-negative donor to avoid any issues during pregnancy, our donor number dropped from 23 to four.
B.A.: When we got that negative, I went back to the other donor sites to compare. Maybe those other sites had more black CMV-negative donors. But they didn’t, so we stuck it out with our original choice. I had a surprising reaction: I felt like now we had to settle because we want to be moms more than anything. And honestly, it was all rooted in shallowness. I wasn’t physically attracted to any of the four donors. So, it felt unfair that one of them had to be the donor. I mean, I got to choose you and you’re beautiful.
Nikki: I was disappointed with your disappointment. I was hoping that it wasn’t going to affect our baby journey. But I know you care more about the health of our child.
B.A.: That’s why we went with the donor we chose. He had pristine health compared to the other three options.
Nikki: But still I wanted you to have the best experience possible. And you did care more about the attractiveness of the donor than I did.
B.A.: And that’s my issue in life. I’m very invested in aesthetics and appearances. I’ll own it. I’m shallow. I’m working on it. I need to be clear though, our donor isn’t unattractive. He’s just not my type.
Nikki: And that’s O.K. I get it.
B.A.: Well, this brings me to our black male friends who have offered to donate for free and because they love us, but also because they now understand the limited supply of black sperm. But you were apprehensive while I was so on board for their contribution. Why were you against it?
Nikki: All the men who wanted to donate are friends that we have in our lives. I do not want to co-parent with anyone but you. So even though they’d be signing away their parental rights, I know they could change their minds. I don’t want to have to deal with the emotional turmoil that comes with that. … Plus, we have all this extensive health information (from the sperm bank). That was key here.
B.A.: Yes, and so outside of everything else, the donor we chose was perfect because his entire family tree was healthy.
Nikki: We can’t forget in his interview he said what inspired him to donate was his female friends who wanted black sperm but there was very little to choose from. I’m about intentions, you know that.
Nikki: I wouldn’t be able to provide enough support for our child’s other culture, and that’s not fair.
B.A.: It’s important, too, that we have black children that understand that being just black is beautiful. I know too many people who believe that black by itself isn’t beautiful or enough. That’s simply not true.
Nikki: I agree. We want our future children to love who they are. We’re both black and we want our children to reflect our genetic makeup.
B.A.: Exactly. Which was another issue I had initially because our donor isn’t as dark as me. I love my skin color and yours, and I had hoped our child would look as much like us as possible.
Nikki: Yeah, that makes sense.
B.A.: Anyway, how do you feel about the process overall?
Nikki: It’s all so beautiful, but let’s be real. It cost a pretty penny. On top of the $300 access fee and $1,045 for the specimen, they wanted to charge an additional $300 for priority next-day shipping to our home. We avoided the $300 because we had it shipped to one of their locations and picked it up. But the specimen alone almost cost $1,400.
B.A.: When you add all the frustration of not having enough options, the emotional turmoil, the feeling of settling, on top of the cost, it’s so hard not to carry that into the pregnancy. It’s so important to think about the physicality of your future child throughout the process, to imagine the child’s face, the rhythm of their breath, the curl of their upper lip, from the moment you buy the vial. If you don’t have this sensory evolution of your little being in your head, this entire process can get you down.
Editor’s note: This is the first in a series of articles following B.A. and Nikki’s baby journey. Read the second installment on couples therapy and IUI and the third piece on assisted fertility.
