If you’ve ever wanted to learn more about dance, now is a good time to explore. Here are some places to begin.
Dance is a medium best experienced in person, but it can be inaccessible: You have to show up at a certain place and time, often with an expensive ticket in hand.
One strange benefit to this era of social distancing is that while theaters may be shuttered, the work seen on their stages has become more widely available than ever before. Arts organizations have rushed to set up virtual programming, existing online services have lifted their paywalls and free platforms have expanded their offerings. If you’ve ever wanted to learn more about dance, but geography or cost stood in the way, now is a good time to start.
The proliferation of options can also be overwhelming. Where to begin? Here are some digital spaces, both new and long established, providing free access to high-quality performance videos, illuminating dance documentaries and, in many cases, context for what you’re watching in the form of essays, interviews and conversations. If you like what you see, follow your curiosity; chances are you can find more in the labyrinths of YouTube, Vimeo and Instagram.
Chocolate Factory Theater For years, this small but vital space for experimental dance and theater, in the Long Island City neighborhood of Queens, has been building an under-the-radar Vimeo archive of all that happens there (or most of it). Browse dozens of performances from the past decade — along with helpful “context videos” in which the artists talk about their work — at vimeo.com/chocolatefactory.
Marquee TV With its array of dance, theater and opera on demand, this is the digital place to be for fans of classical and contemporary ballet. A 30-day free trial gives you access to performances by the Royal Ballet, New York City Ballet, Paris Opera Ballet, Bolshoi Ballet, Alonzo King LINES Ballet and other companies from around the world. The selection of dance documentaries is also solid. marquee.tv.
Martha Matinees On Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2:30 p.m. Eastern, the Martha Graham Dance Company invites viewers to tune into its YouTube channel for screenings of all things Graham, including vintage clips of the modern dance matriarch herself. The troupe’s artistic director, Janet Eilber, offers commentary through the live chat feature, joined by special guests. youtube.com/marthagrahamdancecompany.
