Mayor de Blasio cited “promising signs” in the virus fight.
A final step for medical students who are eager to join the fight.
Cathedral of St. John the Divine will serve as a field hospital.
For days, officials in and around New York have sought indications that the coronavirus was nearing a peak, and that the number of cases might start leveling off, in the region, which is the U.S. epicenter of the pandemic.
And for days, the death toll just kept climbing more sharply. In New York State, for instance, it rose by more than 200 in a day, then more by than 400, and then by 630 people.
But on Monday, for the second straight day, officials found reasons for hope, even as hundreds of people continued to die and thousands clung to life on ventilators.
On both Sunday and Monday, fewer than 600 deaths related to the virus were reported in New York: 594 on Sunday and 599 on Monday, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said.
In New Jersey, Gov. Philip D. Murphy reported a similar trend: 71 deaths on Monday and 86 on Sunday, after a three-day streak when deaths broke triple digits.
And in Connecticut, Gov. Ned Lamont on Monday reported a one-day death toll of 17, the lowest since last Wednesday.
Mr. Cuomo said the data suggested that the spread of the virus in New York at least was nearing its apex, but he emphasized that the state remained in a dire, unsustainable state of emergency.
Confirmed cases in the state: 130,689, up from 122,031 in New York.
Hospitalizations in the states: 16,837, up 2 percent from 16,479 on Sunday. It was the third straight day of single-digit percentage growth, after a long period when hospitalizations were growing 20 to 30 percent a day.
Patients in intensive care: 4,504, up 2 percent from 4,376 on Sunday. The day-over-day increase, 128, was the smallest in at least two weeks. Last week, the number of people in intensive care beds, which have ventilators, was growing by more than 300 people a day.
Later in the day, Mr. Cuomo said in an interview on MSNBC that President Trump had approved his request for the U.S.N.S. Comfort, a 1,000-bed Navy hospital ship that arrived in New York last week, to begin treating virus patients. Mr. Murphy said separately that the president had approved the Comfort treating virus patients from New Jersey.
He emphasized that officials needed more evidence before they could draw meaningful conclusions. But he said the shortage of intensive care beds and ventilators the city had been plagued by “appeared to change meaningfully” in the past day, as the state delivered hundreds of ventilators and the number of people who needed them declined.
Among unnamed others.
The vast interior of the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine in Manhattan stood empty on Monday, the thousands of chairs that normally sit beneath its soaring ceiling and stained-glass windows removed to make room for a more grim sight: a coronavirus field hospital.
The cathedral, which describes itself as the largest Gothic cathedral in the world, said on Monday that its 600-foot-long nave and equally large subterranean crypt would be turned into an emergency hospital as part of the fight against the pandemic.
Nine climate-controlled medical tents capable of holding a total of at least 200 patients will be erected inside the cathedral by the end of the week, said the Rt. Rev. Clifton Daniel III, the dean of the cathedral.
The crypt, which is primarily accessible via a series of winding staircases, will be used as “a staging area” for medical personnel, he said. It is the first time the cathedral, which is the seat of the Episcopal Diocese of New York, will have been used for such a task, he said.
The police broke up a Pink Floyd party in New Jersey.
One example of the kind of behavior the governor was criticizing happened Saturday night, when the police in Rumson broke up a loud party of about 30 people, all in their 40s and 50s.
When officers arrived at the house where the party was being held, officials said, they found the homeowner and another man strumming guitars and performing Pink Floyd songs.
Because the gathering violated the state’s social-distancing orders, officials said, the police told those who were there to disperse.
The homeowner, John Maldjian, 54, was charged with reckless endangerment, disorderly conduct and two separate charges related to violating the state’s coronavirus emergency orders, the state attorney general’s office said. Mr. Sheftel was charged with disorderly conduct and violating a borough ordinance by disturbing the peace, the authorities said.
In a statement, Mitchell J. Ansell, a lawyer for Mr. Maldjian, said his clients had planned a concert to be broadcast online via Facebook Live and had decided at the last minute to perform on his front porch.
“He never intended, nor invited, a crowd of people to come watch him play in person,” Mr. Ansell said in a statement.
But neighbors and other people eventually wander over, Mr. Answell said, calling the decision to perform on the porch a “mistake” that Mr. Maldjian regretted.
The party came two weeks after New Jersey enacted a statewide ban on most gatherings in an effort to blunt the virus outbreak. As of Monday, more than 1,000 people had died of the virus in the state.
Nonetheless, the authorities announced that they had arrested several people over the weekend for violating various emergency orders. As least two people besides Mr. Maldjian were arrested in connection with holding parties, officials said.
Domestic workers weigh the risk of working against the risk of not.
Thousands of domestic workers in New York City who clean and cook for well-off families are still working every day. They ride the mostly empty subway and buses to go clean and sustain the homes of people who can afford to self-quarantine.
Some of these workers have lost their jobs when their employers departed to second homes at the beach or upstate, while others grapple with working and risking exposure to the coronavirus, or staying home and falling into a deep financial hole.
“You run a risk each time you step out of your home,” said Luz, 36, an undocumented immigrant from Mexico who works for a family on the Upper East Side with two children.
The nearly half-million undocumented immigrants in New York City report the lowest median annual earnings of any group of working New Yorkers, just over $26,000. They do not qualify for most forms of government assistance, including any of the emergency benefits in the $2 trillion stimulus package that Congress approved last month.
But many cleaners do pay taxes, though not with a Social Security number that would qualify them for one of the $1,200 cash payments included in the aid package.
New York City shuts down dog parks and dog runs.
All dog parks and dog runs in New York City were shut down on Monday for the foreseeable future, the city parks department said, after it received complaints about people not maintaining social distancing at them.
There are dozens of dog runs throughout the city, where dogs are allowed to play with other dogs off leash. Dogs will be still allowed inside parks, but they must be leashed, the department said.
In addition, park officials said that all public tennis courts, handball courts and basketball courts outside playgrounds would be closed. To further discourage their use, tennis nets and basketball rims will be removed later this week.
De Blasio said New York City received 600,000 N95 masks.
New York City received 600,000 N95 masks from the federal government, Mayor Bill de Blasio said Monday, thanking President Trump and Jared Kushner and saying that the city had a “sufficiently secure” supply of the masks for the week.
“This has definitely changed the dynamic for us this week and that’s a very good thing,” the mayor said.
The previous day, the mayor had said that the city was in dire need of medical supplies and only had enough to get through the middle of the week.
The city had 135 ventilators in reserve and needs 1,000 to 1,500 more to get through the week, Mr. de Blasio said on Sunday. On Monday, he reiterated that fact, adding that other medical supplies, such as surgical gowns, were also necessary.
“We continue to focus this week on finding more surgical gowns and of course, on ventilators, to get us through,” he said.
The mayor also repeated that 291 military medical personnel had arrived on Sunday to work in the city’s public hospitals, but that the city still needed more aid.
Mr. de Blasio repeated on Monday that he had asked for 1,450 military medical personnel, and said that he would be speaking to the president about the need for more.
A tiger at the Bronx Zoo has the virus.
“This is the first instance of a tiger being infected with Covid-19,” the federal Agriculture Department said. Although only Nadia was tested, the virus appeared to have infected other animals as well.
“Several lions and tigers at the zoo showed symptoms of respiratory illness,” the department said in a statement.
They include Nadia’s sister, Azul, who was born with her at the zoo in 2016.
Public health officials believe that the tigers caught Covid-19 from a zoo employee. Nadia appeared visibly sick by March 27.
from schools Schools have been given significant discretion in determining the way in which remote lessons are conducted. Some teachers see their students every day or a few times a week for Google Hangouts. Others post assignments online and ask students complete them as their class participation.
An education department spokeswoman said that flexibility allowed teachers who needed to take religious holidays off to replace one type of instruction with another.
A Rikers inmate died of complications from the virus.
Weeks after the coronavirus was first detected in Rikers Island, the first inmate at the jail complex died on Sunday from complications related to the virus, according to two people with knowledge of the matter.
The inmate, a 53-year-old, arrived at Rikers on Feb. 28 and was hospitalized on March 26, according to an official who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of retribution.
The City Department of Correction did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Public officials have moved to release hundreds of inmates in recent weeks in an effort to reduce the spread of the virus behind bars. Public defenders and jail health officials have called for more releases.
“We had day after day of bad weather and folks just didn’t show up,” he said, adding that the Police Department’s priority was to enforce social-distancing rules at essential businesses like supermarkets and pharmacies.
Half in N.Y.C. are worried about being able to afford food, poll finds.
With New York’s economy crippled by the virus, a little more than half of all New Yorkers — and 58 percent of New York City residents — said they were concerned about being able to meet their monthly financial obligations, according to a Siena College poll released Monday.
Forty-one percent of all survey respondents said they were concerned about being able to afford food. In New York City, that figure was 49 percent.
The survey also offered a glimpse into how many people say they are complying with calls to quarantine, self-isolate and social-distance, all efforts intended to reduce the spread of the virus.
Fourteen percent of people surveyed said they were under mandatory quarantine, and 42 percent said they were self-quarantining. Thirty-nine percent said they were not quarantining but were cutting back on going around and also social distancing. In New York City, that number was slightly lower: 35 percent.
Only 4 percent of survey respondents said they were going about life as usual. The poll was conducted March 30 through April 2.
More students are absent from the online version of school.
With the vast majority of the nation’s schools closed and lessons being conducted remotely, more students than ever are missing class — not logging on, not checking in or not completing assignments.
The absentee numbers appear particularly high in schools with large populations of low-income students, whose access to home computers and internet connections can be spotty. Some teachers report that only half of their students are regularly participating.
New York City, the nation’s largest school district, has not yet released data on the number of children participating in online learning. The district said it will officially begin tracking remote attendance on Monday. But students and teachers reported widespread disparities.
Titilayo Aluko, 18, a junior at Landmark High School in Manhattan, has been thwarted by her access to technology. She has a district-issued laptop, but no home Wi-Fi. The cable company removed the router from her family’s Bronx apartment after they had trouble paying the monthly bill.
The cratering attendance in low-income schools is in contrast to reports from several selective or affluent schools, where close to 100 percent of students are participating in online learning. The dramatic split promises to further deepen the typical academic achievement gaps between poor, middle-class and wealthy students.
As the virus spreads, crime plunges across New York.
In New York City, the number of arrests on felony and misdemeanor charges dropped a collective 43.3 percent from March 18 to March 24, compared with the same period in 2019, according to the New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services.
All other regions in the state experienced an even greater decline over the same period: a drop of nearly 69 percent in misdemeanor and felony arrests.
The number of felony arrests specifically dipped 33 percent in New York City and 60 percent in the rest of the state.
Reporting was contributed by Jonah Engel Bromwich, Annie Correal, Kimiko de Freytas-Tamura, Jim Dwyer, Michael Gold, Dana Goldstein, Joseph Goldstein, Matthew Haag, Elizabeth A. Harris, Nikole Hannah-Jones, Andy Newman, Azi Paybarah, Adam Popescu, Jan Ransom, Eliza Shapiro, Ashley Southall, Matt Stevens, and Katie Van Syckle.