The tests, many made in China without F.D.A. approval, are often inaccurate. Some doctors are misusing them. The rollout is nowhere close to the demand.
A law firm in Scottsdale, Ariz., tested employees who hoped, with the prick of a finger, to learn if they might be immune. In Laredo, Texas, community leaders secured 20,000 of the new tests to gauge how many residents had been infected. In Chicago, a hospital screened firefighters to help determine whether they could safely stay on the job.
And even if the tests do improve, their availability could be hampered by the same manufacturing shortages that have prevented the Covid-19 diagnostic tests from scaling up adequately.
“The more testing, the more open the economy,” Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said on Wednesday. He has pushed for the production of antibody tests as a central cog in plans to ease stay-at-home restrictions, saying that New York would eventually screen 100,000 people a day.
In Laredo, officials discovered the tests they received were woefully inadequate. The local health department found them to have a reliability of about 20 percent, far from the 93 to 97 percent the company had claimed. A police investigation led to a federal seizure of the tests.
More than 90 companies have jumped into the market since the F.D.A. eased its rules and allowed antibody tests to be sold without formal federal review or approval.
Some of those companies are start-ups; others have established records. In a federal guidance document on March 16, the F.D.A. required them to validate their results on their own and notify the agency that they had done so.
Their products vary. Some test only for a transient antibody that spikes while the body is in the throes of an active infection. An antibody that peaks about four weeks after infection and typically marks longer-term immunity is a separate target. There are tests that look for both antibodies; others also look for a third involved in respiratory infections.
The most reliable ones involve a laboratory technique called Elisa that can indicate the amount of antibodies a person may have. Researchers are not certain that people who have recovered from Covid-19 have immunity, though it would follow the usual pattern for viral infections. Higher levels of antibodies generally mean a stronger physiological response, but it is unclear what levels are needed for immunity to the new coronavirus — or how long it might last.
For example, Britain recently said the millions of rapid tests it had ordered from China were not sensitive enough to detect antibodies except in people who were severely ill. In Spain, the testing push turned into a fiasco last month after the initial batch of kits it received had an accuracy of 30 percent, rather than the advertised 80 percent. In Italy, local officials have begun testing even before national authorities have validated the tests.
Germany, which has emerged as a model among Western democracies in its efforts to curb the spread of the virus, is pursuing one of the most ambitious antibody studies, striving to test its entire population. It is a leader in the technology, has made its own antibody tests and conducted extensive diagnostic screening from the beginning.
This month, the F.D.A. warned that some firms marketing their antibody tests in the United States were falsely claiming that they had formal federal approval, or that they could diagnose Covid-19.
In an effort to speed up access, the F.D.A. apparently did not fully consider how these tests would be administered. The agency released a guidance document saying that antibody tests could be performed at “point-of-care” settings, indicating that doctors, nurses and others could give them to patients in their offices. But agency officials also acknowledged that under federal law, if a test has not been authorized by the agency, it must be conducted in so-called high-complexity laboratories, like some large commercial facilities or public health labs. The officials decline to provide additional clarification.
“If you are getting an antibody test and it’s being conducted in your physician’s office, it’s a red flag,” said Kelly Wroblewski, director of the infectious disease programs for the Association of Public Health Laboratories.
The F.D.A. has received requests for emergency-use authorization from 120 antibody-testing developers. So far it has granted formal approval to just four: Cellex, Ortho Clinical Diagnostics, Chembio Diagnostic Systems and the Mount Sinai Laboratory.
Eurofins, a network of clinical labs, is working with its subsidiary Boston Heart Diagnostics to test employees at 100 hospitals, including the V.A. New England Healthcare System, which serves about 265,000 patients a year. In Michigan, Beaumont Health is offering voluntary testing to its 38,000 employees and thousands of affiliates.
Dr. Ida Bergstrom, based in Washington, described the rapid tests as only “one tool” in the arsenal against the virus. Dr. Syed Ashraf advises patients in Northern Virginia that positive results, while not “a free license to run around and do whatever you feel like,” can help clear someone to move forward.
Some smaller businesses, though, have pursued the new tests. At John Christner Trucking, a food transportation company near Tulsa, Okla., about 220 workers took rapid tests. They were concerned about exposure after two were infected with the virus. A small number came back positive, said Danny Christner, the chief executive. “I knew it wasn’t a silver bullet, but it was some information that people could be aware of,” he said.
The Chicago Public Health Department bought 5,500 rapid tests and put them to use in homeless shelters as a supplement to diagnostic testing. Those who were positive for the early antibodies were placed in hotel rooms rented by the city during the 48 hours it took to get diagnostic test results back, said Dr. Allison Arwady, commissioner of the department. The next step may be testing people in nursing homes, she said.
Sports leagues are also considering how antibody tests can figure into their plans. The N.B.A., with its season paused, has been approached about purchasing tests and is awaiting guidance from public health officials.
Major League Baseball employees and players will be tested as part of a 10,000-person nationwide study run by outside researchers to better understand the scale of infection. A players’ union official said the testing was voluntary and not connected to beginning the season.
Less than 5 percent of the U.S. population may be infected, and even in hot zones like New York or New Orleans, the prevalence may not be higher than 10 to 15 percent, according to Dr. Osterholm. In China, early screening in hard-hit Wuhan indicates that only about 3 percent of the population has antibodies against the new coronavirus.
When the proportion of people exposed is that low, the tests’ false positive rate — signaling antibodies where there are none — can limit the tests’ utility.
Even Cellex’s F.D.A.-authorized test has a false positive rate of about 5 percent. That is still a significant margin of error: In a community where 5 percent of people have had the virus, Dr. Osterholm said, there would be as many false positives as true ones.
Some tests on the market without federal approval are likely to have even higher false positive rates. It is unclear how these companies have validated their tests or how they stack up against one another.
Researchers at the National Institutes of Health are validating some of the tests in cooperation with the F.D.A. A Danish group published a small analysis of nine tests and found, as might be expected, that some performed better than others. A research group backed by the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative is working to assess all available tests using the same set of samples for each, with early results expected next week.
“There’s an urgent need to know which of these tests we can rely on — I think the only way we can know is head-to-head testing,” said Dr. Alexander Marson, one of the leaders of the project and a microbiologist at the University of California, San Francisco.
President Trump has said that once the federal government has finished validating the antibody tests, manufacturing will swiftly meet demand. But that may not be realistic.
Most companies are buying rapid tests from China, though they are unsure if and when they will become available. Early on, Chinese businesses could sell their products freely, but now, Chinese officials have signaled that only antibody tests approved by the country’s government can be exported. So far, China’s National Medical Products Administration has authorized only 11.
A start-up in Los Angeles, Scanwell Health, expected to receive a million tests each week from Innovita, one of the 11 companies. But it is still waiting for its first shipment of 10,000, which was scheduled to arrive three weeks ago.
Reporting was contributed by Emma Bubola, Kate Conger, Sopan Deb, Hana de Goeij, Ellen Gabler, Constant Méheut, Raphael Minder, Alexandra Stevenson, James Wagner and Karen Weise.