The Upshot|How Will We Know When It’s Time to Reopen the Nation?
Experts offer four benchmarks that can serve as a guide for cities and states, eliminating some of the guesswork.
Everyone wants to know when we are going to be able to leave our homes and reopen the United States. That’s the wrong way to frame it.
Any date that is currently being thrown around is just a guess. It’s pulled out of the air.
To this point, Americans have been reacting, often too late, and rarely with data. Most of us are engaging in social distancing because leaders have seen what’s happening in Europe or in New York; they want to avoid getting there; and we don’t have the testing available to know where coronavirus hot spots really are.
Since the virus appears to be everywhere, we have to shut everything down. That’s unlikely to be the way we’ll exit, though.
Some cities or states will recover sooner than others. It’s helpful to have criteria by which cities or states could determine they’re ready. A recent American Enterprise Institute report by Scott Gottlieb, Caitlin Rivers, Mark B. McClellan, Lauren Silvis and Crystal Watson staked out some goal posts.
Hospitals in the state must be able to safely treat all patients requiring hospitalization, without resorting to crisis standards of care.
Other cities and states fear that they will approach New York City’s state of crisis. They’re trying to increase the number of available beds and ventilators — as well as doctors, nurses and other health care providers — to make sure they aren’t overwhelmed in their capacity to provide care to all those who need it.
This is the most immediate bar, and the focus of most public health officials’ attention. At the moment, there’s no reason to believe any area is over a surge of cases, and analysts’ models predict many places won’t peak for weeks to come.
A state needs to be able to at least test everyone who has symptoms.
Dr. Gottlieb and colleagues estimate that the nation would need to have the capacity to run 750,000 tests a week — this is after things have calmed down greatly. There are times we might need even more.
A national estimate means less in deciding whether a state can reopen than its local capabilities. A state would need to be sure it could test every single person who might be infected, and have the results in a timely manner. That would be the only way to achieve the next requirement.
The state is able to conduct monitoring of confirmed cases and contacts.
A robust system of contact tracing and isolation is the only thing that can prevent an outbreak and a resulting lockdown from recurring. Every time an individual tests positive, the public health infrastructure needs to be able to determine whom that person has been in close contact with, find those people, and have them go into isolation or quarantine until it’s established they aren’t infected, too.
This will be a big challenge for most areas. Other countries have relied on cellphone tracking technology to determine whom people have been near. We don’t have anything like that ready, nor is it even clear we’d allow it. The United States also doesn’t have enough people working in public health in many areas to carry out this task.
There must be a sustained reduction in cases for at least 14 days.
It would also prevent us from offering false hope about when America can start reopening. Instead of guesses, people could have clear answers about when they might be able to go back to a closer-to-normal way of life.
