Virtual sessions offer the intimacy — and comedy — of seeing patients and therapists in their personal environments.
Ms. Gottlieb is a psychotherapist.
Every day since the onset of the coronavirus outbreak, friends and family have been checking in on me — and not just in the general way that we all seem to be checking in on the people we love. They worry that the kind of work I do might make me sick — emotionally, that is.
As a psychotherapist, I’m on the front lines of the mental health fallout from Covid-19, and those who care about me imagine that I’m being exposed to a toxic daily dose of devastating stories of anxiety and loss of every conceivable kind — loss of loved ones, loss of health, loss of jobs, loss of stability, loss of physical presence, loss of touch, loss of daily routines, loss of weddings and graduations and holiday gatherings, and loss of even the ability to smile at neighbors while walking around the block (with our mouths now covered by masks).
In some ways, the losses can be boiled down to this: loss of everything that makes us feel human.
This may not be the image people have of therapy sessions during a pandemic, but the truth is that my patients and I have been laughing regularly, freely and with abandon.
It wasn’t always this way. Last month, when I stopped seeing patients in my office and began conducting virtual sessions from my home, I thought it would seem inappropriate to laugh at something that ordinarily might be funny — like the screen suddenly freezing at an inopportune moment — so I suppressed it, only to learn later that my patients had been holding back their laughter too. We worried that laughing amid so much suffering would seem insensitive.
But then the toilet thing happened.
My patients sheltering at home have had to find a place for their therapy sessions where nobody else can hear them. Sometimes they find privacy in a bedroom or a closet or a car, but often it’s in a bathroom, with my patient sitting on a toilet seat while we speak.
One day, as a patient was crying, feeling terrified and helpless after talking to her mother in a nursing home thousands of miles away where another resident had contracted the virus, she leaned back and accidentally hit the lever that flushes the toilet. Suddenly, her sobs were drowned out by a loud whooshing sound.
Her face turned red. “Am I the only one who Skypes with you from the toilet?” she asked, mortified.
I instantly regretted the joke — she had just been crying about a potential threat to her mother’s health. But instead of being offended, she burst out laughing. When it was time to sign off, she told me that although she appreciated my guidance during the call, laughing had made her feel better than anything I or anyone else had said to comfort her. It had been more than a month since she had laughed, she realized, and she hadn’t noticed how much she missed it. Laughing felt like a return to her former self and also offered a glimpse of herself in a happier future.
I know, of course, about the therapeutic benefits of laughter. Her comment called to mind another patient I once treated who had cancer. This patient told me that she felt frustrated when people were so careful around her, afraid to make jokes or laugh about the small stuff for fear of minimizing the gravity of her condition. They assumed that joy and pain were mutually exclusive, and they didn’t want her to think that they had forgotten about her cancer and all that came with it — anxiety, uncertainty, sadness.
“I need some normalcy to sit alongside the anxiety and uncertainty,” she told them. And as my patients and I are now seeing firsthand, so do the rest of us.
And yet in this unusual moment, virtual sessions also offer the intimacy — and comedy — of seeing patients and therapists in their personal environments. For the first time, I get to see unfiltered interactions with their spouses or children or roommates or dogs if they happen to barge in (and inevitably, they do), instead of just hearing stories about them in my office.
“And so are you,” she said, indicating the unmade bed behind me. We laughed and laughed.
And that’s a good thing. Because while we’re so focused on protecting our physical immune systems, we shouldn’t forget to protect our psychological immune systems as well.
The other day, another patient on another toilet seat quipped between her tears: “At least the tissues are already here!” When cats crawl across screens during sessions, or someone puts on a button-down shirt at the appointed time but doesn’t realize that I can also see his flannel pajama bottoms, we laugh at these moments because our chuckles and chortles and giggles and howls encapsulate what we’re feeling when words fail us: While so much has changed, deep down we are still essentially the same.
We may have lost so much of what makes us feel human, but we haven’t lost it all.
