The pandemic is inspiring a rabbi to appreciate the Jewish practice of Shabbat in new ways.
Rabbi Olitzky is a senior rabbi of Beth El Synagogue in St. Louis Park, Minn.
Two Saturdays ago was the first time I used my computer on Shabbat in over 20 years. I was leading and participating in my congregation’s Zoom Minyan — our Cyber Shul.
Had you asked me a year ago whether logging on to my computer and participating in Saturday morning’s service would be breaking Shabbat, I would have answered, “yes.” But I found that doing so not only enhanced my Shabbat; it made my Shabbat.
I still wore a tie, feeling even more compelled to wear “bigdei Shabbat” (clothing special for Shabbat). I donned my Tallit and away we prayed.
A majority of those participating were from here in Minnesota, but we heard “amens” and harmonies from California, North Carolina, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Florida, Maryland, Washington, D.C., and even as far away as Chile.
Seeing the smiles on the faces of children recognizing their classmates, seniors miraculously experiencing companionship in their solo-occupied homes, newly bereaved choking up at the opportunity to pray and mourn with community — it all brought tears to my eyes.
I was raised in a home that observed the Sabbath. I carried that practice into adulthood and professional life, including 15 years as a Conservative rabbi. Shabbat is about leaving the week behind — the toils, the trials, the anxiety, the heartbreak — all of it.
Once Shabbat sets in, everything is on pause. My shoulders relax, my breathing changes, and I enter into what I hope is a restorative period. That is the charge of Shabbat: the rest of the week is about creation, but Shabbat is about ceasing from creating. If we are in a perpetual creating mode, we burn out, the world burns out. Shabbat is the reset.
Further, the Torah charges us to rest because God rested. For us to suggest that we don’t need to disconnect and rest, especially when God did, is to suggest that we are more capable and able than God. There may not be a greater subtle display of arrogance than to suggest that we have a far superior stamina than the Divine.
To truly experience the restorative force of Shabbat, one needs this pausing to happen within community. Shabbat may be the gift God keeps in store for Israel, as described by the Talmud, but the way to truly delight in it is with other people.
Before the coronavirus pandemic, community on Shabbat centered around synagogue. Some people have relationships that exist only within the walls of their synagogue. Friends, for decades, sitting near or next to each other — because of Shabbat at synagogue.
The pandemic took that physical community away from us. But because of technology — once a distractor and now a savior — we are able to immerse in community despite our physical isolation.
Yes, there are traditional Jewish legal challenges about using a computer on the Sabbath. Many rabbis have written about this over the past several decades in support and against logging on. But the absence of community takes a person down a path of despair. It can lead to life-threatening depression. Building and engaging in community saves lives — and violating the Sabbath has always been acceptable in the name of saving a life, even if the danger was not imminent.
The pandemic has cut many of us off from our communities, and so we’ve forged new paths to connect. This is a good thing. And it extends beyond the Sabbath. Families will be joining together virtually for Seder on Passover — iPads and laptops, intentionally and strategically placed around the table. We will each be able to very obviously answer the question of how different this night is from all other nights (and years). The memorial service on the last day of Passover will be broadcast from each community into nursing homes and private residences alike. The smell of Pop-Pop’s matzo brei may not waft through the screen, but the smiles and laughter of the great-grandchildren as they connect over FaceTime may indeed be as soothing.
We will eventually keep this virus at bay and return to our “normal” daily life. But that normal really is no longer. We will be changed and the world will be changed.
We as a synagogue will have reached people we’ve never reached before. The collective world is finally realizing that this is the type of outreach and engagement we should have been doing all along. Meeting people where they are, bringing light into their dark corners — that is how you change and build a world.
Rabbi Avi S. Olitzky is a senior rabbi of Beth El Synagogue in St. Louis Park, Minn.