But in the past month, as the coronavirus pandemic made her housebound, Ms. Smith, a writer in Los Angeles, began shopping — and eating — completely differently.
Many large food businesses like the Campbell Soup Company, which had seen steady declines in soup sales the last two years, are now ramping up production and temporarily increasing wages for hourly employees to meet the higher demand. In the last month, sales of Campbell’s soup soared 59 percent from a year earlier. Prego pasta sauce increased 52 percent, and sales of its Pepperidge Farm Goldfish crackers climbed nearly 23 percent.
Similarly, Kraft Heinz, whose products had fallen far out of favor with consumers, resulting in massive write-downs in the values of its Kraft natural cheese and Oscar Mayer cold cuts businesses a year ago, told investors last week that some of its factories were working three shifts to meet high demand for products like its macaroni and cheese. The company’s stock rose on Tuesday after it said first-quarter sales would be up 3 percent.
And Conagra Brands, which had reported a decline of more than 5 percent in net sales for the quarter ending Feb. 23, said its shipments to retailers and in-store sales in March had grown 50 percent as demand increased for Slim Jim jerky snacks, Birds Eye frozen vegetables and Chef Boyardee pastas.
Much of the early panic buying that cleared out stores of rice, cans of tuna and soup, and beans was rooted in a combination of fear and practicality. Shoppers, uncertain of when they would be able to return to grocery stores and whether they would find any food restocked, bought foods that could sit on their shelves for months.
Executives at General Mills said they had worked diligently to improve the nutrition level and taste of many products. “Right now, we have people trying the products they haven’t had for a while, and we hope they’re surprised and find that they’re delicious and that we have them come back,” said Jon Nudi, who leads the company’s North American retail operations.
General Mills has seen across-the-board increases in its various product lines in the last four weeks, from Yoplait yogurt to Cheerios cereal to Progresso Soup and even baking products like Gold Medal flour and Bisquick as consumers confined to their homes fill the endless hours by trying new recipes or even baking bread.
