The Croatian writer Robert Perisic goes out of his way not to tell us where his novel “No-Signal Area” is set, but it is clearly one of the former Yugoslav republics, about 15 years after the wars that broke them up in the 1990s. There’s nothing vague about his characters, however, and nothing indefinite about their stories.
Two cousins, Oleg and Nikola, arrive in “the town of N., in the middle of Nowheresville,” from another Yugoslav republic, hoping to restart a turbine factory that was shuttered during the war. The equipment in the factory doesn’t work, but it houses the remnants of two long-obsolete turbines sought by a certain North African dictator known as the Colonel. Hamstrung by international sanctions, the Colonel’s country needs the machines to run its power plants — which date back to the 1980s, when “nonaligned” Yugoslavia was an ally — and is offering big money for a pair. Oleg, a former arms smuggler, hires the factory’s former workers to rebuild the turbines, not telling them whom they’re for.
N. throbs with unemployment and alienation, as do many provincial towns and villages in the former Yugoslavia — not to mention nonurban, noncosmopolitan places all over the world, whether formerly socialist or not. The cell reception is spotty, the local government barely functions, and to reach the town visitors usually have to cross some freshly drawn border. The rehired factory workers drink at a lugubrious, wildly misnamed bar, the Blue Lagoon, where a framed, yellowed poster of Brooke Shields from the 1980 movie hangs on the wall.
The cousins’ simple scheme, justified as an example of “textbook globalization,” soon draws the attention of local gangsters. N.’s lovers and estranged families also find themselves involved. Before they can produce a single kilowatt, the turbines will generate tragedy and loss, comedy and mayhem, and, unexpectedly, musings on the commodification of art.
Under the leadership of a former engineer named Subotka, whom the cousins first consider “an old-school loser,” the workers throw themselves into their jobs. Their bosses have told them to rebuild the turbines as they think best, in a gesture toward the Yugoslav system of worker self-management, but really because the shady entrepreneurs are clueless about the machinery. The workers start to act as if they own the plant. They don’t realize the cousins will close the factory after they ship the turbines.
Ellen Elias-Bursac, translating from the Croatian, renders distinctively the many voices of “No-Signal Area,” which moves from character to character often without identifying who’s speaking. Few conform to type. The cousins are touched by conscience. An ex-militiaman on the run, hiding in a room at his mother’s, is transformed by the handful of books he finds there, including works by Shakespeare and Engels. Some of the workers try to reassemble their families; especially moving are Subotka’s attempts to reconnect with his grown daughters abroad. The polyphonic storytelling enriches this amply populated novel, whose ambitions extend well beyond the Balkans.
The same may be said when nations break up. In Perisic’s poignant telling, the erasure of Yugoslavia and its socialist experiment continues to haunt its people, exes now adrift in a postwar vacancy. This void may be familiar to any reader who no longer feels connection to the divided, damaged nation he or she inhabits.