A xenobot, derived from the skin cells of frog embryos, at an early stage of development in the laboratory.
A xenobot, derived from the skin cells of frog embryos, at an early stage of development in the laboratory.Credit...
A swarm of computer-designed organisms couple together.
Xenobots are new but not without precedent. Part of their inspiration dates to 1994, when Karl Sims, the computer graphics artist, unveiled some of the world’s first virtual creatures.
Each entered existence in a simulation that approximated real-world physics. Each had a simple task to perform, like battling with another digital creature for control of a cube. And they could evolve over time. Better still, Mr. Sims shared a video.
“I saw that, and I knew that’s what I wanted to work on,” said Sam Kriegman, a graduate student who now uses similar virtual simulations to design robots at the University of Vermont, with his adviser, Joshua Bongard.
Most modern A.I. research focuses on simulated minds inspired by organic brains: neural networks that can beat any human at strategy games, or algorithms that can control pre-designed, occasionally terrifying robot bodies. But a smaller community of researchers, including Mr. Kriegman and Dr. Bongard, let their simulated robots evolve simple bodies and minds in tandem.
Of course, Mr. Sims’ creatures never left their virtual homes. “There was one TV channel that built one just to demonstrate,” he said. But that model was just a blocky replica, not a moving robot.
In 2000, virtual creatures took a halting first step into the real world when Dr. Lipson, then at Brandeis, and his colleague Jordan Pollack, a roboticist, connected an algorithm that could evolve its own simple machines to a 3-D printer that could make the machines out of plastic.
Still, Mr. Kriegman and Dr. Bongard doubted that some of their own designs could ever emerge out of a computer. Then they started working on a project for DARPA, the futuristic research wing of the U.S. Department of Defense, with Dr. Blackiston and Michael Levin, a biologist who directs the Allen Discovery Center at Tufts.
In one Skype call between groups, Mr. Kriegman showed a video of one of his virtual creatures. It looked like a squat table and walked by rocking between its front and back legs.
These organisms can automatically heal themselves after a large mechanical laceration.
Dr. Blackiston got to work. He began with fertilized frog eggs, then pried them open and gathered skin cells from the embryo inside each one. Developmentally, these cells were fated to sit on the surface of a tadpole and ward off pathogens; now they would do something else.
Next, Dr. Blackiston swept the skin cells into a little well, forming a milky ball. Soon the cells glued themselves back together. Then he cauterized away some parts of the ball, carving a tiny figurine — a living skin-sculpture, about the size of a fine grain of salt, that looked like Mr. Kriegman’s quadruped. Two weeks later, he showed a picture of the entity to the Vermont computer scientists.
In Vermont, he and Mr. Kriegman began crafting virtual worlds that would reward particular behaviors by the clumps of repurposed frog. Take walking: First an algorithm produced many random body designs; some just sat there, others rocked or waddled forward. Then the algorithm let the best of the walkers procreate into the next generation; from these, another generation was produced, and so on, each one improving on the best designs. Another simulation, aimed at finding designs that could carry an object, became crowded with bagel-like bodies that had evolved a central cavity to hold things.
After the process ran for about a day, it produced body shapes preprogrammed to execute the initial tasks. Then the Vermont team relayed the resulting best body shapes to Dr. Levin and Dr. Blackiston, who began trying to sculpt cellular figurines that resembled those designs: first with just skin cells, then also with cardiac tissue — an assemblage of muscle cells that contracts and expands. The Tufts team offered feedback, to make the next round of simulations better at predicting what would happen in a real petri dish. And so on, in a loop.
In their paper and in press coverage, the team hinted at what these xenobots might someday do. Sweep up ocean microplastics into a larger, collectible ball? Deliver drugs to a specific tumor? Scrape plaque from the walls of our arteries? The xenobots would biodegrade after using up the yolk inside their cells. And whatever their intended purpose, their bodies would be designed not by an engineer but by a simulacrum of real evolution built to encourage the right behavior in the target environment.
Traces carved by a swarm of these organisms as they move through a field of particulate matter.
None of the researchers wanted to forecast when such applications might come to pass. Dr. Blackiston can try out as many as 50 computer-suggested designs in a week, but is considering how the process might be automated with 3-D cell printers.
Dr. Levin stresses that he regularly consults with an ethicist at Harvard’s Wyss Institute, and points out that research using animals like frogs — or their embryos — already falls under ethical oversight. At the moment, other living, adaptive systems like treatment-resistant bacteria are more advanced and dangerous than xenobots. “To be worried about xenobots, in a world where we already have both natural and human-designed pathogens, is just nuts,” he said.
The team’s published paper is only the first entry in a series of studies. Future work will explore how these organisms behave with computer designs and as unsculpted balls of cells.
