NYT Parenting sent out a call for delightful children’s programming, and you answered.
This article was originally published on June 25, 2019 on NYT Parenting.
Children’s television can be nearly unwatchable for adults: screeching neon cartoons, inane earworms and nonsensical story lines that you’re stuck “co-viewing” with your kids. There are some bright spots in the chaos, though. NYT Parenting lead editor Jessica Grose wrote about the shows she actually likes watching with her daughters: “Booba” and “Puffin Rock” were among the highlights. She asked readers to share the shows they enjoy watching with their kids, and how they keep their little ones away from too much seductive screen time.
“The Octonauts.” After watching “The Octonauts,” Philadelphian Eleni Belisonzi’s 3-year-old son started to rattle off facts. “Whales eat kelp,” he would say. “Narwhals have a long nose to break ice.” The show features a crew of animals — a valiant polar bear named Captain Barnacles, a thrill-seeking kitten who dons an eye patch and a penguin who’s somehow the medical officer of the bunch — who scout out the seas. The suspense of each episode enthralls her son, and Eleni likes that he’ll discuss a plot for days after watching one.
“Bluey.” This Australian animated series was, by far, the most popular reader submission. Rachael Antony, from Melbourne, looks forward to watching the main character, a 6-year-old Blue Heeler dog who adventures with her family on a tropical island, zip across the screen. “It’s funny, poignant, unexpected and very real,” she said. Audrey Jacometti, who watches the show with her 3-year-old, said the series is “charming, smart, and an entirely tolerable watch for adults.” For Tim Fisher, whose 4-year-old daughter “cackles away” at the cartoon, the seven-minute episodes hit close to home. “In all honesty, the father in the program is the dad I try to be,” he said.
Where to find it: The show isn’t out in America yet, but fear not — it just snagged a deal with Disney.
“Let’s Go Luna”: A glowing cartoon moon traverses the world in “Let’s Go Luna,” leading an international band of animals — a wombat, butterfly and frog — through different cities and cultures. Parents wrote in to praise the show, saying it pushes back against gender stereotypes and centers itself around diversity. Plus, the art is incredible.
“Tumble Leaf.” This stop-motion series follows a blue fox named Fig, who whizzes around a whimsical world, trying to figure it all out. “The message of the show: Get out and play!” said Jessica Monge Coria. “Tumble Leaf” had “a better end-game than the last season of ‘Game of Thrones,’ ” said Emily Merriweather from Houston, who teared up watching the show’s season finale with her 2-year-old and 1-year-old.
Calculations around TV time can get trickier when you’re a self-described “major lover” of TV, like Nick Bjork of Portland, Ore. He tries to calibrate the right amount of “Daniel Tiger’s Neighborhood” and “Puppy Dog Pals” for his 2-year-old daughter — and when she looks especially “zombie’d” by a show, he said, they immediately grab their shoes and head to the garden or a park.