Be prepared and avoid a wild scramble when a sudden illness or accident strikes.
Last August, I was invited to do a weeklong artist’s residency in Peak’s Island, a tiny island off Portland, Maine. I brought along my husband, Tom, daughter Sylvie, and 12-year-old nephew, Gray, who were all happy to bike through the piney woods and inspect tide pools while I worked on a children’s book.
On the second morning of our Maine idyll, Tom complained of stomach pains. Hours later, the pain hadn’t subsided. I called a local nurse, who ordered me to take him to the hospital immediately. I threw together a bag of clothes as both children trailed me, fearfully asking questions. My daughter burst into hysterical tears.
Tom, we soon learned, had appendicitis. Being far from our Brooklyn home, I had nowhere to park the kids — so for the next 36 hours before and after Tom’s emergency surgery, I pasted a jack-o’-lantern grin on my face and attempted to keep my nephew’s and daughter’s spirits up.
The kids’ ‘fun’ began with the water taxi I had to hire to rush us to the mainland. “Kids, we’re taking a speedboat!” I announced, clapping like Auntie Mame. It wasn’t technically true, but they cheered.
After Tom’s operation, I thought it would be good for the children to visit him and see that all was well. This was a mistake. When my daughter saw her normally hale father looking frail and bristling with tubes, she bolted from the room. Once I had calmed her down, I told the kids they could pick any restaurant in the city for dinner and order whatever they wanted. That night, they slept with me.
In retrospect, we were lucky. Harrowing stories abound of parents facing a medical emergency and — if they’re lucid — scrambling to stash their kids somewhere, anywhere.
Fortunately, a neighbor saw Solis getting into her car, retrieved her daughter and brought the child to the hospital, just as Solis arrived, asked the first stranger to help her and fainted behind the wheel.
Child care options offered by hospitals vary; a press officer at the American Hospital Association said there was no industrywide policy. Many hospitals have in-house social workers that can help; two of the few that offer on-site emergency child care for patients are Massachusetts General Hospital and Brigham and Women’s Hospital, both in Boston, but the child care is only available during business hours.
Then create a document to share with your emergency contacts, with important details about your child’s medical history, insurance information and pediatrician’s contact details in case she needs medical care while you’re unwell.
If your contacts aren’t reachable, several national babysitting chains, such as Nanny Poppinz, offer emergency sitting services. “We’re truly 24 /7,” says the company president and owner, Susan McCloskey. “Because child care emergencies don’t happen Monday through Friday 9 to 5, do they? They happen when you’re on vacation in Miami.” McCloskey said she can typically get a screened, CPR-trained nanny to a family within a half an hour to an hour. “We’ve had nannies pick up children at the hospital and get them settled at home,” she said.
If — like me — you must bring children to the hospital, let them know what’s going on, said McCoy. Keep your words brief, modulate your voice and follow their lead.
If you bring your child to visit a parent in a hospital room, said Dr. Cesares, explain ahead of time what he’s likely to see. “Plan on keeping the visit short the first time around in case he becomes more overwhelmed than you originally anticipated,” Dr. Cesares said.
Finally, said McCoy, use technology such as FaceTime or Skype to keep in touch with other family members. “Your child will likely feel more relaxed if they have someone special to talk to while at the hospital,” she said. I put my daughter and nephew in charge of regularly updating my parents, which made them feel important.
