From Tiger Moms to helicopter parents, no child-rearing style escaped scrutiny.
According to the self-help book aisle, among the things French women don’t do are: get fat, get face-lifts, and — according to Pamela Druckerman’s “Bringing Up Bébé” — coddle their kids. An American former newspaper reporter living with her husband and children in Paris, Druckerman translated the French way of parenting for a United States audience, to groans and oui-ouis alike. “The French exert their authority by declaring, ‘C’est moi qui décide’ (‘It’s I who decide’). The result of raising children French style, Druckerman writes, is ‘a fully functioning society of good little sleepers, gourmet eaters and reasonably relaxed parents,’” read a Times review. The book served up an alternate approach to what was seen as weak and ineffectual American parenting, and boy did it hit a nerve. “When Ms. Druckerman has trouble being firm with her children, parents in all 50 states are indicted,” Susannah Meadows wrote in The Times.
Emily Oster’s rebellion against conventional pregnancy wisdom, “Expecting Better” takes exception to many of the rules doctors and their patients take for granted. Maybe sipping a glass of wine in the second trimester isn’t such a sin, Oster, a health economist and professor, posited. And, she asked, is there any solid evidence that bed rest for at-risk pregnancies is safe or effective? Oster shook up the conversation around pregnancy norms and rattled obstetricians — suggesting their patients be better-informed advocates for themselves and their babies. “Throughout ‘Expecting Better,’ Dr. Oster paints a fairly antagonistic picture of the doctor-patient relationship, castigating what she views as the restriction of women’s freedom,” Catherine Saint Louis wrote for The Times’s Well blog.
In “All Joy and No Fun,” Jennifer Senior, now an Op-Ed columnist for The Times, looked at shifting dynamics in parent-child relationships that sent kids “from being our employees to our bosses” over the past several decades. “Every debate we have had about the role of parents — whether they should be laissez-faire or interventionist ‘Tiger Moms,’ attachment-oriented or partial to the rigors of tough love — can be traced back to the paring down of mothers’ and fathers’ traditional roles,” Senior argued. She gathered examples from interviews with middle-class families about how parents relate to their kids on a psychosocial level and found that parents have come to derive their happiness in relationship to their kids. “Social science is especially inadequate to describe the nature of this particular joy, but Senior deploys a novelist’s sensibility in giving evidence of that privileged euphoria, insisting that it is not merely coincident with all the tedious things parents must do, but actually an outgrowth of them,” Andrew Solomon wrote in a Times review.
“How to Raise an Adult” is one in a series of books from the last decade that sought to redirect the energy of hyper-involved parents into a healthier and more relaxed dynamic for both parent and child. Julie Lythcott-Haims, the former dean of freshmen and undergraduate advising at Stanford, had a front-row seat to the fallout from parents hovering, hectoring and still failing to teach their children how to live successfully on their own or even be accepted into college on their own merits — seeming to foretell the turn-of-the-decade college admissions scandal. “Like so many others in the jittery child-rearing mob, Julie Lythcott-Haims has identified overparenting as a trap. But once you escape the trap, the goal remains the same: to mold your offspring into thriving adults,” Heather Havrilesky wrote for The Times.
Another in the “how to help your kids succeed in life without really trying too hard” category, Paul Tough’s “How Children Succeed” looks at the role of hardship in forming resilience and much-discussed grit among children. The aptly named Tough assigns more importance to character than to I.Q. in the formula that makes a successful person — a viewpoint in opposition to the modern parenting focus on academic success and insulating children from struggle. In consulting the work of psychologists and neuroscientists, and offering up case studies of children from various income levels, Tough made the case for standing back and occasionally letting kids puzzle out their own problems. The gist: “Character is created by encountering and overcoming failure. In this absorbing and important book, Tough explains why American children from both ends of the socioeconomic spectrum are missing out on these essential experiences,” Annie Murphy Paul wrote in a review for The Times.
In “Women’s Work,” the journalist Megan K. Stack mapped the complicated dance that allows many upwardly mobile moms to continue to thrive in their careers while daring to have it all — “it” being a family that isn’t starving to death and drowning in dirty laundry. “Memoirs about motherhood are exceedingly common, but ‘Women’s Work’ dares to explore the labor arrangements that often make such books possible,” Jennifer Szalai wrote in a Times review. Stack credits the often low-income brown women who must leave their own families to cater to families like hers — and she and her husband don’t come out smelling like fresh laundry. “Why was it that, whatever you desired, you could find a poor woman to sell it?” Stack wondered.
Melonyce McAfee is a senior editor for NYT Parenting.