NYT Parenting readers wrote in with their experiences of clinging and kicking kiddos.
In her 26 years of teaching kindergarten in Westchester, N.Y., Claudia Tucci, 64, saw some tough drop-offs. There was the little boy who flung himself on the carpet, spread eagle-style; the student from Japan who became physically sick when his parents left; and several students who sobbed for hours. But, according to Tucci, the longer parents lingered, the harder it became for their children to separate.
“The message we want to send is, ‘You are going to be O.K.,’ and ‘You can trust these adults,’” Tucci said. Now retired, and a new grandmother, Tucci can look back on her days wrangling howling 5-year-olds and laugh.
For parents dropping their children off at school or day care for the first time, though, the ordeal is probably much less amusing. In last week’s NYT Parenting newsletter, lead editor Jessica Grose recalled the horror of hearing her daughter wailing, “Don’t leave, Mommy!!” as she said goodbye at preschool. NYT Parenting readers wrote in with their own experiences of clinging and kicking kiddos.
Mae Alfeche, 33, used to feel physically ill dropping her daughter off at a Montessori preschool in Paris. “You try to be strong and you try not to cry,” she said, watching her daughter sob every morning. Her daughter’s teacher suggested planning an activity to do together after school. Now, Alfeche reminds her daughter of what they have planned — painting, reading a story together, baking bread, doing puzzles — over breakfast, and her daughter barely whimpers going to school. “It’s more about spending time with me,” Alfeche said.
After Julie Wilson DiColo, 36, of New Orleans, La., eats breakfast with her 3-year-old, it’s dress rehearsal time. She stands in the study while her husband walks their son down the hallway, pretending to be dropping him off at school. DiColo will mimic a teacher, changing her voice and announcing a plan for the day (sometimes as silly as, “Today, we’re going to stand on our heads!”). Before they started practicing for drop-off, teachers would have to pry her clinging son off her husband; now, after a run-through or two in the morning, he’s relatively tear-free.
For the first month of dropping her one-and-half-year-old daughter off at preschool in Teaneck, N.J., Claudia Jannucci, 44, would cry behind a large pair of black sunglasses. The door to her daughter’s classroom had a large glass panel, so, to avoid being seen, Jannucci would walk down the hallway to weep in a chair, or sob on the bus on her way to work. Her daughter would scream, “Come back, Mama, come back!” and Jannucci would cry along with her. “It felt like the end of the world back then,” Jannucci said. Years later, drop-offs for her second daughter were practically weep-free. “Whaddaya know?” Jannucci laughed.
When Vincent O’Keefe, 50, of Lakewood, Ohio, began dropping his 3-year-old off at her Montessori preschool, she would flail and scream. O’Keefe is fairly sure she once kicked a teacher inadvertently. He felt mortified and torn, he said, watching from the driver’s seat. After a few such incidents, his daughter’s teacher suggested that she bring fruit to share with her classmates. O’Keefe’s daughter looked forward to handing out apple slices, and soon, the chaotic mornings were a thing of the past.
When Andrea Pallotta, 34, of Ridgefield, Ohio, drops her 4-year-old son off, he asks for 20 hugs. She gives him second-long speed hugs, jostling him around, until he’s laughing. Around a year ago, she would have to turn her back to him while he cried; she took over drop-off duties from her husband, and the transition was a little unsettling for their son. Now, she leaves him more or less smiling. He gives her a final wave out the window, and then she’s on her way. “It’s kind of a nice way to say goodbye,” she said.