Parenting|How Do You Help a Child Leave His First Friends?
How Do You Help a Child Leave His First Friends?
Our move was overdue. But watching our son say goodbye to his beloved day care nearly broke me.
The summer our son Louie turned 3, my husband and I moved from Brooklyn to Maplewood, N. J., to join a fair number of our media and publishing colleagues who had two kids.
It was a long overdue move — our 10-month-old daughter was sleeping in a Pack ‘n Play at the foot of our bed — and we were following a well-trod path. So as sad as I was to be saying goodbye to the Brooklyn neighborhood I’d been living in for 14 years, the only real snag in the plan was Louie’s day care.
He’d been going there since he was 3 months old, and adored the nine or so kids he’d been playing alongside for almost three years. You had to sign up for the school, as they called it, in four-month chunks, and our final cycle ran out two months before we were set to move — leaving us with a long, lonely stretch of days when he would still be living just a few blocks from his happy place, but would not be allowed to go to it.
I was stunned by how painful it felt when they gently denied my requests for a mini-extension outside the standard fourth-month window. I had naïvely assumed they’d be as desperate for any extra time with us as we were for time with them. I baked cupcakes for the last day and smiled dumbly in all the pictures at the final pickup, hoping Louie wouldn’t notice my rapid-fire, please-don’t-cry blinks.
We still saw most of his buddies at the playground where everyone went after pickup. But Louie quickly started asking if they still went to school. Despite my steady chorus of yeses, he decided that I was wrong, and his questions about whether his friends still went to school gave way to “School is closed, Mommy.” I didn’t argue.
This mostly satisfied him, but the problem of Miss Jennifer remained.
I might have been jealous of the frequency with which Miss Jennifer’s name could be heard in our apartment had I not been so grateful for the effectiveness of her adages. We would ask Louie to sit down and he would ignore us for a solid 15 seconds before saying, “Miss Jennifer says ‘crisscross apple sauce,’” then dropping and crossing his legs. While I’d heard other parents express disappointment that school policy forbade teachers from doing babysitting, I was mostly just sorry that Miss Jennifer and I would probably never go out for some wine and chat. I adored her almost as much as Lou did.
Of all the things Miss Jennifer excelled at, yoga was high on the list. For months before he stopped going to the school, Louie had been coming home ready to randomly freeze and shout out an animal — alligators and cheetahs were the favorites — just before contorting his body into his idea of those animal shapes.
The Friday before Memorial Day weekend, I decided to start the summer with a yoga for tots class, determined to find ways to fill the hole school had left in Louie’s life. There, the patient, chipper teacher tried to teach Louie new poses, but he had no interest. He sat in the corner of the classroom pointedly calling out Miss Jennifer’s poses and then twisting his body into them while the rest of the class dutifully made banana and airplane and swimmer shapes. I tried to salvage the morning by stopping at the playground on the way home, hours earlier than we normally would have gone.
And then there was Miss Jennifer in all her early-summer glory, leading a fluorescent rope attached to a half-dozen 2-year-old charges wearing neon pinnies. She paused every so often to turn her face up to the sun, always looking back at her squirming line a second or two sooner than I would have. Louie ran to her, to all of them, unabashedly. Their cacophony of squeals and calls of “Louie, we miss you!” matched his enthusiasm, and by the time he had hugged each of his beloved friends, his sweaty little face shone with a maniacal happiness. Miss Jennifer was the last to hug him, dropping down to her knees, and he wouldn’t let go until she whispered something into his hair.

The yeses were swift and unanimous. I was about to congratulate myself on having mastered parenting and retreat to a bench to read Us Weekly on my phone when Lou abruptly turned and pointed to the far side of the playground, where the climbing equipment and slides designed for older children were.
He immediately retreated behind a tree about 20 feet away, making no pretense of making good on all his big talk about the big slide. He stood there longer than I had ever seen him stay in one place, eyes downcast, lips and gut grazing bark, heart broken. His blue-and-green-striped truck socks were both bunching sadly.
Then he dashed out to a patch of asphalt in the sun furious with determination. He froze for one wild second before flinging out both arms to his sides and throwing back one of his legs. “Airplane pose!” he shouted.
I’ve been out in the world, Miss Jennifer. 
It was the most magnificent, ambitious, successful pose he had ever struck in his short yoga career, and he held it in a classic moment of doomed glory. It was clear it was going to end badly long before his little leg started to wobble. When I turned back to Miss Jennifer and her cohort, they were at the distant ends of the younger kids’ playground, too far away to hear his swan song. But the sun seemed to shine down right on him.
I sent up one of those agnostic prayers that parents send up silently 40 or 400 times a day for their kids, sometimes so instinctively and naturally they don’t even realize they’re doing it, never looking away from the busy street their kids are approaching or pausing the ongoing what’s-for-dinner negotiations. I wished that he would be able muster even just a kernel of this much grace in walking away from all the other things he would inevitably have to walk away from in this life.
The only time he looked at Miss Jennifer was after he fell — as he was falling really, the tumble of limbs and giant head pointed in her direction even as he tumbled away from her. He rolled for what felt like forever, stopping just before the bottom of the medium-sized slide that separated the playground his friends were playing on from the one he was in.
I leapt up, ready to run to pull him up and wipe tears, but he was already standing by the time I got to him, brushing off his knees, satisfied.
“Mommy, I fall,” he said, looking up at me, buoyantly, beamingly proud. He had made a real mess of it, his smile said, but wow, what fun it had been. How lovely to have people worth hurling your body so recklessly through space, even if you ended up very far away from them. “What a pose, Lou!” I said, hoping there was enough real enthusiasm in my voice to persuade him that what he had discovered would remain true even in the future, when he had to move away from people who were even more beloved.
He looked around the playground with new eyes. The entire summer lay before us, after all. There was a whole state’s worth of new slides to slide down, a seemingly infinite number of yoga poses still to be learned, new wonders to discover.
We still left before the class did, though, so we wouldn’t have to watch the children and Miss Jennifer walk away.
Caroline Zancan is the author of the novels “Local Girls” and “We Wish You Luck,” which was published earlier this month by Riverhead Books.