Watching my cycle like a hawk to prevent pregnancy has been effective for me — and, no, it’s not the rhythm method.
“Yes, I count my cycle days on an abacus and mark them on a stone tablet,” I want to say, but don’t because I’m a classy lady. Sure, both the rhythm method and fertility awareness rely on avoiding sex during a woman’s fertile periods, and their users might choose to forgo hormonal, I.U.D. and barrier methods of contraception. But here’s the difference: The rhythm method pretends women run like clocks, while fertility awareness means paying attention to the sometimes unpredictable signs and symptoms that come along with hormonal changes.
Over the course of my marriage, my husband and I have used a few different techniques, including the Sympto-Thermal Method (ugh, trying to find that thermometer first thing in the morning), the Billings Method (useless postpartum in the long months before my period reappeared) and finally the Marquette Method, which we use now. Marquette utilizes fertility monitoring test strips, with friendly little icons that show a cartoony egg when you ovulate. It’s like a fertility Tamagotchi. Because I’m Type A, I also double check for the signs I learned from Billings, like monitoring my cervical mucus (the two words most likely to make someone spit out their drink) and the ovulation cramp I get that makes me feel like someone has a voodoo doll of me somewhere. Marquette was a lifesaver postpartum, when hormones are as unpredictable as infants. With perfect use of the method — abstaining during any fertile times — unintended pregnancy rates are 1 in 100. With typical use, Marquette is still more effective than typical use of condoms, where 18 couples out of 100 may find themselves with two lines on a home pregnancy test.
To marry in the Catholic Church, my husband and I had to take a family planning class, and I remember the instructor saying that she signaled to her husband when a night was “on the table” for sex by putting a teddy bear on their bed — which is kind of creepy and isn’t the kind of teddy usually associated with setting the mood. In my house, we just talk. What I like about using my cycle as a barometer is that both partners take responsibility for the method and consent is key. Is it hard to abstain? Sure, but here’s the thing: Sex being forbidden for a few days a month makes me look forward even more to the times when we can get intimate. Plus, fertility awareness makes us talk about our sex life regularly and openly, which after 10 years in a relationship is a godsend.
Despite all the spousal communication, our chosen birth control method can feel lonely. Luckily internet forums provide pseudo-anonymity when talking about tough things. I was in forums while trying to conceive and after my miscarriage, then while pregnant and postpartum. Now, as I walk the tightrope of family planning, I cherish groups that bring women together to talk openly about our losses, fears, hopes and health. We write about trying to conceive, trying to avoid conception and T.T.W. (trying to whatever). I turned to them when, six months after the birth of my third child, I went from a low reading on my fertility Tamagotchi to “ovulation” overnight. Of course, my husband and I had had sex the night before — I was terrified.
During that time, I was in the pit of postpartum depression — severe enough that I didn’t recognize its depth until I started to claw my way out about a year after giving birth. Severe enough that I didn’t admit it to anyone until the fog began to lift. It wasn’t until recently that I told my husband about some of my suicidal ideations, about the nights I cried while nursing our child to sleep for the fourth or fifth time. That ovulation reading came at the worst moment. I posted a question to the forum: Is this real? Could I get pregnant?
The women waited with me. They reassured me. I didn’t show any other ovulation symptoms — symptoms I was well aware of by now. Still, I couldn’t stop panicking. A few weeks later I found that it was a false peak.
I don’t want to get pregnant again, maybe ever, but fertility awareness gives me no promises that I won’t conceive (nor do hormonal birth control or barrier methods). I like promises. I like 90-Day Money Back Guarantees when I buy products. Uncertainty, the inability to control something so important, is tough. While the women in my fertility awareness group post about their long-term success stories, I find myself nervous. After a string of grueling pregnancies, postpartum depression and the stress of everyday life, I am not sure I can do this again. The Catholic Church’s doctrine doesn’t require constant pregnancy, only an openness to new life, unless there are psychological or physical reasons to avoid it. For the near future — and maybe distant future — I have those reasons.
I joke sometimes that my cycle is my favorite TV show. I can’t stop watching it, even when the plot is as repetitive as an episode of “Daniel Tiger’s Neighborhood.” Practicing fertility awareness — and becoming a parent — has made me gentler with others and with myself. I think about the fear that so many of us carry around — the fear of getting pregnant or never getting pregnant; the judgments of family and friends about our life choices. Fertility awareness taught me that I should trust myself, even when it scares me. I know my body. I hope that in the future, the medical community will learn more about modern fertility awareness and that women, whatever their chosen method of family planning, find respect when communicating with their physicians and partners.
Rachel Mans McKenny is a writer, parent and humorist.