When the Krewe of Zulu parade rolled out onto Jackson Avenue to kick off Mardi Gras festivities on Feb. 25, the party started for black New Orleans. Tens of thousands of people lined the four-and-a-half-mile route, reveling in the animated succession of jazz musicians, high-stepping marching bands from historically black colleges and universities and loose-limbed dancers dressed in Zulu costumes, complete with grass skirts and blackface makeup, an homage to the Zulu people of South Africa and, for some, a satirical spit in the eye to the past, when Mardi Gras was put on by clubs of white men who barred black people from taking part.
Though some black critics have chided the Zulus for continuing to “black up,” their costumes and traditions are a way of reclaiming and redeploying the most toxic stereotypes of black Americans. Founded in 1909, the Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club is a brotherhood of some 800 men, nearly all of them black, known for community service, civic pride, black excellence and that Mardi Gras parade. And so on that late February day, as people stood shoulder to shoulder and several feet deep, hoping to catch a painted coconut, the “throw” that is the Zulu parade’s signature and coveted prize, no one had any idea that this joyous gathering would turn out to be a coronavirus hothouse.
For the Zulu club, the Carnival season involves a series of meticulously planned and eagerly awaited ceremonies, balls and festivals, almost every day in January and February. The Zulu Ball, one of the group’s three grand-scale, marquee events, fell on Friday, Feb. 21, this year. Some 20,000 people, floor-length ball gowns and tuxedos required, packed into the New Orleans Ernest N. Morial Convention Center — one of the few venues large enough to hold the crowd that came to eat and drink and dance and witness the crowning of the Zulu King and Queen of Mardi Gras. At the parade, the king, elected by club members, wears a golden crown and an elaborate festoon of feathers. He rides on a float, waving a glittery scepter at the crowd, flanked by two hand-painted leopards rearing up on their hind legs.
On Feb. 5, four days after Surgeon General Jerome Adams tweeted, “Roses are red/Violets are blue/Risk is low for #coronavirus/But high for the flu,” New Orleans officials held a multiagency coronavirus planning meeting. The same day, a statement posted on the city’s website read: “Our public health and health care systems are ready for Mardi Gras, and the coronavirus poses a very low risk to the Carnival celebrations.” At the time, just 12 cases had been reported in the United States and none in Louisiana.
Relatives and friends mourned Larry A. Hammond, a former Zulu Mardi Gras king, on April 22.
Listen to ‘The Daily’: Why Is the Pandemic Killing So Many Black Americans?
 My colleague, Times Magazine writer Linda Villarosa, on the myth of the pandemic as the great equalizer.
It’s Wednesday, May 20.
Hello. Hi, my name’s Linda Villarosa. I’m from The New York Times Magazine.
How are you, Miss Linda?
I’m OK. How are you?
I’m just OK, too.
Yeah. I think we should just accept that we’re, like, OK. And listen, I’m — I’ve been hearing stories about your husband all morning and, you know, wish I had gotten to meet him. What a wonderful person he sounds like.
Oh, yes he was. That’s what he was.
Linda, tell me about Cornell Charles.
Cornell Charles, who goes by the nickname Dickey, was born and raised in New Orleans. He still lived in the house where he grew up. He was a family man who had two daughters. He was married for decades to Nicole Charles, his wife, who I got to speak to recently.
My husband loved to cook. Every Sunday my husband would cook — you would think he was cooking for the military.
Dickey was the king of the kitchen. Every Sunday after church, friends and family gathered at Nicole and Dickey’s house.
You didn’t have to have an invite to come in. Everybody knew it — I want to eat something, I’m going by Cornell and Nicole’s.
People knew you could just go there. The door was open.
And what were his best dishes?
Oh, my god, Miss Linda. His gumbo was number one. He was definitely a seafood boiler.
He cooked seafood. He cooked gumbo.
He also was a master of spaghetti salad.
He also made meatballs.
He would cook meatballs the size of a baseball. So everybody would call them miniature meatloaves, because they were so big.
And as a community man, he was also part of this club called the Zulu Club.
Tell me about what the Zulu group meant to your husband.
It was — let met see how I can — it was in his blood. If I can — that kind of sums it up.
And what is the Zulu Club?
So the Zulu Club is an organization of mostly black men in New Orleans.
He first got involved in Zulu in around 2004. My dad was Zulu governor that year. And my husband began to deal with Zulu.
And it was started in 1909. Black people were still reeling from the end of slavery. And also, it was during the years of Jim Crow, when black people and other people couldn’t afford funerals. And so the Zulu Club members came together to pool their money together to bury their dead in a dignified manner.
He was passionate about it. And he would give his all. Zulu was definitely something he enjoyed. It was a respectable organization of men.
The King of Zulu.
It’s the symbol of black New Orleans. And it involves festivals, and balls, and all kinds of different events.
The event that Dickey Charles was the most involved with was the Governor’s Ball. And there were thousands of people at that event. It’s a party. People bring their own food. You have to wear formal clothes or else you can’t get in. People are elbow to elbow. They’re dancing. And it lasts all night. It’s really fun.
But as this was happening, behind the scenes coronavirus was also building.
He came home from work.
10 days after Mardi Gras ended, Dickey Charles didn’t feel well.
So that was March 14.
They checked him in to the hospital, and by the following day, it was clear that something was wrong.
Sunday, when the medical doctor came in, she said, I want you to see the chest X-rays. So I said OK. She put it up on the screen. She said, “Well, you see where his left lung is clear?” Left lung is fine. She said, “But you see this little cloud over his right lung?” I said, yes, ma’am. She said, well, this could be pneumonia. But she said, “But I’m going to start him on some antibiotics. In case that’s what it is, I want to beat it.” In a matter of hours — in a matter of hours, they come back, and they tell me how bad his lungs are.
And that was a clue that they needed to test him for the coronavirus, even though it would take 10 days for the results to come back.
I was like, he really is — my husband really is sick, which I didn’t realize it was to that extent. If they’re telling me he needs to be on a ventilator. I don’t want to say no and not give him a chance. Do you know what I’m saying?
So I’m like, OK. All right, let’s do it.
So for the next three days, Nicole was at the hospital. Dickey’s on the ventilator. He was in a coma-like state, so he’s not responding.
What were you saying to him?
Oh, my god, how much I love him. I miss him. You know, pray. I need you to pray. You know, I was telling him, “You may not can speak, but God can hear your prayer.” And that was basically my conversation for him every day in I.C.U. You know, and we would listen to gospel music. I would pray for him anyway. And I was in the midst of praying for him — which is what I did all the time. I would touch him from his head to his toe, and I would pray over his body. I was at his feet, and I was coming back up towards his head, and he opened his eyes for me.
And that was the last time I saw my husband with his eyes open.
I kept talking to him and just — telling him how much we loved him. And how much we’re going to miss him.  He looked really, really peaceful. He did. Yes.
He died that afternoon. And he was only 51 years old.
The next day, as Nicole was grieving, she finally got the results of Dickey’s Covid test and found out that, yes, he was positive. He did die of the coronavirus.
The phone calls that I have gotten from Zulu members have been overwhelming. They have reached out via text, via phone call, sending cards. It’s just so much, you know Miss Linda, and I didn’t realize the magnitude of the people my husband touched until his passing.
And I’ve gotten so many phone calls to tell me, you know, he motivated me to do this, or he encouraged me to do that, or he was my mentor. I mean, I can just stand so proud and say he was my husband. I can stand tall and just brag that that was my husband, you know what I mean?
It’s so funny, because being his wife, and as much as he used to go — and when I say “go,” he went with a purpose. Baby, I’m going to — I’ve got to go practice this team at this time. I have to practice this team at that time. When I leave there, I have to go to this meeting, or whatever, whatever.
And to realize what his purpose was now gives me such a sense of joy.
Well, Since Mardi Gras Day, it has been a devastating couple of weeks for Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club.
But he wasn’t the only member of the Zulu Club to get sick.
Several of their members tested positive for coronavirus.
At the time I finished my reporting, 30 members of the Zulu Club had been infected with the virus, and of those 30, eight had died.
I looked at the Facebook page yesterday and saw that on May 4 another one of them died.
Linda, what did you, and what did the members of the Zulu Club, make of the number of members who were dying?
Nationwide, cities have been releasing Covid-19 data showing racial disparities in diagnosis and in death.
It confirmed what many in public health knew.
Those numbers show a disturbing trend.
But it was still very scary.
Black people are dying at a much higher rate than any other race right now.
Of the more than 500 people whose final breaths were stolen by this disease, the state says that more than two thirds of them were black.
Black people comprise 30 percent of the population but 70 percent of those who have died of Covid. Then other states started to roll out their data.
A thousand more cases of Covid-19 confirmed here in Illinois just today.
More than half of all cases in Chicago are in the African-American community.
38 percent of Missourians who died from Covid-19 were black, but African-Americans only make up 12 percent of Missouri’s population.
The reports are startling — in North Carolina, Connecticut, and Michigan, too.
So at that point, it begged the question why. Why was this killing so many black people? 
Linda, how do we explain this extraordinarily higher death rate in the black community from the coronavirus?
Everyone — everyone — is subject to this virus. It is the great equalizer.
People started saying, oh, Covid is the great equalizer, or, the virus doesn’t discriminate.
From the moment the coronavirus outbreak began, health officials have preached that Covid-19 doesn’t discriminate, that it’s an equal opportunity killer.
But those of us who have studied public health know that that wasn’t true. And in fact, we say it a different way. We say, when America sneezes the black community gets pneumonia. And for me, I’m really passionate about racial health disparities. I’ve been studying it for 30 years. I was a young editor at Essence magazine, and I started first writing about this. I’m writing a book about it now. And we have long known that all kinds of diseases do discriminate. It’s not equal.
And how does Covid-19 discriminate against black America?
Covid-19 is more serious in black Americans. So we’re more likely to be hospitalized, to have a serious case, and to also die from it. And there are three main reasons for this disparity.
OK. And what is the first of those reasons?
The first reason is simple. It’s proximity to the virus. Black Americans are more likely to be employed in essential jobs, in frontline jobs, in jobs where they are more commonly exposed to the virus itself.
I’m thinking of Dickey Charles. He continued working. He was a courier for a medical company. I think of the Zulu members. One of the men who died was a postal worker. He was a mail carrier. One was a police officer who contracted Covid.
Another was a security guard. And look, we don’t know whether these members of the Zulu Club contracted the virus at Mardi Gras or on their jobs. But we do know that the majority of black people in this country have jobs that put them at risk.
So that’s the first reason black Americans are dying at such disproportionate rates. The second factor is discrimination that is embedded in the health care system itself.
Linda, this is something you and I first talked about over a year ago when we did an episode of “The Daily” about black women and their mortality rates when giving birth. And you explained this concept that, essentially, racism — conscious or deeply unconscious — influences the kind of medical care delivered to black patients.
Yes. And I believe that it’s unconscious. And it’s not just white doctors, it’s also black doctors we — or doctors of other races. Because we all live in this society that has discrimination and racist images embedded in our culture. It’s baked in. Thousands of studies have shown over decades that black people get unequal treatment in our health care system.
I wonder if you can walk me through a scenario that people in public health say could or has happened when it comes to this pandemic that explains this.
Well, you can imagine being a health care provider, specifically being a physician, and you’re having to make life-or-death decisions — who should get tested? Who should be admitted to the hospital? Who needs to be put on a ventilator? Who needs to be taken off a ventilator?  Medical providers don’t go into medicine to harm people, but that harm may show up, especially during a very stressed out moment, which is the essence of this moment and coronavirus.
So, Linda, what is the third major factor here in why something like the coronavirus discriminates against black Americans?
So the third reason is that black Americans have more of the underlying conditions that make Covid-19 worse. Some of these are hypertension and heart disease, diabetes, stroke, and asthma. So if you have these underlying conditions, you’re more likely to be quite sick. That was the case with Dickey Charles. He had high blood pressure. He had diabetes. He had kidney disease. And that is also the case with so many other black Americans.
And why is that? Why is there such a disproportionate level of these pre-existing underlying conditions?
So at first glance, it seems like, well, if everyone just takes better care of themselves, you can avoid these kinds of conditions.
But that tilts toward a kind of irresponsibility among black people that really isn’t fair. So a study in early April found out that people who have been subjected to long term exposure to air pollution are more likely to have serious cases of Covid than people who don’t. And black people are more likely to live in areas that are polluted.
New Orleans is part of “cancer alley,” which is an 85-mile stretch along the highway in Louisiana where there’s the largest concentration of petrochemical factories in the country. 
And this is where the Zulus live. This is where Dickey Charles and Nicole Charles live. So the environment is one factor that drives the underlying conditions that black Americans are disproportionately more likely to face. But a second factor is the concept of weathering.
And weathering is the concept that racism takes a physical toll on the black body and leaves it more vulnerable to all kinds of illness.
That’s exactly right. And it’s best to think of it as a kind of accelerated aging. So adversity comes in the form of discrimination.
It could be discrimination in housing. It could be discrimination by police. It could be discrimination in employment. It could just be the stress of having to struggle every day. It changes the systems of the body at a cellular level. So if you are faced with a kind of adverse event, your blood pressure goes up, your heart rate goes up, your breathing becomes more rapid. And this is all part of the fight-or-flight syndrome. But it shouldn’t be made to happen over and over and over again.
But if you’re facing that kind of adversity, that’s what happens, and it wears away the body. It ages the body. So that would make sense why black people are more likely to have these kind of underlying conditions and why we get them at younger ages.
So, Linda, putting all of this together, all these factors, you have a black population at a higher risk of exposure, just given the nature of their work; a population that already has higher rates of underlying conditions; on top of that, there is this weathering phenomenon that deepens those conditions, literally seems to age this already-not-well, vulnerable body; and finally, a medical system inclined to undertreat these people when they come in to a hospital or a doctor’s office.
Yes. And that is what has created this perfect and terrible storm when it comes to the coronavirus and black people in America.
Linda, it sounds like the public health experts you talked to, that they knew these death rates, these infection rates, this kind of disproportionateness, was going to play out with this pandemic. And now that it has, how are they thinking about it?
I think this is a difficult moment, but it’s also a moment where a tragedy can be turned into something else. So those in public health have known that there are racial disparities in health. I mean, we’ve known since 1899 when W.E.B. Du Bois was calling it a crisis. And some of the people that I interviewed in my story have been studying this for decades and have added up the price. And so they’re hoping that now is a moment of reckoning to say, this is a horrible moment, please don’t turn away. Do something about this.
I’m curious what the government’s response to this pandemic, which is widely acknowledged, was slow, what that has meant for this particular group of Americans.
So the government’s slow and uncoordinated and confusing response hurt everyone. It hurt all Americans. It harmed us. But it hurt this group — black people, black Americans — worse. Because we were already more vulnerable to many of these health problems that make Covid-19 worse. And sometimes when I think of it, I think specifically about the men in the Zulu Club and how they were harmed by this federal response. And it had this terrible sad trickle-down effect to them on the ground.
Right. Well, how are members of the Zulu Club and their families doing at this point?
The entire group is reeling from what happened. I mean, they’re a brotherhood, so they’re trying to support and take care of each other. But they’re in pain.
And you’re good? You’re feeling OK?
I also checked in with Nicole, Dickey Charles’s wife, just to see how she was doing.
I’m feeling as good as I can be. God didn’t choose me, so I have to find a way to maneuver my new life.
This is a very hard time for her. She’s grieving this man that she was married to for three decades.
But it’s going to be a huge, huge adjustment. I tell people my life did a 180-degree turn within a matter of 10 days, you know.
And I sorely miss my husband. Out of 30 years, Miss Linda, I’ve never not slept next to him for longer than two days. In 30 years.
More than a week after Dickey Charles died, she arranged his funeral.
It was at their church. There were 10 people there — 10 family members and an organist.
It was also live streamed. Six hundred people tuned in. I tuned in.
(SINGING) Oh, I feel trust in the Lord.
I found it sad and hard, because I was thinking about someone like Dickey and many of the other Zulus would have gotten a different kind of sendoff. Would have gotten a second line funeral, where, you know, it happens in the street, and all those 600 people would be right there in person. People would be dressed up. There would be music.
And that is the legacy of the Zulu Club. It was formed to help people send off their dead in a graceful, in a respectful, in a dignified way, and in a way that celebrated their life.
Linda, thank you very much. We appreciate it.
Thank you. And please take care of yourself.
I will. I will. I will. Thank you so much. OK.
Here’s what else you need to know today. The death toll from the coronavirus in the U.S. has reached a new milestone, surpassing 90,000 people. Nearly a third of those deaths occurred in New York State. As of Tuesday, there have been more than 1.5 million infections across the U.S.
And a major new study found an unprecedented decline in global carbon emissions during the pandemic as demand for major sources of carbon dioxide, like flying and driving, have sharply declined. During March and April, carbon emissions fell by 1 billion tons or 17 percent, a decline that was cheered by those studying climate change. But scientists expect those emissions to rebound as economies around the world begin to reopen.
On Sunday, Feb. 23, two days after the Zulu Ball, President Trump set the tone for the country, the state of Louisiana and the city of New Orleans when he said at a news conference: “We have it very much under control in the country.” On Monday, Feb. 24, when an estimated 200,000 people spent the day at Lundi Gras, sponsored by the Zulu club, enjoying a smorgasbord of New Orleans food and music on three stages at Woldenberg Park along the Mississippi River, he reiterated on Twitter that the disease was “under control.” According to an internal memo, however, Trump had already been warned by his own trade adviser about the potential of half a million deaths and an economic hemorrhage of trillions of dollars as a result of the pandemic. According to reports, his health and human services director had alerted him twice about the possibility of a pandemic; the president accused him of being alarmist.
Mayor LaToya Cantrell of New Orleans stood on St. Charles Avenue during the Feb. 25 parade next to Jay H. Banks, chairman of the Zulu club’s board, raising a glass and joyfully shouting, “Hail Zulu!” as the king passed by on his float. She would later defend not canceling the festivities. “When it’s not taken seriously at the federal level, it’s very difficult to transcend down to the local level in making these decisions,” Cantrell told CNN on March 26.
Banks, a city councilman who first became involved with the Zulu club as a boy, remembers the rush of panic he felt on March 16, when he saw a Facebook post about the first of his Zulu brothers to get sick, Dickey Charles, who was just 51. Written by the chaplain of the Zulu club, Jefferson Reese Sr., it read, “Zulu Brother Cornell ‘Dickey’ Charles is very ill and in need of prayer. Amen” followed by three brown praying-hands emojis. “When I saw the post, I thought, Oh, man,” Banks says. “I knew we were going to have a problem.” Eight weeks after Mardi Gras, at least 30 members of the club had been found to have Covid-19. Eight would be dead.
Banks, who believes he knows at least 16 people who have died of the disease, says if he and the Zulu leadership had had the slightest clue that the pandemic was a direct danger, they would have canceled their events. “The president was saying that this was not a big deal, and nobody in the federal government raised a red flag,” Banks says. Gov. John Bel Edwards of Louisiana could have canceled the parade. But like Mayor Cantrell, he said he had little useful guidance from Washington. “There was not one person at the state or its federal government, not at the C.D.C. or otherwise, who recommended canceling any event, not just Mardi Gras, but I don’t think anywhere across the country,” he told “Face the Nation” on March 29.
Michael McKnight Sr., Ph.D., 47, is a fiscal officer for the New Orleans City Council. A Zulu member since 2014, he tested positive for Covid-19.
Alphonse Ponson Sr., 71, a Zulu member, is a maintenance worker. He tested positive for Covid-19.
On April 6, Louisiana became one of the first states to release Covid-19 data by race: While making up 33 percent of the population, African-Americans accounted for 70 percent of the dead at that point. Around the same time, other cities and states began to release racial data in the absence of even a whisper from the federal government — where health data of all kinds is routinely categorized by race. Areas with large populations of black people were revealed to have disproportionate, devastating death rates. In Michigan, black people make up 14 percent of the population but 40 percent of the deaths. (All data was current as of press time.) In Wisconsin, black people are 7 percent of the population but 33 percent of the deaths. In Mississippi, black people are 38 percent of the population but 61 percent of the deaths. In Milwaukee, black people are 39 percent of the population but 71 percent of the deaths. In Chicago, black people are 30 percent of the population but 56 percent of the deaths. In New York, which has the country’s highest numbers of confirmed cases and deaths, black people are twice as likely to die as white people. In Orleans Parish, black people make up 60 percent of the population but 70 percent of the dead. Data from the Louisiana Department of Health shows that neighborhoods in the parish with large numbers of black residents have been hit hardest.
The coronavirus pandemic has stripped bare the racial divide in the health of our nation. A complex and longstanding constellation of factors explains these higher death rates. On April 8, a C.D.C. study suggested that about 90 percent of the most serious Covid-19 cases involve underlying health conditions — hypertension and cardiovascular disease, obesity, diabetes, chronic lung disease — that are more common and more deadly in black Americans and strike at younger ages. According to the C.D.C., the rate of diabetes is 66 percent higher in black Americans than in white Americans; the rate of hypertension is 49 percent higher. The average black life expectancy, from birth, is about 3.5 years lower than white life expectancy. In fact, the health outcomes of black Americans are by several measures on par with those of people in poorer countries with much less sophisticated medical systems and technology. And though these health disparities are certainly worsened by poverty, they are not erased by increased income and education. The elevated rates of these serious illnesses have weaponized the coronavirus to catastrophic effect in black America.
“As public-health officials, we knew about the clear, distinct racial health disparities, as it relates to chronic illnesses in our state, in the early months,” Benjamin-Robinson says. “But in the absence of racial data and with no real sense of urgency coming from the federal government, we weren’t able to put a plan in action to create targeted messaging and get information directly to African-Americans.” After the release of racial data for Louisiana in early April, Benjamin-Robinson’s office helped develop public-health promotional materials about Covid-19 specifically for black Louisianans, which were distributed via email and social media.
Amid this pressure from lawmakers, physicians, scientists and advocacy groups to release national Covid-19 statistics by race, on Wednesday, April 8, the C.D.C. put out a limited data set of 1,482 coronavirus patients hospitalized in 14 states. It indicated that despite making up 18 percent of those studied, black people accounted for a third of all severe cases.
Trump then referred to the racial statistics as “very nasty numbers. Terrible numbers.” As the news conference went on, the president expressed confusion about the disproportionate rates of infection. “Why is it that the African-American community is so much, you know, numerous times more than everybody else?” he asked.
A photograph of Terry Sharpe Sr., 49, held by his widow, Debra Sharpe, and his children, Terry Sharpe Jr. and Emily Sharpe. A truck driver and a Zulu member since 2017, Sharpe died of Covid-19.
Fifty years after the legislative and societal advances of the civil rights movement, America remains deeply segregated. Black people are more likely than white people to live in communities with high rates of poverty, where physical and social structures are crumbling, where opportunity is low and unemployment high. 
The conditions in the social and physical environment where people live, work, attend school, play and pray have an outsize influence on health outcomes. Those in the public-health field call these conditions social determinants of health. Living in safe communities with adequate education and health care services, outdoor space, clean air and water, public transportation and affordable healthful food all contribute to lower rates of disease and longer, healthier lives. Living where the streets are unsafe and the air and water are polluted, where adequate health care facilities and outdoor space are lacking and where a dearth of healthful and affordable food creates a “desert” all leads to poorer health outcomes.
As scientists and policymakers have known since the 1980s, black and poor communities shoulder a disproportionate burden of the nation’s pollution. Covid-19 typically attacks the lungs and is especially dangerous to those with existing respiratory conditions, and a paper released on April 5 by researchers at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health found that a majority of the conditions that increase the risk of death from Covid-19 are also affected by long-term exposure to air pollution. After analyzing over 3,000 U.S. counties, the researchers concluded that even a small increase in exposure to fine particulate matter — tiny particles in the air — leads to a significant increase in the Covid-19 death rate. Less than two weeks after the report was released, the Trump administration declined to impose stricter controls on the lung-corroding industrial matter that the Harvard researchers underlined as hazardous.
The accumulated effects of environmental inequality are compounded by the physiological ramifications of an atmosphere of bias and discrimination, which have been documented to lead to higher rates of poor health outcomes for black Americans. Dr. Arline Geronimus, a professor at the University of Michigan School of Public Health, termed this phenomenon “weathering.” The landmark research she and her colleagues published in 2006 pointed to early health deterioration, caused by stress that required high-effort coping, evident across multiple biological systems even when adjusted for poverty. The authors concluded that the lived experience of being black exacted a physical price on the bodies of African-Americans. Dr. Camara Phyllis Jones, a physician and epidemiologist and a former president of the American Public Health Association, describes this effect as “accelerated aging.” “We have evidence that the wear and tear of racism, the stress of it, is responsible for the differences in health outcomes in the black population compared to the white population,” Dr. Jones says. In a 2019 study comparing 71 individuals, 48 of them black, a team of U.C.L.A. scientists found evidence that racist experiences may lead to increased inflammation in black Americans, heightening the risk of serious illness including heart disease. In the study, published in the journal Psychoneuroendocrinology, the scientists compared participants with similar socioeconomic backgrounds to rule out poverty as a determining factor in the changes in inflammation.
Burnell Scales Sr., father-in-law of Cornell Charles, in self-isolation after testing positive for Covid-19.
On March 12, it was clear to Nicole that Charles still didn’t feel well. His fever had been up and down, spiking close to 102. She stayed close to him, administering fluids and Tylenol, assuming he had the flu. That day, after it proved difficult to get a fast appointment with his primary-care doctor, she insisted that he go to urgent care, where he was tested for the flu. When the test was negative, he was sent home — with no mention of Covid-19.
Brian Pollard, 41, a Zulu member since 2017, is a police officer. He tested positive for Covid-19.
Jarvis Lewis, 30, a Zulu member since 2014, is chief of staff for the New Orleans City Council member Jay H. Banks. He tested positive for Covid-19.
This “peculiar indifference” was infamously sanctioned by the federal government between 1932 and 1972, when the United States Public Health Service conducted a study on hundreds of black day laborers and sharecroppers in Alabama. The “Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male” examined the progression of untreated syphilis, under the assumption that the infection manifested differently in black people. The subjects were told they would receive treatment for what was described as “bad blood,” but they never did. Instead, they were poked and prodded while the illness was allowed to progress. Once the men died, doctors autopsied their bodies to compile data on the ravages of the disease. The effects of the Tuskegee syphilis study still reverberate in the form of distrust and sometimes avoidance of the health care system among black Americans. In our current moment, this medical distrust has shown up in the form of those conspiracy theories and low-information rumors about Covid-19 — akin to the false theories and rumors that were also prevalent during the AIDS era — that Dr. Benjamin-Robinson of the Louisiana Department of Health warned against and Idris Elba tried to dispel.
Joseph Sumter Sr.’s widow, Leola C. Sumter, and Jonathan O. Sumter, their son. Sumter, a Zulu member who owned a print shop, died of Covid-19 at age 79.
But the Heckler Report recommended no new government funding to address the crisis. Instead, the report essentially advised black Americans to save themselves by improving their health through education, self-help and self-care. Dr. Edith Irby Jones, president of the National Medical Association, a black medical society, was one of many critics of the report’s emphasis on merely health education and lifestyle changes. “If black people would only ‘behave,’ their health problems would be solved,” she wrote in 1986 in the association’s journal. The insidious conclusion was that black people, individually and collectively, were poor, irresponsible, careless, uneducated and making thoughtless choices that led to the health crisis in the first place. There was — and remains — little focus on the societal conditions that erode the health of black Americans, and little mention of discrimination and bias either inside or outside the health care system.
Many of the same experts who had pushed to release coronavirus data by race also worried that racial disparities in infections, hospitalizations and deaths would be used against black people. And like clockwork, after cities with sizable populations of black people began to report large numbers of Covid-19 infections at the beginning of April and statistics showed disproportionate death rates for African-Americans, a counternarrative began to arise: The national, state and municipal shutdowns were too draconian; the coronavirus pandemic was not as much of a threat — at least, not to all Americans — as had been argued. A smattering of demonstrations broke out the week of April 13, as protesters gathered in a handful of states to push back against stay-at-home orders.
Merlin Jackson, 75, a Zulu member, is a public-school employee. He tested positive for Covid-19.
Charles Goldston, 51, a Zulu member, is a security officer. He tested positive for Covid-19.
On Sunday, March 15, the day after he was admitted to the hospital, Dickey Charles’s oxygen levels had become unstable, with his fever spiking and breaking. Late that evening, a chest X-ray showed potential signs of pneumonia. Nicole, who had been sleeping on a pullout chair next to her husband in his room, said one of the doctors told her it was time for an honest conversation. “They said, ‘Your husband is much sicker than he looks,.” she remembers. .‘His lungs will not be functioning much longer. We need to vent him.’” 
Nicole was able to stay with Charles for the next three days, locked to his side. Attached to the ventilator, unable to speak, he looked surprisingly peaceful to her, even vital. She kept up a vigil of prayer, whispering “I love you” over and over. She streamed gospel music on Pandora on her phone, taking comfort in the song “The Blood Still Works.” “It’s still healing,” she sang to him. “There is power in the blood of Jesus, the blood still works.” She had Charles’s phone with her and did her best to field an avalanche of calls from worried family members and Zulu brothers. “I told them, ‘Please keep him in prayer,.” she says.
On Wednesday, March 18, while Nicole was in the midst of praying, Charles opened his eyes. “I said to him: ‘Baby, you opened your eyes for me! I love you so much,.” she recalls. “That was the last time I saw my husband with his eyes open.” The next day, Nicole says, hospital administrators told her she could no longer visit her husband because of a shortage of personal protective equipment. Louisiana’s caseload had increased to 392 cases from 280 the day before. At a news conference, Governor Edwards announced that the state’s health care system could be overwhelmed in seven to 10 days on its current trajectory.
The following day, as Nicole was subsumed by staggering grief, she received a call that Charles’s Covid-19 test had come back positive. Since his death, she and Le’Treion have tested negative for the virus. Bethaney and Nicole’s father, Burnell Scales, have tested positive; Bethaney has remained asymptomatic, while Scales had mild symptoms and has since recovered.
The afternoon Charles died, Jay Banks was crushed to learn that two other friends had died as well. The same day, at a White House briefing, President Trump stated, “There is tremendous hope as we look forward and we begin to see the light at the end of the tunnel.” At a Fox News town hall, he said: “I would love to have the country opened up and just raring to go by Easter.” Since then, Reese, the Zulu club’s chaplain, has posted a heart-wrenching scroll of deaths on his Facebook page: the Zulu warriors who have received, he wrote, “their wings.” On March 26, Earl Henry Jr., 63, died. He was a Zulu member for nearly half his life. Three days later, Terry Sharpe Sr., 49, died. He drove a truck for a living and was a loyal member of Pilgrim Baptist Church. On March 31, Larry A. Hammond died. A retired postal worker, he was a member of the Omega Psi Phi fraternity and a veteran of the Air Force; he died in the local V.A. hospital. On the day of his death, Mayor Cantrell tweeted that he had been “a vital part of our city’s rebirth after Katrina, and a culture bearer in the truest sense.” She included a picture of them smiling together. Hammond was wearing his Zulu jacket.
Linda Villarosa is a contributing writer for the magazine, focusing on race and health. She teaches journalism and black studies at the City College of New York in Harlem. Villarosa’s 2018 cover story on black maternal and infant mortality was a finalist for the National Magazine Award in public interest.