Parenting|I’ll Never Be a ‘Type A’ Mom, and That’s O.K.
I’ll Never Be a ‘Type A’ Mom, and That’s O.K.
My version of parenting isn’t always Instagram-worthy.
When my house is a disaster and I’m home all day with my three kids, I don’t clean it — I escape the mess. One recent morning I packed my kids into our van and headed to my friend Hannah’s home, where I knew there’d be no clutter, but there would be a full fridge. While Hannah warmed up some homemade biryani, my daughter Penny poked around her organized kitchen, asking to see which spices were used to make our lunch. Hannah slid out a drawer filled with colorful spices, each carefully labeled in matching glass containers.
While our children played, and the microwave hummed with our warming meal, I felt a sinking feeling in the pit of my stomach. I pictured the chaotic jumble of spice jars and packages in my own kitchen, some spilling out and dusting the shelf. I added the sad state of my pantry to a mental checklist of all the ways I’m failing my children, from the mess of clothes in their drawers to the bedtime routine that we never stick to. Was I failing my kids because I couldn’t pull myself together?
I’ve always identified as a Type B, go-with-the-flow personality — excessively relaxed, and lacking in any schedule or routine. My earliest memories recall a pint-sized version of myself scrambling to find my homework or my shoes. Motherhood has only amped up the disorder in my life, and now I have three more pairs of shoes to find. When I compare myself to more put-together mothers, I start to shrivel up in embarrassment.
I don’t have a printable household calendar on my wall, or a color-coded chore chart on my fridge. I rarely remember to pack diapers in my 2-year-old daughter’s diaper(less) bag, relying on the forward-thinking parents at playgroup or at the park when my toddler needs a diaper change. It’s not that I don’t care, I simply struggle to remember. Even when I do try to implement new systems to avoid forgetting essentials, I often ditch them after a week — and end up feeling guiltier than I did before.
When I succumb to the grip of parental comparison, I start to believe that I’m less valuable because of my laissez-faire tendencies. It doesn’t help that our culture favors effortlessly efficient parents. Our 21st century version of motherhood has not evolved as much as we’d like to think beyond 1950’s archetypes. Instead of “Today’s Woman: The magazine for young wives” touting the perfect patterned dishware, we have picture-perfect Instagram influencers and online magazines telling us to Marie Kondo, or else. What you don’t see are articles lauding the benefits of ditching schedules, or tossing your shoes into the closet willy-nilly. But that’s who I am, and the harder I try to change, the more stubbornly my proclivity toward chaos trends.
I know that I’ll never be the parent who cuts cucumbers into star shapes for perfectly organized bento boxes, but I do crave a sense of stability — of knowing what comes next. I don’t want to be late to drop my daughter off at preschool every day, and I don’t want to keep forgetting those darn diapers, either.
So I enlisted some help in my quest to get a better handle on my family’s domestic life.
Eileen Kennedy-Moore, Ph.D., a clinical psychologist and author of “Kid Confidence: Help Your Child Make Friends, Build Resilience, and Develop Real Self-Esteem” chatted with me about some of my tendencies toward disorganization. “It may be harder for you to keep a schedule, that doesn’t mean you’re incapable of doing it,” she said. It’s important not to rely on willpower when trying to make changes to your routine, she emphasized, because willpower gets easily depleted.
Dr. Kennedy-Moore suggested that I start small, and choose one area that I’d like to work on. For example, if I don’t typically remember to pack diapers in my bag, I may decide that I cannot brush my teeth in the morning until I’ve packed what I need. Linking one morning ritual that I never forget to a morning habit that I often forget may lead to success.
Maybe I’m pigeonholing myself, anyway. There’s little scientific foundation behind Type A and Type B personalities, Dr. Kennedy-Moore said, but we all have tendencies based on inborn temperament and experience. While putting people into two neat personality boxes likely isn’t sufficient, it does make it easy to differentiate between those of us who are typically more organized and people, like me, who aren’t. “We don’t want to say that we are doomed,” she cautioned. We should be gentle with ourselves when we make mistakes or our plans don’t work out, she added. If I forget to pack diapers even after establishing a new routine, I shouldn’t label myself as a failure — perhaps that plan just wasn’t a good fit, or I need more practice.
I’d never thought about the value I bring to my children by being spontaneous, extra-patient and open-minded, because I’d been focused on negative labels, and changes I want to make. This toxic mindset, and comparing myself to parents who look perfect on social media, has left me criticizing parts of myself that don’t need changing. Both Reynolds Lewis and Dr. Kennedy-Moore advised that I step away from Instagram.
What do I honestly think will change if I am suddenly organized? Would I be a better person, or a better parent somehow? When I packed my children up and headed to my friend Hannah’s place I wasn’t just escaping to a cleaner, more organized home — I don’t actually care about her organizational systems, even though they are impressive. I went to her house that day because Hannah makes me feel safe. And that’s not because of her homemaking skills, it’s because of who she is: a comforting, wise and compassionate friend. I’d like to think Hannah chooses me as her friend because I make her feel that way, too.
I’ve spent so much time labeling myself as a frazzled parent that I viewed myself more as a caricature, and less as a complex woman with my own strengths. When Dr. Kennedy-Moore cautioned me to stop looking at myself as a Type B personality, I bristled at the idea that I might lose that part of myself. Instead, I’m learning to appreciate those parts of me that don’t need labeling. As adults, my kids won’t recall the number of diapers I’ve “borrowed” from kind strangers. They’ll just remember me for who I am — their perfectly flawed mother who was always generous with her love.
Brianna Bell is a Canadian journalist, wife, and mom to three daughters. Her work has been published by The Globe and Mail, the CBC and The Independent, among other outlets. She’s currently at work on a memoir.