Baby|Do Babies Cry in Different Languages?
A pioneering German researcher decodes newborns’ cries. Here’s what they reveal.
In a sunny hospital room in the German university town of Würzburg one recent afternoon, Dr. Kathleen Wermke positioned her microphone next to the tiny red face of a 4-day-old named Joris. As Joris’s mother, Judith Fricke, began changing his diaper, the baby wriggled, stretched and opened his eyes.
He didn’t appear to at first. But eventually, Joris let out a few snorts that built up to a disgruntled cry. This was the moment Dr. Wermke, a biologist and medical anthropologist who studies babies’ first sounds, had been waiting for. She made a recording for later analysis in her lab, Würzburg University Clinic’s Center for Pre-Speech Development and Developmental Disorders. But even without the aid of computerized tools, Dr. Wermke could make out a distinctive pattern in Joris’s wail.
“He really cried in German just now, right?” she said, smiling as she packed up her equipment.
Quantitative acoustic analysis of these recordings has produced further insights into the factors that shape a baby’s first sounds. Newborns whose mothers speak tonal languages, such as Mandarin, tend to produce more complex cry melodies. Swedish newborns, whose native language has what linguists call a “pitch accent,” produce more sing-songy cries.
These studies underpin the lab’s broader effort to map the typical development of a baby’s cries, as well as vocalizations like cooing and babbling. Knowing what typical development looks like, and what factors can influence it, helps doctors address potential problems early on.
Dr. Wermke’s team already routinely works with doctors at the Würzburg University Clinic to support babies with hearing difficulties, recording babies before and after they receive hearing aids or surgery. These recordings can help doctors and parents understand how hearing problems are affecting the babies’ ability to imitate and experiment with language — long before this would otherwise become obvious — and how they are progressing after treatment.
Hearing and imitating are fundamental to language development. By the third trimester, a fetus can hear the rhythm and melody of its mother’s voice — known as “prosody.” Since individual words are muffled by tissue and amniotic fluid, prosody becomes the defining characteristic of language for the fetus. After they are born, young babies mimic many different sounds. But they are especially shaped by the prosody they heard in the womb, which becomes a handy guide to the strange sounds coming from the people around them. Through stress, pauses and other cues, prosody cuts up the stream of sound into words and phrases – that is, into speech.
In English, for example, a stressed syllable is often a cue for the start of a word, as in: English language. In French, a lengthened syllable signals the end of a sentence, as in: “Bonjour Madame!” Long before they can speak, babies begin to recognize patterns like these.
Dr. Wermke played her recording of baby Joris on a computer, using specialized software that mapped the fluctuating pitch and intensity of his cries. Joris took a breath and let out a gently falling sound as he exhaled, as if his voice were gliding down a long slope: Waah! He took a breath and repeated the sound: Waah! Together, these sounds formed the chain so typical of newborn cries: Waah! Waah! Waah!
On the screen, each “Waah!” appeared as a little arc with one long, sloping side.
In a healthy newborn, the shape and sequence of these individual arcs evolve rapidly. Within the next days and weeks, Joris is expected to combine the arcs, using them as building blocks for his ever-closer imitation of the sounds he hears from the adults around him: Waahwaah! Waahwaahwaah!
Eventually, he will produce his first consonants. For example, pressing his lips together will naturally result in an “m” sound. Waah-waah will become Ma-ma — “Mama” being the German word for “mother,” as in many other languages, probably because it is so easy to say.
Wermke played me a recording of a cooing 2-month old with profound hearing loss. At this age, he should be producing varied, gliding melodies, visible on the screen as multiple arcs during each exhale. Instead, the screen shows a series of individual bumps, mixed up with his breathing.
Pinpointing problems at this early stage can help put a baby’s development back on track, especially if the parents articulate words carefully to show how each sound is formed.
We listen to another baby. She is almost 10 months old, and has just had a cochlear implant, which turns sound into electric signals and sends them to the cochlear nerve. Implanting it is a big decision, as the operation irreversibly destroys any remaining hearing.
Soon, however, she grows used to it. What happens next is astonishing.
In just over a month, the baby undergoes a fast-forward version of the typical developmental path. She races from single arcs to multiple arcs to syllables with consonants. The next stage will be words.
“They catch up pretty fast,” Dr. Wermke said of post-implant babies.
The 2-month-old with hearing problems also makes a leap. Nine days after receiving a hearing aid, his irregular, choked cries have given way to confident experiments with vowel sounds.
It’s not just babies with hearing devices who can be tracked this way. Two of Dr. Wermke’s Ph.D. students, Pauline Hammerstädt and Jasmin Mack, showed me a tiny plastic plate that’s used to cover the roof of the mouths of newborns with a cleft palate. They analyze recordings of babies with and without the inserted plate from birth to 180 days, to investigate how this affects their speech development. Such information can help doctors decide on the best treatment plan.
She demonstrated this to me in her office, puckering her lips and filling the room with an undulating, wolf-like sound. I tried to copy her, she offered tips for improvement, and for a while we sat there, howling at each other. Later, I saw her howl at two babies and newborn Joris, none of whom she’d met before. One of the babies laughed with delight and seemed absolutely transfixed. The other stopped crying and relaxed. Newborn Joris turned his head to peer at the howling scientist, let out a deep sigh and fell asleep.
And the howl? After returning from my trip, I tried it out on my 3-week-old nephew. My version was not as melodious as Dr. Wermke’s, but to my delight, it sort of worked. He snuggled against my shoulder and stopped crying – at least for a little while.
Sophie Hardach is a journalist and author living in London. Her next book, “Languages Are Good For You,” celebrates linguistic diversity. It will be published by Head of Zeus in 2020.