Families related through a shared sperm donor unite to explore their uncommon connection.
This story was originally published on Jan. 24, 2020 on NYT Parenting.
Josephine, 7, had dragged every couch cushion to the corner of the Airbnb’s living room to construct a womb-like structure. She burrowed into the cocoon, her tiny limbs concealed from view. From across the room, her half sister spotted her wisps of hair peeking out from the cushions and took a running leap onto the fort. She peeled back a layer of pillows and brought her face close to Josephine’s so that their noses touched.
“I love you,” the half sister whispered, unprompted, then sped away.
For generations, Hollywood and classic literature sold a storyline as familiar as it was reductive: Unhappy families come in many varieties, we were told, but happy families look mostly alike. Families like Josephine’s are rewriting that age-old plot.
Josephine and the other children gathered in a rented house west of Toronto share a significant portion of their genetic material. They are “diblings,” a term that has come to characterize children from different families who were conceived with the same sperm donor. Their own network now includes 31 kids, who live in the United States, Canada, Britain and Australia. The oldest known member of the group is 7, and the youngest is less than 1 month old. Eight of them met in mid-July for their second summer reunion.
There is little data on the number of donor-conceived children in the United States; the most frequently cited figure is from a 2010 study, which found that the United States sees roughly 30,000 to 60,000 children born from sperm donation each year. The United States has no legal limitations on how many offspring can come from a single donor, though some sperm banks have set constraints.
While Norway, China and other countries have imposed limits on the number of births per donor, the Food and Drug Administration rejected a petition seeking similar limitations in 2018, claiming such regulations would exceed the agency’s mission to screen donors for communicable diseases. As a result, North America has hundreds of half-sibling networks that include upward of 20 and even more than 100 children.
The Donor Sibling Registry says it has connected nearly 18,000 donor-conceived children with their half siblings or donors worldwide. The nonprofit was created in 2000 by Wendy Kramer, a Colorado mother who wanted to help her son, Ryan, contact his siblings.
The proliferation of hundred-strong dibling groups has spawned stories of relatives meeting by coincidence — in a college dorm room at Tulane University, for example — or by design, connected through genetic tests like 23andMe. Often, these meetings occur when children get older, as the self-discovery of adolescence prompts a curiosity about biological roots.
Namerow, Klein and the other dibling mothers decided they wanted to dispel the mystery for their children early on. They wanted them to grow up in each other’s lives, more like cousins than stranger lookalikes. In 2017, they organized their first dibling meet-up, in New Hampshire.
As children climbed the furniture and played patty-cake at the Toronto reunion, the mothers remarked on the frictionless nature of their gatherings. Their weekend included pedicures and an afternoon at a local amusement park. One mother said that her son, who was typically shy, seemed immediately at ease; another said that her daughter now sleeps with the dibling photo book in her bed.
Looking around the house, Marks was struck by how closely some of the children physically resembled each other. Rasheda Carroll, another dibling mom, mused at shared behaviors, like picky eating; Namerow noted several wrinkled-nose expressions and large, doey eyes.
Beyond their genes, there’s a common denominator, absent but subtly felt: the donor. Some of the diblings know him by name, others don’t know he exists at all. Carroll referred to him as “the helpful man,” because the term “sperm donor” felt, to her, too clinical.
The mothers said they believed that their shared interest in the donor, who was selected from hundreds of contenders, at least partially explained why the group got along so seamlessly. Marks said that his profile gave her the sense that, if he were younger, they’d be in the same group of friends.
To Carroll, sorting through donor essays felt like reading dating profiles. She found it tough determining the traits she wanted in her child’s genetic pool — especially since her job, as assistant head for equity, inclusion and counseling at an elementary school, involves teaching people not to place a premium on qualities like race and physical appearance.
“I wanted someone who seemed kind,” she said. “Education mattered. Height still mattered, a little bit.” In reading the donor’s profile, she saw humility and humor. She liked that he was a vegetarian, enjoyed hiking and made a tender joke about his brother in the sperm bank essay.
The values that the mothers sought out in their donor — gentleness, smarts — now help them come together in a tightly woven dibling community. It’s become a social network for the parents as well, who share updates on Facebook and call one another for child care advice.
For some of the dibling mothers, the donor’s Jewish identity was a bonus perk. Not all of the families are Jewish, but many connect over their shared interest in religious observance.
On Friday night, the families held a Sabbath dinner. One family from the dibling group, which had chosen not to participate in the reunion, still drove by to drop off challah. One mother said that in her tradition, each member of the family lays a hand on another as they recite the Sabbath blessings. Crumbs covering the table, the rental home filled with song. The diblings held each other’s arms to create a warm, fleshy web.
Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misstated the birth year for Jordan Namerow and Idit Klein’s son. Lior was born in 2015, not in 2014.
Emma Goldberg is a researcher at The New York Times.