Sunday Review|We Were Planning an Inequality Project. Then History Lurched.
We Were Planning an Inequality Project. Then History Lurched.
Times Opinion will be arguing its way to some proposals for how America can emerge stronger from this crisis.
Mr. Bennet is the editorial page editor.
Last fall, I polled my colleagues in Times Opinion about what subjects they thought we should focus on in 2020. The overwhelming answer was that we should bear down on how inequality of wealth and income was distorting American society.
Yet in the following weeks, as we worked to put together a project on inequality to appear later this spring, we ran again and again into the same challenge: When our readers had already heard so much about the subject, from us and others, how could we get across the urgency of actually doing something about it? In an era of partisan gridlock, how could we promote real change?
And then history lurched. The coronavirus pandemic scrambled our plans, along with those of the rest of the world. It cast searing light on the ideas we were debating. Yes, the pandemic may have reminded Americans that they were all still bound together. But it also began demonstrating, day by day, how dangerously far apart they were.
Sick people, lacking paid leave, couldn’t afford to stop working. Others who lost their jobs lost their health insurance, too. White-collar workers on lockdown discovered they were counting on people without health care to endanger themselves by delivering food. Poor children began falling behind in school because their parents couldn’t afford internet access. African-Americans in states like Louisiana began dying in numbers out of all proportion to their share of the population. The coronavirus was a serious blow. But it quickly became obvious that America’s pre-existing conditions had left the country far weaker and more vulnerable than it should have been.
That meant, as our introductory editorial argues, that this pandemic offers the same opportunity that Americans have seized during past crises: To recognize national priorities and set to work again creating a more perfect union. We’re launching this initiative in hopes of supporting that national instinct.
In this first, foundational “chapter,” you’ll find pieces examining the consequences of past pandemics, the perversities of American health care, the particular cruelties of racism, and the moral dimensions of this emergency. You’ll encounter people like Melissa L. St. Hilaire, a home care aide fired during the pandemic who is struggling to feed her son. You’ll also find a statistical primer on inequality. In subsequent chapters over the next two months we’ll explore the geography of inequality and the dynamics of labor and capital, and assemble some solutions. The full project can be found here.
Our premise — our hope — is that the crisis might be enough of a shock to shake American politics out of its special-interest-induced coma. Already the pandemic has usefully complicated catchphrases that have dulled the discourse for decades. Opponents of “big government” have recognized, at least tacitly, that the federal government has a central role to play in managing the economy and assuring sensible outcomes; advocates of “socialism” must see that private laboratories have played a critical role in creating rapid, reliable tests for the disease, after the government botched the job.
Perhaps above all, the pandemic has illuminated how cramped the American conception of freedom has become. Yes, wealthy Americans enjoy tremendous liberty. But can we really claim all Americans have the same inalienable rights when the ZIP codes they were born into so determine their possibilities?
Times Opinion will remain focused on the tragic cost of the pandemic. It will continue to analyze the news as the story unfolds, debating the most sensible steps to save lives and get the economy moving again, while also keeping a close eye on how life is changing.
At the same time, through this project, we’ll be arguing our way toward a set of proposals for how American society can eventually emerge from this crucible stronger, fairer and more free. As always, we will be soliciting dissenting views as we go. Our goal, also as always, is not to tell you what to think — we don’t presume to do that — but to aid you in the project of thinking for yourself, and the United States in the never-ending project of renewing itself.