Neal Nibur has lived in a nursing home for about a year, ever since he had a bad bout of pneumonia. Now, the 80-year-old man has not only his own health to worry about but that of his neighbors at the Poughkeepsie, N.Y., residence. Four new patients recently arrived from the hospital with Covid-19.
But states are increasingly turning to nursing homes to relieve the burden on hospitals and take in Covid-19 patients considered stable enough to be released. Although there is no evidence so far that the practice has allowed infections to spread in nursing homes, many residents and advocates fear that it is only a matter of time. One lawsuit in New Jersey alleges that a worker was likely to have been sickened by a Covid-19 patient readmitted from a hospital.
In contrast to these states, Connecticut and Massachusetts designated certain facilities for Covid-19 patients alone — considered the safest way to free up hospital beds. The Washington Health Care Association, which represents long-term care facilities in Washington State, has asked officials to adopt a similar policy; so far, they have not.
The fears that moving coronavirus patients to nursing homes might spark outbreaks is compounded by the lack of protective equipment at many facilities, as well as shortages in staffing, requiring workers to interact with more patients. And not all hospitals are testing to check whether stable patients are still infectious before releasing them.
In a national survey released on Thursday of almost 9,000 nursing homes, fewer than 10 percent said they were able to take in new Covid-19 patients from hospitals. The survey was done by CarePort Health, a company that works with hospitals to manage the release of patients to long-term care facilities.
The New Jersey lawsuit, filed on Wednesday against Alaris Health at Hamilton Park in Jersey City by a former nurse, alleges that another employee, a certified nursing assistant, was probably exposed to the virus from a patient readmitted from a hospital.
The assistant was not given protective equipment and not properly isolated while treating the patient, according to the lawsuit. It also said that workers and residents were not told about the patient’s Covid-19 diagnosis. The patient died around March 29, the lawsuit said. Cheryl Roberts, the nursing assistant, was put on a ventilator and died on April 5, said her brother, Darryl Roberts.
“I was devastated, because not only did they put my sister in jeopardy, they put the whole facility in jeopardy,” Mr. Roberts said.
Cheryl Roberts, a nursing assistant at Alaris Health who died after being put on a ventilator.
In New York, the new rule has increased strain on nursing homes, many of which are now staffed at less than 50 percent, said Stephen Hanse, the president and chief executive officer of the New York State Health Facilities Association and the New York State Center for Assisted Living.
Mina Ebrahem, 31, a physical therapist in New York City, works for agencies that have sent him to several nursing homes over the past month. All were admitting Covid-19 patients from hospitals while providing only limited protective equipment, he said. At one home, he helped check in new patients, about five a day. He said 90 percent of them had been treated for coronavirus symptoms at hospitals.
Mina Ebrahem, a physical therapist, has worked at multiple homes in New York City that have accepted infected hospital patients.
On Thursday, Mr. Cuomo reiterated that nursing homes had to accept the patients — but only, he clarified, if they could do so safely. Homes unable to comply should transfer them to other facilities or notify the state Health Department, he said.
The department, responding to questions from The Times, said that nursing homes were not permitted to discriminate against Covid-19 patients, but that they should avoid taking patients if not “medically prepared.” Mr. Zucker said on Thursday that he did not know of any homes in that position.
“Nursing homes are simply not equipped to act as hospitals and should not be used as depositories for infected individuals,” he wrote in a letter to health officials last week, adding that patients should instead be sent to facilities designated for Covid-19 patients, separate from large populations of elderly residents.
While the rule is still in effect, Mr. Jacobson said he was heartened by the governor’s remarks on Thursday and hoped nursing homes ill equipped to handle Covid-19 patients would reject them.
Connecticut and Massachusetts both set aside facilities to care for Covid-19 patients. One in Connecticut started accepting patients from hospitals last week. Massachusetts emptied one site of other residents and reopened seven closed facilities to treat positive patients.
Nursing homes in Massachusetts are also being asked to take coronavirus patients, but only if they verify that they have adequate staff and protective gear and can isolate the infected. In return, those homes will collect 15 percent more in reimbursements for every Medicaid patient.
John Stubits, 96, a former civil engineer, was sent by a Michigan memory care center to a nearby hospital on March 30, where he tested positive for the virus. He briefly improved, and the hospital searched for somewhere to discharge him, according to his daughter, Eva Stubits. His previous residence would not accept him unless he tested negative for the infection; no other home in the state would take him.
John Stubits, 96, was being treated for the coronavirus when his hospital discharged him to a nursing home.
Ms. Stubits said she was told that her father would be sent to a home in Ohio, more than an hour away. But those plans unraveled when Mr. Stubits became much sicker. Last week, his daughter learned that the hospital planned to send her father to a nursing home in Detroit with poor ratings. After many phone calls, Ms. Stubits found another home about 30 minutes away from his previous residence.
Despite everything, on Friday, Mr. Stubits died at the nursing home.
Reporting was contributed by Sarah Almukhtar, Jake Holland, Danielle Ivory, Jesse McKinley, Alison Saldanha, Mitch Smith, Timothy Williams and Karen Yourish. Susan C. Beachy contributed research.