New York|A Beloved Bar Owner Was Skeptical About the Virus. Then He Took a Cruise.
Joe Joyce oversaw JJ Bubbles, a welcoming tavern in a conservative corner of Brooklyn, for 43 years until he died of Covid-19.
Joe Joyce, left, the owner of JJ Bubbles, a popular neighborhood bar in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, with his family in the 1980s.
The only child of a single mother who struggled with depression, Joe lost his father when he was 7 — maybe to a heart attack, he was never really sure. At the Tankard Inn, distinguished in the Brooklyn happy-hour scene of the period as a “couples bar,” Joe seemed to find his place in the conviviality of saloon life — the constant company of other people; the distracting kookiness and drama of the regulars; the dutiful marrieds, the swingers. He wanted a bar of his own.
That ambition was fulfilled when he opened JJ Bubbles in Bay Ridge in 1977. The neighborhood was newly famous following the release of “Saturday Night Fever,” the blockbuster showcasing the area as a center of white working-class frustration and epic escape.
It was a good time to own a bar in southwest Brooklyn; the vibe didn’t accommodate restraint. But even as moods and tastes shifted, JJ Bubbles and Joe Joyce largely thrived — a son sent to Harvard, a daughter to graduate school at Brown, a getaway place bought in New Hampshire — until the cruelest interventions of the pandemic, last month.
I have heard about Joe Joyce for as long as I have known his oldest son, Eddie, a neighbor and friend, a lawyer turned novelist who was at odds with his father politically but grateful for his contradictions. Joe Joyce was a Trump supporter who chose selectively from the menu of current Republican ideologies, freely rejecting what didn’t suit him. He didn’t want to hear how much you loved Hillary Clinton, as one regular at his bar put it to me, but he was not going to make the Syrian immigrant who came in to play darts feel as if he belonged anywhere else.
Last year, Vice Media went to JJ Bubbles and other bars in Bay Ridge to talk to supporters of the current president and landed on some of these ambiguities, discovering for instance the guy who admired Pete Buttigieg as much as he loved Donald Trump. Where these kinds of voters align is not in the right’s hatred of the marginalized but in its distrust of the news. If the “liberal” media was telling us that a plague was coming and that it would be devastating, why should anyone believe it? Joe Joyce had his skepticism.
The longevity of a bar in New York can almost always be tracked in inverse proportion to its snobbishness. Those that cater to the well paid and highly self-regarding rarely survive consecutive presidential administrations. Novelty compels, and the caravan invariably moves on.
JJ Bubbles became an institution for those who remain: transit employees, ironworkers, teachers, sanitation guys, cops, firefighters, civil servants, accountants, retirees from all those occupations who, for the most part, sought their pleasures close to where they lived and in many cases where they had grown up. Neighborhood bars are places of consistency. For the near entirety of its existence, JJ Bubbles kept only two kinds of beer on tap: Bud and Bud Light. Every fourth drink was free.
In his bar Joe Joyce had set the tone for what evolved into an incongruously progressive place. From the beginning there had been a quiet gay presence that eventually grew. In the 1990s, a couple — Jim and Jim — became regulars. They were caring for a friend who was dying of AIDS. That friend started to come as well.
A decade or so ago saw the arrival of Billy Baby, who had been selling makeup at the Bloomingdale’s flagship in Manhattan since the 1970s and moved to Bay Ridge from the Bronx. Billy Baby (who is really William Zeoli but called that by no one) quickly became a fixture at JJ Bubbles.
Joe was someone who “always had his hand in his pocket,” Billy said. “That’s an old Italian expression meaning you’re always ready to help someone.’’ Joe opened up JJ’s for Billy’s fund-raisers — for a neighborhood community theater, for children’s charities. He supported groups that raised money for food banks and organizations that helped battered women. He worked helping disabled children.
He and his wife then headed to their house in New Hampshire. Their children were checking in from New York and New Jersey, and on March 27, when Kristen got off the phone with her father, she called an ambulance. He was wheezing. His oxygen level turned out to be a dangerously low 70 percent. On April 9, he died of Covid-19. The following day, Artie Nelson, one of his longtime bartenders at JJ Bubbles, and also in his 70s, died of the virus as well.
