The market has been steadily climbing since it hit that bottom, a rebound that began after the Federal Reserve and lawmakers in Washington took steps to protect the U.S. economy from a collapse amid the coronavirus pandemic. Stocks are still down about 19 percent from their late February high.
More recently, the gains have reflected hope that the peak of the pandemic in many cities is near, or already past. The growth rate of hospitalizations in hot spots like New York is slowing; China has lifted its lockdown of Wuhan, the city where the virus emerged; and governments in parts of Europe are making plans to do the same.
After a 3.4 percent rise on Wednesday, the S&P 500 has bounced 23 percent from its low in a disastrous March, despite a darkening outlook for economic growth and corporate profits.
Cole Smead, a portfolio manager at the Smead Value Fund, has been snapping up bargains in beaten-up parts of the market, like oil and energy producers, homebuilders and shopping-mall companies, that are closely tied to short-term swings in the economy.
WeWork has not made scheduled rent payments to the landlords of some of the buildings where it operates its co-working spaces, according to a person briefed on the situation.
With revenues down for surgeries and other care not viewed as essential, providers are scrambling for money to pay for protective equipment and other supplies. “The pressure on the entire health care ecosystem is something I’ve never seen before,’‘ said Mr. Markovich, who hopes to get out the first payments as soon as this week.
These numbers are important because our official statistics cannot keep pace with the abrupt economic changes the coronavirus shutdown has caused. All those closed stores, silenced factories and darkened office buildings are yet to be counted in the government’s official economic numbers, which take months to collect, process and report.
Food banks are squeezed by rising hunger and dwindling resources.
Here are the answers to common questions about these programs. If you have questions, or have applied for small business aid and can tell us how the process went, we’d love to hear from you.
More information on money help during this difficult period be found in our F.A.Q. for individuals and our Hub for Help.
The Walt Disney Company has been badly battered by the pandemic, with its theme parks closed and movies postponed, but the company on Wednesday offered an upbeat update on its nascent streaming service: Disney Plus has passed 50 million paid subscribers worldwide in just five months of operation. Before its November introduction, analysts had predicted that Disney Plus would take a full year to sign up half that many subscribers. A hit series, “The Mandalorian,” has greatly increased demand. The pandemic has likely also helped, with parents looking for ways to entertain homebound children.
Nordstrom, one of the country’s best-performing department stores, said in a regulatory filing on Wednesday that it did not have a “firm date” on when its stores would reopen. Most of the company’s work force — about 69,000 people, according to a separate filing — has been furloughed “or assigned zero hours of work.” Nordstrom has also temporarily closed its headquarters in Seattle.
Amazon said it planned to pause a pilot program that shipped products for sellers on its marketplace in a bid to ease the pressures on its logistics operations, which are stretched thin by the surge in online shopping. The program, called Amazon Shipping, picked up packages that were already packed and labeled from a seller’s warehouse and then delivered them using Amazon’s delivery network. It competed with U.P.S. and FedEx’s ground service.
Reporting was contributed by Peter Eavis, Reed Abelson, Jeanna Smialek, Emily Flitter, Ana Swanson, Stacy Cowley, Karen Weise, Noam Scheiber, Liz Alderman, Jack Ewing, Sapna Maheshwari, Conor Dougherty, Niraj Chokshi, Adam Satariano, Choe Sang-Hun, Jack Nicas, Ceylan Yeginsu, Austin Ramzy, Mohammed Hadi, Matt Phillips, Katie Robertson, Carlos Tejada and Amie Tsang.