Leaders of the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in Manhattan were upset by the involvement of Samaritan’s Purse, led by the Rev. Franklin Graham.
Plans to turn the Cathedral of St. John the Divine into a vast coronavirus field hospital were abruptly shelved on Thursday, with public health officials saying that a leveling off in virus-related hospitalizations in New York City had made them reassess the need for the project.
But behind the scenes, Episcopal leaders said they were upset by the role played in the project by Samaritan’s Purse, an evangelical humanitarian organization whose approach to L.G.B.T. issues runs counter to that of the Episcopal Diocese of New York, which is based out of the cathedral.
The Episcopal Church did not realize that Samaritan’s Purse would be involved in the project when it offered the use of the cathedral to Mount Sinai Health System last month, and the slowing rate of hospitalizations might have created an opportunity for all parties to step back from a fraught situation, officials said.
The project was intended to turn the church, which describes itself as the largest cathedral in the world, into a 200-bed medical facility. If the need for hospital space increases, those plans may be reactivated, but Dean Clifton Daniel III, the cathedral’s leader, said he thought Samaritan’s Purse would not be back.
Kaitlyn Lahm, a spokeswoman for Samaritan’s Purse, said the group decided against opening a field hospital at the cathedral, where the floor was covered on Thursday by blue tarps that bore the relief group’s stylized cross logo. She did not say what had led to the change.
The role of Samaritan’s Purse in responding to the coronavirus outbreak in New York first drew criticism last month when the group, in partnership with Mount Sinai, built a field hospital in Central Park.
Mayor Bill de Blasio said at a news conference last week that the city had received assurances from Samaritan’s Purse that it would follow local anti-discrimination laws in providing treatment. Mount Sinai has defended its decision to partner with Samaritan’s Purse as a pragmatic move during a public health crisis.
The cathedral’s leaders see it as a beacon of an inclusive form of Christianity as well as a representative of New York City in all its diversity.
Its Edenic 11-acre grounds in Morningside Heights are home to an AIDS memorial, and one of its chapels houses a bronze and white gold triptych, “The Life of Christ,” by Keith Haring, a gay artist who died of AIDS in 1990.
One of the Episcopal bishops in New York, Mary D. Glasspool, was the first openly lesbian bishop to be consecrated in the Anglican Communion, of which the Episcopal Church is a part. She and the other bishops declined to comment on the hospital project on Thursday.
Dean Daniel is known for reminding parishioners that Matthew Shepard, a college student killed in 1998 in an act of homophobic violence, was laid to rest in 2018 at the Washington National Cathedral, the Episcopal house of worship that is a fixture of American politics and religion.
On Thursday, he said that the cathedral was ready and willing to help local, state or public health authorities respond to the coronavirus pandemic, and that its commitment to both the city and its core beliefs remained unshaken.
