Theater|Isabelle Huppert Is Busy. But There’s Always Time for Theater.
Isabelle Huppert Is Busy. But There’s Always Time for Theater.
The French actress has five films coming out in 2019, including one while she stars in Florian Zeller’s play “The Mother” at Atlantic Theater Company.
Isabelle Huppert has five films coming out in 2019. The French actress is so notoriously busy that, when playing an exaggerated version of herself in an episode of the Netflix comedy “Call My Agent!” last year, she was depicted shooting two major films at once (and doctoring the script for one of them) while squeezing in an artsy Korean flick on the side and preparing to play Hamlet onstage.
The portrayal is gently satirical. But only just.
The American theater producer Jeffrey Richards approached her with the project by Mr. Zeller — whose “The Father” was on Broadway in 2016 — and she immediately signed on.
Anne, the titular mother, is opaque and elusive. Is she mad? Is she hopped up on too many pills? The character, and the play, do not provide answers. But Ms. Huppert, who has an uncanny gift for portraying women on the edge, should make the mystery compelling.
It’s hard to believe that, with more than 120 films on her résumé, she has had much free time, but since the early 1970s Ms. Huppert, now 65, has also had a thriving stage career. She has appeared in classics by Shakespeare and Ibsen, as well as in drastically experimental, reworked classics like “A Streetcar,” Krzysztof Warlikowski’s spin on Tennessee Williams. She has done contemporary hits — she was in the original Parisian cast of Yasmina Reza’s Tony Award-winning “God of Carnage” — and contemporary tests of endurance, like Sarah Kane’s “4:48 Psychosis,” a grueling play in which Ms. Huppert remained nearly motionless for 105 minutes.
“The Mother,” which is directed by Trip Cullman and also stars Chris Noth as her husband, is only the third time Ms. Huppert has done theater in English, after Schiller’s “Mary Stuart” in London in 1996 and a kinetic, hysterically pitched staging of “The Maids” opposite Cate Blanchett at the Lincoln Center Festival in 2014.

The irony is that, like “The Maids,” “The Mother” was originally written in French. Ms. Huppert has not read the original, nor did she see the premiere in Paris 2012. She jumped straight into Christopher Hampton’s English translation.
At the same time, Ms. Huppert knows a certain looseness is key when working on a project.
In her downtime, away from film and theater, Ms. Huppert likes to ... end up in theaters. She said she loved Sam Gold’s divisive Broadway revival of “The Glass Menagerie” with Sally Field in 2017, and since arriving in New York for “The Mother” she has seen “Blue Ridge” (“Marin Ireland is great, really extraordinary”); “Choir Boy” (“It’s not quite a musical, it’s an adventurous, modern way to renew the genre”); and “True West” (“Very good”). Next on her list was “Network,” by Ivo van Hove, who is slated to direct her in “The Glass Menagerie” at the Odéon Theater in Paris in 2020.
Ms. Huppert was even game for “Rent: Live” at a watch party with her fellow cast members and friends of Mr. Cullman’s.
Then it was back to the rehearsal room to try to make sense of Anne in “The Mother.” Or not: Ms. Huppert has little patience for putting her characters on the analyst’s couch.
She and Mr. Wilson will reunite after “The Mother” concludes for “Mary Said What She Said,” a new monologue by Darryl Pinckney that will open in May in Paris. The show will tour Europe, “then it’s ‘The Glass Menagerie’ with Ivo van Hove,” Ms. Huppert said.
