Europe|A Bargain Store Has Britons Asking: Can You Really Pop the Question With Plastic?
A Bargain Store Has Britons Asking: Can You Really Pop the Question With Plastic?
LONDON — He had thought of everything: a home-cooked, candlelit dinner, a romantic playlist, a declaration of love and a ring.
But when Tim Egerton, 27, got down on one knee and opened up a heart-shaped box to reveal a white sequin cast into plastic, he didn’t quite get the response he was hoping for.
His girlfriend, Danielle Nichol, 26, froze.
With that, Ms. Nichol laughed with relief and then cried out of happiness as she said “yes” several times. Mr. Egerton later confessed that he didn’t have enough money for a real ring, but assured her that he was saving.
The couple’s experience has apparently been widely shared in the last week, as more than 20,000 people have purchased the engagement ring from the discount store Poundland (the British equivalent of America’s Dollar Store). They come in four varieties, with stones resembling diamonds, topaz and rubies, and cost one pound, or about $1.30.
The rings have prompted a flood of proposal posts on social media and television — the British presenter Piers Morgan jokingly proposed to his co-host, Susanna Reid, on air — and nearly as much commentary. While some women have dismissed the rings as tacky or insulting, others have welcomed them as a funny and spontaneous idea that allows women to participate in choosing the real ring.
By Valentine’s Day, Poundland was almost sold out of the rings, but a spokesman said they would bring in new stock after Feb. 14 to meet the unceasing demand.
Browsing the Valentine’s Day gift section at a Poundland store in London’s northern Kilburn neighborhood, Miriam Abati, a married mother of two, said she would have been mortified if her husband had proposed with a plastic ring.
Her friend, Joelle, chimed in. “You don’t buy an engagement ring the same place you buy your house cleaning products,” she said, laughing.
As marriage proposals have modernized in recent years, men and women are increasingly opting to shop together for their rings to avoid expensive disappointments or mistakes, experts say.
When Ms. Nichol announced her engagement to a group of her closest friends on WhatsApp, the first thing they asked after congratulating her was to see the ring.
The Poundland rings have even found favor with older couples. Lizzie Bennetti, a 48-year-old former jeweler, was proposed to on the top of London’s Shard building last Saturday with a placeholder ring.
Her boyfriend, Barry Fricker, 47, later gave her a real diamond ring that she said she loved.
A woman shopping at London’s Portobello Poundland branch disagreed.
