Several Democratic presidential candidates spoke up when the actor Jussie Smollett described a hateful attack based on his race and sexual orientation in January.
Not as many have spoken up since the police said the assault had been staged.
At first, several Democratic presidential candidates expressed support for Mr. Smollett, who stars on the show “Empire.” Senators Kamala Harris and Cory Booker both called the reported assault a “modern day lynching,” comments that Republicans are now criticizing them for.
In a Facebook post on Thursday, Ms. Harris said she was “sad, frustrated and disappointed” by the reports about Mr. Smollett. But other candidates have not publicly revisited their initial views of the case.
Here are the responses — and lack thereof — of Democratic presidential contenders on social media. Several candidates have not said anything.
Two candidates who made statements in January offered new thoughts on Thursday: Ms. Harris and Representative Tulsi Gabbard of Hawaii.
But in her Facebook post on Thursday, she said a false claim to the police “not only diverts resources away from serious investigations but it makes it more difficult for other victims of crime to come forward.” She then pivoted to a discussion of hate crimes, citing F.B.I. statistics showing a 17 percent increase last year.
“Part of the tragedy of this situation is that it distracts from that truth, and has been seized by some who would like to dismiss and downplay the very real problems that we must address,” she said.
Mr. Booker, Julian Castro, Kirsten Gillibrand and Joseph R. Biden Jr. — who is thought to be considering a presidential run but has not announced one — spoke up on Jan. 29 but have not put out new statements.
Mr. Booker used the alleged assault to promote an anti-lynching bill. He said this week he would withhold further comment “until all of the information actually comes out from on-the-record sources”; a spokesman did not immediately respond to a message on Thursday.
But later in the day he tweeted more definitively about Mr. Smollett. “In 2019, he was violently attacked because of his race and sexual orientation,” he wrote. A spokeswoman said Thursday that Mr. Castro had no new comment.
Initially, Ms. Gillibrand, a New York senator, called the reported assault “a sickening and outrageous attack” and said she was “praying for Jussie and his family.” She told CNN this week she would “wait to find out the facts before I make another statement”; a spokeswoman did not immediately respond to a message on Thursday.
Mr. Biden, the former vice president, said “we are with you, Jussie” after the reported attack. A spokesman did not immediately respond to a message on Thursday.