Politics|Elizabeth Warren Formally Announces 2020 Presidential Bid in Lawrence, Mass.
Speaking on a clear, chilly day against a backdrop of old red brick mill buildings at the site of one of the nation’s most famous labor strikes, she said workers now, like workers then, had had enough. She said that replacing Mr. Trump, whose administration she called “the most corrupt in living memory,” was only the first step in fighting back against a system tilted in favor of the wealthy.
The selection of Lawrence was symbolic: In 1912, a historic labor strike was started by a group of women at Everett Mill, where Ms. Warren made her announcement. The senator drew on the strike as a story of women, many of them immigrants, taking on a stacked system and triumphing by gaining raises, overtime and other benefits.
Ms. Warren described the American economy as similarly tilted against the middle class, with wealth and political power concentrated at the top.
Ms. Warren, 69, who took the stage to the Dolly Parton song “9-to-5,” described her own journey, growing up as the daughter of a janitor and going on to become a law professor and a senator. As a scholar of bankruptcy law, she explained, she had studied how the opportunities she was afforded had narrowed in recent decades, as the rich became richer and the middle class was squeezed.
Ms. Warren also received important endorsements Saturday from Senator Edward J. Markey of Massachusetts; Representative Joseph P. Kennedy III of Massachusetts, her former law student; and from the Progressive Change Campaign Committee.
In practical terms, Ms. Warren entered the presidential race over a month ago and has campaigned in Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina and Puerto Rico since then. But as the Democratic field becomes increasingly crowded, the event in Lawrence was seen as a way to draw a fresh burst of attention to her candidacy.
Her announcement comes as she seeks to establish herself in the race as a champion of liberal policy but also as she continues to face questions about her claims to Native American ancestry and her sometimes awkward attempts to settle the issue.
Although there is no evidence that claiming Native American identity helped her professionally, the matter has dogged her throughout her political career. Mr. Trump has long branded her with the slur “Pocahontas,” suggesting that she made up a minority identity.
Mr. Trump weighed in on Twitter on Saturday night, making what appeared to be a derisive reference to the Trail of Tears, during which thousands of Native Americans died while being forcibly relocated from their homelands in the mid-1800s.
On social media, there was immediate blowback to the president’s tweet and accusations he was joking about one of the worst tragedies Native Americans ever experienced to focus attention on his favorite line of attack against Ms. Warren.
Ms. Warren stepped afoul of some Democrats last year when she took a DNA test to prove Native ancestry, which angered some social justice activists and Native American leaders who felt that she gave undue credence to the controversial claim that race could be determined by blood and conflated heritage with tribal citizenship.
Ms. Warren apologized to the Cherokee Nation last week, after months of resisting her own advisers and staff, some of whom had called for her to show contrition earlier. Democratic voters at Ms. Warren’s early campaign stops have repeatedly said the issue was not important to them, but it continues to be discussed.
Several people at the rally in Lawrence said that the issue did not bother them personally but expressed concern that it could be an ongoing weakness for her, especially in a general election.
But some other comments suggested how successful Mr. Trump has been at painting Ms. Warren as fundamentally dishonest about her background.
John Boyle, 18, a high school senior from Andover, who was wearing a “Love Trumps Hate” button and said he was a registered independent, said the issue was a problem for him.
Later in the day, Ms. Warren held an event in Dover, N.H., where voters asked her about topics including veterans affairs and Middle East politics.
One woman said she was appalled by how much money was spent in the last presidential election and asked how Ms. Warren would change the election system.
