For weeks, President Trump has been criticized for exaggerating the brutality experienced by migrant women on the border as he makes his case for a wall.
If the president was suggesting that such savagery occurs daily on America’s southern border, then he was indeed exaggerating. News organizations and immigrant advocate groups were quick to express skepticism. Trafficking experts told the news media they had not heard of such an episode.
But there is some truth to the president’s descriptions of the threat of sexual assault and of women who have been duct-taped and bound.
Human smuggling has grown more and more violent, as border security tightens and as the smuggling of people and drugs becomes costlier and riskier. In this particular kind of border crossing, the smugglers are paid thousands of dollars by the migrants, but the relationship resembles not seller and buyer but prisoner and warden.
The smugglers are called coyotes, and the migrants are called pollos, or chickens, and these terms very much reflect the dehumanized nature of a migrant’s journey through the borderlands. Clients are sometimes forced to take off their shoes or strip to their underwear to prevent them from fleeing. The coyotes control when and what the migrants eat, and where they sleep. They decide when their debt can be considered paid.
And the smugglers are not the only culprits.
In 2000, a Border Patrol agent in Arizona, Dennis M. Johnson, was charged with sexual assault and kidnapping after he forced a 21-year-old migrant from El Salvador to disrobe and perform oral sex on him while she was handcuffed with her hands behind her back.
In 2014 near McAllen, three Honduran migrants — a woman, her daughter and her daughter’s 14-year-old friend — crossed the Rio Grande and came across a uniformed Border Patrol agent. The agent, Esteban Manzanares, bound them with plastic police restraints, put silver duct-tape on their mouths and kidnapped them, driving them around in the back of his Border Patrol truck.
“I thought he was going to harm us, because from the moment that he duct-taped our mouths, I felt that that was not normal anymore,” said the woman, 40, who asked to be identified by her initials, M.G.
Mr. Manzanares tried to kill M.G. and her daughter, and then handcuffed the 14-year-old girl to a tree, her mouth still taped. He finished his shift, returned to the tree for the girl, drove her to his apartment and tied her to a bunk-bed, where he repeatedly sexually assaulted her. Her ordeal ended only many hours later, when law enforcement agents closed in on the apartment, and Mr. Manzanares, facing imminent capture, took his own life.
— MANNY FERNANDEZ, reporting from McAllen, Tex.
Manny is one of a team of New York Times journalists currently deployed along the border. Each week they’ll be sharing a slice of their reporting about the border and the people who spend time on both sides of it.
It’s hard to find one number that encapsulates the myths versus the realities of living in a border city. This one comes pretty close.
It starts with a question about crime. How many murders occurred last year in the South Texas border city of McAllen, the center of the busiest Border Patrol sector and the release point for thousands of asylum seekers from Central America?
That’s right — McAllen had zero homicides in 2018, down from seven in 2017, three in 2016 and two in 2015.
There is cartel-fueled drug violence directly across the border in parts of Mexico, but it largely fails to spillover into McAllen. Undocumented immigrants and drugs are smuggled through McAllen, but the city is largely a crossing point for that flow of people and drugs, not a destination point. Last year’s zero homicides were part of an overall low-crime pattern in the city, which has a population of 142,000. In 1991, about 2,150 cars were stolen in McAllen. Last year, there were 55.
A woman in Immigration and Customs Enforcement custody gave birth to a stillborn baby. The episode was one of several to thrust the issue of caring for migrants in United States custody — especially the youngest — back into the spotlight this week.
Here’s how to go deeper into the conversation.
• House Democrats this week issued subpoenas to three Cabinet officials, escalating a battle against the Trump administration’s policy last yearof separating migrant children from their families. The subpoenas came hours after a House committee sharply questioned an official with the Department of Health and Human Services who oversaw the policy’s implementation. Read more here.
• One issue was this report, from January, that thousands more children might have been separated from their parents at the border last year than the administration initially reported.
• According to a Justice Department report released just ahead of the hearing, the federal government received more than 4,500 allegations of sexual abuse against immigrant children who were being held at government-funded detention facilities over a recent four-year period. Read more about the report here.
• The attorney general of California released findings of a state audit of immigrant detention centers. It found detainees faced barriers to medical treatment. Read more at The Los Angeles Times.