It’s been 541 days since “Game of Thrones” last aired a new episode.
Our long “Thrones”-less night will end April 14, when the eighth and final season of HBO’s biggest ever hit finally kicks off. The Times will be there with the usual array of recaps, interviews and explainers, as well as our day-after newsletter.
Want exclusive “Thrones” interviews and news, as well as the internet’s best articles on that week’s episode? Sign up for our Season 8 newsletter here.
Starting next week, however, we’ll get the whole Westeros ball rolling early with a preseason “Thrones” newsletter: a rewatch guide to the first seven seasons, tackling a different season each week.
If you aren’t yet a subscriber to to our “Thrones” newsletter, here’s a sign-up link. You’ll receive the preseason edition every Monday and Friday beginning Feb. 25, as well as our day-after edition once the season starts. If you’re already a subscriber, you’ll get them automatically.
Want some company? Share the sign-up link with any friends who 1.) love the show but weren’t previously part of our newsletter family, or 2.) don’t really care about it but might want some background for pop-cultural literacy reasons. All are welcome!
Monumentalism has always been a key component of a show that began with a giant sword beheading a deserter and most recently saw a zombie dragon destroying a leviathan Wall.
But this season will be even bigger, with six nearly feature length episodes and some of the largest, most complex sequences ever filmed for television. The final clash between the heroes and the undead White Walkers, in particular, took many weeks to film, including 55 nights of outdoor shooting.
That episode was overseen by the veteran “Thrones” director Miguel Sapochnik, whose previous episodes like “Hardhome” and “Battle of the Bastards” featured some of the show’s most dazzling action scenes. But the new one “makes the Battle of the Bastards look like a theme park,” Peter Dinklage told Entertainment Weekly.
There will be new alliances.
Some of the more enjoyable scenes of the occasionally lackluster Season 7 came when the far-flung characters we’ve been watching for years finally met, or were reunited. Jon and Daenerys, of course, but also Cersei and Daenerys. Jaime and Daenerys. Arya and Sansa. The Clegane boys.
Eagle-eyed fans also noticed Jaime Lannister, last seen finally leaving his toxic sister, Cersei, sporting the armor of the North (Stark country) in a photo released by HBO.
It will be satisfying. Or not.
Casey Bloys, HBO’s programming president, has said that David Benioff and D.B. Weiss, the creators of “Game of Thrones,” have ended the show in a way that is both dramatically and emotionally satisfying. But what else would he say?
More interesting were remarks last year from Sophie Turner, who plays the Stark daughter Sansa. In an interview with IGN, she said that the ending would probably divide viewers. “I think a lot of fans will be disappointed and a lot of fans will be over the moon,” she said.
This jibes with what George R.R. Martin, the godhead of the “Thrones” universe, has suggested, which is that the end of the saga will be bittersweet.
That seems less “bittersweet” than “nutty and unlikely.” But so did plenty of other things that eventually transpired on “Game of Thrones,” so who knows?
Of course, this isn’t really the end.
Well, this part of the story will end. But given the show’s extraordinary — and extraordinarily profitable — success, we’ve most likely only just begun exploring the “Thrones” universe.
This summer, HBO will begin shooting a prequel pilot written by Jane Goldman and Martin, set thousands of years before the events of “Game of Thrones” and starring Naomi Watts, among others.
So while winter is finally here, this game will be on, in some form, for the foreseeable future.