WASHINGTON — He cannot get into the locked Venezuelan Embassy in Georgetown, has no staff and does not even live in a permanent residence in Washington.
Venezuela’s new ambassador to the United States, Carlos Vecchio, is spending his days doing what ambassadors all over the world do — meeting with leaders in his host country to win support for his government.
Yet it is a bit more complicated in the case of Venezuela, because Mr. Vecchio’s leadership is not the only one claiming power in Caracas, the capital.
There are dueling governments, which means there is dueling diplomacy unfolding around the world.
Most nations still recognize the government of Nicolás Maduro, a strongman leader who was re-elected last spring in a disputed vote and whose policies have led Venezuela to economic ruin. They continue to deal with Mr. Maduro’s embassies and diplomats.
But at least 27 countries have recognized the government of Juan Guaidó, the 35-year-old leader of the National Assembly who last week proclaimed himself the interim president and called for new elections.
Among the leaders recognizing Mr. Guaidó are President Trump, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada and the heads of most Latin American nations. As a result, Mr. Guaidó this week appointed ambassadors to at least 11 countries or organizations.
At the same time, Mr. Maduro has recalled at least some diplomats from those nations and shuttered embassies, barring the new appointees from getting in.
If things appear to be in disarray, that is because they are. There is no recent precedent for nations trying to sort out diplomacy with two rival governments that are based in the same capital.
There have been defections, of course. Mr. Vecchio said a dozen of 20 or so Venezuelans working in the embassy in Washington had decided to stay in the United States rather than obey the recall orders. The same has occurred with a handful of diplomats at Venezuela’s consulate in Houston and with at least one, the veteran envoy Scarlett Salazar, in Miami. Mr. Vecchio said he planned to work with them as he built a diplomatic corps in Mr. Guaidó’s name.
“Many of them have been calling us saying: ‘What is going to happen? We want to stay with you, we want to recognize President Guaidó as the new president,’” Mr. Vecchio, 49, said in an interview in borrowed office space in downtown Washington.
The dueling diplomacy is critical in Venezuela’s political rivalry, as the envoys are responsible for maintaining support for their respective presidents from their host country’s leaders. Given Mr. Maduro’s reliance on political support from Moscow, for example, his ambassador is most likely firming ties with President Vladimir V. Putin and the Kremlin. Russia and Cuba are Mr. Maduro’s most important allies.
Mr. Vecchio is doing the same in Washington.
“Our interest is to just put in all the effort, all the pressure, to end the suppression of power, to end the dictatorship,” Mr. Vecchio said of his meetings over the last week with American officials.
“Of course, we will discuss how we can protect our assets right here,” he added.
So far, Mr. Guaidó has dispatched ambassadors to the United States, Canada, the Lima Group and eight Latin American countries. On Tuesday, Mr. Vecchio flew to Washington from his home in Miami, where he has been a political activist working with the Venezuelan opposition in exile, for a White House meeting with Vice President Mike Pence.
Also present was Julio Borges, the ambassador to the Lima Group, an organization of Western Hemisphere countries that have been trying to resolve the long-running instability in Venezuela.
Mr. Vecchio told Mr. Pence and other American officials of the need to block Mr. Maduro’s government from obtaining Venezuela’s foreign assets and to instead turn them over to Mr. Guaidó. In the United States, that includes potentially billions from oil revenues sitting in bank accounts — the United States has imposed oil sanctions on Venezuela — and the embassy itself.
Mr. Vecchio said he had not gone by since arriving in Washington because he wanted to follow proper procedures for legally taking control of it.
He added that the interim government and the United States were scouring the globe to find and secure Venezuelan government assets. “Obviously, if they have an account in Moscow, we’re not going to get at it,” he said.
Mr. Maduro has demanded that the United States shut down its embassy in Caracas. The State Department has refused because Mr. Guaidó has asked the diplomats to stay. Mr. Abrams said the United States would have to find a way to maintain contact with Mr. Maduro and his allies in the absence of formal ties.
Mr. Vecchio is a polished politician who, on the surface, fits the role of ambassador well. He speaks fluent English and did postgraduate studies at Georgetown University and Harvard, where he was a Fulbright scholar. He helped Leopoldo López, his friend and an opposition leader, found Voluntad Popular, the same political party of which Mr. Guaidó is a member.
Fernando Cutz, a former senior White House official on Latin America policy in the Trump and Obama administrations, said Mr. Vecchio was “the right choice” to represent Mr. Guaidó’s government in Washington.
On Friday, Mr. Vecchio flew home to Miami with Mr. Pence and several politicians from Florida, including Senator Marco Rubio, to meet with Venezuelan exiles.
Multinational institutions have taken different approaches on which government in Caracas to recognize.
Changes of government in the Western Hemisphere have previously led to confusion within embassies. In 2009, when the military and the Supreme Court in Honduras ousted President Manuel Zelaya in a coup, he tried to keep his diplomats in foreign embassies even as his successor, Roberto Micheletti, was consolidating power.
Mr. Guaidó’s installation of new diplomats across much of Latin America has had a fitful start.
Humberto Calderón Berti, a former Venezuelan oil minister who served briefly as the nation’s top diplomat in the 1990s, said he was in Madrid when the call came that he had been tapped to represent Mr. Guaidó in Colombia, where a staggering one million economic refugees from Venezuela live.
Mr. Calderón said he has since spoken at least five times with Carlos Holmes Trujillo, Colombia’s foreign minister. He is making arrangements to get accreditation from President Iván Duque of Colombia after Mr. Calderón arrives early next week in Bogotá.
His first task, Mr. Calderón said, will be to take control of the embassy building and remove employees who are loyal to Mr. Maduro and have not cleared out.
The question of who runs the Venezuelan Embassy in Ecuador is causing anxiety in its capital, Quito, where the government once backed Mr. Maduro but is now recognizing Mr. Guaidó.
Ecuador plans to recognize René de Sola Quintero, a lawyer who was appointed as Mr. Guaidó’s ambassador to Quito. But it is unclear whether the host government has the right to remove Mr. Maduro’s appointees from the embassy, an Ecuadorean official said.
Carlos Scull, a 32-year-old Venezuelan political scientist with a banking background, has been named Mr. Guaidó’s envoy to Peru. Mr. Scull said he had spent recent days lobbying Peru’s Foreign Ministry and preparing for an emergency meeting of the Lima Group.
“The truth is we have no physical office,” he said.
Mr. Scull also runs an aid organization to help shelter Venezuelan refugees, and plans to focus on helping refugees who have fled Venezuela’s economic collapse. In total, three million have left Venezuela, including around 600,000 who have gone to Peru.
Mr. Scull himself arrived as an immigrant to Peru last year. He said he had never stepped inside the Venezuelan Embassy in Lima before he was appointed to be Mr. Guaidó’s ambassador there.
