A Second Empire-style condominium in Newport, a brick Tudor in Omaha and an 1870s home in Mobile.
George Champlin Mason Sr., who built several notable Newport buildings, designed this stucco house with a mansard roof and dormer windows for Henry Ledyard, a former mayor of Detroit. In the early 20th century it was the summer residence of Louis Lorillard, the father of a founder of the Newport Jazz Festival. Today it is a five-unit condominium building called Cloverleigh that sits on a hill in the Kay-Catherine neighborhood, half a mile east of downtown and less than a mile west of First Beach.
Indoors: One of two ground-floor units in the building, which was converted from a single-family residence in 2012, this apartment is on the southwestern side and is notably bright. The formal entrance is through a common hall; it opens to a great room with picture-frame molding and hardwood floors laid in a geometric light-and-dark pattern. A dramatic gas-compatible black marble fireplace with swag ornament is at one end of the room, next to a wet bar. A peninsula sets off a small widowed kitchen with granite counters and glass-front cabinets that were repurposed from the original pantry.
Double doors open from the great room to a bedroom (currently used as a sitting room) with striped floors and a fireplace. The en suite bathroom has a marble-tile shower. The master suite is also off the great room and has a fireplace as well as French doors that open to a private lawn. The master bathroom includes a mosaic-and-travertine-tile shower and a closet with a washer and dryer. The entire apartment, inside and out, has an integrated sound system.
Outdoor space: French doors lead directly from the master suite to the lawn. The owners of this unit have exclusive access to a large circular porch and yard, along with three off-street parking spaces.
Birger J. Kvenild, a Norwegian-born local architect, designed this house for Louis A. Metz, who was from a family of successful brewers. It is in the Happy Hollow neighborhood, near restaurants and Memorial Park (known for its celebrity music concerts and extensive rose garden). Downtown Omaha is 10 minutes east.
Indoors: Unusual for the historic neighborhood, this house has for the most part maintained its original floor plan. The plumbing and master bedroom were recently updated, and the kitchen is about 10 years old.
A stair hall, with the same original pegged wide-board floors found throughout the main level, opens on the left to a front parlor with a wall of built-in shelves and niches. Beyond is a living room with original casement windows, crown molding and a gas-burning fireplace, followed by a sunroom with herringbone red-brick floors and white-brick walls.
Off the stair hall to the right is a formal dining room with a bay window inset with tall casement windows. A swinging door opens to a large eat-in kitchen wrapped in custom cabinets, with black granite counters and backsplash. A staircase at the back takes you to the lower level, which has a paneled family room, or up to the second floor.
The more formal approach upstairs is by the front staircase, past a powder room at the base. Four bedrooms and three bathrooms are on this level, including a master suite with a marble-tiled bathroom, an adjacent office and, next to that, a sitting room with a fireplace that could be used as a fifth bedroom.
Outdoor space: In back, the property is divided between a hard-surface driveway leading to an attached two-car garage, and a walled yard with a back porch topped by a pergola. Among the plantings are dogwood, hydrangea and rhododendron, as well as a star magnolia in front and a 100-year-old ginkgo tree in back.
The house, which the owner brought back from decrepitude in 2006, is in the oak tree-studded De Tonti Square Historic District, a few blocks north of downtown Mobile. Its Italianate style, with cast-iron exterior galleries, is typical of the neighborhood. The building is zoned for residential and light commercial use.
Indoors: The original front door, with its etched glass and period hardware, opens to a central hallway that divides a succession of rooms on the left from the formal dining room and kitchen on the right. The left front parlor has high ceilings, pine floors (freed from their linoleum covering) and an original white-marble fireplace. Separated by a pocket door, the rear parlor has a matching fireplace and floral-papered walls.
The dining room, hand-painted with palm trees, includes a black-marble fireplace and a bay window. A doorway with a glass transom leads to a cabinet- and appliance-lined butler’s pantry, and then to an open kitchen and family room with a bar. At the rear of the house is a paneled sunroom converted from a screened porch, with exposed ceiling beams and a fireplace. Here, too, is an office overlooking an orchid house, where the owner kept some 400 plants.
Two guest bedrooms each have a decorative fireplace and a full bathroom, and there is an office that could be used as a fourth bedroom. The double back porch was rebuilt and enclosed with floor-to-ceiling windows overlooking the courtyard.
Outdoor space: A wrought-iron gate borders the front of the house, and a rear wraparound deck with a pergola and a firepit steps down to a paved, landscaped courtyard with a fountain. The 0.2-acre property is lush with oaks and palms.
