WASHINGTON — The House voted on Wednesday to require background checks for all gun purchasers, including those at gun shows and on the internet — the first significant gun control bill to clear the chamber in a quarter of a century.
The 240-to-190 vote is the first of two gun control measures expected to be put to House lawmakers this week, a turning point in gun legislation after 25 years when the National Rifle Association dominated the chamber. Last year’s massacre at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., prompted a wave of student-led activism that pressed Democrats to unite around gun control, and the activists cheered when the measure cleared the 218-vote threshold for passage.
The Democratic victory was tempered, however, after Republicans prevailed in adding a provision that would require the F.B.I. to alert Immigration and Customs Enforcement if an undocumented immigrant tried to obtain a firearm. Twenty-six Democrats, primarily from moderate or Republican-leaning districts, broke party lines to support the measure.
But Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California and other Democrats insisted that would ultimately have little import.
“Finally, we have done more than thoughts and prayers. Finally, we have taken a vote to expand background checks and help save lives,” said Representative Mike Thompson, Democrat of California, who leads the congressional Gun Violence Prevention Task Force.
More than 100 student activists, gun violence survivors and advocates — clad in a sea of orange scarves, ties and blazers to denote their support for the legislation — looked on from the House gallery as lawmakers advanced Mr. Thompson’s legislation, the Bipartisan Background Checks Act. It seeks to close loopholes that allow individuals to buy firearms on the internet or at gun shows without having to pass a background check.
The Democrat-led House is expected to pass legislation on Thursday that would extend the amount of time the F.B.I. has to conduct background checks of gun purchasers, to 10 business days from three. It is an attempt to close the so-called Charleston loophole, which allowed Dylann Roof, the white supremacist who killed nine people in 2015 at a historically black church in Charleston, S.C., to buy a handgun even though he should have been barred from purchasing the weapon.
It is “unlikely” that either measure will be taken up in the Republican-controlled Senate, Senator John Thune of South Dakota, the No. 3 Republican, said on Tuesday. House Republicans have flatly condemned both pieces of legislation, arguing the measures would be both ineffective and infringe on law-abiding citizens’ rights.
Gunmen at the center of a number of high-profile mass shootings passed background checks and legally purchased the firearms they used. But gun control activists have praised both background check measures as a critical first step in a broader drive to reduce gun violence.
Once divided on the issue, House Democrats returned to the majority, promising meaningful action on gun control, with aid from advocacy groups backing candidates who made the issue central to their campaigns. Michael Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York, spent around $100 million in the midterms last year to elect gun control supporters, according to Everytown.
The group will continue its push this week with $400,000 in digital ads urging lawmakers to support the legislation as it tries to break through the Senate.
One of the new freshman Democrats supported by Mr. Bloomberg, Representative Lucy McBath of Georgia, had a 17-year-old son, Jordan, killed by gun violence.
The Republican measure attached to the bill would present a problem if a version of the gun bill cleared the Senate. The measure has angered liberals in the House, who would like to see it removed in House-Senate negotiations.