President Trump’s former lawyer told Congress on Wednesday that Mr. Trump remained deeply involved in the arrangement to pay hush money to a pornographic film actress, even while in the White House, telling him just a year ago to lie to a journalist about the president’s involvement.
Testifying before the House Oversight Committee, the lawyer, Michael D. Cohen, also for the first time publicly implicated the president’s eldest son, Donald Jr., and the chief financial officer of his company, Allen Weisselberg, in the arrangement involving the actress, Stormy Daniels. She had been paid $130,000 before the 2016 election to keep quiet about an alleged affair with Mr. Trump, and Mr. Cohen was reimbursed in 2017 for fronting that money.
While federal prosecutors in New York had laid out a general narrative around the payments, including Mr. Trump’s involvement, Mr. Cohen explicitly placed Mr. Trump at the center of the events, producing checks he described as evidence of the role the president and his company played.
Mr. Cohen pleaded guilty last summer to campaign finance crimes relating to payments made to Ms. Daniels and a second woman, Karen McDougal, who also said she had had an affair with Mr. Trump. He is scheduled to begin serving a three-year prison sentence in May for those and other crimes, including lying to Congress during earlier testimony.
Republican members of the committee on Wednesday repeatedly challenged Mr. Cohen’s remarks as untrustworthy, and even before Mr. Cohen was sworn in, the president posted on Twitter that he was “lying in order to reduce his prison time.” The Trump campaign also released a statement impugning Mr. Cohen’s credibility.
In his cooperation with prosecutors, Michael D. Cohen, President Trump’s former lawyer, has implicated the president in a hush-money scandal and provided other information to the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III.
But in testimony punctuated with flashes of anger and regret, Mr. Cohen said he had seen the errors of his ways and was determined to serve as a positive role model to his children. Insisting he was speaking the truth, he offered the first up-close description of how involved the president remained in concealing details of the payments, even after winning the election.
He described a meeting with the president in February 2017 when Mr. Trump said two of the checks written to Mr. Cohen as reimbursement for the $130,000 had gotten caught up in the White House mail.
Last year, Mr. Cohen said, the president contacted him after The Wall Street Journal first reported the payment to Ms. Daniels.
Mr. Cohen said that he, Mr. Trump and Mr. Weisselberg discussed coordinating a statement that rebutted the report and that asserted that Mr. Cohen had paid Ms. Daniels on his own. He also described receiving a phone call that same month from Mr. Trump during an interview with Vanity Fair in which, Mr. Cohen said, the president directed him to tell the reporter that Mr. Trump had no knowledge of his dealings with Ms. Daniels.
Separately, Mr. Cohen said one of his greatest misgivings surrounding the hush money involved the first lady, Melania Trump. Mr. Cohen said Mr. Trump told him to lie to Ms. Trump about the payment.
Mr. Cohen, who had worked for a decade at the Trump family business, also offered the clearest suggestion yet that Mr. Weisselberg, a stalwart of the company, was a key figure behind the effort to conceal the hush money. The executive has been a focus for several months of an investigation by federal prosecutors in New York, according to people briefed on the matter.
Mr. Cohen suggested that the president and Mr. Weisselberg were mindful of the political and legal tightrope they were walking. He described a meeting he attended with Mr. Trump and Mr. Weisselberg in which Mr. Trump ordered the payment. After the meeting, Mr. Cohen said, he and Mr. Weisselberg debated the best way to pay Ms. Daniels — and then decided to disguise the reimbursement from Mr. Trump to Mr. Cohen by breaking it up into monthly installments.
Mr. Cohen paid the money and in 2017 filed “sham invoices” to the Trump Organization, according to prosecutors.
On Wednesday, Mr. Cohen produced two checks that he said were among 11 installments to reimburse him. One check, dated March 17, 2017, bore the signatures of Donald Jr. and Mr. Weisselberg. The other, dated Aug. 1, 2017, had the president’s.
Mr. Cohen had long been aware of Ms. Daniels and the alleged affair. In 2011, he made legal threats as she promised to detail her allegations to a gossip website, TheDirty.com.
“It was down to the wire,” Mr. Cohen told lawmakers on Wednesday, explaining why he initially paid her out of his own pocket.
A lawyer for Mr. Weisselberg declined to comment. Mr. Weisselberg testified before a grand jury last year while prosecutors were building their case against Mr. Cohen, and was granted immunity from prosecution related to that testimony only.
In response to questions from lawmakers on Wednesday, Mr. Cohen also mentioned Mr. Weisselberg as someone who would know about other possible irregularities at Mr. Trump’s company. The New York Times reported on Friday that Mr. Cohen met last month with federal prosecutors in Manhattan, offering information about possible issues involving insurance claims, and reported last year that Mr. Trump had engaged in suspect tax schemes in accumulating his wealth.
Mr. Cohen was also involved in the hush money payment to Ms. McDougal, a former Playboy model who received $125,000 from American Media Inc., the publisher of The National Enquirer. Mr. Cohen said that Mr. Trump had known she was shopping her story around in the summer of 2016 and that he had intended to reimburse the tabloid company for what it paid to keep her quiet.
“He was supposed to pay,” Mr. Cohen said of the president. “He was supposed to pay $125,000 for the life story of Karen McDougal. For whatever reason, he elected not to pay it. David Pecker was very angry,” he said, referring to A.M.I.’s chief executive.
Prosecutors said last summer that Mr. Cohen had promised to reimburse A.M.I. for the money paid to Ms. McDougal. In October 2016, they said, Mr. Pecker instructed Mr. Cohen to “tear up” the document relating to Ms. McDougal’s contract. He did not, and the document was among those seized in a raid of his office last spring.