PARIS — The Vatican’s envoy to France is under investigation after being accused of sexually molesting an employee of Paris City Hall, French officials said on Friday.
The case adds to a long list of sexual assault accusations around the globe — from minors, other priests and nuns, among others — that have confronted the Roman Catholic Church and that threaten Pope Francis’ pontificate.
The Paris prosecutor’s office opened the preliminary investigation on Jan. 24, according to a spokesman for the French judiciary, after it was informed by Paris City Hall of the accusations. The spokesman, who insisted on anonymity in line with department policy, did not provide further details.
A City Hall official said on Friday that the employee had accused the envoy, Archbishop Luigi Ventura, 74, of “repeatedly” sexually molesting him on the sidelines of one of Mayor Anne Hidalgo’s traditional New Year’s ceremonies, on Jan. 17.
The official, who said he was not authorized to speak publicly about an investigation while it was in process, said that the employee, whose name has not been made public, was in his 30s and worked for the city’s international relations department. On the day he said the sexual assault took place, he was charged with greeting and guiding the archbishop before the ceremony.
Archbishop Ventura, the apostolic nuncio to France, has been the Vatican’s diplomatic representative in Paris since 2009, and he has regularly attended the ceremony, during which the mayor meets with religious leaders and the diplomatic corps. But the City Hall official said this was the first time a city employee had complained about the archbishop’s behavior.
The employee accused Archbishop Ventura of touching his buttocks on three occasions, the official said, first when the Vatican envoy arrived at City Hall, greeting him and complimenting him on his physical appearance. The employee said he thought the gesture might have been involuntary, according to the official.
The employee sought to distance himself from the archbishop, going to another room, but the archbishop followed him and touched his buttocks a third time, the official said. In that instance, four other City Hall employees were witnesses.
The employee left and told his manager, and on Jan. 23 the city authorities formally informed the Paris prosecutor’s office of the episode in a written letter, the official said, as well as the Foreign Ministry.
The investigation comes days before Pope Francis is to meet with the presidents of the world’s bishops’ conferences and other religious leaders at the Vatican for an unprecedented conference focusing on the protection of minors in the church.
Vatican officials have described the four-day event as an educational meeting for pastors to assist the global church to better deal with clerical sexual abuse, especially in areas where the issue has still not received the attention it warrants.
Advocates for victims and church critics say that the Vatican has been largely ineffectual in addressing the issue, and the persistence of scandals throughout the world — cases emerged last year in Chile, Germany, the United States and other countries — continue to threaten the credibility of the church.
Last year, another Vatican diplomat, Archbishop Carlo Maria Viganò, the former apostolic nuncio to the United States, accused Francis of personally covering up cases of sexual abuse and called for his resignation.
In a long letter leaked to the news media, Archbishop Viganò also called out other clerics he accused of belonging to “homosexual networks” inside the church.