LOS ANGELES — Voting for the 91st Academy Awards ends on Tuesday, with roughly 8,200 movie industry insiders using a private website to mark their choices. Just what goes through their minds when they point and click?
To a large degree, Oscar voting is about personal prejudices and petty grievances. (Just read the anonymous voter columns The Hollywood Reporter has published in the past.) It is about who has the most pals in the voting pool, which remains 69 percent male and 84 percent white despite years of diversification efforts. It also involves Hollywood’s changing business landscape — namely, whether Netflix should be embraced by the industry or kept out of the club for as long as possible, regardless of the quality of the films it serves up.
So, as an experiment, I called 20 academy members (none directly associated with any of this year’s nominees) and asked for utter candor: How are you evaluating the eight candidates for best picture?
The problem, at least for a few voters: “Black Panther” was made by Marvel, which is owned by Disney, which has turned every other studio into a box office also-ran. It will be even worse when Disney completes its takeover of 20th Century Fox. “And now we’re also supposed to give Disney the Oscar for best picture?” one voter from a rival studio told me.
On the downside, movies that win best picture usually connect with voters on an emotional level. At least in my little sample, “BlacKkKlansman” fell more into the “deeply admire but don’t feel the need to watch it again” zone.
This Queen biopic, directed by Bryan Singer (at least until he was fired for erratic behavior), ranks as one of the more puzzling best picture contenders in memory. (And that’s saying something, considering that the talking-pig movie “Babe” was a contender in 1996.) Voters used words like “superficial” and “messy” to describe the film, which received lukewarm reviews from critics and prompted an outcry for soft-pedaling gay plot points.
Others seemed unsure whether “The Favourite” sent a positive message about women (Olivia Colman, Emma Stone and Rachel Weisz lead the cast) or ultimately reinforces a “Mean Girls” stereotype (they scheme, double-cross and manipulate).
Directed by Alfonso Cuarón and distributed by Netflix, “Roma” seems to be prompting a crisis of conscience.
Do we vote for “Roma” because we think it’s the best? Or do we withhold our support — regardless of the film’s artistic merit — because we see Netflix as a threat to moviegoing? Although the company pushed “Roma” into about 250 independent theaters in the United States, on par with many foreign-language releases, the streaming giant mostly bypasses cinemas. There are voters in both camps. A couple of those in the anti-Netflix group told me that they would vote for Cuarón for best director as a way to assuage their guilt.
The chief complaint about “Roma” involved its leisurely pace. One voter in the acting branch described the period black-and-white film as important but boring.
It’s a long, bumpy road to the Oscars. And this blockbuster remake — a front-runner for best picture late last year — went kerplop somewhere along the way.
Some voters said they lost their zeal for “A Star Is Born” after the film converted only one of its five Golden Globe nominations into a win (best song). Others faulted Lady Gaga, who plays the main role, for giving speeches on the awards trail (the Globes, National Board of Review) that struck them as cloying. A few older voters said they had gone back to watch the 1954 version of “A Star Is Born,” with Judy Garland, and come away with the belief that the current version wasn’t as good, especially in its second hour.
“The new one is a masterpiece — for 40 minutes,” one producer told me.
Only one person said he would vote for “Vice,” a comedic biopic about Dick Cheney that was directed and written by Adam McKay. “I’m pals with one of the producers, so I feel like I have to,” the person explained in a less-than-ringing endorsement.
Others gushed about the performances in “Vice” (especially Christian Bale’s in the title role and Amy Adams’s as Lynne Cheney) but complained that Mr. McKay’s film, as a whole, was a shade too impressed with its own cleverness and visual gimmicks.
The #OscarsSoWhite outcry from 2015 and 2016 also seems to loom over “Vice.” An organization filled with older white dudes gives best picture of the year to a movie about an old white dude? “We’d get crucified,” one voter said.