BAGHDAD — President Trump said Wednesday the United States would not re-admit an American-born woman who traveled to Syria to join the Islamic State and now wants to come home.
That law does not apply in Ms. Muthana’s case, said Charlie Swift, the director of the Constitutional Law Center for Muslims in America, who is representing her family. Ms. Muthana, he said, was born a month after her father was discharged from his position as a United Nations diplomat.
After she joined the Islamic State, Mr. Swift said, Ms. Muthana’s family received a letter indicating that her passport had been revoked. Her father sent the government evidence of his nondiplomatic status at the time of his daughter’s birth, but did not receive a response.
Mr. Swift said Ms. Muthana had in fact been issued two American passports: one when she was a child, and a renewal she applied for herself just before leaving for Syria. In the case of the first, he says that her father provided a letter from the United Nations proving that he had been discharged, to overcome the jurisdictional challenge.
Hassan Shibly, a lawyer with the Council on American-Islamic Relations Florida who is advising the family, provided a birth certificate for Ms. Muthana that showed she was born in Hackensack, N.J., on Oct. 28, 1994.
“If the passport was a legitimate passport and she was a U.S. citizen, nothing that Pompeo says takes away her citizenship,” Mr. Leopold said.
On the other hand, he said, if her father was an accredited diplomat at the time of her birth, then Ms. Muthana would have been a permanent resident — not a citizen. In that case, he said, the government could have grounds to bar her from re-entry, though she could be eligible for a hearing.
There are circumstances, Mr. Leopold said, in which the government can revoke citizenship, such as a conviction for an act of treason. But taking an oath of allegiance to a terrorist group or committing a crime like providing one with material support would not be enough.
Now 24, Ms. Muthana escaped ISIS-held territory in January, and is in a refugee camp in Syria with her young son.
Ms. Muthana is one of at least 13 people identified as Americans — almost all of them women and children — who are being held in detention camps by Kurdish forces in northeastern Syria. Many of them are facing similar issues as Ms. Muthana does, with their citizenship being challenged on technical grounds. A majority of American men caught on the battlefield were the subject of sealed indictments and have been repatriated to face charges.
