Some Republicans have seized on actions by Representatives Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, center left, and Rashida Tlaib, right, to cast them as radical or anti-Semitic.
Democrats see an insidious effort to use women and minorities, especially women of color, as the new symbols of the radical “other.” And they are calling out Republicans as hypocrites, noting that Mr. Trump and other Republicans trafficked in anti-Semitic tropes and racist dog whistles long before anyone noticed Ms. Omar’s Twitter feed.
But Republicans like Mr. Emmer say they are simply repeating Democrats’ own words, and they have been aided by Democratic stumbles. Ms. Ocasio-Cortez’s team published an early draft of the Green New Deal — which has been backed by several top-tier Democratic presidential candidates — that contained phrases those candidates did not endorse, including a call for economic security for “all who are unable or unwilling to work.” Ms. Ocasio-Cortez deleted the draft from her website, but Republicans took it and ran.
In the Senate, where five Democrats are already running for president, Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, announced he would force a vote on the measure, drawing howls from Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, who slammed the move as a “cynical stunt” intended solely to put Democrats, including the presidential candidates, on the spot. A vote in favor of the Green New Deal could help them court progressives in the primary vote, but hurt in a general election.
Democrats dismissed the messaging as par for the course.
Democrats say they intend to counter the offensive by talking about the issues they ran and won on: reducing health care costs and prescription drug prices, passing an infrastructure package and rooting out corruption in Washington.
But Democrats must be careful not to let those exaggerations take hold. They are well aware that their path to keeping the majority runs through districts like Ms. Bustos’s, which the president carried in 2016.
The National Republican Congressional Committee, meanwhile, began filling reporters’ inboxes with attacks targeted at centrist freshmen, with subject lines like “So we’re murdering newborns now?” and “Abortion extremists come to New Mexico,” referring to Representative Xochitl Torres Small.
The committee has spent weeks lobbing charges of anti-Semitism at Ms. Omar and another freshman Democrat, Rashida Tlaib of Michigan, both fierce critics of Israel. But after Democratic leaders forced Ms. Omar to apologize for insinuating on Twitter that American policy toward Israel was fueled by money, the committee expanded its campaign, suggesting that other Democrats — including Representative Elaine Luria of Virginia, who is Jewish — were somehow abetting an anti-Semite.
Ms. Luria and her team were incensed. “Congresswoman Luria served for 20 years in the United States Navy, and, as a Jewish woman in America, she will not be lectured by Washington Republicans about anti-Semitism,” Ms. Luria’s chief of staff, Kathryn Sorenson, said in an email.
