When the Russian politician Denis Voronenkov was gunned down in Ukraine, officials blamed the Kremlin. The truth was more complicated.
Voronenkov had seen the transcript of the interview a few nights earlier — quote approval is standard in the Ukrainian press — and told a friend over dinner that it was his best yet. Now that it was online, he sent a short note of thanks to the journalist, Natalia Dvali, telling her the article was “interesting” and “accurate” and closing with a smiley face. Handsome with round cheeks and sandy brown hair, he cut a dapper figure in his finely tailored suits. He presented a specific combination of Russian masculinity — he could be gruff and haughty but also earnest and affable, depending on the setting. He could recline, collar loosened, and speak to citizens about the troubled economy, or he could button up, cross his arms and act dismissively when journalists asked about things he didn’t think they needed to know.
Voronenkov was en route to the Premier Palace hotel to meet Ilya Ponomarev, another former member of Russia’s Parliament now living in Ukraine. Ponomarev had taken Voronenkov under his wing in their mutual exile and was helping him compose a filing to Interpol intended to pre-empt a red notice from Russia that would seek his arrest and prevent him from traveling out of Ukraine. Voronenkov told Dvali that he was not afraid of reprisals from Russia — “We all die sooner or later,” he said. “The important thing is how and why we lived” — but privately he was concerned. He had become obsessed with threats emanating from the Russian media, which called him a traitor and rooted for him to “choke on a piece of meat,” and he had personally lobbied the Ukranian government for protection. He strolled down the sidewalk with his bodyguard, while another was at home with his wife and their young son.
Voronenkov remained absorbed in his phone as he walked toward the entrance of the hotel, a grand classical building on the corner of Pushkinska Street, named after Russia’s national poet. Neither he nor his bodyguard saw a young man in a gray sweatsuit, black puffy vest and red sneakers emerge from a silver Daewoo Lanos and trot swiftly toward them from behind. Closing the distance, he shouted, and Voronenkov turned around. Security cameras captured grainy images of the scene: The young man pulled out a Soviet-designed TT pistol and fired, sending Voronenkov to the sidewalk, clutching his stomach. The bodyguard rushed the assassin, and as the two men tussled, the gun went off again. The bodyguard fell face down on the pavement. The gunman ran back to Voronenkov and fired multiple rounds, but as he turned to make his escape, the bodyguard, wounded in the torso, sat up, pulled a gun out of his satchel, took aim and shot the assassin.
In the hotel’s dark-wood-paneled lobby, Ponomarev realized that Voronenkov was running even later than usual. When calls to his cellphone went unanswered, Ponomarev contacted a Ukrainian official, who told him his friend had been shot. He rushed out to find a crowd of onlookers gathered around the three men. Ukraine’s prosecutor general, Yuri Lutsenko, along with the director of Ukraine’s security service, the chief of police and the chief military prosecutor, arrived at the scene and stood around the cordon tape amid the assembling TV cameras. Voronenkov’s wife, Maria Maksakova, was the last to arrive, dressed in all black. Until that moment, she later told me, she hoped her husband was simply injured. But when she saw his body, riddled by six bullets, with multiple wounds through his chest and head, she crumpled.
The next day, March 24, 2017, the killer was identified as Pavlo Parshov — a 28-year-old far-right Ukrainian nationalist who served in the National Guard and was wanted in a money-laundering case. Known to his friends by his nom de guerre, the Boxer, he died in custody at the intensive-care unit.
The Boxer never said a word.
Voronenkov was only the second sitting member of Parliament to have fled Russia while still in office and publicly oppose the government. The first, Ponomarev, arrived in Kiev about a year earlier. But while Ponomarev had been an outspoken critic in Moscow, Voronenkov lent his voice to the opposition only after crossing the border into Ukraine. The two countries had been locked in confrontation since 2014, when popular protests in Kiev forced President Viktor Yanukovych, a Kremlin ally, to flee to Russia, which then moved to annex the Crimean Peninsula. Voronenkov traded his Russian citizenship for a Ukrainian passport, gave closed testimony in Yanukovych’s treason trial and embarked on an impassioned media campaign.
The lead investigator into Voronenkov’s murder was Pavlo Kononenko, deputy prosecutor for Kiev. Kononenko could watch Russian television and read the country’s press, which contained myriad articles about Voronenkov’s life in Moscow, but diplomatic relations between the two countries have ceased and he could not question anyone there. Voronenkov had become an object of fascination in his own country — trashy programs looped on prime-time television, speculating on his career, the insincerity of his marriage to Maksakova and the involvement of the C.I.A. or its Ukrainian analogue, the S.B.U., in a setup. Television presenters interviewed guests who were sure that Voronenkov had undergone plastic surgery and was alive and well in Tel Aviv.
When I met Kononenko in his downtown office, he walked me through his investigation. He was focused on the gunman and his accomplices — right-wing ultranationalists who lived in a constellation of ramshackle towns in central Ukraine. Since 2016, Ukraine had experienced a surge of unexplained deaths, nearly a dozen in all, and Kiev had come to feel like a city of assassins in waiting. Ukraine immediately blamed Moscow for all the murders, but none were definitively linked to the Kremlin; most remain unsolved. Russian media outlets used the incidents to portray Ukraine as a warning of what happens to a nation when masses mobilize: instability, chaos and right-wing fanatics terrorizing citizens in the streets. Ukraine, meanwhile, saw the killings as more evidence of Russia terrorizing its population, after centuries of oppression and the recent war in Ukraine’s east, which has killed more than 10,000 people.
Kononenko assured me that he had done his best to comb through Voronenkov’s life despite the obstacles presented to him. Before he was murdered, Voronenkov had offered his own theories about who might want him dead. In his Interpol filing, he wrote that as a member of the Federal Drug Control Service, the F.S.K.N., Russia’s equivalent of the D.E.A., he led an investigative unit that helped crack a sprawling corruption case known as Three Whales, which has been called “the criminal case of the Vladimir Putin era.” More than a dozen high-ranking officials, including F.S.B. generals, were dismissed as a result of the investigation. Voronenkov said that the security services retaliated against him; in particular, he claimed that his work had drawn the ire of a notorious F.S.B. general named Oleg Feoktistov, who was known in Russia for his involvement in cases that brought down prominent officials. Feoktistov’s mentor was dislodged in the raid, and Voronenkov said Feoktistov pledged vengeance. In the end, it was the general’s plot, according to Voronenkov, that cost him his homeland and forced him to Ukraine.
Sitting in Kononenko’s office, I chronicled my attempts to look into Voronenkov and understand why he might have been killed. Kononenko eyed me with frustration and a tinge of pity. He had given me hours of his time, but we went back and forth about even the most basic parts of Voronenkov’s biography. Between us lay an unspoken question: Why go to such lengths to understand the truth of a man’s life when the story of his death was already decided?
Voronenkov arrived in Moscow at the turn of the century from humble origins in Nizhny Novgorod, a city on the banks of the Volga River. I heard various rumors that he was estranged from his mother, that his father, a military man, died in a fire. He graduated from a prestigious military academy and claimed to have earned a law degree; he then quickly attained a coveted job in the Duma, while at the same time supposedly earning a Ph.D. In 2000, a little-known former F.S.B. director named Vladimir Putin assumed the presidency, yet the city was still very much a product of the freewheeling transition from the Soviet Union. Under Boris Yeltsin, shrewd operators found riches as state-controlled entities were privatized. A combination of back-room deals and lethal opportunism had turned toy sellers into industry titans, mathematicians into owners of TV channels.
I heard about a series of jobs Voronenkov took on, not always successfully. He created identities, feigned friendships and dropped the names of powerful connections to dupe people into paying him to solve their problems. He left in his wake a series of very unhappy customers. I spoke to a businessman who claims he paid $80,000 to Voronenkov and an associate to take care of a distribution problem. “He was at the beginning of his way,” the businessman told me. “You could feel his potential already. He was a very talented swindler.” Another prominent entrepreneur said he was asked for $800,000 to “settle issues with the Ministry of Internal Affairs,” issues that he later learned probably did not exist.
It was unclear if Voronenkov was working alone or with a krysha — literally a “roof,” a higher-ranking official who protects the fixer and receives a share of the profits. After a few years in Moscow, Voronenkov had amassed a sizable amount of money from graft and had become part of the lawless opportunism of the previous era that Putin promised to root out when he came to power. “Russia needs strong state power and must have it,” read a manifesto on the eve of Putin’s presidential election. To accomplish his goal, Putin relied at least in part on the institution with which he was most familiar: the security services, which had given him his start.
In 2003, an undercover operative from the Ministry of Interior named Alexander Sharkevich was assigned to trace networks of corruption in the government. (Putin’s so-called fight against corruption was also a convenient cover for the drive against various political or financial enemies.) Sharkevich, acting under cover, says he approached a former general under the pretense of needing a client sprung from prison; the general referred him to Voronenkov. The fee was $1 million.
After Voronenkov was rejected from the ministry, he disappeared, Sharkevich told me, taking a third of the payment meant to entrap him. Only later did he realize that Voronenkov had been studying him. “Our meeting changed my life, very strongly, and it changed his life,” Sharkevich said. “He wanted to become me.” Voronenkov had been fascinated by the power of the security services: the IDs that let Sharkevich walk into different offices under assumed names, the papers that prevented his car from being searched by the police, the gun awarded for honorary service to the nation. Six years later, Sharkevich says, he was jailed for Voronenkov’s theft, and Voronenkov had found a position in the security services.
While Sharkevich was in prison, his mother died, and he didn’t have a chance to say goodbye. He made a vow, when he got out, to find the right people and tell them the truth about who Voronenkov really was.
Gen. Alexander Bulbov, the former deputy director of the F.S.K.N., told me that when the agency hired Voronenkov, it didn’t know about his forged academic past. In fact, when we met, Bulbov brought up Voronenkov’s educational achievements as one of the few things he still thought his former protégé could be lauded for. When I mentioned the forgery, Bulbov admitted that perhaps his team hadn’t properly vetted every agent. Perhaps, he said, it had been too busy staffing up.
The agency was headed by one of Putin’s friends from his days at the K.G.B. in St. Petersburg, part of a larger strategy Putin employed of stacking competing services with loyalists who would report on one another to him. By the time Voronenkov joined F.S.K.N. in 2006, Putin had handed it the notorious Three Whales file. The case, under investigation by various ministries and security organs since 2000, got its name from a showroom of a furniture company that had been underdeclaring the value of imported furniture and making tens of millions in profit. One of the chief security officers who worked with the company was also the father of the deputy director of the F.S.B. As the investigation grew to involve as many as five agencies, chaos erupted — grenades thrown into cars, armed standoffs at furniture warehouses, hospitalizations and a mysterious death that looked a lot like poisoning. Three Whales was the opening salvo in a battle between Russian security agencies that spanned more than a decade and came to be known as the siloviki wars. Putin was the sole referee.
Voronenkov joined F.S.K.N. at the time Three Whales was coming to its conclusion. He had written in his Interpol filing that he was “appointed to lead an operational investigations group” that solved the case. Maksakova, Voronenkov’s widow, provided me his F.S.K.N. ID, which listed his position as a director of an investigations group, but she did not have paperwork tying his name to Three Whales itself, and plenty of people I spoke to who worked on the case, and had seen various paperwork related to it, insisted that he played no part in the affair. Viktor Cherkesov, a former director of the F.S.K.N. who served in Parliament alongside Voronenkov, repeatedly declined requests for an interview; only Bulbov could confirm whether he had a role.
When I met Bulbov at the office of a Duma member he now advises, he sat beside a dainty porcelain tea set at a dark wooden conference table. With heavily lidded eyes and a soft, slow voice incongruous to his size, he was clearly unhappy to find himself sitting across from an American journalist. He sighed and fiddled with the tea set. At his most exasperated, he called me a term of endearment — “my little berry” — and wondered why Americans would care about Voronenkov in the slightest; he wasn’t important, he assured me.
Bulbov served his time in prison, and when he was released, he announced that he would return to the agency the next working day. It’s worth noting that almost every man I spoke to in Moscow had charges levied against him or served time in jail. All of them suggested to me that they were imprisoned not for their crimes but because their enemies were better connected — a vortex of loyalties with Putin at its center.
Voronenkov was waiting for Bulbov when he got out. Voronenkov had always been solicitous of the general’s attention; now he proved himself loyal. He invited Bulbov to his home; their wives became friends. Voronenkov, Bulbov said, was a doting father to his three children and a good husband to his wife at the time, Julia (who declined a request for an interview). By all accounts, the couple lived well. Voronenkov had a driver, vacationed frequently in Europe and owned property inside and outside Moscow.
Bulbov remained well connected politically after prison, and when an old friend, the head of the Communist Party, approached him asking for candidates for the 2011 parliamentary elections, Bulbov recommended his acolyte. In Russia, top placement on a party list in a district where the party was strong is a near guarantee of victory. There were rumors that Bulbov and Voronenkov were profiting on various “fixing” arrangements together, but Bulbov denies that accusation, as well as the assertion that Voronenkov paid for his endorsement. “I thought he was deserving,” he told me. Voronenkov won easily.
Voronenkov entered the Duma in late December 2011, taking his office on the ninth floor of the gray-and-glass block in central Moscow. By then, Putin had been in power for more than a decade (though his title of president would be interrupted by a four-year stint as prime minister, out of respect for the illusion of term limits), and the governing body had been transformed into a rubber stamp of his will. Voronenkov was like most of today’s Communist Party representatives — rich businessmen who play the role of opposition and provide a release valve for the older generation of Soviet nostalgists. The Duma retained the trappings of legislative power — marble staircases, ornate chandeliers, thick red carpets — but it had become an aquarium, brightly colored fish swimming in circles but getting nowhere.
Voronenkov now had no fewer than five apartments, two garages and a huge country house on a salary that would have been worth about $45,000 in 2015. One property was on Tverskaya Street — Moscow’s Fifth Avenue — the value of which, Navalny estimated, was $5.3 million. He had a Mercedes S350, a Bentley Continental, two Range Rovers and a Land Cruiser. When the list was published in 2015, Navalny’s employees heard Voronenkov had been thrilled to be included. It offered a scorecard of his rise from the provinces and a perverse kind of protection: The Kremlin would never bend to Navalny’s accusations.
In the end, the deal that ruined Voronenkov was unremarkable. In fact, the scheme is so ubiquitous in Russia as to earn its own word, reiderstvo, which essentially means the theft of a business or property. An individual or a group will work with corrupt judges, administrators and the police to help shift the title into their own name, either through forgery or stock-purchase chicanery. Victims included Moscow’s planetarium, oil-and-gas companies, a firm making orthopedics and an airport. Raids often seemed to happen overnight — a company that existed one day would belong to someone else by morning, much to the puzzlement of employees and the owners. Though some cases were fought in court, most victims were left no alternative but to accept their fate.
The target, in this instance, according to court documents, was a single building. Voronenkov, who is not named but is referred to as a person with “special” status because of his parliamentary immunity, along with his co-conspirators, used their contacts with the government and law enforcement to switch the building’s ownership for a fee. Voronenkov found a businessman to front their scam for $2 million, who could flip the building for $5 million. The documents show that Voronenkov did not split the profits evenly, instead keeping $1.2 million for himself. The owner of the building found out, and soon there was an investigation. Voronenkov’s co-conspirators, including the man who fronted the operation, would spend time in prison.
I met one of those co-conspirators, Andrei Murzikov, in a restaurant in Moscow. The former F.S.B. officer looked the part — his muscled bulk was rounded with age, his hair closely cropped and slightly balding on top. He seemed as if he could easily break an arm. Murzikov showed me a photograph of his motorcycle, which has a large American flag attached to the back. He likes driving it around Moscow, he told me, to enrage Muscovites and entertain American tourists. “Everyone comes up to me, and I punch them all,” he said. I wasn’t sure he was speaking in jest. He said he had spent a month and half traveling around the United States, visiting a dozen cities on both coasts. He didn’t find it to be such a bad place. 
Murzikov denies having anything to do with the building heist, though he pleaded guilty to all charges and admitted helping Voronenkov smuggle illegal pistols from Austria. “There are no innocent people there,” he said. “You are guilty just because you got into such a situation. That’s why we confessed to the crime. We confessed that we were crooks.” Then he giggled, as if he were still surprised it happened. “I still want to go and look at that building, just to see what it looks like,” he told me, and giggled again.
When the story of the reiderstvo hit the papers, Voronenkov met with investigators twice but declined to do so again. So long as he was a member of the Duma, he received immunity from criminal prosecution. By then, Bulbov and Voronenkov had grown very close. The two men traveled to Russia’s cosmodrome in Kazakhstan in 2012 to watch a space launch. They took their families and got drunk waiting for humans to ascend to the unknown. Bulbov took Voronenkov home with him to his ancestral village in the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad, where Voronenkov drank so much he became emotional. He spoke, haltingly and through tears, about how he never had a real family or ancestral identity.
But now, Bulbov said he was starting to hear things from all sides. He heard that Voronenkov was “fixing” using Bulbov’s name. When Voronenkov assured him that he had nothing to do with the reiderstvo, Bulbov wasn’t sure what to make of it. He advised Voronenkov to continue to testify. If he was innocent, why hide behind his Duma immunity? Bulbov told me he used his own network to look into the case and found Voronenkov guilty, perhaps not as accused, but far more involved than Voronenkov claimed.
The last time Bulbov saw Voronenkov was in 2015. The men hadn’t spoken for about a year. Voronenkov had left his wife for Maksakova, an opera singer and Duma member from Putin’s United Russia party. The couple visited Bulbov to invite him to their wedding, a historic interparty union that had been announced in the golden halls of the Duma.
Maksakova came from a famous family of performers stretching back generations. She had hosted a TV show, recorded pop songs and performed as a soprano in the renowned Mariinsky Theater. She had access through friends to some of the highest-ranking members of Putin’s inner circle, and she said she tried everything she could think of to protect her new husband from allegations that he assured her were phony. “There wasn’t a single person in my circle whom I wouldn’t be begging to help him — not a single one,” Maksakova told me. “As long as there is no political will in the particular case, it is useless,” she said, drawing out the word in her silky cadence.
The night of his election loss, Maksakova told me, he was distraught. He lay in bed awake, staring at the ceiling silently, while Maksakova consoled him. “Denis, listen, life goes on. Look, I’m with you. I’ll never leave you, no matter where life takes us,” she said. “We’ll deal with all this. What can we do? Why are you so sad?” His choice was clear: flee or face prison.
Voronenkov still had a few months of his Duma term left, at which point his immunity would expire. Maksakova had a German passport, though it is technically illegal for Duma members to hold dual citizenship. Ponomarev asked why they didn’t just move to Munich.
Ponomarev had heard about Voronenkov’s reputation as a fixer and dirty dealer, but he told me that he decided Voronenkov’s value as a symbol of regime defection outweighed his reputation. “He’s not an angel,” Ponomarev told me. “He’s a security guy, and you know how those things work in Russia. I cannot say this for sure, but of course he’s not a crook to the degree that it was portrayed. That’s a discreditation campaign run by the F.S.B.” Ponomarev thought he might even prove useful as an actual investigator of Russia’s dealings in Ukraine, given his connections to the security services and the criminal class.
“That’s exactly what I want,” Voronenkov said.
Voronenkov kept his status secret while he moved his assets from Moscow to Ukraine, but in January, a Russian journalist confirmed that Voronenkov was the second Russian lawmaker to testify in the Yanukovych treason case. Social media exploded with vitriol, as Ukrainian journalists and activists began asking why their country had given refuge to a Putin crony. It was then that Voronenkov dedicated himself to yet another reinvention.
Voronenkov’s first interviews were works in progress. Confronted with his social-media posts about Crimea, he said his Twitter account had been hacked. As for his vote on annexation, he started by denying he had voted yes, only to change course and say he had been forced to do it. Not everyone in the press bought his explanations, but he was slowly getting better, more polished in his presentation. The interview with Dvali, his last in the Ukrainian press, was indeed his best. Less than two hours after it was published, he was dead.
But what separated this theory from all the other conspiracies swirling around the case? Did they have any proof? “We have no proof that they met and made arrangements, paid money or organized the purchase of weapons,” Lutsenko said.
The Ukrainian prosecutor’s theory seemed to make sense, and yet when one looked at it closely, its underlying logic seemed to color, flare and disintegrate, like a paper held too close to a flame. It was a combination of things the investigators could prove and things they wished to be true, and it relied primarily on a host of assumptions about Russia that were advantageous for Ukraine to promote: Russia as a monolith, with all power flowing in and out of the Kremlin. This myth has flourished in part because everyone has an interest in promoting it: The Ukrainians get their villain; the Kremlin gets a reputation for fearsomeness and efficiency.
To the contrary, the story of Denis Voronenkov is about something else entirely: a story of the chaos at the heart of the sistema, the Darwinian chaos Voronenkov himself exploited, mastered and was ultimately felled by. The ambiguity bred by such bedlam now stood in the way of us ever really understanding who or what was truly responsible for his death. It was strange that Voronenkov was unable to find his way out of the building raid, uncharacteristic of him to get burned by something so simple — was it the sum of all the people he had double-crossed? Had someone he swindled hired an assassin to kill him? Maksakova herself did not believe the Ukrainian government’s theory. She thought that her husband had been killed in a hit that involved the wealthy businessman from the building raid, whose lawyer denied that he played any role.
General Bulbov ran his large palms along his thighs. He asked me why I couldn’t just write a nice story about Russian-American relations, maybe about the space station. Did I plan to create a hero out of Voronenkov or an antihero? Did I plan to write that all Russian security services are corrupt?
As we spoke, Bulbov doodled in his notebook. He carefully drew lines that he connected into boxes; inside the boxes, he wrote numbers, then he crossed them out in rich blue ink. He seemed not to want to be there, but he also seemed desperate to convince me of something. We sat for hours. Voronenkov had done something unforgivable: He was a traitor. He had found wealth and status; he married fame. In rising so high, he knew the arrangement — you may steal a certain amount, but no more than that. You may make deals, but know that someone can always pull the rug out from under you.
Bulbov was trapped in his own box: He could not suggest that the system that had jailed him for three years while encouraging Voronenkov by rewarding his crimes, allowing him into F.S.K.N., catapulting him in the Duma, was a terrible one, because that too would be treasonous. He couldn’t tell me that Voronenkov had to go sit out his time in jail for the building raid, regardless of whether he was guilty, because that was part of the bargain. He could not say that Voronenkov was killed by Russia, but it wasn’t the authorities who signed his death warrant. That bore Voronenkov’s own signature. The general could not say that the Russian system is an ouroboros — it must consume itself in order to survive.