It started off as a serious discussion about Jeff Bezos’ accusation that The National Enquirer was engaging in extortion and blackmail by threatening to expose his private photos. But the discussion didn’t stay serious for long.
In its opening sketch this week, “Saturday Night Live” presented a parody of “Meet the Press,” hosted by Chuck Todd (Kyle Mooney) and featuring the panelists Eugene Robinson (Kenan Thompson), Peggy Noonan (Cecily Strong) and Donna Brazile (Leslie Jones).
“Excuse me?” Jones replied.
The panelists offered various theories (except for Jones, who remained astounded), and Mooney asked what the scandal said about the overall state of the country.
“And what about when the pictures do come out?” Mooney asked.
Asked by Mooney if her Whitaker had ever been instructed by President Trump to interfere in the special counsel’s investigation, Bryant began to answer.
Mooney interrupted: “I’m being told that the Bezos pics have actually come out at this very moment,” he said, vowing to devote the rest of the program to the photos.
One more quick thing before we get out of here. As you all know, earlier this week, our governor admitted to wearing blackface in college as part of a costume. And then later the attorney general. It’s extremely embarrassing to the state, and as chair of the ethics committee, I have to ask: Has anybody else worn blackface in college?
One by one, the elected officials posed oblivious questions as each confessed to having worn blackface.
“Does it count if you did it all the way back in the ’80s?” Strong asked.
“Who was your hero?” Thompson said.
“Al Jolson,” Mooney answered.
Returning to an idea it introduced in December, “S.N.L.” offered another installment of “Them Trumps,” in which the first family’s life is presented like the Fox drama “Empire,” and the president is Darius Trump (Thompson).
In this episode, Darius Trump is being sped by limousine to his State of the Union address, telling the other passengers in the car that he will push back against the special counsel’s investigation.
As police lights become visible in the rear window, he is interrupted by an aide played by Halsey, the evening’s mononymous host and musical guest.
“O.K., we’re getting pulled over,” she says.
“Oh, yeah, I knew that was coming,” Thompson says under his breath.
A sketch titled “Women of Congress” started off as if it were going to be a satire of “Charlie’s Angels”: Nancy Pelosi (McKinnon) leads an action-packed team of female politicians who don’t often get the spotlight on “S.N.L.,” including Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (Melissa Villaseñor), Maxine Waters (Jones), Kyrsten Sinema (Strong), Ilhan Omar (Ego Nwodim), Ann McLane Kuster (Aidy Bryant), Abigail Spanberger (Heidi Gardner) and Rashida Tlaib (Halsey).
Then, shortly after its opening credits, it ended. Well, maybe another time, ladies.
Virginia Governor Ralph Northam is still refusing to resign after a racist photo from his yearbook surfaced. O.K., but if it was in a yearbook, how bad could it be? [The photograph is shown onscreen.] Oh. O.K. So, very bad. I knew it was a yearbook, but I didn’t know the year was 1870.
Democrats are now calling for Northam to resign, but the second in line is embroiled in now two sexual assault scandals, and the third in line also did blackface. So at this point, maybe Virginia should take a cue from the Oscars and just go without a governor this year. Or they could just come full circle and make it Governor Kevin Hart.
When Chris Redd, Jones, Thompson and Nwodim came on stage to celebrate Black History Month and pay homage to previous cast members like Garrett Morris, Eddie Murphy and Ellen Cleghorne, were you expecting a totally sincere tribute?
The segment took a satirical turn with the entrance of Mooney, a white man, who claimed he wanted to support his co-stars but kept interrupting to explain black history to them.
“Did you know African-American contributions to entertainment didn’t start with ‘Saturday Night Live’?” Mooney asked to their chagrin.
