Type “vaccine” into its search bar and nothing pops up. “Vaccination” or “anti-vax”? Also nothing.
Other platforms like Facebook and YouTube have also been infiltrated with misinformation about vaccines, and are taking steps to combat it. One of YouTube’s policies is to demonetize anti-vaccine videos.
But only Pinterest, as first reported by The Wall Street Journal, has chosen to banish results associated with certain vaccine-related searches, regardless of whether the results might have been reputable.
“Right now, blocking results in search is a temporary solution to prevent people from encountering harmful misinformation,” said Jamie Favazza, a spokeswoman. The company said it was working with experts to develop a more tailored long-term approach.
The changes, which were not publicly announced, started in September and October.
Opposition to vaccinations can be traced to the introduction of the first vaccine in the 18th century. Over time most people accepted vaccines, and diseases that could be prevented by them declined. They declined so much, in fact, that the success of vaccines may have muted the dangers associated with those diseases.
The World Health Organization identified “vaccine hesitancy” as one of this year’s 10 notable threats to global health.
Despite clear evidence that vaccines are effective and safe, some people still choose not to get vaccinated or to vaccinate their children, which has contributed to a surge in measles cases worldwide. In the United States, there have been five measles outbreaks this year and at least 127 individual cases.
 Last year, measles killed 72 adults and children in the European region, where measles has reached its highest levels in two decades. While measles deaths are rare in developed countries, the illness can have severe lasting consequences, such as vision loss.
There are several reasons for vaccine hesitancy: worries about side effects, cost, moral or religious objections, fears about a debunked link to autism and lack of knowledge about immunizations.
“We’re just seeing all sorts of misinformation flying around on social media,” said Arthur L. Caplan, head of the Division of Medical Ethics at the New York University School of Medicine, who has been writing about vaccine ethics and policy for 25 years.
Last week, Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, a Democrat and the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, wrote a letter to Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook, asking what steps the company was taking to prevent anti-vaccine information from being recommended to users. He sent a similar letter to Sundar Pichai, the chief executive of Google, which owns YouTube.
YouTube said on Thursday that it started surfacing more authoritative content in late 2017 for people searching for vaccination-related topics, and that its algorithmic changes would become more accurate over time.
YouTube also said it does not permit anti-vaccine videos to show ads.
The company said it was considering reducing or removing this type of content from recommendations and demoting it in search results.
Dr. Poland, an internist who has spent 35 years in the vaccine field, said he often encountered patients who relied on social media when researching health questions.
“We, as a company, should not be the arbiter of truth,” Katie Rosborough, a Twitter spokeswoman, said in a statement on Friday, adding that the company was working to surface the highest-quality and most relevant content first.
For all of these companies, containing the spread of misinformation, particularly about something as emotionally charged as vaccines, will be a lasting challenge as they balance fears about censorship with the need to promote useful content, experts said.
“It’s a mess that I don’t see easily solved,” Dr. Poland said.