Spike Lee’s Prince-symbol necklace is gold, framed in diamonds with an opal, and his gold Jordans were commissioned by Michael Jordan.
The day that Prince died in April 2016, Spike Lee threw a celebration of his friend’s life. On a brick townhouse-lined street in Fort Greene, Brooklyn, hundreds of people gathered in the street, as Mr. Lee blasted song after song from the steps of his building. He played deep cuts and greatest hits, as neighbors wept and sang along into the night.
On the Academy Awards red carpet, Mr. Lee wore a custom-made gold, diamond and opal necklace in the form of the symbol Prince adopted as his name. It was made by the jewelry designer Amedeo Scognamiglio, and was paired with an all-purple Ozwald Boateng suit and gold Jordans made by Tinker Hatfield (and commissioned for Mr. Lee by Michael Jordan himself).
Mr. Scognamiglio first met Mr. Lee about a year ago and the two have become friends; the director can often be seen sporting the artisan’s oversized jewelry.
Mr. Lee and Prince first met when the musician, impressed by the director’s 1986 debut feature film, “She’s Gotta Have it,” flew him out to Paisley Park in Minnesota, around the time that Prince was working on the film “Graffiti Bridge.” There was an immediate sense of understanding between the two men. They remained close, despite not seeing each other very often.
“It might be six, eight months before we talked but when we talked it was like, we see each other,” Mr. Lee said.
The last time he saw his friend was after a performance of the musical “Hamilton,” Mr. Lee’s seventh time seeing it. After the show, Mr. Lee said he went backstage and cast members told him that they were going to an after-party hosted by Prince.
The song was recovered by Troy Carter, a friend of Mr. Lee’s who is an adviser to the Prince estate (and who also used to manage Lady Gaga). Mr. Carter called Mr. Lee and told him that among the thousands of disorganized cassettes that the musician had left behind, one had been found that featured just Prince and a piano.
He does not think that finding the tape was a coincidence.
