A terminal at Orlando International Airport was evacuated and incoming flights were grounded on Saturday morning after a Transportation Security Administration officer jumped to his death, the police and witnesses said.
The officer, described by the Orlando police as a man in his 40s, had just clocked out of work before jumping from a balcony of the Hyatt Regency in the airport atrium about 9:30 a.m.
Jenny L. Burke, a spokeswoman for the agency, confirmed that an off-duty T.S.A. employee had fallen from a balcony inside the airport and died. “Our thoughts and prayers go out to the officer’s family, friends and everyone in our T.S.A. family,” she said.
The sound of the man crashing to the floor caused passengers to flee unscreened into a restricted area, Ms. Burke said. Crowds of passengers were being rescreened on Saturday afternoon. Officials said flight operations were starting to return to normal about 12:30 p.m. on Saturday. The Federal Aviation Administration issued a halt to inbound flights that was lifted at 11:30 a.m.
Michael Bawol, 32, was traveling home to Halifax, Nova Scotia, after a week of work in Florida when he saw a man standing on the outer ledge of a balcony on the top floor of the hotel, he said.
Mr. Bawol, who said he was about 20 feet away, looked away when he realized that the man was jumping.
“I covered my ears, but the sound of impact was still audible,” he said.
Adults and children began crying when they realized what had happened. T.S.A. agents rushed in and guided passengers to the terminal exits. Paramedics tried to revive the man before moving him to a stretcher.
The police said the man, whose name was not released, was taken to a hospital, where he was pronounced dead.
Another witness, Greg Oswald, a psychologist from Plainfield, Ill., was returning home after a Disney cruise with his wife and four children when he heard passengers gasping and screaming.
During the partial government shutdown, T.S.A. workers at several major airports around the country were working without pay and began to call in sick in increasing numbers, union and airport management officials.
