President Trump spoke at a rally in Texas not long after congressional negotiators said they had reached a tentative deal to keep the government open without full wall funding.
I have to tell you, as I was walking up to the stage, they said that progress is being made with this committee. Just so you know, we’re building the wall anyway. They say that progress has been made. [cheering] Just now, just now. I say, wait a minute, I got to take care of my people from Texas. I got to go. I don’t even want to hear about it. [cheering] I don’t want to hear about it.
EL PASO — President Trump came to this bustling border city on Monday to rally support for his wall with Mexico. But he was met by El Paso’s favorite son, Beto O’Rourke, who denounced Mr. Trump’s claim that walls reduce violent crime and led the city’s residents in his own boisterous show of opposition.
The dueling rallies, just across the Rio Grande from Mexico, offered a vivid snapshot of the national debate over immigration, as well as a tantalizing early glimpse of the rivalry between Mr. Trump and Mr. O’Rourke, the former Texas congressman who is now considering a challenge to the president in 2020.
As he mulls a run for the Democratic presidential nomination, Mr. O’Rourke has seized on immigration as a defining issue. With a flair for political theater that even Mr. Trump took note of, Mr. O’Rourke addressed a crowd less than a mile from the El Paso County Coliseum, where the president spoke to thousands of cheering supporters.
Mr. Trump’s rally, his first since an acrimonious debate over funding of the wall shut down the government, came as negotiators in Washington appeared to reach a deal, potentially averting another shutdown. The president said he was told about the agreement just before taking the stage.
In an interview with Laura Ingraham of Fox News that aired at the end of the rally, Mr. Trump seemed more concerned with talking about the number of supporters in the crowd on Monday night than about an update on negotiations with Congress.
The president said he had had the option of receiving a briefing on the negotiations or going on camera.
The president’s choice of El Paso to make his argument was curious on several grounds. Violent crime actually declined for years in this vibrant immigrant city across the river from Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, before the Army Corps of Engineers began building a fence in 2008. It rose during the two years before and after the barrier was constructed.
A Democratic stronghold in a mostly Republican state, El Paso has long been one of the safer cities of its size in the United States — a trend that local law enforcement officials attribute to the residents and community policing, not to the border fence.
Still, if Mr. Trump wanted to force the debate with Democrats, he could hardly have chosen a better place. The presence of Mr. O’Rourke, who represented the city in Congress before he gave up his House seat to run unsuccessfully for the Senate, guaranteed the president the kind of confrontation he relishes, even if the two men did not come face to face.
Mr. Trump has insisted that El Paso was an example of why a wall is necessary.
Mr. O’Rourke debunked that claim on Friday in a lengthy post on the website Medium, in which he also tried to set out an alternative blueprint for overhauling the nation’s immigration laws. El Paso’s success, he said, repudiated Mr. Trump’s call for a border wall.
“He will promise a wall and will repeat his lies about the dangers that immigrants pose,” Mr. O’Rourke said of the president.
Mr. O’Rourke has spotlighted his heavily Latino hometown on Facebook and on other social media sites as an example of what works in immigration policy.
A short walk from the coliseum, protesters gathered to march in a show of dissent against the president. Many held signs criticizing Mr. Trump; buttons, signs and stickers proclaiming “Beto 2020” could be seen throughout the crowd.
“Trump is an insult to my proud military family,” said Isabel Harris, 60, an immigrant from Mexico who held a sign honoring her son Martin Ferrufino, 32, a disabled veteran of the Iraq war.
The Trump administration’s hard-line stance on keeping migrants out is pushing asylum seekers to take remote and dangerous routes into the United States. And a wall might not be able to fix that.
Building a border wall. It’s the holy grail of President Trump’s immigration policy. “The United States will not be a migrant camp, and it will not be a refugee holding facility. It won’t be.” But at the border, there’s a kind of chaos unfolding that a wall might not fix. The Trump administration’s hard-line stance on keeping migrants out is pushing asylum seekers to take remote and dangerous routes into the United States. Here’s how this is playing out. The border stretches nearly 2,000 miles, and these are the official ports of entry. More than 650 miles already have barriers installed. Fences, barbed wire or vehicle barricades. Over the years, that’s pushed people to try riskier routes to get across. And since 2014, more families have been arriving. And many of them are seeking asylum, a human right protected by both U.S. and international law. The Trump administration’s hard-hitting crackdown includes a tactic called “metering.” “Documents ready.” Entering through an official border crossing is one way to request asylum. But that’s become more difficult under Trump. The practice of metering allows border agents to limit the number of asylum seekers that are processed each day by delaying them from setting foot into the U.S. We can see it in action here, at the Paso del Norte crossing in El Paso, Texas. Officers are standing right at the border, trying to intercept people before they get to the border station. This tactic is deliberate. Once people reach U.S. soil, they have the right to claim asylum. But if they never cross the border, they have to come back another day. Metering is not new. But the Trump administration has taken it to a new level. “We’re metering, which means that if we don’t have the resources to let them in on a particular day, they’re going to come back. So they’re going to wait their turn.” But as the government is limiting asylum seekers, they’re still funneling people to these same ports of entry to seek asylum. “Instead migrants seeking asylum will have to present themselves lawfully at a port of entry.” This is creating bottlenecks. Here, in Tijuana, is a vivid example of how metering plays out. Thousands of migrants are stuck. Human rights observers say that some are camping in squalid and dangerous conditions. The situation is leading migrants to try riskier routes through desolate terrain, where they’re at greater risk of dehydration and other illnesses. They’re showing up in places like Antelope Wells, N.M. It’s extremely remote and mountainous. Antelope Wells is part of the El Paso border area, which has seen a dramatic increase in the number of families crossing far away from official border stations. As you can see here, this increase happened right when the practice of metering expanded. And many are crossing in groups of 100 or more, like this one that arrived in January. But these remote outposts lack facilities, especially to deal with children. 7-year-old Jakelin Caal Maquin and her father crossed here on Dec. 6, where they encountered Border Patrol. They were brought to a nearby outpost, where Jakelin got sick. It took an overnight journey with multiple stops, including a 94-mile bus ride and an air ambulance evacuation to get her to the children’s hospital in El Paso. Her condition worsened, and she later died. 12 days later, another father crossed the border in the El Paso area with his 8-year-old child. Felipe Gomez Alonzo was in custody for six days. He died from the flu on Christmas Eve. Border Patrol officials say that they’re not equipped to deal with all of this. “Our infrastructure is incompatible with this reality. Our Border Patrol stations and ports of entry were built to handle mostly male, single adults in custody, not families or children.” But the practice of metering is forcing people through more remote routes, in turn overtaxing these far-flung outposts and putting a strain on officers. It’s also leading to ever-more-dangerous consequences for migrants.
Ms. Harris said Mr. Trump’s efforts to curb immigration was an affront to her son, who crossed the border illegally as a child. Later, he attended high school in El Paso and joined the Army.
“My son sacrificed for this country, and this is how he’s treated? How we are treated?” Ms. Harris said in Spanish.
Nearby, two El Paso-born brothers, Adam and Andrew Peña, also joined the protest against Mr. Trump.
Mr. Trump got the idea to focus on El Paso from an exchange with the Texas attorney general, Ken Paxton, who told him the wall drastically reduced the city’s crime rate and therefore served as a persuasive argument for building one along more of the southwestern border.
While it is true that Juárez has a much higher crime rate than El Paso — and while the fence did cut down on illegal crossings — the rest of his statement is, at best, highly misleading.
The El Paso Times, which analyzed three decades of statistics from the F.B.I. and the local police, found that crime peaked in 1993, with more than 6,500 violent crimes recorded. It then dropped by 34 percent over the next 13 years.
The crime rate then increased by 17 percent from 2006 to 2011. Construction of the wall began in 2008, under President George W. Bush, and was completed in mid-2009, during the Obama administration. Crime has ebbed and flowed within a fairly narrow band since then.
Local officials, including Mayor Dee Margo, a Republican, have spoken out against Mr. Trump’s claims. Representative Veronica Escobar, a Democrat who recently won Mr. O’Rourke’s former seat, has demanded that the president apologize and meet with migrant families seeking asylum in the United States. Among lawmakers who represent border districts, there is remarkably little support for a wall.
Yet Mr. Trump has been undeterred. He repeated grisly stories of violent crimes committed by illegal immigrants — never mind that the crime rate among immigrants is no higher than among native-born residents. He said a wall would stem the flow of deadly opioids and other illicit drugs into the United States — another dubious assertion, given that most drugs arrive at legal ports of entry.
Mr. Trump’s aides are trying to build momentum after last week’s State of the Union address, which they believe was well received by his political base. Unlike some of his predecessors, the president did not immediately leave on a road trip to sell the messages in the address. But he has been eager to return to rallies, which energize him and filled up his calendar before the midterm elections.
Mr. Trump dismissed those who disputed his facts about the wall, saying the mayor of El Paso was “full of crap,” even if he was a Republican.
