Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and newly emboldened Democrats in the State Senate appeared headed for open warfare on Monday over a plan to bring Amazon to New York City after the Senate leader named a critic of the $3 billion deal to a state board that could scuttle it.
The decision to choose the critic, Senator Michael Gianaris, for the board immediately presented a direct political challenge for Mr. Cuomo — who must decide whether to refuse the Senate’s selection. And it demonstrated the ability of the Democrat-led State Legislature to call into question the governor’s control over the kinds of state boards that, in recent years, he had been mostly able to bend to his will.
In November, Democrats reclaimed control of the Assembly and the Senate for the first time in a decade, radically shifting the dynamics of power in Albany and making it easier for the Legislature to resist Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat. The governor can no longer point to Republicans to avoid legislation he disliked, or use the G.O.P. majority in the Senate as leverage with recalcitrant members of his own party.
Mr. Cuomo could reject the pick, though doing so could create a protracted standoff with the Senate leader, Andrea Stewart-Cousins, and her fellow Democrats. Already, the battle lines were hardening on Monday as Mr. Cuomo’s office reacted angrily to Mr. Gianaris’s appointment.
She declined to say whether Mr. Cuomo would reject the selection of Mr. Gianaris, who represents the Queens area where Amazon would like to build a campus.
The ability of a local legislator to block the deal to bring a major new Amazon campus to Long Island City was exactly what Mr. Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio had tried to avoid when they decided to use a state development process and to bypass more onerous city rules. Opposition, while vocal, seemed futile.
But now, with the insistence of Senate Democrats on appointing Mr. Gianaris to the little-known Public Authorities Control Board, those who want to stop Amazon from coming to Queens have gotten their most tangible boost yet. The board will have to decide on the development plan for Amazon, Mr. Cuomo has said, and could veto it.
The selection of Mr. Gianaris, detailed in a brief letter obtained by The New York Times, was cheered by those who have advocated for elected leaders to try to block the agreement, which could amount to $3 billion in state and city incentives for Amazon to create 25,000 to 40,000 jobs in Queens.
The obscure state board does have a history of blocking major deals: 14 years ago, it helped derail former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg’s plans for a new stadium in Manhattan.
In response to Ms. Lever’s comment, a spokesman for Ms. Stewart-Cousins, Mike Murphy, said that signs of an economic slowdown, highlighted by Mr. Cuomo on Monday, made it “even more imperative that we are vigilant with taxpayer money” for development projects.
Amazon declined to comment and referred questions to the state. Company executives have said they expected the development plan would not go before the board until next year. Voting members of the board are appointed to one-year terms, and Mr. Murphy said Ms. Stewart-Cousins was likely to renominate Mr. Gianaris for subsequent terms.
Mr. Gianaris, like several local elected leaders now opposing the deal, signed a letter initially supporting city and state efforts to lure the company to New York City.
The comment led to criticism from Ms. Stewart-Cousins and her counterpart in the Assembly, Carl Heastie.
Lawmakers have used the Public Authorities Control Board — whose voting members are appointed by the Senate, the Assembly and the governor — as a roadblock to big projects before. In 2005, Mr. Bloomberg saw his plan for a stadium on the West Side of Manhattan, part of the city’s bid to host the 2012 Olympics, shot down in front of the board by the vote of one state lawmaker, Sheldon Silver, who was then the Assembly speaker. Mr. Silver said he could not support a deal that could harm the district in Lower Manhattan that he represented.
Shortly after Amazon announced it would be building the new campus, Robert F. Mujica Jr., Mr. Cuomo’s appointee to the board and its chairman, suggested that the deal might not necessarily come before the board.
But Mr. Cuomo has since said it would play a crucial role.
