The Justice Department said Wednesday that it had opened an investigation into a 2007 plea deal negotiated by a prosecutor who is now a member of President Trump’s cabinet that kept the financier Jeffrey E. Epstein from facing federal charges related to accusations that he molested dozens of underage girls.
The inquiry came in response to requests from Senator Ben Sasse of Nebraska, who on Wednesday posted a letter on his website from Assistant Attorney General Stephen E. Boyd informing him of the investigation.
The plea deal, which was negotiated by the labor secretary, R. Alexander Acosta, when he was the top federal prosecutor in Miami, was the subject of a Miami Herald investigation that was cited by both Mr. Sasse and Mr. Boyd. The letter does not mention Mr. Acosta by name.
On Capitol Hill, Mr. Sasse, a Republican member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, celebrated the decision to open an investigation.
Mr. Epstein, a well-connected investor who once had a list of billionaire clients and influential friends including President Trump and former President Bill Clinton, was suspected by the F.B.I. of international sex trafficking of underage girls.
Police findings showed Mr. Epstein had engaged in sex acts with underage girls, some of them runaways or foster children, in his Palm Beach, Fla., mansion. He currently lives in the United States Virgin Islands, Mr. Weinberg said.
Under the terms of the nonprosecution agreement, Mr. Epstein pleaded guilty to state charges of soliciting prostitution from a minor. He was supposed to spend 18 months in the Palm Beach County jail.
But once in custody, Mr. Epstein was granted work-release privileges that let him leave jail for up to 12 hours a day six days a week, The Herald found. He served 13 months in jail.
Mr. Weinberg, the lawyer for Mr. Epstein, said in an email that the plea deal had been in the best interest of prosecutors.
The deal enraged Mr. Epstein’s accusers, who did not learn about its existence until after it was approved by a judge.
Two of his accusers, who are now adults, have filed a lawsuit against the federal government. It alleges that the deal violated the Crime Victims’ Rights Act and seeks to have it voided. On Wednesday, their lawyer, Bradley Edwards, declined to comment on the announcement about the federal investigation.