For a year, this bride traveled the world, with her wedding dress in tow. After her actual wedding day, she stepped into the dress 50 more times, zippering up the back and taking photographs — in 33 different countries, including Spain, Greece, Israel and Seychelles.
How did the idea of wearing your dress on a multiple-destination honeymoon come about?
The concept behind the wedding dress came about much later. Only a short time before we set off to travel, friends and family kept asking to see my wedding dress. One day a family friend apologized for asking and I replied, ‘Don’t apologize! I’ll only get to wear this dress once, might as well get my money’s worth!’ And it all clicked. From the moment we started dating Nick has made me feel like I can do anything I put my mind to. He’s motivated me to live life outside of my comfort zone. I realized we were taking this big trip, a huge leap out of our comfort zone. I bought a dress out of my comfort zone. So why not add one more thing to the list? Why not bring along the dress that makes me feel so beautiful to the most beautiful places in world?
How did you know that the Watters Ferrera dress was the one?
Before I purchased my dress, I had asked Nick what types of dresses he thought I should try on. He told me a few times, ‘Something out of your comfort zone. Don’t play it safe. You’re the bride! I want you to stand out!’ Standing out isn’t exactly easy for a girl that likes to blend in. But I kept hearing his voice in my head with every dress I tried on. I had a ‘safe’ option in one hand and an ‘out of my comfort zone’ in the other. I really loved them both but I felt like a bride in the Watters Ferrera gown. I looked at my parents and both of them were crying, then I started to cry. I found my dress!
How long was your honeymoon?
It was definitely a bit longer than the usual honeymoon but we tend to do things in our own way. We left at the beginning of January 2018 for Thailand. We came back home in May for three weeks to catch up with family and repack for the next journey of our trip. Then we set back out at the end of May for Greece and continued from there until October.
How did you pack your wedding dress for each location?
Before we left I purchased a garment bag from Bed Bath & Beyond. We had no clue how to travel around the world with a wedding dress but we figured that was a start! The first few flights we were very gentle with placing it inside the garment bag. As the trip went on and the dress showed its resilience we got creative with packing it. For example how do you carry a wedding dress on a motorbike in Bali? We had no idea so we put it in a backpack and hoped for the best! The dress continually withstood it all! Plastic bags, backpacks, beach bags and luggage.
What was your favorite destination ?
Every place gave us wonderful memories but there was something special about our “Trash the Dress” photo shoot (drone photograph, above) in Seychelles, Africa. We had talked about taking this trip for two years and here we were in one of the most incredible places ending the trip we worked so hard to go on. So we decided to run into the Indian Ocean with our wedding attire on. It was an early morning. The sun was just rising. It was this euphoric moment of “We did it.” And we did it our way, not caring what others thought or said. We wanted this, we saved for this, waited for this and we actually finally did it. And the best part was, we did it together. And for anyone wondering, the dress was not trashed in the slightest. It actually came out of the water cleaner than it went in!
Do you plan to wear your dress again now that the honeymoon is over?
We have a lot more traveling to do so who knows! It will take a back seat for now because we really want to focus on helping others travel. We’d like to write about our experiences so others can learn from them and travel a little easier, cheaper and less stressfully! For right now the dress is resting in New Jersey while we venture to Morocco and volunteer in Sierra Leone.
Will you be keeping your dress?
Absolutely! Not only does it carry memories of our wedding but of our trip as well. Plus, it’s a constant reminder to live life our favorite way, out of our comfort zone!
“I Doozy” is an every-so-often feature highlighting people, places or things related to Weddings.