He said working for Donald Trump was “intoxicating.” We’re all feeling hung over.
It was Representative Paul Gosar, Republican of Arizona, who burst forth with this playground taunt of Michael Cohen, the longtime fixer and personal lawyer for President Trump who appeared Wednesday before the House Oversight and Reform Committee to talk about his former boss.
But Mr. Gosar’s observation was more than an isolated zinger; it was an encapsulation of his party’s overarching approach to Mr. Cohen’s testimony. It also provides a pretty good sense of how few minds the hearing is likely to change in this era of bitter polarization — and how tough it can be to bring any clarity to the swirl of controversies engulfing this president.
We await the results of Mr. Trump’s and Mr. Kim’s negotiations. We hope that they are more edifying than the House hearings.
Oh, and India and Pakistan — both possessed of nuclear weapons — were engaged in escalating hostilities, including the downing of two Indian warplanes on Wednesday.
On Capitol Hill, committee Republicans did not waste their time disputing Mr. Cohen’s characterization of Mr. Trump as “a racist,” “a con man” and “a cheat.” At one point, Representative Mark Meadows asked Lynne Patton, an African-American woman who worked for the Trump family as a party planner and now serves in the administration, to stand behind him, citing her as proof that the president cannot possibly be racist. That’s about as substantive as the pushback got.
Instead, Republicans stuck to discrediting and vivisecting the witness. Member after member detailed Mr. Cohen’s financial fraud, his tax evasion, his professional disloyalty and, of course, his previous lies to Congress. The committee’s ranking Republican, Jim Jordan — in high-dudgeon and dangerously over-caffeinated — seemed particularly troubled by the origins and authenticity of a Twitter account, Women for Cohen, that pushed out ridiculous flattery about Mr. Cohen’s manliness: #sexy! #handsome!
 Multiple Republicans, in fact, went on at length about what a disgrace it was that Democrats had provided a platform for such a scoundrel.
Aware of his credibility problems, Mr. Cohen showed up with hard proof of Trumpian misdeeds: a personal check from the president, allegedly used to reimburse Mr. Cohen for his payment to Stormy Daniels; evidence that Mr. Trump arranged to have a portrait of himself purchased at a charity auction by a straw buyer, who was then repaid through Mr. Trump’s charitable foundation; and letters that Mr. Trump had instructed Mr. Cohen to write, warning the president’s high school, colleges and the College Board not to release his grades or test scores without his permission.
Mr. Cohen noted that threatening people on Mr. Trump’s behalf was an integral part of his job, estimating that, over a decade, he was called upon to do so around 500 times.
Mr. Cohen said that working for Mr. Trump was “intoxicating.” But something has changed. Mr. Cohen’s performance is likely the first of many such soul-barings to play out in hearing rooms and courtrooms over coming months.
