Will Nediger puts the cart before the horse.
WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — I’ve either got the midweek malaise or a virus, so I’m going to offer you just the basics today. Please feel free to discuss the rest among yourselves.
This was a very clever puzzle by Will Nediger, and the theme eluded me for quite some time. The “Aha!” moment, however, was delicious.
39A: As a devotee of ’70s rock music, I had a hard time not envisioning ELO or ELP for this three letter entry. But with that question mark, the answer happens to be PET, as in PET rock.
Yes, kids, you read that right. There was a time when millions of people paid $3.95 each — this was in 1970s dollars, worth approximately $18.64 today — for a novelty item that consisted of a cardboard box (complete with air holes), some wood shavings, a manual for the care and upkeep of your pet and, of course, a rock. No, it wasn’t a sentient rock. It was your plain old, basic rock.  Me too. But we are not supposed to be thinking of her; that is just clever misdirection. A thatcher can also be someone who makes a thatched ROOF.
11D: “Park place?” isn’t the Monopoly property (“place” would be capitalized). In this puzzle, it is a place where one might park the car, and that would be a CURB.
25D: Without the question mark, “Auto-reply?” is the automated message you might leave on your email if you are out of the office on vacation, not that I would know. In this puzzle, however, the answer is ECHO, because an ECHO is an automatic response to sound waves hitting a surface.
On the right side of the grid, Mr. Nediger has compiled a set of three words that typically have the prefix “pre-.” (Hey, “prefix” might have made a good entry.) The “pre-” is removed, leaving a real word that means something else and is clued that way. A synonym for the “pre-” word is on the left. I’m not sure if that’s a convoluted way of explaining it or if the cold medication is kicking in, but either way, “pre-” word minus “pre-” on the right, synonym for “pre-” word on the left.
For example, at 22A, the answer to the clue “Go for a stroll” is AMBLE. Makes sense. But then we have 20A’s “Pre-22-Across,” and what does that mean? When you solve some of the crossings, the answer turns out to be FOREWORD.
And when is an AMBLE a FOREWORD? When you add the “pre-” in the clue to it: PREAMBLE.
