The writer-actress behind the wild, disorienting comedy of “Fleabag” and “Killing Eve” is bringing her sneak-attack humor to New York.
Ms. Waller-Bridge, a writer and star of strange and beguiling comedic works, is tucked into a red leather booth in the lobby bar of the Soho Theater, eating a browning banana and searching for little openings to laugh about just about anything. She describes something she once did as “hilarious,” and then laughs at herself for thinking she is so funny. She tells me that she loves staring into the eyeballs of a live audience, but that on TV it’s like she’s acting for just one big shiny eyeball, and then she laughs because she’s suddenly become hyper-aware of my eyeballs.
She talks like a one-woman band, always pulling some strange new sound effect out of her body. She is 33 years old and just under 6 feet tall, and when she is paired on screen with men, she must deflate herself — “PFFFST”— to let them seem big. When she laughs, her voice opens into an off-kilter melody, as if her throat has recently taken up the xylophone. If you ever have the opportunity to make her laugh — it’s not hard — it will feel like she’s thrown her head back and released a song just for you.
Her one-woman play, “Fleabag,” hit the Edinburgh Festival Fringe with such force in 2013 that it left a smoldering Phoebe-shaped crater in the comedy landscape. Almost instantly, she was enlisted to adapt “Fleabag” for TV, create and star in another sitcom, write a weirdly funny murder show, and ultimately ascend to the “Star Wars” universe, playing a mouthy droid programmed to deliver “Solo” some comic relief.
The sneak attack has become Ms. Waller-Bridge’s creative signature. “Fleabag,” which she will soon take to the Soho Playhouse in New York, is a sex comedy that is secretly a tragedy. The title character is a cafe-owning singleton who is always arching a flirty eyebrow at the audience, but her charming mug is a mask — a way to hide her grief and shame in the wake of her best friend’s death. Ms. Waller-Bridge created a modern heroine and deconstructed her at once.
Every night the cast would march from stage to bar, where, years later, she’d meet with BBC executives about taking “Fleabag” to television. Around the corner is where she had a falafel with Luke Jennings, the author of the novellas she would adapt into “Killing Eve,” a spy thriller that is secretly a screwball romance between an intelligence operative and a psychopathic assassin. Down the street is her alma mater, the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, the acting school that secretly taught her she should be a writer.
When she graduated in 2006, she assumed that “being posh with curly hair basically equals a Shakespearean career,” as she once joked to British Vogue, but instead she struggled to get any work at all.
Then she found her fellow bat. Ms. Jones was directing a play featuring Ms. Waller-Bridge’s boyfriend at the time, and afterward Ms. Waller-Bridge approached her, flattered her and handed her a gaunt résumé. Ms. Jones was “blown away by this beauty who was being so nice to me,” she says, and when they worked together on a play of their own, Ms. Jones was startled by her wild and unpredictable acting choices. She gave her a nickname: Brando.
Soon the actress and the director had teamed up to form a theater company, DryWrite, staging guerrilla theater nights that challenged writers to provoke audiences: make them fight or make them fall in love. One night, designed to incite a battle of the sexes, produced a raft of submissions that were so bleakly misogynistic that they finally moved Ms. Waller-Bridge to write a script of her own.
Her early work is sprinkled with notes from her relationship with Ms. Jones. 
Later Ms. Waller-Bridge gave the game to Lulu, the character she played in “Crashing,” and what is remarkable is how she takes a sweet memory and curdles it into something awful for the purposes of the story. Lulu, a kind of proto-Fleabag, uses truth songs to wreak havoc among her housemates, and the ukulele she carts around like a personality isn’t cute. It’s infuriating.
Ms. Waller-Bridge works instinctively, prying open new possibilities and savagely deleting existing plots and characters as she goes. She often consults Ms. Jones, who says that she is “such a perfectionist that it is terrifying.” She regularly chucks out early drafts that blow Ms. Jones away. (Ms. Waller-Bridge has said that she is somewhat less inclined to show her work to her boyfriend, the playwright and director Martin McDonagh).
Another secretly brilliant move: disappearing into a writing project just as her face was hitting Hollywood billboards.
WHEN MS. WALLER-BRIDGE leaves the Soho theater, she will fold herself into a cab and go put the final touches on the second season of the television “Fleabag,” a project that she passionately did not want to do. She had put all of this effort into building the perfect story arc for the first season, and now the BBC wanted her to twist it out of shape to make way for more content. “I was really proud of myself, having such artistic integrity,” she says.
But when the network asked her to reconsider, it planted a pesky idea in her brain. She began to think about the last thing that anyone would ever expect of Fleabag, and now the second season is about her finding faith. Ms. Waller-Bridge swears she will not do another one.
In her career, as in her plots, she is working to defy expectations. She sneaks out of all of the boxes that people want to trap her in: the comedy writer, the sex writer, the feminist writer. When “Fleabag” came out, critics were fixated on how sexually explicit it was, which is ironic because the sexual bravado is the character’s disguise, her way of preventing anyone from really seeing her.
It’s not enough for a woman to write a beloved television show, or three. “It’s part of the job now,” she says, “to be a brilliantly articulate spokesperson for feminism.” But she’s already poured her best insights into “Fleabag,” and she doesn’t see the point of cranking open the hood on her art and exposing all of its parts.
One time she cited Bret Easton Ellis as an inspiration in an interview, and when it caused a ripple of feminist backlash — how could she appreciate the work of a male chauvinist? — she was bewildered, like: “Don’t attack me for reading.” Actually, she finds that misogyny invigorates her: “It makes me want to retaliate artistically,” she says.
Ms. Waller-Bridge relishes writing moments where women get thwacked, cartoon rake style, by the contradictions of feminism. But secretly, she is not interested in focusing on the things that keep women down. Her characters aren’t entrapped in feminist controversy or pulverized by the patriarchy. “They’re just getting on with it,” she says. “Funny, clever women running the show.” She is aspirational in this way, always pitching women toward some strange, as-yet-unseen future. She just wants to show them living their lives as bats.