Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez may be just the beginning.
Less than eight months after Ms. Ocasio-Cortez stunned the political world by unseating a powerful Democratic congressman, her home state is emerging as an epicenter of House primary challenges in 2020.
Party insurgents are plotting and preparing to battle with the entrenched establishment — targeting as many as a half-dozen Congress members in and around New York City — over what it means to be a Democrat and a progressive in the age of President Trump.
The coming New York uprising could result in a series of races that lay bare some of the same generational, racial, gender and ideological cleavages expected to define the 2020 presidential primary.
The activist left, in particular, hopes that Ms. Ocasio-Cortez’s victory will inspire a brush fire of Democrat-on-Democrat campaigns that will spread from New York across the nation.
Serious primary challengers for House seats have historically been rare, and it is almost unheard of for so many to emerge in one region so early in the election cycle.
Only two Democratic incumbents — including Joseph Crowley, the former No. 4 Democrat in the House, who lost to Ms. Ocasio-Cortez — were felled nationwide in 2018. But threats now seem to loom for numerous New York incumbents.
In Manhattan, Jerrold Nadler, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, could be challenged, just as a California billionaire pressures him to move to impeach President Trump.
On Long Island, a Democratic National Committee member is making noises about taking on Tom Suozzi. In Brooklyn, a rematch is in the works in what was one of the nation’s closest primaries in 2018. And in the Bronx and Westchester, some progressives are pushing to unseat Eliot L. Engel, a white congressman who represents a diversifying district where white residents are now in the minority — just like where Ms. Ocasio-Cortez won.
Not every challenge in New York will be run on ideological grounds. Some will be powered by more local disputes, longstanding grudges or just timely ambition. But for many progressives, the goal is to police the Democratic Party ideologically, much in the way the Tea Party pushed Republicans to the right.
After Mr. Crowley’s defeat almost no one is seen as untouchable.
“They should be afraid,” Maria L. Svart, the national director of the Democratic Socialists of America, which backed Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, said of incumbent House Democrats.
A report that Ms. Ocasio-Cortez was seeking a Democratic challenger to Representative Hakeem Jeffries, the highest-ranking New Yorker in House leadership, rattled the delegation. Ms. Ocasio-Cortez denied the story with her colleagues and has sought to smooth over relations.
They, in turn, have sought to establish personal or professional bonds with her, signing onto her Green New Deal, for instance — recognizing the power of her megaphone.
Whether or not Ms. Ocasio-Cortez gets personally involved, insurgent groups are plowing ahead.
Mr. McElwee called the push to recruit a challenger to Mr. Engel, who chairs the House Foreign Affairs Committee and has been in Congress for three decades, a “top priority” and he recently commissioned a poll there.
Mr. Engel easily dispatched a self-funded white male challenger in 2018 but activists are particularly keen on finding a younger candidate of color in 2020; only about a half-dozen white Democratic men represent a more diverse district in Congress than Mr. Engel.
“I just can’t justify having my daughter watch me sit on the sidelines,” she said.
A huge X-factor in any Nadler primary would be the billionaire activist Tom Steyer, who has pushed for the impeachment of Mr. Trump. Mr. Steyer has already polled the popularity of impeachment in the district and is launching a $200,000 direct mail, television and digital ad campaign this week urging Mr. Nadler to begin impeachment hearings in his committee.
In the Bronx, Representative José E. Serrano, in Congress since 1990, could face a challenge from Councilman Ritchie Torres, a 30-year-old often described as a rising star, who said he is weighing a run. Mr. Serrano, 75, almost faced a primary in 2018: Ms. Ocasio-Cortez initially filed paperwork to run against him before refiling days later against Mr. Crowley.
Two other Democratic New York City congresswomen who faced primary opponents in 2018, Representatives Yvette Clarke and Carolyn Maloney, expect challenges again. Ms. Clarke, who won with only 53 percent of the vote, is likely to face a rematch with Adem Bunkeddeko, the Harvard-educated son of war Ugandan refugees who has signaled he plans to run again.
Ms. Clarke said she had reorganized her district office following the 2018 close call and is aggressively selling her progressive credentials in the more gentrified and liberal parts of the district, such as Park Slope. “I definitely will not be caught by surprise,” she said.
Two Long Island Democrats could face 2020 primaries, too: Representatives Suozzi and Kathleen Rice.
Mr. Suozzi, a member of the bipartisan Problem Solvers Caucus, has angered progressive activists, including on immigration, after he went on “Fox and Friends” last summer to embrace “some physical structures on the border” and defend the Immigration and Customs and Enforcement agency.
Some on the left have encouraged Robert Zimmerman, a D.N.C. member who lives in the district and once ran for Congress in the early 1980s, to challenge Mr. Suozzi from the left.
Of Mr. Zimmerman, Mr. Suozzi declined to comment.
In the neighboring district, Ms. Rice riled up some national and local Democrats with her outspoken opposition to Nancy Pelosi’s ascent as speaker. Mr. McElwee’s group commissioned a poll of how Ms. Rice’s opposition to Ms. Pelosi was received, along with her positions on other progressive issues.
Kevan Abrahams, the Democratic leader in the Nassau County Legislature who lost a primary to Ms. Rice in 2014, is considering running again, though he said he was currently focused on his own re-election this fall.
