A north/south view of a rendering of MoMA looking east along Fifty-Third Street. The second-, fourth- and fifth-floor galleries will continue to form the chronological spine of exhibitions, but in expanded form. The red line on the second floor traces the expansion into the former Folk Art Museum and the Jean Nouvel building. The fourth and fifth floors contain the Studio. The second floor houses the Daylit Gallery. At street level are a gallery and the Projects Room.
With the doors closed from June 15 to Oct. 21, the museum will give up summer tourism revenue in the interest of creating a new MoMA that will abandon the discipline-based display system it has used for eight decades.
“Untitled,” a gelatin silver print from around 1955 by Shigeru Onishi at the Museum of Modern Art.Credit...The Museum of Modern Art, New York.
The museum will reopen with a survey of Latin American art, along with exhibitions by two African-American artists: Pope.L, known for his provocative performances, and Betye Saar, 92, whose collages and assemblages have often flown under the radar.
During its last renovation in 2004, designed by Yoshio Taniguchi, MoMA moved to temporary space in Queens for two years. Because the museum will be closed for a shorter period this time, Mr. Lowry said relocation would be unnecessary.
Asked about the financial cost of the hiatus, he said the museum had budgeted to prepare for lost revenue (MoMA PS 1 will remain open). In the last few years MoMA has received what Mr. Lowry once called “the kind of gifts you only dream about,” namely $100 million from the entertainment mogul David Geffen. On Tuesday, MoMA will announce yet another: more than $200 million from the estate of David Rockefeller, the philanthropist and banker, who died in 2017.
They will also find a new two-story Studio for live and experimental programming, including performance, dance, music, moving image and sound works. Another new space, the second-floor Platform, will be a place for visitors to make art and join conversations. “We’re trying to make a visit to the museum a comfortable, enjoyable experience that lets you move back and forth from looking at art to talking about art to thinking about art,” Mr. Lowry said.
The new museum will open earlier, at 10 a.m.; extend its hours to 9 p.m. on the first Thursday of every month; and include a reconfigured Museum store . Member benefits will include a new dedicated entrance and coat check and 9:30 a.m. entry. A redesigned lobby aims to improve circulation, and new lounges to signal welcome.
