We asked readers whom they would bring to President Trump’s address on Tuesday.
The State of the Union address is an elaborate form of political gamesmanship. Members of Congress trot out guests who will help them make a point, good or bad, about the president’s agenda, and vice versa.
When we asked readers whom they would invite to the address on Tuesday, we heard from many liberals who described their fantasies of inviting guests to rebuke President Trump.
Some people came up repeatedly: Christine Blasey Ford, Colin Kaepernick and immigrants whose families were separated at the border. We also heard from some who chose nonpartisan guests — relatives, personal heroes and co-workers.
Here are some of their answers, which have been condensed and edited for clarity.
Fred Rogers might have been capable of showing partisan zealots how to listen and get along with one another.
— David Hill, Rochester, N.Y.
To honor those who serve this country by risking their lives for us.
— David B. Nummey, Floral Park, N.Y.
My granddaughter Katt Baldwin Greenberg, 29. Katt has had Type 1 diabetes since birth. In that time, the price of insulin, which Type 1 diabetics must take every day to stay alive, has tripled. People with Type 1 diabetes are dying in this country because they cannot afford their life-sustaining medicine.
Colin Kaepernick, because we need to shine a spotlight on racial inequality in America. It can’t be brushed under the shiny hood of so-called respect for the flag. Real respect means striving for the ideal of true equality.
— Sophia Naz, Glen Ellen, Calif.
Colin Kaepernick is an unwavering voice for racial justice. He has been a phenomenal example of putting principles before personal gain. And I think it would make a lot of the G.O.P. very uncomfortable.
— Jennifer Armstrong, Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
I would invite the fiancée of Jamal Khashoggi to point directly to the Trump administration’s refusal to hold Mohammed bin Salman, the crown prince of Saudi Arabia, responsible for Khashoggi’s murder.
— William Johnston, Higganum, Conn.
I would hold up a massive picture of Jamal Khashoggi, front and center, to show the president how he has failed and continues to fail America and American citizens.
— Peggy White, Ypsilanti, Mich.
A. G. Sulzberger! Support the free press and the next generation.
Cardi B was a superstar during the government shutdown with her viral tweets and videos. She’s passionate about American politics, specifically presidential history. Plus she is a badass who would bring some spunk to the usually boring political affair!
An undocumented immigrant to the United States from El Salvador or Guatemala who has been the victim of gang violence, to demonstrate the humanity of these people and how the United States should be a land of refuge.
— Joe Waks, Bayonne, N.J.
A baby separated from her or his parents at the border, to remind everyone of that cruelty, and that reunification is not happening quickly.
 I’d like to draw attention to the unacceptable hatred that is seething in this country.
I would invite Jussie Smollett as a concrete, human reminder that racism and homophobia are alive and well in our country and have violent consequences for L.G.T.B.Q. people of color. Feeling safe on the streets should not be a privilege. It should be a right, one that is defended vehemently by the president at all times for all people.
— Trish Vawter, Portland, Ore.
Ruth Etzel, the former director of the Environmental Protection Agency’s Office of Children’s Health Protection and a world-renowned expert on environmental health, whom the Trump administration placed on administrative leave with pay.
Dr. Etzel’s team was getting ready to release new, stricter lead guidelines to protect children. Children will continue to suffer.
— Kathy King, Stillwater, Minn.
I would invite one of the people who have been unjustly placed in prison for decades and have had their verdicts overturned because of the work of the Equal Justice Initiative, so they could see, face-to-face, the people who appoint federal judges and who have sworn to work for justice in our country.
— Barbara Ann Brothers, Staunton, Va.
I would invite Christine Blasey Ford because she had great courage, and I know she was telling the truth. She stood up to power and still does. She is a true hero.
— Christine Williams, San Jose, Calif.
I cannot fathom the strength it takes to tell the entire world about something as deeply personal as sexual assault. She gave a voice to people everywhere who have faced abuse at the hands of those in power, and because of that she is an American hero.
— Emerson Ellis, Austin, Tex.
David Hogg or Emma González (both survivors of the shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., in February 2018).
It would be a positive message by young people who are risking their lives and reputations by going public, and doing something about pervasive gun violence in America.
— Don Reeck, Whitmore Lake, Mich.
The kids from the Parkland high school shooting. They moved the country to think about weapons sales.
Lara Takenaga contributed reporting.