President Trump delivered his second State of the Union address on Tuesday night. Here are the highlights.
We meet tonight at a moment of unlimited potential. Our new U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement — the U.S.M.C.A. — will replace Nafta and deliver for American workers like they haven’t had delivered to for a long time.  In the past, most of the people in this room voted for a wall. But the proper wall never got built. I will get it built. [applause] No issue better illustrates the divide between America’s working class and America’s political class than illegal immigration. Wealthy politicians and donors push for open borders while living their lives behind walls and gates and guards. All Americans can be proud that we have more women in the workforce than ever before. [applause] You also have more women serving in Congress than at any time before. [cheering] To defend the dignity of every person, I am asking Congress to pass legislation to prohibit the late-term abortion of children who can feel pain in the mother’s womb. [cheering] Great nations do not fight endless wars. If I had not been elected president of the United States, we would right now, in my opinion, be in a major war with North Korea.” Chairman Kim and I will meet again on Feb. 27 and 28 in Vietnam. When I took office, ISIS controlled more than 20,000 square miles in Iraq and Syria. Just two years ago. Today, we have liberated virtually all of the territory from the grip of these bloodthirsty monsters. Now, as we work with our allies to destroy the remnants of ISIS, it is time to give our brave warriors in Syria a warm welcome home.
WASHINGTON — President Trump delivered a message of bipartisan unity on Tuesday night in his first address to Congress in the new era of divided government, but signaled that he would continue to wage war for the hard-line immigration policies that have polarized the capital and the nation.
In a nationally televised speech that toggled between conciliation and confrontation, Mr. Trump presented himself as a leader who could work across party lines even as he pressed lawmakers to build a wall along the nation’s southwestern border that leaders of the newly empowered congressional Democrats have adamantly rejected.
Any hopes for a newfound spirit of cooperation, however, seemed elusive as the president and Democrats spent the hours before, during and after the address exchanging partisan political fire, making clear that ritualistic calls for across-the-aisle collaboration were unlikely to transform an environment that has turned increasingly toxic.
Republicans jumped to their feet at the president’s calls to curb immigration, limit late-term abortions and ensure that the United States does not turn to socialism, even chanting “U-S-A, U-S-A” a couple of times as if at a Trump campaign rally. “That sounds so good,” he exulted.
Speaker Nancy Pelosi, sitting behind Mr. Trump for the first time, and other Democrats largely remained in their seats without applauding and expressed only tepid enthusiasm even for his mention of goals intended to appeal to them, like infrastructure and paid parental leave. Ms. Pelosi maintained a polite, even amused smile on her face for much of the speech.
But the evening was filled with political theater as the president introduced World War II veterans, Holocaust survivors, the Apollo 11 astronaut Buzz Aldrin, a 10-year-old cancer survivor, a police officer shot seven times at last fall’s synagogue massacre in Pittsburgh and the teary-eyed relatives of a couple killed by an illegal immigrant, all sitting with the first lady, Melania Trump.
The change in the power structure in a Capitol long dominated by men was on display as Ms. Pelosi and scores of House Democratic women wore white, the color of the suffrage movement, reflecting the fact that 131 women were sworn into the new Congress, the most in American history.
He made no direct mention of the issues that may yet come to dominate the year, such as the Russia investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, or the parallel inquiries that House Democrats intend to conduct into his campaign’s ties with Russia and efforts to impede investigations.
But Mr. Trump indicated no retreat from his almost singular pursuit of a border wall, directly taking on Ms. Pelosi, who has called it “immoral.” He devoted 15 minutes of the hour-and-22-minute speech to immigration with no concession to Democratic priorities like a path to citizenship for immigrants brought into the country illegally as children.
The president’s speech, built on a theme of “choosing greatness,” came at a pivotal moment halfway through the president’s term as he seeks to regain momentum after the midterm election defeat that handed control of the House to Democrats and after his failed effort to use a partial government shutdown to extract money for the wall.
Stung by his retreat on the government shutdown, Mr. Trump has hardly been in the mood for collaboration with the other party. As he and his team drafted his address in recent days, he has groused about the text, complaining that it was too gentle on Democrats, according to people briefed on the matter.
The president insisted on sharpening some of the lines in the speech and rebuffed aides, who urged him to congratulate Ms. Pelosi on her ascension to the speakership.
During an off-the-record lunch for television anchors on Tuesday before the speech, Mr. Trump offered scathing assessments of a number of leading Democrats, including some lining up to run against him next year.
He dismissed former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. as “dumb,” called Senator Chuck Schumer of New York a “nasty son of a bitch” and mocked Gov. Ralph Northam of Virginia, who he said “choked like a dog” at a news conference where Mr. Northam tried to explain a racist yearbook photograph, according to multiple people in the room.
Mr. Trump arrived at this point in his presidency with the approval of just 37 percent of the public, according to Gallup. In the past four decades, the only times a president headed into a State of the Union address with as little or less support were in 1983 when Ronald Reagan was struggling with a painful recession and in 2007 and 2008 when George W. Bush was trying to turn around the Iraq war.
Mr. Trump is the only president in the history of Gallup polling to have never drawn the support of a majority of the public at any point in his first two years in office. But while he is the fourth president in a row to lose at least one house of Congress during a midterm election, Bill Clinton and Barack Obama both bounced back to win re-election, and Mr. Trump has privately expressed confidence that he will, too.
Like President Trump, the last three presidents all lost at least one house of Congress at a midterm election. Their subsequent speeches offered a blueprint for what came next.
Today: In his first State of the Union address since losing control of Congress, the president repeatedly spoke of bipartisan unity. But a history of these speeches suggests that it’s everything else he said that will best predict how he actually governs.
It’s Wednesday, February 6.
Good. Happy State of the Union.
Yeah, it’s really awful.
Awful. So let’s not do that.
It’s kind of a dismal evening anyway, and calling it “S.O.T.U.” just sort of deepens the gloom that hangs over the whole thing.
And yeah, why is it so gloomy?
I don’t know. I mean, you wouldn’t believe it— there were, like, 50 people in the meeting today for S.O.T.U. planning.
What did we say about that word?
O.K., everybody good? Mark, what’s the significance of this particular State of the Union in your mind?
It’s not a unique situation, by any stretch. [AUDIO PLAYBACK] ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): Madame Speaker, Vice President Cheney, members of Congress, distinguished guests and fellow citizens.
With State of the Union addresses they gave after their party suffered defeats in midterm elections. [AUDIO PLAYBACK] ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): When decisions are hard and courage is needed.
Each of them approached the situation in different ways. And in each case, it provided a sort of a telling glimpse, a blueprint for how they were going to behave over the coming two years of their presidencies. [AUDIO PLAYBACK] ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): And this is the business before us tonight.
That’s what the people who sent us here expect of us.
So take us through the examples of these last three presidents who have given these speeches after they lost a midterm election. How have they approached the speech?
So how much did Clinton’s message at this State of the Union— this conciliatory tone, these promises of bipartisanship and an acknowledgment of this conservative agenda— how much did it predict how he was going to govern for the next two years?
And how did Obama’s State of the Union confront that?
Essentially, by ignoring it.
So it was a very soaring message that was in keeping with the way President Obama ran for office, but one that didn’t necessarily acknowledge the defeat that his party had just suffered.
So does the way that Obama responds to this division in this speech— by kind of ignoring it, by not fully acknowledging the new political terrain he has to confront— does this forecast how he ends up working with Congress for the next two years?
I think it does quite accurately. Because if you look at what happens in the years after this, President Obama never really does form a good working relationship. He never really does roll up his sleeves and attempt to find much common ground with Republicans in Congress. And so, to some extent, these grand ideas remain just that— grand ideas, because he wasn’t able to work with Republicans to translate them into more of a tangible reality.
So in that sense, the speech was a very honest and accurate predictor.
O.K. So it is 7:52, Mark— a little over an hour before President Trump gives his State of the Union. Given the history you’ve just described, what do you expect his message to be now that he has divided government?
We don’t know exactly what he’s going to say, but we do know that whatever their differences, all three of his predecessors issued a call for unity. Unity is the one theme that we can almost certainly expect to hear in virtually any State of the Union address. But what’s really interesting is less that than what’s between the lines, what’s the subtext or the nuance in the State of the Union address. That’s where you can really see what the president plans to do, how he plans to govern, what blueprint or what predicate he’s putting in place. So what’s going to be interesting in President Trump’s address is not a call for unity. It’s almost certainly going to be there. It’s the other things that are in the speech that are going to really tell you what we can expect.
So, Mark, thank you for now. We will talk to you after Trump’s State of the Union in, I guess, an hour or two.
So, Mark, what did President Trump do tonight?
But it sounds like you think that the conciliatory language is just the obligatory language of the State of the Union, and it’s the harder-edged stuff that we should be listening to and thinking about in relation to past State of the Unions that you outlined before.
In 2019, we also celebrate 50 years since brave young pilots flew a quarter of a million miles through space to plant the American flag on the face of the moon. [END PLAYBACK] To make it more attractive to a broad audience while also speaking to the president’s political base. But make no mistake— this speech was targeted to the political base. It was meant to mollify that base. And I think it’s important that we not lose sight of that reality.
So where does this speech fit into the history of State of the Unions that have come after the dawn of divided government?
Well, I think what’s most significant is that there is really no acknowledgment in this speech of the changed circumstances. There’s no acknowledgment here that President Trump faces a new political reality, that he has to do business with the Democrats if he wants to get any significant legislation passed. This is the speech given by a president who is behaving very much like he did the week he was inaugurated, when he had a unified Congress under his control.
Does that make this, then, an Obama-like State of the Union?
And the president broke into a smile and appeared, in a funny way, to be taking credit for their presence in the House— which, of course, is deeply ironic, because the reason they’re in the House is because they were elected largely as a repudiation of him. So I think if you’re looking for any signs of a newly pragmatic president or a president who will take heed of some of the concerns of the opposing party, I don’t think we saw any of that in the speech tonight. And I would not expect to see any of that in his governing style over the next couple of years.
Well, Mark, it is almost 1:00 a.m. We are really grateful to you, thank you so much.
After presidents suffer setbacks in midterms, they often reach out to the victorious opposition with words of conciliation, however artificial or short-lived they may be. In Mr. Trump’s case, he opened this period of partisan power sharing with a relentless confrontation over his proposed border wall, resulting in a record-breaking 35-day partial government shutdown.
That impasse nearly cost Mr. Trump his opportunity to deliver his State of the Union address, as Ms. Pelosi refused to let him come to the House chamber as long as federal agencies were closed and workers unpaid. Mr. Trump backed down and accepted a measure reopening the government for three weeks, but negotiations in the interim have made no more progress toward winning money for his wall — and the government could close again on Feb. 15.
Given that, Mr. Trump’s calls for unity were almost surely destined to fall on deaf ears. Even Republicans have publicly rebuked him lately for his plans to withdraw troops from Syria and Afghanistan, and party leaders have pressed him not to declare a national emergency bypassing Congress to build the wall.
Among those invited by the president to join the first lady during the speech was Joshua Trump, a sixth-grade student from Wilmington, Del., who “has been bullied in school due to his last name,” according to the White House.
Democrats were making points with their guests, as well. Among those they invited were air traffic controllers who went unpaid during the government shutdown, illegal immigrants who worked at Mr. Trump’s properties and transgender soldiers who will be banned under the president’s new policy.
In addition to Ms. Abrams, other Democrats sought to get in on the action. Senator Kamala Harris of California, who is running for president, delivered her own response shortly before the speech, while Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, who may also run, delivered his afterward.
In his address, Mr. Trump assailed Democrats like Mr. Northam for comments in support of easing restrictions on late-term abortions and called for federal legislation cracking down on such procedures, a nod to Mr. Trump’s conservative base. He made no mention of the racist medical school yearbook picture that has threatened Mr. Northam’s political career, after aides cautioned him about raising that issue.
The president highlighted what he sees as the accomplishments of his first two years in office, including a growing economy, rising energy production, increased military spending, deregulation and tax cuts. He pressed Congress to approve his new trade pact with Canada and Mexico updating the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Mr. Trump did not outline the traditional laundry list of new initiatives, the way other presidents have, but he did plan to make a national commitment to end transmission of the virus that causes AIDS, with a goal of stopping its spread in the United States by 2030. He repeated past calls for bipartisan measures to rebuild “America’s crumbling infrastructure,” curb the cost of prescription drugs and approve paid parental leave.
The president also talked about his goal of bringing an end to the “endless wars” in places like Syria and Afghanistan, the threat he sees from Iran and his bid to force President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela to step down. He announced that he would meet for the second time with North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, in Vietnam on Feb. 27-28 to seek his nuclear disarmament.
