‘#ADULTING WITH MICHELLE BUTEAU AND JORDAN CARLOS’ at Union Hall (Feb. 10, 5 and 7:30 p.m.). Buteau, who co-stars in the forthcoming BET reboot of “First Wives Club,” and Carlos, a former writer for Comedy Central’s “The Nightly Show With Larry Wilmore,” host this live show in which they ask comedians how they cope with the concept of acting like grown-ups. The early show features Phoebe Robinson and Marie Faustin; the late show, Wyatt Cenac.
‘FRIENDS OF SINGLE PEOPLE’ at Littlefield (Feb. 10, 8 p.m.). If you’re currently single, get a jump on Valentine’s Day by attending this event, where comedians will become your official dating representatives. How does it work? Arrive by 7:30 p.m. if you want to participate and speak with a panel of comedians, one of whom will act as your proxy onstage. Later on, when another comedian representing a fellow single person in the audience picks your proxy, you and that audience member will come to the stage to collect some drink tickets, and you’ll be off to the relationship races! Jo Firestone, a writer for “The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon,” hosts.
‘STAND UP SCIENCE’ at Improv Asylum (Feb. 10, 8 p.m.). As a stand-up, Shane Mauss has performed on “Conan” and Comedy Central. As the host of the podcast “Here We Are,” he has interviewed more than 200 academics about their fields of expertise. This live showcase is the best of both. Mauss and Myq Kaplan perform their smartest jokes, and also listen and pose questions to their guests: Elodie Ghedin, professor of epidemiology at N.Y.U., and Dr. Itai Yanai, director of the Institute for Computational Medicine at N.Y.U. Langone.
‘X-RAE PODCAST LIVE’ at the Comedy Cellar at the Village Underground (Feb. 11, 8 p.m.). The comedian and actress Iris Bahr performs her podcast, “X-Rae,” as Rae Lynn Caspar White, her “Southern intellectual, professional body surrogate and life coach” alter ego. In past live recordings of the show, Bahr’s guests have included famous movie directors and political commentators. For this episode, it’s all comedy, with Jessica Kirson, Andrew Schulz, Joe Machi and Mehran Khaghani.
