Do you feel like you can afford to live in California?
If you said no to that question, you’d be in good company: 43 percent of Californians would agree with you.
The one part of the state where they’d be less likely to feel the crunch? The Bay Area — land of some of the nation’s most crushing housing and child care costs — where 65 percent of registered voters said, yes, they feel as if they can afford to live here.
Still, 77 percent of Californians acknowledged the state’s housing crisis, including 85 percent in the Bay.
And that’s compared with 52 percent of L.A. County residents who said they felt as if they could afford to live in the Golden State and 53 percent of Inland and Valley residents.
Those are a few findings from Quinnipiac University’s first California-specific poll.
Quinnipiac is known for its national election polling, as well as a source for public opinions in states like New York, New Jersey, Florida and Ohio. But until now, not California.
Doug Schwartz, director of the Quinnipiac University Poll, said that’s mostly a function of momentum.
Tim Malloy, assistant director of the poll, said the university had always had its eye on the West.
California, Mr. Malloy said, is a microcosm of the country.
Still, he said, he was a little surprised by some of the results.
For instance, one number that got a bit of attention: While 58 percent of Californians said they’d be excited if Senator Kamala Harris became the Democratic nominee for president, only 40 percent said she’d make a good president.
Mr. Schwartz said one more statistic that struck him as curious was that 43 percent of voters said forest mismanagement was more responsible for the severity of wildfires than climate change. The same percentage said the opposite — that they thought climate change was more responsible than forest mismanagement.
Somehow it’s almost Valentine’s Day already.
The gift and dining guides are trickling out. So are the sweet stories, like this one, about a Bakersfield couple who will get married next month at age 90 and 89.
The two were high school sweethearts in 1944 before they went their separate ways, lived separate lives, raised separate sets of children. But then, as The Bakersfield Californian reported, not long after Earle Murie lost his wife of 67 years, Laurette Ellis called to wish him a happy birthday.
And just like that, their new life together started.
If you’re looking for love stories that involve more 21st century concerns, The Times, of course, has its tiny love stories. They come from all over. But I’d love to read about uniquely California love. So if you have a tiny California love story — 100 words or less — send it to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays.