WASHINGTON — As the child of former sharecroppers, Representative Elijah E. Cummings of Maryland is no stranger to blunt conversations about race. But when a fiery freshman Democrat practically accused a conservative Republican of racism on Wednesday, the uneasy truce that Mr. Cummings brokered put him in the center of a raw debate over race and gender in a changing House.
Mr. Meadows, red-faced and near tears, demanded that Ms. Tlaib’s words be “taken down” — struck from the record as a violation of House rules — and Mr. Cummings asked Ms. Tlaib to explain herself. She apologized. Then the questions began.
The episode underscored who Mr. Cummings is and how he wants to run his committee. On Thursday, many of his colleagues — including Ms. Ocasio-Cortez — came to his defense, saying he handled a difficult situation well by preventing an important and historic hearing from going off the rails.
Beyond that contretemps, the Cohen hearing served to shine a national spotlight on a new generation of outspoken young Democrats, many of them women of color, who are forcing pointed conversations about race and abandoning the unwritten protocols of decorum in the way their elders — who often agree with them — have not.
For the House Republican Conference, 90 percent of whom are white and male, some uncomfortable moments are inevitable. Mr. Meadows called the “birther” videos “old news” on Thursday and said he had previously apologized. He also appeared to reconcile with Ms. Tlaib; the two shared a hug and a seemingly cordial talk on the House floor.
Mr. Meadows and Ms. Tlaib are political and cultural opposites. Mr. Meadows, 59, a well-to-do real estate developer, is the chairman of the House Freedom Caucus and one of Mr. Trump’s most ardent defenders on Capitol Hill.
Ms. Tlaib, 42, made headlines on her first day in office after she was captured on video using an expletive to describe Mr. Trump as she spoke of her desire to impeach him. A lawyer and social justice advocate from Detroit, she is the daughter of Palestinian immigrants and one of the first two Muslim women in Congress.
Congress, of course, has been grappling with issues of race for most of its existence, and certainly the debates during the civil rights era were pointed and passionate. But the rise of Mr. Trump, who has referred to a former black aide, Omarosa Manigault Newman, as “a dog” and declared that there were “very fine people on both sides” of the white supremacists’ march in 2017 in Charlottesville, Va., has made Washington’s conversation about race deeply personal for Ms. Tlaib and other lawmakers of color.
In fact, the only Democrats to call Mr. Meadows out were women of color. Men of color on the committee, such as Mr. Khanna and Representative Raja Krishnamoorthi of Illinois, held their tongues.
While Mr. Cummings may have wanted to put the matter to rest, the exchange was reverberating inside and outside the Capitol.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez agreed, saying she felt Mr. Cummings was “correct in the procedure” and was “trying to do everything in his power to protect” Ms. Tlaib from being reprimanded. But, she added, women of color often face disparate treatment at work.
