The return of Alex Vratsanos.
TUESDAY PUZZLE — The body is a miraculous feat of design and engineering. We don’t stop to think about it on a daily basis, but our bodies are these incredible, one-of-a-kind machines with more moving parts than we can count, if we go down to the cellular level. Not only that, but if everything goes according to plan, parts of the body miraculously work in concert with one another to make sure you get out of bed in the morning, perform your morning ablutions, eat a hearty breakfast and get to work having remembered to put on pants.
I bring this up because Alex Vratsanos, whose last New York Times puzzle was a little over a year ago, offers us a crossword that highlights some of the creakier parts of the body, which are still miraculous and amazing, mind you. The trick is to keep them in good working condition as you age, so that you can still get those pants on. If you remember.
1A: “River that formed part of the border between East and West Germany” for ELBE might be a tough geographical question for beginning solvers who aren’t used to holding these factoids in their heads, but those crossings are fairly kind.
15A: Remembering the Best Actor Oscar from 90 years ago might seem like an impossible task, but again, EMIL Jannings is someone who crossword solvers know to store away in their brains. He was exceedingly famous in the 1920s and ’30s, especially for the 1930 cult classic “The Blue Angel,” starring Marlene Dietrich. He was considered to be a great actor for his time, but he was also a Nazi, and while he went on to have a career in German films, he was prevented from being hired by film companies outside the country because of his beliefs.
67A: Loved this wordplay. “Religious setback?” could mean a problem for a church or temple, but in this case, it means a physical setback, or an APSE in a church.
7D: “Critical point?” does not mean a point in time in this puzzle. It refers to a small point that one might pick or criticize, which is commonly called a NIT.
11D: I did not know the Green Knight’s weapon, but with three letters and the A and E filled in, AXE just made sense.
26D: I had to research this, because as clever as the clue was, I couldn’t get from “Stone face?” to STUCCO easily. Some stucco consists of lime, sand and water, or Portland cement, which consists of limestone and clay. Lime is a stone. Sand was stone. Clay was probably near a stone once. And stucco is used on the “face” of a house. There you go: Stone face.
Those grayed squares (they might be circled if you solve in Across Lite) that form right angles in Mr. Vratsanos’s puzzle are JOINTs in the human body. Solvers will discover eight of them as they solve the puzzle.
I felt it was fairly easy to figure out the theme of Mr. Vratsanos’s puzzle just by looking at the empty grid. Those gray squares at right angles had to represent something that bends, right? And once you start to fill in some of the grayed squares, it’s easy enough to guess the rest of the JOINT, which is the revealer in the center of the grid. So once I got ANKLE from 5A and 8D, it wasn’t hard to get the rest of them, with a few squares filled in.
I came up with this idea in late 2015, being inspired by two prior Tuesdays: May 1, 2007 and November 16, 2010. It struck me that they both had a “pinwheel” pattern of long answers that did not really have anything to do with theme, just to help set up the actual theme entries, and that they fit the simple “word that comes before or after” theme type. JOINT then struck me as a both a description of the 90-degree turn and something with a more definite list of potential theme entries, and so I set to work on it.
At first, I considered JOINT RESOLUTION in the center, but I wasn’t sure how familiar it would be, nor could I think of any meaningful reason for RESOLUTION other than that it would make the revealer 15 letters long. It hit me immediately after trying the revealer in its current form that it would allow for two more theme entries. As I went along filling and cluing it, I was afraid that not all the joints being hinge joints, like their arrangement seemed to indicate, would be cause for rejection. There is always some such kind of risk that you take whenever you submit a puzzle, though, so I kept going, and was thrilled when Will accepted it last May 18.
Thank you, solvers, for taking the time to try this. A puzzle is never truly happy until it is solved by people.
Finally, I must give a big shout-out to fellow constructor Tim Croce, who is a very good friend of mine … and, as of February 16, became a dad!
