President Trump spoke with The New York Times on Thursday, sitting in the Oval Office for an interview with A. G. Sulzberger, the newspaper’s publisher, and two White House correspondents, Peter Baker and Maggie Haberman.
For the first part of the conversation, Mr. Baker and Ms. Haberman led the interview of the president. Later on, Mr. Sulzberger engaged Mr. Trump on journalism and so-called fake news.
The following are excerpts from that discussion, transcribed by The Times. They have been lightly edited for content and clarity, and omit off-the-record comments and asides.
A.G. SULZBERGER, publisher of The New York Times: Mr. President, before we wind down, I didn’t want to miss the opportunity just to raise a concern that we discussed last time I was here.
SULZBERGER: — and warned that I thought it could have consequences. I feel like in the time since we’ve started to see some of those consequences play out. We’ve seen around the world an unprecedented rise in attacks on journalists, threats to journalists, censorship of journalists, jailing of journalists and murders of journalists.
TRUMP: Where in particular?
SULZBERGER: Globally, on every continent. I’m happy to send you some of the literature.
SULZBERGER: It’s very closely tracked. But one of the things that’s been very striking to me is that as I’ve talked to my colleagues around the globe, you know, working in different countries, particularly working in countries where a free press is already a tenuous thing, they say that they are increasingly of the belief that your rhetoric is creating a climate in which dictators and tyrants are able to employ your words in suppressing a free press. And I wanted to circle back to this, you know, first, I guess to ask you, you know, if you are aware of these broad consequences that we’re seeing.
TRUMP: So the person, honestly, that’s been most suggestive of that would — is you.
TRUMP: — more so than others. I do notice that people are declaring more and more fake news, where they go “fake news.” I even see it in other countries. I don’t necessarily attribute that to me. I think I can attribute the term to me. I think I was the one that started using it, I would say. But I do see that.
SULZBERGER: But can I just respond to that? Because the phrase fake news — you’re exactly right — it has been embraced globally. And several countries have actually banned fake news, but it was a technique to actually ban an independent media. And so it’s not, you know, about viral, you know, viral stuff on Facebook. It’s about countries using that term to actually ban independent scrutiny of their actions.
TRUMP: Right, I’ve seen that.
TRUMP: I don’t like that. I mean I don’t like that. I don’t like, though I do think it’s very bad for a country when the news is not accurately portrayed. I really do. And I do believe I’m a victim of that, honestly. In all due respect, I know what a good writer these two people are. But Peter’s been very tough on us the last couple of months. I don’t know why, because I really think I’m doing a great job.
SULZBERGER: Can I say something on Peter?
TRUMP: I know, I know.
SULZBERGER: But one of the things that we’ve learned over a century and a half of covering the men who’ve occupied this office is that every occupant feels that the press is too tough at times.
SULZBERGER: But our job and our constitutional structure and, you know, the centrality of a free press and the First Amendment, demands that a free press asks tough questions and hold the powerful to account. And I know that’s not always comfortable, and I certainly would never ask you to, you know, bite your tongue if you have coverage you disagree with.
TRUMP: No, I understand that.
SULZBERGER: — hard, dangerous work of ferreting out the truth in — in societies where leadership often tries to suppress it. And, and you know I’d urge you to reconsider these things.
TRUMP: I understand that.
SULZBERGER: But if — you choose not to, I just, I want you to be aware of some of the consequences that I’m starting to see out there.
TRUMP: Would you say more so now than over the last five years?
TRUMP: Right now? I mean, moreso now than even a year ago?
TRUMP: I’m not happy to hear that.
TRUMP: [To aide] One second.
TRUMP: You know I’ve done some very good things. Look — North Korea — you’d be in a war right now. O.K.? Venezuela we have to see how that works out, Maggie and Peter. We’re going to have to see. I mean, I think a lot of people have actually liked what I’ve done in Venezuela, I mean from what I’m hearing. But Venezuela we’re going to have to see. But we have a lot of things going. China. China was killing our country. They were taking out $500 billion dollars a year. Just ripping it out of our country. We wouldn’t have survived, I mean we were going to go down the tubes. And now they’re, I mean they want to make a deal so badly and it’s, it’s big stuff. It’s tremendous. And, and I don’t even know if that’s the most important. We’ve done a good job. And I’d love to be treated fairly. I’ll tell you what I find it so incredible that I’m sitting here with the bad publicity I get. I’m not blaming you two. I mean, I’m blaming like — now Fox treats me very well. I must say and even there, you know, I could be happier, but Fox treats me very well. And others treat me well. You know what’s very interesting — local television is so great to me. Right? I said I can’t believe it. I get some clips. The local, the local station. Even if you go to ABC or NBC — NBC’s terrible — you go to NBC local, it’s like, I’d say it’s like a different planet. CBS. It’s hard to believe actually. But, but what amazes me, because I have great respect for the press, it amazes me that I can be treated so badly and I won. And we’re doing well. You know, it is pretty hard to believe actually. But I don’t want that to happen.
SULZBERGER: I would say, you know, speaking broadly for the press, and then speaking specifically for at The New York Times, every occupant of your office has felt like the coverage was tougher than it should have been.
TRUMP: That’s true. I think that’s true. I mean, I’m surprised because some I think got — [to Baker] now you did a book about Barack Obama so you got to know him. He didn’t think he got good press either. But I think I get it really bad. I mean, let’s face it, this is at a level that nobody’s ever had before.
SULZBERGER: But it’s part, it’s — tough coverage is part of occupying the most powerful seat on earth. You know that chair right there that you’re sitting in is the most powerful seat on earth and it comes with it, you know, scrutiny and questions. You have my, speaking for The Times, you know my enduring commitment that we will treat you fairly and accurately.
TRUMP: I appreciate it.
SULZBERGER: As we have for, for presidential administrations for 150 years now. Starting with I think that guy [gestures to Abraham Lincoln painting].
TRUMP: Yeah. He was a good one.
SULZBERGER: But I do, you know, I hope you’ll think on the language point because the effects are not just being felt with the outlets who you feel are treating you unfairly — they’re being felt all over the world including folks who are literally putting their lives on the line to report the truth.
TRUMP: People. On Twitter. If you add up Facebook and add up Instagram and add up three of four things. But I guess what do I have? 58, 59 million people on the, on the one. So it gives you at least a voice. That’s not — you know, The New York Times is The New York Times. It gives you a voice. If I were treated fairly — and I have great respect for the press — but when I won the election and I know, and I’m not gonna say that you apologized, but they did a whole big thing, you know, like what happened and there were those who say that it was an apology. I was treated really badly during the election. That’s the good news. The bad news is that I’m treated even worse. I’m treated bad. And I’m working hard. This job is from an economic — you know, I get a kick out of these people saying “Oh, a rich Arab stayed at his hotel,” you know, I’ll bet you between opportunity cost and actual cost, you know but I lost massive amounts of money doing this job. This is not the money. This is, this is one of the great losers of all time. You know fortunately I don’t need money. This is one of the great losers of all time. But they’ll say that somebody from some country stayed at a hotel. And I’ll say “Yeah.” But I lose, I mean, the numbers are incredible.
TRUMP: It doesn’t matter to me from the standpoint that this is such an important job. You know I assumed that could happen. I assumed. I think I have a great support. But what does amaze me is the level of inaccurate reporting. It’s really inaccurate reporting.

TRUMP: Can I call — Peter, can I call the boss? Eh?
SULZBERGER: I prefer you start with them.
TRUMP: [To Baker] Give me a card. Give me a card. [Inaudible.] If you don’t mind. The book was good by the way. I wouldn’t say it was my favorite. Very good book. Not my favorite person but that’s okay.
TRUMP: It was a very well-written book. I should be so lucky. You understand?
SULZBERGER: I can’t speak for every news organization, but I can say that that’s something that we pay a lot of attention to and we, there is nothing that this institution has prized more for the last 100 years.
TRUMP: Your father was great. Do you know I negotiated with your father over the Times site on 66, you know, the West Side?
SULZBERGER: I didn’t know that.
TRUMP: Because I had the yards. And the job was a very successful job. He had the back and he was, just a high quality person. And I told you about Abe Rosenthal, right?
SULZBERGER: It’s worth defending.
MAGGIE HABERMAN, White House correspondent: Mr. President, can I ask you a question I was wondering as you were all talking about this.
SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS, White House press secretary: I think we can make this the last one.
HABERMAN: Can I ask you five more questions?
TRUMP: All I ask is one thing. And we’ll do it again. Just treat me fairly. We’ll do it again. We’ll do it a hundred times.
HABERMAN: Well what do you — I guess what I wonder is — and you’ve been with the press for a very long time. You’ve been dealing with the press longer than I’ve been in it, longer than he’s been in it. Longer than Peter’s been in it.
TRUMP: I hate to hear that.
HABERMAN: That’s a long time.
TRUMP: Let me look at a mirror.
HABERMAN: But what do you see the role of a free press as? What do you think the free press does?
TRUMP: It describes and should describe accurately what’s going on in anywhere it’s covering whether it’s a nation or a state or a game or whatever. And if it describes it accurately and fairly it’s a very very important and beautiful thing.
HABERMAN: But I don’t want to be difficult and I have a very respectful relationship with the folks who work here. I think Sarah works incredibly hard.
TRUMP: That’s true, that’s true. That’s what I’ve heard.
HABERMAN: But I have also had stories that were accurate called inaccurate by this White House and I don’t know — what are we supposed to do when this happens?
TRUMP: Well, little things. For instance, you cover me and you know, I get up early in the morning and I turn on television. And I do. But I don’t turn it on very much because I really read the papers much more than I watch the television, O.K.? Especially your columns lately. But it’s O.K. It’s a little off. I wish, I wish you’d call me. I would tell you exactly what the routine is. The routine is a little bit off. But it makes it — you know I went to.
PETER BAKER, chief White House correspondent: [Handing the president a notepad] Put your number right there, and I’ll be happy to call.
HABERMAN: We’ll just — we’ll call you.
BAKER: We’ll be happy to call.
TRUMP: — and I don’t get back?
SANDERS: You told me about a story.
TRUMP: Maggie, I would call people — not only yourselves.
HABERMAN: And she reached out to you and she actually was very helpful.
TRUMP: And No. 2, I think it’s very important because I am a voice. Even without this, I’m a voice, without this position. I’ve always sort of been a voice in the press. Someday, you’ll have to explain why. That’s why I won, I guess. You know, it’s very interesting, when I was running they spent nothing but money on me and one of the reasons Hillary [Clinton] lost is all she did was spend money on negative ads. And I had, I don’t know what the number is, but a record — hundreds of millions of dollars. Every ad was negative and when they got into the voting booth, they had no idea what the hell she stood for and I guess the public knows me so well that they didn’t care.
TRUMP: You look at the Florida primaries, it was Jeb [Bush] and Marco [Rubio]. You have the sitting senator, you have a governor who was popular for eight years who was not out that long running against me.
HABERMAN: You’re a Florida resident though.
TRUMP: I got a massive vote and they got like peanuts. And all they did — and then I got Hillary and it was the same thing. The whole thing was negative and it’s sort of amazing, you know. It’s actually amazing. But I’ve seen what negative ads do, they’re destructive. And yet for me it was a different kind of a thing.
SULZBERGER: Can I just say one thing on that?
TRUMP: — but I became president and I didn’t have a good story. Go ahead.
SULZBERGER: You may enjoy knowing that Hillary Clinton says the exact same thing about us.
HABERMAN: To this day.
SULZBERGER: — toughly and aggressively, we will also do it fairly. You do have my commitment.
TRUMP: I appreciate that. But I say this, look, I started off, real estate guy. Did really nicely. I really built well and I did a lot of good things. I went into show business, I hit a huge home run with “The Apprentice,” I mean it was a very successful deal. I then went into politics.
I had a senator in my office, he said, “You know, Mr. President, I’ve run six times and I’ll tell you, out of six times and I’ve won four.” And I was just kidding, I said, well, you know what — and he was a senator and he was a congressman — I said, “I won — I ran one time for the president of the United States and out of one time I won one. I’m one for one.” And he sort of laughed and it’s never happened before, nobody’s ever done that.
I ran one time and you know I had to go through 15 debates between the two of them. Between the primaries and the other — or whatever the number is, like 15. And I was never off center stage, never once off center stage and I’m going against — I’ll never forget I said, “Tell me about debating.” I’ve never debated. My whole life is a debate but I’ve never stood at a podium and debated.
I said, “Tell me about my competition. Who are these people?” You know for the first — and then I got the crazy Megyn Kelly question with the Rosie O’Donnell answer. I said, “Tell me about this. I want to see, let me see —” And I get the list: Ted Cruz, No. 1 at Princeton, national debate champion, No. 1 at Harvard, national — then I get and a lot of the others, too, you know their politicians they always had their — I never did.
But, I ran, I won, and I’m really doing a good job.  The man from China, the vice — the second man in China, essentially, they call him the vice premier, like the vice president, but he’s the second man, strong second man. He made the nicest statements today. He said, “You’re doing things that nobody could ever do.” And he actually said it in front of the press, it was nice. I mean I’d love you, just look at it, you don’t have to put it down if you don’t want but I’m sort of entitled to one good story in The New York Times. I started off, I ran against very smart people and a lot of them.
I’ll never forget, Charles Krauthammer’s on television, he said, “Why would Trump run? This is the greatest field of candidates ever assembled in the history of the Republican Party.” 
He said, “You have the greatest people, why he run? Why would be do that?” And then after that I was like, you know I never left center stage, right? And you know when you leave center stage things aren’t going good. I’d look at Jeb Bush, I’d say, “Jeb, you’re going to fall off that stage next week, you’re going further left or further right.” So anyway, I just sort of think I’m entitled to a great story from The New York Times.
I mean I’ve done something that nobody has ever done, they’ve never done it. They said, that guy [gestures to painting] had the greatest election of all time — Andrew Jackson. You know when you read it it was a wild time.
HABERMAN: More than this?
TRUMP: And they said — Well now? No, no. Now they say, “We topped him.” O.K., Peter, they say, “Now we’ve topped him.” But they said, they were saying the other day, somebody was saying, “It was the greatest of all time.” I just think, honestly, I’m enti— I came from New York, I love New York, I’ll be back there someday, and I do, I love the place. And I sort am of entitled to a good story — [to aide] Yeah? Come.
AIDE: I just want to show you who’s calling [hands list of calls].
TRUMP: O.K., well, maybe I’ll show it to them if it’s important. Let me just see — a lot. Oh, that’s good. That’s O.K., I don’t care. Who’s more important than — but, I just think, honestly, I started from Queens, my father was — I loved my father, [gesturing toward a photograph] picture. I loved my father, had a great relationship with my mother and father, had a nice family, you know nothing — there was no trauma.
TRUMP: I came from Jamaica, Queens, Jamaica Estates and I became president of the United States. I’m sort of entitled to a great story from my — just one — from my newspaper.  Cause I think you’re right.
HABERMAN: Can I ask you one — literally last question?
HABERMAN: You were criticizing the Cliff Sims book. What do you think of the Chris Christie book? Since you, I know, pay attention to that.
TRUMP: Well, honestly he was very nice to me.
TRUMP: He was not nice to my people. Some of them. Some of them he was.
HABERMAN: Well your family, he was not totally nice to your family.
TRUMP: No, but he was unbelievably nice to me, actually.
HABERMAN: So, you’re fine with it?
TRUMP: You know, I didn’t have time to read it, but I get all, I have somebody boom boom. They give me the quotes, it’s like five pages. That, you can read, right? And he was very respectful of me.
HABERMAN: Thank you, sir.
TRUMP: Thank you. Peter, thank you.
BAKER: Thank you. Good to see you.
TRUMP: Appreciate it. When they call, let me speak to them.