Eavesdrop at any dinner party, and talk of sleep — and the lack thereof — abounds. Which sleep aids, natural remedies or strategies do you resort to during the lonely hours of the night? What about pre-slumber rituals? Oh, you’re a new parent, good luck.
Indeed, there is one question that is never posed during these commonplace conversations: What if you got too much sleep? This is what Karen Thompson Walker explores in her inventive, well-crafted novel “The Dreamers.” The story opens innocently enough: A freshman at Santa Lora College, in a small town about 70 miles from Los Angeles, doesn’t stir one morning after a night out. Her shy roommate, Mei, doesn’t bother to wake her. Later, in the early evening, Mei returns, finding her roommate in the same somnolent state that she had left her nine hours earlier. The paramedics are summoned, and the unconscious student is transported to the hospital.
Fans of Walker’s best-selling debut, “The Age of Miracles,” will recognize a handful of similarities between the two novels: Chaos ensues when something goes extraordinarily amiss (in her debut, the rotation of the earth slows down, and in this novel, individuals are trapped in sleep); both are set in Southern California, where Walker grew up; and both narratives tell coming-of-age stories (despite the multiple narrative threads of “The Dreamers,” a boy-meets-girl scenario sparks one of the many moments of tenderness in this book).
Instead of using the first-person voice, as in “The Age of Miracles,” Walker works on a broader canvas here, with a roving, third-person omniscient narrator that creates a symphonic voice. Seamlessly, the author circulates through the town and a specific constellation of characters: Mei; Sara and Libby, daughters of a conspiracy-fueled father; Ben, a young parent; Catherine, a neuropsychiatrist from Los Angeles who is attempting to figure out the precise nature of the illness; and Nathaniel, a biology professor who cares for his dementia-addled partner. In the meantime, Walker telescopes in and out among these characters’ experiences and the college town, animating both intimate and panoramic moments of the plague. As with the epidemic itself, there is a generous sweep within this story — and then, just as quickly, the author refocuses the narrative attention onto the ever-changing relational fault lines between her characters. “This is how the sickness travels best: through all the same channels as do fondness and friendship and love,” writes Walker.
Her choice in perspective — combined with the use of the present tense — produces an immediate and urgent portrait of the mounting public health crisis and how the characters’ lives are shaped by the epidemic. Here and there, the narrative gallops at an accelerated pace, almost tilting toward the melodramatic, but, for the most part, Walker bypasses this pitfall. At the same time, despite the dire circumstances, the omniscient narrator’s voice, buoyant yet sympathetic, propels things along.
Readers may draw comparisons between “The Dreamers” and Emily St. John Mandel’s “Station Eleven,” a post-apocalyptic survivalist’s tale set during the aftermath of a horrific flu pandemic, but in some ways, this novel has more in common, thematically speaking, with the haunting, beautiful stories of Lauren Groff’s “Florida” — especially with the way that many of Groff’s surreal stories explore the fear of bringing a generation of children into an increasingly dangerous world. Walker is clearly as preoccupied by the natural forces and rhythms of new life as she is by the end of life. What happens when children are abandoned? What transpires when unknown external forces, like a sleep virus, provoke these separations? Is anyone really up to the task? Can anyone ever recover from the heartbreak of this kind of infinite love? Even though I’m not a parent myself, I found the author’s thoughtful observations of these bonds powerful and moving; Walker invites the reader into this life-defining experience rather than placing it on a distant pedestal. Taken altogether, she produces precarious, tender portraits of parents and children — newborns, teenagers and adults — and suggests that these relationships are what save us in the end.