Lawmakers are lashing out at teachers after their strikes. The children will lose the most.
Ms. Peace is a reporter from West Virginia currently reporting in Kosovo.
Last week, West Virginia lawmakers approved an education bill that, if signed into law, would weaken the future negotiating ability of educators, drastically changing the public school system in one of the nation’s most disadvantaged states.
Just 11 months ago, West Virginia public schoolteachers took to the streets demanding a pay raise and more funding for health insurance. They are some of the lowest paid teachers in the country, and legislation proposed at the time would have only worsened the disparity.
Teachers across all 55 counties united in protest for nine days and ultimately compelled Gov. James C. Justice to sign a bill that temporarily delivered on their demands, giving public employees a 5 percent raise and appointing a task force to investigate a fixed solution for insurance funding. Current funding for insurance has to be passed each year in the state budget, and costs for school employees have increased.
Their efforts in 2018 resulted in seemingly positive change and a more sustainable wage, one that would prevent teachers from having to choose between their commitment to the students of West Virginia and their ability to make ends meet at home.
And their protests empowered teachers across the country to make similar demands. In the 11 months since their strike, teachers in Oklahoma and Arizona have protested, and so have teachers in California, who walked out last month. Denver teachers are expected to strike on Monday.
That’s partly why the education overhaul bill that was passed in the State Senate last week serves as a grim reminder that the fight for a better educational system is not over.
There’s one thing that everybody seems to agree on: When it comes to the way that West Virginia supports education, change is necessary. But the changes put forth in Senate Bill 451 have done little to address the concerns of educators and are arguably changes for the worse.
If signed in the form passed by the Senate, the bill will weaken existing public schools and teachers’ bargaining abilities, undermining the protections that enabled them to secure the small pay raise in the first place.
These proposals include requiring unionized employees to annually re-agree to have dues deducted from their pay and allowing money to be withheld from teacher paychecks if a future strike results in missed school days.
County school boards will be allowed to disregard how long a person has been teaching when choosing which workers to lay off. That means teachers who are more openly critical as well as union-oriented ones will become easy targets for punishment, while their quieter colleagues will be discouraged from speaking out. West Virginia students will be the ones left to suffer the consequences while their fiercest advocates are muzzled.
Beyond the way it suppresses our teachers’ ability to organize, the bill allows for the establishment of the state’s first charter schools.
In the version of the bill passed by the Senate, charter schools would face little regulation, and could be authorized by for-profit and political organizations. Teachers at these schools could be hired without certification or even a high school diploma, making it clear that this has little to do with student achievement.
Since the bill was introduced, educational organizations and boards across the state, as well as the president of the State Board of Education, have opposed it, noting that the establishment of such schools would be harmful to West Virginia’s children as public funds are sent away from district schools, with the greatest negative effect falling on already vulnerable and disadvantaged students; those are plentiful in a state with high rates of poverty.
Despite opposition from educational leaders, Mitch Carmichael, the president of the Senate, chose to rush the bill to a vote when he deliberately bypassed the Senate Finance Committee and established a committee of the whole in a rare action that’s only happened three times in state history.
Amid the negotiations taking place at the Capitol, union representatives gathered over the weekend and voted to approve another walkout, should teachers deem it necessary. Meanwhile, the bill is being revised by the House Education Committee and will go to a public hearing on Feb. 11. For now, its future, and that of West Virginia’s public school system, remains unclear.
But the troubling reality is this: West Virginia Senate Bill 451 is a subtle and manipulative attempt by state legislators to disenfranchise the voices of the community they were elected to amplify.
And just like West Virginia teachers set a strong precedent for organizers seeking equity in other states, legislation like this could set a dangerous precedent for politicians interested in using bullying tactics to silence the voices of their constituents, even at the expense of the state’s school children.
Lauren Peace (@LaurenMPeace) is a reporter from West Virginia currently reporting in Kosovo.