Opinion|Will Trump Take Us Back to ‘Fire and Fury’?
Will Trump Take Us Back to ‘Fire and Fury’?
When leaders’ summits fail to reach agreement, diplomacy has reached the end of its rope.
Mr. Cha is a former National Security Council director for Asia.
Having participated in nuclear negotiations with North Korea, I know what failure smells like. The truncated Hanoi summit, which concluded abruptly without an agreement between President Trump and Kim Jong-un, carried an awful stench.
There were high expectations for this second meeting of American and North Korean leaders after the lack of progress on denuclearization commitments made at their first summit, in Singapore last summer. And yet, not only did Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim fail to offer more empty promises, they even dispensed with signing a joint statement, canceled their planned ceremonial lunch, and skipped the joint news conference.
This outcome shouldn’t necessarily be a surprise. Presidential summits are supposed to be painstakingly manufactured for success by working-level diplomats. This one wasn’t. Mr. Trump’s eagerness to have the top-level meeting early — perhaps to draw headlines away from domestic turmoil — contravened the advice of his best advisers to do the necessary work before putting the president in front of the North Korean leader again.
Though the president never should have gotten himself into this position, he still probably did the right thing leaving Hanoi empty-handed. No deal is better than a bad deal. Mr. Kim apparently wanted to turn over only some old nuclear facilities for freezing and inspection, including the reactor complex at Yongbyon, but in return he reportedly demanded the lifting of all United States and United Nations sanctions. That would have been a sucker’s deal. Mr. Trump, in turn, asked for access to additional facilities and bases that are more crucial to the North’s nuclear program. Mr. Kim balked.
But what next? Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Mr. Trump both tried to put the best face they could on Hanoi: “real progress was made,” Mr. Pompeo said. Or, as the president put it, “when we walked away it was a very friendly walk.” But when leaders’ summits fail to reach agreement, diplomacy has, by definition, reached the end of its rope.
That leaves a great deal of uncertainty going forward. The South Koreans will frantically seek meetings with Washington and Pyongyang to try to pick up the pieces by offering humanitarian assistance to the North and eliciting reaffirmations from Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim that they will remain committed to diplomacy. Meanwhile, the North Koreans already have sent an envoy to China to chart the next steps. Beijing will hear complaints from both Americans and North Koreans about how the other side was unreasonable, but will do little to press Pyongyang to agree to allow inspections at its core nuclear facilities.
It wasn’t long ago that Mr. Trump was tweeting threats about “fire and fury” and armed conflict between North Korea and the United States seemed entirely possible. Thankfully, a return to that level of tension seems unlikely. But the situation could easily take a turn for the worse. If Washington wants to put more pressure on North Korea, it could introduce further economic sanctions or restart military training exercises with the South Koreans, which were suspended in October to encourage diplomacy. For his part, Mr. Kim will have to decide whether he will break the self-imposed moratorium on testing weapons of mass destruction, which has held for the past 15 months.
Mr. Trump’s early post-summit statements don’t suggest he will move the needle on economic and military pressure, and recent commercial satellite imagery does not suggest a North Korean weapons test is imminent, either. But we are left with two disquieting problems after the Hanoi summit: First, the leaders could not produce an agreement on a cessation of North Korean weapons and fissile material production. Experts believe Pyongyang may have already made material for as many as eight new bombs in the period between the Singapore and Hanoi summits.
And second, Mr. Trump will not be yearning for another summit with Mr. Kim any time soon. Indeed, he may lose interest in the issue as he becomes distracted by the Mueller report, trade negotiations with China, Venezuela’s political crisis, and Indo-Pakistan relations. And if he gives up on diplomacy completely, then it’s either back to the fire-and-fury of 2017 or the de facto acceptance of North Korea as a state armed with nuclear weapons. Either outcome will make Americans less secure.
Victor Cha (@VictorDCha) is a professor of government at Georgetown University and Korea Chair at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. He was the National Security Council’s representative to the Six Party talks from 2004 to 2007.