Israel Goodman Young was born on March 26, 1928, on the Lower East Side of Manhattan and reared in the Bronx. His parents, Philip and Pola, were Jewish immigrants from Poland.
Then, while a student at the Bronx High School of Science, he was smitten by folk dancing, becoming a member of the American Square Dance Group. The company, founded in New York by the folklorist and teacher Margot Mayo, revived traditional dances of many kinds.
The dances led him to folk music, and he was soon collecting books on the subject. He attended Brooklyn College but did not finish.
In the mid-1950s, after working for several years at Borough Park Shomer Shabbos, the bakery his father had established in Brooklyn, Mr. Young became a dealer in rare folk-music books. His private clients included Harry Belafonte and Burl Ives.
He opened the Folklore Center in April 1957, and it quickly became a mecca for pleasurable activity of all kinds.
In the early 1960s, Mr. Young persuaded a Village restaurateur, Mike Porco, to emphasize folk musicians at his establishment, Gerdes. They proved such a success that the restaurant’s name was changed to Gerdes Folk City and eventually simply to Folk City.
Over the years, Folk City featured the likes of Mr. Dylan, Joan Baez, Judy Collins, Tom Paxton and Muddy Waters. It closed in 1987.
In 1961, Mr. Young helped spearhead a protest known in the press as the Beatnik Riot. That year, the New York City Parks Department, under pressure from conservative groups and real estate interests, banned folk musicians from Washington Square Park. The park, in the heart of the Village, had been a traditional gathering and performing place for musicians since the 1940s.
With the Rev. Howard R. Moody, the minister of the nearby Judson Memorial Church, Mr. Young formed the Right to Sing Committee. On April 9, 1961, as scores of New York City police officers looked on, the committee staged a protest in the park, with hundreds of musicians marching and singing.
The committee held more demonstrations in the weeks that followed but could not stop the State Supreme Court from upholding the city’s ban later that spring. In July, however, an appellate court lifted the ban, and the park was once more awash in folk music.
The Folklore Center moved to Sixth Avenue in 1965. Eight years later, after being transfixed by traditional Swedish fiddle music, Mr. Young closed the store and relocated to Stockholm, where he opened the Folklore Centrum.
There, as in New York, he led a threadbare existence. In 2014, Mr. Young put up for auction at Christie’s the manuscripts of two obscure early songs by Mr. Dylan: “Talking Folklore Center,” about the old Macdougal Street establishment, and “Go Away You Bomb,” about nuclear disarmament. Both failed to meet their reserve price and were not sold.
In addition to Ms. Grandin, Mr. Young is survived by a son, Thilo Egenberger, and three grandchildren.
Mr. Young was the subject of a documentary, “Izzy Young: Talking Folklore Center” (1989), directed by Jim Downing. His Sing Out! columns and other articles were anthologized in “The Conscience of the Folk Revival: The Writings of Israel ‘Izzy’ Young” (2013), edited by Scott Barretta.
Though the concert is now considered a landmark, Mr. Young, who charged $2 a ticket, lost money.
