Seweryn Bialer, who endured persecution by the Nazis in Poland and served in its postwar Communist government before defecting to the West and becoming a leading expert on the Soviet Union, died on Feb. 8 at his home in Manhattan. He was 92.
His wife, the scholar Joan Afferica, said the cause was heart failure.
Professor Bialer, who taught at Columbia University for 33 years, was a sought-after voice on Soviet affairs, testifying to congressional committees, participating in conferences, writing commentaries in journals and newspapers and appearing on television and radio.
He was especially in demand in the 1980s as the Soviet Union went through a series of upheavals, including the deaths of three leaders in rapid succession — Leonid I. Brezhnev, Yuri V. Andropov and Konstantin U. Chernenko — and the emergence of Mikhail S. Gorbachev. If few Kremlinologists foresaw just how much turbulence Mr. Gorbachev’s tenure would bring, Professor Bialer at least realized early on that the new leader was a harbinger of change.
“The free lunch period is over,” he told The Boston Globe in April 1985, reflecting on the likelihood that the West would no longer be dealing with Soviet stagnation under aging, ill leaders. His comment came just a month after Mr. Gorbachev replaced Chernenko as general secretary of the Communist Party.
Professor Bialer was well regarded for illuminating Soviet history, as he did in his first book, “Stalin and His Generals: Soviet Military Memoirs of World War II” (1969). The book assembled excerpts from the writings of the country’s wartime leaders to shed light on how a man as unstable as Joseph Stalin could have led a successful war effort.
Professor Bialer influenced generations of students, some of whom became scholars themselves, like Linda J. Cook, a professor of political science and Slavic studies at Brown University.
Seweryn Bialer (pronounced seh-VER-in BYA-ler) was born on Nov. 3, 1926, in Berlin and raised in Lodz, Poland, in a prominent Jewish family. At 13, with the country under German occupation, he was relocated to the Jewish ghetto in Lodz. There he discovered the writings of Karl Marx, which later became an area of his expertise, and joined the Communist underground. For almost a year at the end of the war he was imprisoned at the Auschwitz and Friedland camps.
Professor Bialer’s “Stalin’s Successors” was published in 1980. “We had best try to understand the sources of Soviet conduct, and reading Seweryn Bialer is one of the best ways to begin,” a reviewer wrote.
He was also admitted to the Polish Academy of Sciences Institute for the Education of Scientific Cadres, receiving a doctorate there with a dissertation on the Marshall Plan.
In 1954, the year after Stalin died, Professor Bialer made his first trip to the Soviet Union as part of a delegation from the Polish Communist Party, and his disenchantment began.
After several years as a research analyst for United States government agencies, Professor Bialer joined the Columbia faculty in 1964 and began work on his Ph.D. there, earning it in political science in 1966 with a dissertation on the Soviet political elite.
In 1983 he received a MacArthur Foundation “genius grant.” In 1986 he published another book, “The Soviet Paradox: External Expansion, Internal Decline.” He also edited or contributed to many others.
He married Ms. Afferica, now the L. Clark Seelye professor emeritus of history at Smith College, in 1967. She is his only immediate survivor.
