The Times’s newly named data editor spends her time thinking about how best to leverage data for journalism and present it with reader-friendly tools like charts, graphs and interactives.
In 2004, Amanda Cox was a first-year graduate student studying statistics at the University of Washington, not sure she wanted to be there. So, she sent off applications for all kinds of opportunities, including an internship with the graphics department at The New York Times. She hoped that her disappointment in being rejected for one of them would offer clarity.
“I was trying to figure out, What do I actually really want to do?” she said.
Her only “journalism adjacent” experience at that point was two years filling the back page of her college newspaper with charts, tables and commentary. At the time, the graphics department at The Times asked internship candidates to complete short editing and design tests, as well as to critique charts it had published.
In January, The Times announced that Ms. Cox was stepping into a new role: data editor. She will help coordinate data work across departments, in interactive news, computer-assisted reporting, graphics and The Upshot, and pave the way for journalism using data to play a bigger role throughout the newsroom. She will also act as an adviser when big questions arise about how to think about and use data thoughtfully, without overstating what it supports.
Journalists are making use of better tools as well as more abundant and accessible data to do things today that they couldn’t just a few years ago. For instance: building a model to estimate the number of Tesla Model 3s being produced, as a team at Bloomberg did, or documenting the extent of corporations’ efforts to prevent people from filing class-action lawsuits, a project of The Times.
And data visualization — how best to present it with tools like charts, graphs and interactives — is not a new challenge, but one that news organizations have taken on more seriously as they make greater use of data.
Using her statistical expertise, programming chops, an artistic flair and classic reporting skills, Ms. Cox has created or had a hand in some of the most innovative, thought-provoking and delightful projects The Times has leveraged data to produce. Among them are interactive charts that let users see a Democratic, Republican or nonpartisan view of jobs report data; election night coverage that includes a forecast of how the race will most likely go as votes come in — something election-watching mortals have historically had to rely on live experts to interpret for them; and a first-of-its-kind polling project that published polling data in real time, helping demystify where such numbers come from.
Over the past decade or so, as The Times “got serious about data visualization,” Ms. Cox played a central role, Mr. Duenes said, continually imagining new ways to inform and delight readers of The Times with data.
Shan Carter, a former colleague of Ms. Cox’s on the graphics desk who now works for Google, drew a comparison between her and the kind of great writer who knows when to follow rules about grammar and when to bend them. When visualizing data, there’s making a basic bar graph or line chart, and there’s blowing people away with flashy design that may not actually help them learn.
Ms. Cox thinks of it as finding the right way to present the specific data she is working with. She digitally sketches different versions of charts over and over before landing on the right one. Her work has drawn attention from the wider data visualization community as well. It has been cited in academic papers and used in classrooms. In 2013, she was asked to give the keynote address at the inaugural meeting of OpenVis, a conference that focuses on open-source data visualization tools and techniques and attracts people from a variety of fields. (She spoke there again in 2017 and 2018.) Lynn Cherny, a data scientist and a chairwoman of the conference, said Ms. Cox was always a hit. “She brings a statistical rigor that some data visualization people don’t have, and she’s also interested in being creative in the visualization domain,” she said.
The Times has had something like a data editor at points in the past (Rich Meislin, for one, had various roles in a similar spirit during his nearly 40-year tenure at The Times, including the title editor of statistical news), but Ms. Cox is not stepping into anyone else’s shoes.
Ms. Cox dreams that taking on her new role will lead to The Times’s publishing more of the kind of information — in ambitious enterprise stories, investigations as well as everyday news stories — that would be hidden but for creative investigation of data.
