President Trump didn’t mention climate change in his State of the Union address on Tuesday night, but on Wednesday Democrats worked to make sure the topic was front and center in Congress.
In two separate and simultaneous House committee hearings on global warming, lawmakers testified that climate change is real, happening now and requires urgent action. It was the first hearing the Energy and Commerce Committee had held on global warming in six years; for the Natural Resources Committee it was the first in more than eight years. In both cases, the rooms were packed with spectators.
Gov. Roy Cooper of North Carolina, a Democrat, and Gov. Charlie Baker of Massachusetts, a Republican, urged Congress to rein in planet-warming greenhouse gas emissions. Climate change, they said, has already hurt apple growers, farmers and military installations in North Carolina and commercial fisheries, maple syrup producers and ski resorts in the Northeast.
“If you have farmers or fishermen or resort operators or foresters in your communities or your districts, I promise you they are worrying about climate change all the time,” Governor Baker said.
Republicans, for the most part, avoided questioning the established science of climate change, focusing primarily on criticizing economic policies put forward by Democrats, like the so-called Green New Deal legislation that Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York is set to introduce this week. Some others sought to position themselves as bipartisan on the issue.
“One gets the sense that this was just the early jockeying for rhetorical space around the most fraught issue of this Congress,” Mr. Clement said.
I’ve experienced a week of wide-ranging weather. In New Jersey on Thursday, I woke up to 0 degrees Fahrenheit, roughly minus 18 Celsius, for my morning run. By Sunday, it was 50 Fahrenheit and I could grill outside in shorts. Now, I’m in Utah for a reporting trip and it’s snowing again.
The changes are all around us, of course. You can see how your own city fared in 2018 with this feature; about 83 percent of the 3,800 cities measured experienced years that were warmer than normal. Then check out this piece from our colleague Nadja Popovich that shows what’s happening to northern lakes that used to reliably freeze in winter.
In Australia, such torrential rainfall and flooding hit Queensland that residents reported snakes and crocodiles in the streets. In Europe, students have been demonstrating over climate issues. And in other news, Kendra Pierre-Louis wrote about what’s killing off the sea stars. (Spoiler: Climate change is involved.) It’s all part of another busy week at Team Climate.
I always get a little lost in the produce aisle during the winter. A global economy means summertime favorites are always available, but, here in the United States, should I really buy those blueberries shipped in from the Southern Hemisphere if I’m trying to be carbon conscious?
There’s a lot more to answering this question than just calculating shipping distance. It turns out that how far away my food was grown matters a lot less than how it was grown and whether it traveled by air. There’s usually no sign in the store for these things, but I found a few tricks for picking produce in the winter.
When buying off-season produce, be skeptical of anything that’s perishable but super fresh, Mr. Waite said. While transportation accounts for only about 6 percent of food-related greenhouse gas emissions globally, not all modes of travel are created equal. Anything that travels by air, like fresh blackberries or asparagus from South America, is going to burn a lot of carbon.
Also avoid fruits and vegetables that were likely to have been grown in a heated greenhouse, said Martin Heller, who studies sustainable food systems at the University of Michigan. For example, if you live in New York and are choosing between a fresh tomato grown in wintry Canada versus one trucked in from Mexico or California, go with the one from southern climes. Even having been shipped farther, those southern tomatoes probably have a smaller footprint than the hothouse variety because it takes a lot of energy to keep a greenhouse warm during the cold months.
Root vegetables, winter squash and hearty greens are all good winter bets, Dr. Heller said. Carrots, potatoes and squash have long shelf lives, so they can sprout up in summer and still hit stores in the winter. And many greens can thrive under covered, unheated greenhouse conditions, growing fresh well into the colder months without the need for carbon-intensive heating.
