Don’t find yourself; find a vocation.
Mr. Perrin is an English professor at Huntingdon College in Montgomery, Ala.
What is interesting about this movement, at a time when higher education finds itself in crisis, is that the schools that are part of it are flourishing. This is despite the fact that most of them are not well-known institutions that can trade on their brand names — “I had never heard of half these schools!” one administrator said of an early meeting of a group that is now called NetVUE, the Network for Vocation in Undergraduate Education.
What is even more interesting is that many of these schools are in the sector Moody's Investors Service has recently identified as increasingly at risk of closure, insofar as they are both small and private. It’s the sector that contains Green Mountain College in Vermont, which recently announced it would close; Hampshire College in Massachusetts, whose financial woes were just featured in The Times; and Sweet Briar in Virginia, which made headlines as it narrowly avoided closing in 2015. But nearly 70 percent of schools that participated in the Program for the Theological Exploration of Vocation, a major initiative that ran from 2000 to 2009, saw their graduation rates increase, a significantly higher rate of growth than occurred in a random sample of peer institutions.
What exactly does it mean to explore “vocation” this way? In 2005, the Engineers Without Borders chapter at Hope College, a Christian liberal arts college in Holland, Mich., embarked on a project to bring water filtration systems to the community of Nkuv in Cameroon. The trip also included one student, Samantha Webbert, who was making a documentary film with her communication studies professor, Dr. Ji Hoon Park.
The Cameroon trips were brought into being in collaboration with Hope’s project for the exploration of vocation, a campuswide effort to have students consider the meaning and purpose of their lives to a degree unusual even at this actively Christian institution.
According to the students’ faculty adviser, Jeff Brown, when the film, sardonically titled “When the West Brings Civilization Back to Africa,” appeared in 2008, “we had a group of students come over to my house and watch it, and it was difficult.” Scenes showed students dismissing the villagers’ anger that under the planned project only some of them would get access to clean water and seeming, as Ms. Webbert says in a voice-over, to “expect the locals to shut up, provide the support we need and be grateful for whatever we give them.” The Michigan community watched them do so in local screenings and on the regional PBS affiliate.
Professor Brown and others, including me, continue to use this film as a classroom tool. There’s an uncomfortable moment when one student argues that the group had already “maximized our cost-benefit ratio” on “this continent,” and should therefore leave Nkuv with the project only partly finished. But using the film, we can talk about whether a cost-benefit analysis is really the right ethical framework through which to examine the commitment the group had made to the Nkuv community.
Thinking about vocation often requires parts of a college that do not usually work together to think cohesively. Professors might spend time in discussion with the careers office, or the office of community service, in order to plan projects that extend beyond the classroom. At Grand View University in Iowa, such thinking has meant a class in which students use digital tools to create maps of common refugee routes, while they also undertake a service project with refugees in their community who have traveled these routes in order to arrive in Des Moines. At Wake Forest University, it has involved the creation of an Office of Personal and Career Development that is so thoroughly entwined with the curriculum that you can even take courses for credit in career exploration.
At Huntingdon College, where I teach, it involves, among other things, a class in which every student at the college relates philosophy and theology to the day-to-day business of their own lives — their internships, their families and their plans for after graduation. One of my students had done internships in ministry and in physical therapy; he felt fulfilled by physical therapy, but worried that he ought to go into church work, which he enjoyed less, because working in a church would presumably be the more ethical option. At the end of the class he wrote a paper arguing that our reading of the theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer and other ethicists had shown him that, properly understood, physical therapy could indeed be an ethical calling.
Why vocation, though, rather than the old model of learning for learning’s sake? Why not, as the religious studies professor Ron Srigley has recently argued, return to the old, “beautiful goal” of the university, “to discover and then to tell the truth,” disentangled from the mercenary arms of the offices of careers and student life? My answer would be that universities have always been hybrid creatures, serving many masters at once: social norms, the market, churches and the exacting standards of disciplinary research, to name four. But the fantasy of the university as a disinterested sphere of pure knowledge is just that. This is not so much to attack the liberal arts as it is to point out that to link them purposefully with life and career goals is not at all to alter the way they have long functioned.
Another criticism might be that talk of vocation blinds students to inequality. Aren’t all these questions about purpose, as another student asked me, just first-world problems? Well, yes and no. Some popular strains of Christianity don’t focus much on structural inequity. When I worried to other higher-ed vocation types online about this, some chided me for underestimating the capacity of the oppressed to pull themselves up by their bootstraps. God wouldn’t put anything in your way that would prevent you from completing his plan for you, after all. Vocation talk can quickly morph into happy talk.
But scholars are also working hard on research and teaching that imagines vocation in a way that takes into account prejudice and inequity. My students read C.S. Lewis, but also Dorothy Day and Malcolm X. A 2018 NetVUE conference, focused on mentoring students of color, explicitly sought to contextualize the personal concept of vocation within the political structures of race and religion. Recent essays by scholars including the theologian William Cavanaugh, who describes himself as working on “the Church’s encounter with social, political, and economic realities,” squarely situate the issue of vocation in the long history of capitalism and exploitation. As an educational framework, vocation might focus on an individual’s desires and choices, but it need not do so in a way that is blind to social ideologies and structural inequality.
In addition to lifting graduation rates, then, vocation programming can be more intellectually capacious than it might at first seem. Institutions of higher education will of course take many routes through the coming shake-up. Vocation will not be the only one that returns students to the question of what they should do with their lives. But it does offer a model of higher education that is already showing signs of success, which is not nothing.
