DENVER — Amber Wilson was once an evangelist for performance-based pay systems for teachers, and went from school to school in Denver years ago, pushing her fellow educators to support one for their district.
Pay-for-performance models like Denver’s offer teachers bonuses for raising student achievement and for taking on tougher assignments, such as in schools with many students from low-income families. Ms. Wilson and many of her fellow educators across the country say that this model — once hailed as a way to motivate teachers — has delivered erratic bonuses while their base salaries stagnate amid rising living costs.
She was on a picket line in the bitter cold on Monday, striking with more than 2,000 other educators to protest the pay system she had once promoted.
The strike is the first by Denver’s teachers in 25 years, and many students joined in as well, leaving their classrooms with their backpacks and marching in the street alongside their teachers.
Over the last year, in red states and blue states, in big liberal cities and in tiny Appalachian towns, teachers have fought back against core tenets of education reform in the last two decades: that schools can be made better without increasing funding and that competition for resources among teachers and institutions, through school choice, is good for students.
Now another one of those tenets, performance-based compensation, is under attack.
Denver’s pay system, called ProComp, went into effect in 2006 and became a national model. It was developed in partnership with the Denver Classroom Teachers Association, the local union, which is now fighting it and upending the routines of more than 72,000 students with a districtwide strike.
The foundational principle of ProComp — evaluating teachers according to how well their students perform — was later enshrined in Colorado law and then in Race to the Top, President Barack Obama’s signature education initiative.
But such evaluation models typically required more testing of students in order to gather evidence of teacher impact — a change that was unpopular with parents, students and educators alike.
Since 2016, federal and state laws have shifted districts away from using student performance to judge teachers. In many ways, ProComp is now seen as a relic of an earlier era of school reform.
Denver teachers and their union leaders argue that it is more important to raise teachers’ base pay than to offer them modest and unpredictable bonuses. In a city surging with new money from the technology, aerospace and marijuana industries, teachers say they are struggling to pay off student loans and cannot afford rent, much less buy a home.
Denver teachers, on average, earn $63,400 per year, including ProComp bonuses. The union wants more money to go to base salaries, in part by reducing a proposed $2,500 bonus for teachers in high-poverty schools and eliminating a proposed $3,000 incentive for teachers in the district’s 30 highest-priority schools.
The union and the district are also battling over the types of teacher education courses that would lead to higher pay.
While the differences may seem slight to some, Rob Gould, the lead teacher negotiator, said in an interview that philosophically the two were still far apart. “They believe they should spend more money on higher bonuses,” he said of the district.
Central to the debate over ProComp is whether the system has worked to attract and retain good teachers and to improve achievement for Denver children. More than half of public school students in Denver are Latino. Two-thirds qualify for free or reduced-price lunch, and one-third are still learning English.
In a separate paper, the Boulder researchers found that teachers who had scored highly under ProComp were less likely to leave the district than those with low scores. Teacher retention is one of the goals of the program.
Nevertheless, Derek Briggs, a professor of education and an author of the studies, said he was not surprised that the pay system had prompted a strike.
“It’s been an ongoing source of dissatisfaction,” Professor Briggs said. While educators enrolled in ProComp can earn thousands of extra dollars annually, fluctuations in pay from year to year — even when teachers perceive no change in their own efforts on the job — cause resentment and anxiety, he said.
Still, many education reformers continue to support Denver’s commitment to performance pay, calling it a crucial tool for raising achievement for nonwhite and poor children.
“What I find to be really troubling is the union’s insistence that we return to a system of pay that approaches compensation like the great equalizer,” said Kate Walsh, president of the National Council on Teacher Quality, an advocacy group.
Underlying the battle in Denver is the fact that school funding in Colorado was about $2,000 below the national average per student in 2016. The state requires all tax increases to be approved directly by referendum, and during the midterm elections this past November, voters rejected an initiative to raise money for schools by increasing corporate taxes and personal income taxes on those earning over $150,000 a year.
Last April, thousands of Colorado educators walked out of classrooms to protest low education funding.
Most Denver schools are staying open during the job action, with striking teachers replaced by substitutes who will be paid $212 a day, double the district’s normal rate. Gov. Jared Polis, a Democrat and the founder of two charter schools, has said the strike will cost the district $400,000 a day, representing 1 percent to 2 percent of the annual budget if it lasts one week.