Fifty years ago, the band recorded the most entrancing version of its most hypnotic composition.
I stood there on Second Avenue, more than a little discombobulated.
And then, from an open window, I heard Jerry Garcia singing, like the voice of an old friend. “Dry your eyes on the wind,” he sang.
It was fun. And it was 50 years ago today — Feb. 27, 1969 — that Garcia and the Grateful Dead stood onstage at the Fillmore West and recorded the live version of “Dark Star,” a song that is still about as fun, and as weird, as American rock ’n’ roll can be.
But the Velvets and the Dead had a lot in common, and by this I mean more than the fact that they were both originally called The Warlocks. Both liked to stretch tunes out into long improvisations; both had band members (John Cale and Phil Lesh, respectively) with roots in avant-garde music. Cale described the Velvets’ music this way: “It was an attempt to control the unconscious with the hypnotic.” Who else does that sound like?
After the lyric, in most performances, the song turns catty-wompus. There is ambient warping and woofing. There is electronic weeping. Sometimes this part of the tune gives way to something else — jazz riffs, dance music, cowboy songs, the ballad “St. Stephen.” You never know what you’ll get.
It’s that uncertainty that I’ve always loved best in the composition, its sense of infinite possibility. Of the nearly 250 times the band played the song live, no two versions are the same. But it’s more than the tune that keeps changing. Usually, the thing that has changed between each listening is me.
I heard it as a young hippie thing sitting in a friend’s bedroom in Merion, Pa. I heard it the night my daughter was born, in Maine. I listened to it this summer as my wife and I, celebrating 30 years of marriage, hiked the Cinque Terre in Italy.
Some nights the band did only the first verse, and things devolved from there. This happened during the very last performance of the song, in fact — on March 30, 1994, in Atlanta.
Now and again I imagine a world in which Jerry Garcia is alive once more, and the band comes together, to finish what they started that night, and we are all young again.
But Jerry Garcia is gone, of course, as is Andy Warhol, as is Lou Reed, and the world in which they created art has been largely eclipsed by commerce. At the gift shop of the Warhol show at the Whitney right now you can buy a set of Warhol-themed skateboards for $1,750.
If you haven’t listened to the tune for a long time — or if you’ve never heard it — the 50th anniversary today is a good excuse. There are a lot of strange things to uncover in “Dark Star”; ghosts and chaos and watermelons and clocks may be the least of them.
As Warhol’s Frankenstein observed, there are a lot of ways to know life. Music is one of them. Turn and face the strange. It’s fun.
Before checking out these 12 performances, it’s worth reading Robert Hunter’s lyrics here; this version includes the final coda, never performed live. He composed the first verse lying on his bed, listening to the band in a rehearsal space nearby.
Here are 12 classic performances, starting with the best known version, performed 50 years ago today. The next three versions were selected by Mr. Lemieux, the rest by me.
1. Fillmore West, San Francisco, Feb. 27, 1969. From the 1969 “Live Dead” album. On the original vinyl, “Dark Star” jammed into “St. Stephen,” and “The Eleven” and “Turn On Your Lovelight.” The live version of the song that began this sequence, “Mountains of the Moon,” was not released until the full four-night run of the Fillmore shows was made available in 2005. Running time: 23:17.
2. Fillmore East, New York City, Feb. 13, 1970. Mr. Lemieux: “This was the first version of ‘Dark Star’ I heard after ‘Live/Dead,’ the highlight of the first box of cassettes I received in 1984. Its melodic upbeat coda is in stark contrast to the primal, psychedelic, orchestrated chaos of 2/27/69 and shows where the Dead were heading. In the age of the Grateful Dead’s foray into Americana, ‘Dark Star’ from 2/13/70 demonstrated that they were still able to pull off improvised, psychedelic/melodic bliss.” Running time: 29:42.
3. Veneta, Ore., Aug. 27, 1972. “On a hot, sunny day near Eugene, Ore., playing in a field to their tribe, the Dead played a ‘Dark Star’ that is about as dynamic as they ever got with this song in this era,” Mr. Lemieux said. “From the smoothness of the opening section of the song to the meltdown, drum-and-bass duet, and its rising-from-the-ashes triumphant return to light, this ‘Dark Star’ is one of the most deep and joyous journeys the Dead ever took.” Running time: 31:40.
4. The Spectrum, Philadelphia, Penn., Sept. 21, 1972. “Similar in structure to 4/8/72, this ‘Dark Star’ has it all, from the psychedelic depths of its earlier incarnations to the jazz-inflected introspective moments, to an ending that is all bouncing and smiles,” Mr. Lemieux said. “It’s versions like this that make me think the band must have even surprised themselves. This is not composed music, but rather improvisation that is as structured as though they’d played this closing a hundred times.” Running time: 37:08.
6. Fillmore East, New York City, Sept. 19, 1970. This recording begins mournfully. It was the day after the death of Jimi Hendrix. Mid-song, however, things change. Running time: 25:23.
7. Capitol Theatre, Port Chester, N.Y., Feb. 18, 1971. The Dead played a number of legendary shows at this venue; this one jams into the song “Wharf Rat” before evolving again into something later simply described as the “Beautiful Jam.” Running time: 21:42.
8. Wembley Empire Pool, London, April 8, 1972. The band’s spring 1972 tour of Europe was a triumph. This version of the song features the delicate piano of the keyboardist Keith Godchaux. Running time 32:09.
9. Miami Arena, Miami, Oct. 26, 1989. Brent Mydland joined the band as keyboardist in 1979 and gave the Dead a jolt of new energy. This “Dark Star” captures that version of the band, and of the song. Running time: 26:40.
10. Oakland-Alameda County Coliseum, Oakland, Calif., Oct. 31, 1991. The band performed on Halloween, in the wake of the death of their friend, the concert promoter Bill Graham. On that occasion, they were joined onstage by the author Ken Kesey, who was himself in mourning over the loss of his son. Midway into the tune, Kesey reads the e e cummings poem “Buffalo Bill’s Defunct.” Running time: 11:06.
11. The Omni, Atlanta, March 30, 1994. The last performance. Garcia sings only the first of the two verses, leaving the song forever unfinished. The weariness in his voice is heartbreaking. Garcia would die of a heart attack 17 months later, on Aug. 9, 1995. Running time: 10:29.
12. No compendium of “Dark Star”s is complete without a version of the original “single” of the song, from 1968. Garcia considered this short version a flop. It’s historically interesting for the banjo riff at the very end, along with the only recording of the lyricist Robert Hunter’s voice on a Grateful Dead record, performing what he called a “word salad” in the final seconds. Running time: 2:44.