RICHMOND, Va. — A Democratic lawmaker in Virginia on Sunday sent his colleagues a draft resolution that would begin impeachment proceedings against Lt. Gov. Justin Fairfax, who is facing multiple allegations of sexual assault.
Mr. Hope backed down after a Sunday night conference call among House Democrats turned heated when black lawmakers angrily demanded that their colleague, who is white, back off from starting the impeachment process this week, according to two Democrats directly familiar with the call.
Virginia Democrats, who are reeling from more than a week of extraordinary turmoil, are caught in a tough bind after the state’s governor and attorney general both admitted to wearing blackface as young men.
Impeachment proceedings against Mr. Fairfax would be fraught with political risks. Many Democrats have called for Mr. Fairfax to resign over the assault allegations. But some Democrats are wary of impeaching the lieutenant governor, who is black, while sparing the governor and attorney general, who are white and have resisted calls to step down after admitting to racist conduct.
The Democrats also do not hold a majority in the House and are thus not free to set the agenda.
As Mr. Hope was contemplating introducing his resolution against Mr. Fairfax, a lawyer for one of the accusers, Ms. Watson, shared Facebook messages from early 2017 providing more details about Ms. Watson’s accusation against the lieutenant governor.
In the messages provided by the lawyer, Ms. Watson told a friend who also knew Mr. Fairfax that she had not reported her allegation of assault against him to officials at Duke University in 2000 because it had brushed aside her complaint a year earlier about an assault by another student.

In the exchange, she also alleged that because Mr. Fairfax knew how the earlier assault complaint had been handled, he said he targeted her “on purpose” because “he knew I’d be too scared” to report another assault.
“In what world does that make sense,” said the spokeswoman, Lauren Burke.
A childhood friend of Ms. Watson, the Washington attorney R. Stanton Jones, said Sunday night that Ms. Watson had confided in him in 2001 that she had been raped by two men in college but that she did not disclose Mr. Fairfax’s name.
In a television interview, Governor Northam said that he would not resign and that he was best suited to help Virginia “heal” because he is a doctor. Mr. Northam has faced calls to resign after a racist yearbook photo surfaced.
And on Sunday morning, the governor, Ralph Northam, remained firm in his intention to stay in office and stopped short of calling for the resignations of either of his fellow scandal-plagued Democratic leaders.
In an interview with “CBS This Morning,” Mr. Northam said he was “not going anywhere” and instead would work as governor to “take action with policy to address” inequities in Virginia.
Asked about his two besieged colleagues — Mr. Fairfax and Mark R. Herring, the attorney general, who admitted to wearing blackface as a college student in the 1980s — Mr. Northam said that they “have all grown” over the last week, and that the decisions on whether to resign would have to be made by the men themselves.
The governor endorsed Mr. Fairfax’s proposal, made in a statement, to have the F.B.I. investigate the claims of sexual assault. “I really think where we are now, we need to get to the truth,” he said.
In the interview, he also said he was dedicated to continuing the work of racial progress, pointing out that the state is 400 years from the moment “the first indentured servants from Africa” landed in Virginia.
It has been more than a week since a photograph showing men in blackface and a Ku Klux Klan outfit on Mr. Northam’s medical school yearbook page came to light. Nearly every day since has provided an unforeseen twist.
The governor, who initially apologized for appearing in the photo and appeared to be on the verge of resigning, has since insisted it is not him in the picture.
Mr. Fairfax, who a week ago seemed almost certain to take the governor’s place, now appears to be in political danger. And unlike the governor and attorney general, who had both remained in seclusion until Mr. Northam emerged this weekend for a pair of interviews, Mr. Fairfax must show up each day this week to a Capitol teeming with reporters to fulfill his duties as president of the State Senate.
Despite Mr. Fairfax’s and Mr. Northam’s vows to remain in office, it is not clear how much support they can regain. Appearing on CBS’s “Face the Nation” after clips of the interview with Mr. Northam were played, two Democratic members of Virginia’s congressional delegation, Representatives Jennifer Wexton and Don Beyer, said they still believed that Mr. Northam and Mr. Fairfax should step down.
Ms. Wexton and Mr. Beyer were not the only politicians to weigh in on the scandals in Virginia on Sunday morning. Shortly before their appearances, President Trump chimed in on Twitter, apparently alluding to the political awkwardness of scandals that may take down the black lieutenant governor while leaving in place the white governor and attorney general, who have both admitted to wearing blackface.
