Erik Agard brings us together by splitting us up.
SUNDAY PUZZLE — Today’s Erik Agard grid has a little trick, one of those breezy ones that you figure out and start thinking, “Oh, I bet I could come up with dozens of these” (you probably can’t). There’s a Will Shortz introduction to the Sunday grid in print now, for anyone who doesn’t read the paper Sunday Magazine, and apparently Mr. Agard does a Sunday puzzle in around five minutes. I felt as if I sped through this puzzle, although I came nowhere near that blazing speed (I definitely can’t). If you understand the trick early in your solve, you’ll probably feel the same. If you didn’t, never fear! It’s not easy, it’s clever, and it’s one of those that sneaks up on you like a really well-balanced spicy bowl of chili.
There is a bit of a commonality between today’s grid and today’s variety puzzle, so if you liked this one and still have some big puzzle energy try the one called “Meshing Around.” It is certainly a coincidence and I will avoid apophenia but just say it is available on the crossword page, in case you aren’t in the habit of finding and solving our additional Sunday offerings.
Obviously we are going to see some very cool cluing today, given our constructor. I loved YESSIR, SPA, LIES, TSK, SCREW and others.
I had “book” for GEAR because I don’t use a backpack, I am of average height and I look like a tortoise with one. Back in college I once took a backpack on a weekend trip with the Collected Chaucer in it and nothing else. I also drew a blank on some names, including AMECHE (because of how it was clued, I insist), SERT, DARLA and CELIE, who was played by Whoopi Goldberg but was still a toughie to me.
29A: At first I glossed over this clue because I’m no chess expert, but I learned that this move, en PASSANT, is quite unusual and sneaky, and involves only pawns, which is really nice because pawns don’t get much glory, do they. PASSANT is also a heraldic term, referring to that peculiar stance you sometimes see lions or dragons taking, on shields and crests and such, where one paw is raised dramatically in pre-pounce. Cool how this clue crosses over SPARES, another sports reference.
132A: This actress is also a rapper, and she’s from Queens! Look her up — AWKWAFINA. She’s a lot of fun and was just in the news this week for something earth-shattering — she’s the first public figure to have an orchid named after her by the New York Botanical Garden. This is the kind of service journalism I am proud to bring you.
29D: This clue — “Oink-filled pen” — seems as if it could be a sign that a whimsical farmer could buy on etsy.com to put above a PIGSTY. One where the pigs wear sweaters when it’s cold out and get artisanal plant-based slop. Also fabulous how this nearly ran into INK at 72D.
32D: Think military time — this is TWO PM.
73D: This is one you either know or you don’t know, I’m pretty sure, and it is a debut. Manga is a huge pop culture niche and SAILOR MOON is a major franchise, but a person can absorb only so much entertainment.
97D: Think mama birds, or some Hollywood actresses, who PRECHEW everything their precious progeny ingest.
O.K., so I don’t know what made me start at the bottom of this puzzle (I have such a thing for Awkwafina, my brain must have made a beeline to her) — but if you get the clue to the explainer for the theme, at 121A, then the trick is self-explanatory. Still fun, though.
There are seven theme entries, indicated by italic clues at 21, 40, 59, 64, 72, 84 and 99 Across. The clues solve to two-part entries, none of which are particularly obvious: I think I was about a third through the entire grid before I finished my first theme entry. That was 84A, “Allen Ginsberg, e.g.,” which solved to PROTEST POET. Sounds right to me, but it is anyone’s guess, given just that example, what Mr. Agard is getting at.
A bit above this one at 64A, “Posting that is blowing in the wind” made me think of Bob Dylan and vaguely entertain the notion of a “freewheelin’” theme today, something that I would kind of love, and the answer here — SWINGING SIGN — did sort of fit the vibe, a little, sort of.
Then I finished the northwest corner, and with it the slightly city-slicker-snob clue at 21A, “Likely inexpensive place to get one’s hair done,” SMALL TOWN SALON. This was possibly the most stilted of the very smooth theme entries, and it did prompt an attempt to parse just what was going on here.
You might notice that in each of these examples there is a preponderance of the same letters; in fact, every letter in the last part of each theme entry is included in the first part of the theme entry. In fact, every letter in the last part appears, in order, in every other letter position of the first part of the entry. Like so: PROTEST POET. Or SWINGING SIGN. Or, say it with me, SMALL TOWN SALON. And that’s the pattern.
My favorite, I think, was 40A, REINDEER RIDE. I have a mental image of reindeer from their participation in the opening ceremony of the 1994 Lillehammer Olympics.
They’re not that big, are they? I feel a reindeer might come to about midthigh on Erik Agard. So I’m going to say that what’s meant here is a sleigh ride in the silence of the Finnmark landscape.
That revealer, at 121A? “How lucky was that?” If you’ve ever almost been hit by a piano falling out a window or won the lottery, then you know this expression. Oh, also, the letters in the first part of the theme answer, which form the second part of each theme answer, are in the 1, 3, 5, 7 position and so on. WHAT ARE THE ODDS?
Periodic reminder: the Crossword Puzzle Collaboration Directory is a resource for puzzlemakers from underrepresented groups. If you are interested in writing crosswords (or other puzzles) and would like some tips on getting started, someone to critique your work or someone to collaborate with, give it a look.
Still missing something?
