PARIS — The woes keep mounting for Carlos Ghosn.
Renault’s board voted unanimously on Wednesday to cancel tens of millions of euros in compensation that he was set to receive as its chairman and chief executive, days after the French carmaker notified the judicial authorities that he may have misused company money.
Also on Wednesday, the embattled executive hired a star Japanese lawyer known as “the Razor” to prepare for his trial in Tokyo. Mr. Ghosn has been detained since November, facing charges of financial wrongdoing as the head of Nissan, the Japanese carmaker that he also ran as part of a global auto alliance with Renault and Mitsubishi.
Renault, in a statement, said its board would waive a clause in Mr. Ghosn’s contract that would have granted him the equivalent of two years’ salary for not going to work for a competitor.
Mr. Ghosn resigned from Renault last month. The windfall would have been worth about 5 million euros, according to a person with knowledge of the matter, who was not authorized to speak publicly.
The board also voted to cancel Mr. Ghosn’s right to long-term deferred performance shares included in compensation agreements dating back to 2014. The payouts were “subject to his presence within Renault,” the company said in a statement. His resignation invalidated that part of his contract, the statement said.
But given Mr. Ghosn’s continued incarceration, “such condition is not met, thereby triggering the loss of Mr. Ghosn’s rights” to the shares, it added. Renault didn’t specify how many shares were being canceled, although Proxinvest, a French shareholder group, estimated the amount was worth over €20 million.
Renault’s board will meet March 15 to decide how much Mr. Ghosn, who is still a Renault director, will be paid for his work in 2018. Because Mr. Ghosn has been unable to manage Renault since his arrest, his pay will most likely be reduced, the person familiar with the matter said.
Until recently, Renault had stood behind Mr. Ghosn. But last month, as he was denied bail twice, Mr. Ghosn stepped down, paving the way for the French automaker to appoint new leadership. Mr. Ghosn had already been stripped of his leadership at Nissan and Mitsubishi Motors.
Jean-Dominique Senard, Renault’s new chairman, has said he wants to repair the rift that has opened between Renault and Nissan since Nissan accused Mr. Ghosn of hiding large parts of his income from Japanese regulators. Each company has viewed the other as trying to seize the opportunity to tip the balance of power of the alliance in its favor.
Mr. Senard is scheduled to meet in Tokyo this week with Hiroto Saikawa, Nissan’s chief executive, to discuss the alliance leadership.
Nissan and Renault lawyers have sparred over how to conduct a joint investigation of Mr. Ghosn’s finances, including a Dutch subsidiary that Japanese prosecutors say a deputy, Greg Kelly, used to buy houses in several countries for Mr. Ghosn’s use. Mr. Kelly also faces charges of financial wrongdoing in Japan.
Both men have denied all charges.
Renault’s latest move further distances it from Mr. Ghosn, who dominated its leadership roles for nearly two decades. Last week, Renault said Mr. Ghosn may have misused company funds to finance a lavish party at Versailles in 2016 to celebrate his second marriage and his new wife’s 50th birthday — a matter it referred to the judicial authorities.
A spokeswoman for Mr. Ghosn said he would reimburse Versailles for the use of the space, valued at around €50,000, or about $57,000.
Mr. Ghosn’s new lawyer, Junichiro Hironaka, is famous in Japan for a string of high-profile acquittals. Two lawyers who had been representing Mr. Ghosn, Motonari Otsuru and Masato Oshikubo, resigned.
Mr. Hironaka represented the Japanese politician Ichiro Ozawa, known as the “shadow shogun” for his influence, who was acquitted in 2012 of charges related to a political financing scandal. He also defended Kazuyoshi Miura, a Japanese national who was charged with plotting to have his wife killed during a visit to Los Angeles in 1981. In a case that riveted Japan, Mr. Miura was convicted in 1994; the verdict was later overturned.
Mr. Hironaka also defended Dr. Takeshi Abe, a hemophilia expert who led a Japanese government advisory panel on AIDS. Dr. Abe was arrested in 1996 on charges that he was responsible for about 1,800 hemophiliacs being infected with H.I.V. after blood-clotting agents contaminated with the virus were used. He was acquitted and died in 2005.