The culinary star looks back at her career and the international celebrity — and scrutiny — that came with it.
Ms. Lawson, now 59, has recently been spending a lot of time immersed in that past, thanks to the 20th anniversary of “How to Eat,” which was published in Britain in 1998. Mr. Diamond died less than three years later of throat cancer.
“How to Eat” started an almost unparalleled culinary career that sits perfectly and uncomfortably at the highest echelon of fame and scope, particularly in Britain, where an anniversary issue of the book has been released, along with a new audiobook version read by Ms. Lawson.
During her current, seemingly endless schedule of appearances around the world, people keep asking her: Does it seem like a long time ago? How has food changed? How has your life changed?
And her life? It could not be any more different.
Ms. Lawson’s celebrity in Britain and Australia is approximately royal in its breadth and intensity. As a result, she serves as a canvas on which people project their ideas of femininity, celebrity and the British upper class.
Ms. Lawson’s view of herself and of why she became successful oppose this image of the wealthy beauty queen. When she’s not on the road, she said, she is usually “sitting around my house with no makeup, wearing baggy things.” She is the home cook, the anti-expert, the person who cooks for pleasure rather than ego.
In 1998, Ms. Lawson was a freelance journalist with a history as a book critic, a restaurant critic, a columnist and an editor. She is Oxford-educated, the daughter of Nigel Lawson, a conservative British politician, and his first wife, Vanessa Salmon.
Mr. Diamond’s death in 2001, just as Ms. Lawson had a career kicking into high gear and two young children to look after, was not her first experience with cancer and loss: The disease took her mother in 1985 and her sister, Thomasina, in 1993.
But life does not pause. For Ms. Lawson, it came quickly. There were television shows; more cookbooks; newspaper columns (including one in The New York Times); a second marriage, to Charles Saatchi, the business magnate and art collector; an ugly divorce, one version of which played out extensively in the British tabloids; more books; more TV.
Ms. Lawson has a policy of no longer giving interviews that go beyond her professional life, though she made a cautious exception for this article. Her two children are off-limits, and she remains scarred from the time beginning six years ago when she was in the tabloids constantly, owing to her divorce and a subsequent court case in which two former assistants were accused of embezzling from Ms. Lawson and Mr. Saatchi.
The tabloid stories were invasive and exposing: Paparazzi photos captured Mr. Saatchi with his hand around Ms. Lawson’s throat, drawing speculation about abuse. During the trial of her former assistants, she gave testimony responding to accusations of drug abuse, admitting to isolated incidents of cocaine and marijuana use.
The “sexy” part was not always part of the dynamic, at least not in her culinary life. The only photo of Ms. Lawson in “How to Eat” was the author photo on the back flap of the book jacket.
“How to Eat” was written mainly in narrative form, in the tone of the newspaper columnist Ms. Lawson was at the time, the recipes told like stories. Her voice is intimate and chatty — in the midst of telling you how to make “soft and crispy duck,” Ms. Lawson muses about the "industrious intimacy" of cooking with other people, memories of doing so with her sister Thomasina, and how cooking food ahead of time feels like "the bolstering up of a life." There are few cookbooks that might warrant an audiobook version; “How to Eat” was screaming for such treatment.
The book was well ahead of its time, introducing ingredients that have since become ubiquitous in Britain and the United States but were not popular in 1998: avocado, pomegranate, quinoa.
“I remember complaining in the book that no one ate kale anymore,” Ms. Lawson said.
“How to Eat” also marked a step away from technical, chef-written cookbooks and toward a philosophy of cooking that was about pleasing oneself rather than flexing culinary muscles to impress others. “Never worry about what your guests will think of you,” Ms. Lawson wrote. “Just think of the food. What will taste good?
This attitude has remained a constant in Ms. Lawson’s career, the idea that food should be a joy as much for the cook as for the eater, that recipes are malleable, that status anxiety and guilt and stress are enemies of one of life’s greatest gifts: appetite.
But it is Ms. Lawson’s voice, said Ms. Wilson, that elevates the book. “The greatest draw of her recipes, apart from the fact that they taste wonderful, is in how she writes, and how she makes us feel in the kitchen,” she said.
The voice soon became secondary to Ms. Lawson’s looks and demeanor, largely because of a budding television career. The show “Nigella Bites,” which debuted in Britain in 1999, and her second book, “How To Be a Domestic Goddess,” published the next year, cemented her glamorous, flirtatious public persona.
Ms. Lawson’s success on television has had its downsides, according to people who know her well, and the various programs she has done — which include her own cooking shows, like “Nigella’s Kitchen,” and competition shows, like “The Taste” with Anthony Bourdain — don’t capture her at her fullest.
And, Ms. Henry added, many women embraced her.
Later, though, she wished to retract that sentiment.
But the ingredient that made “How to Eat” so alluring may be gone for good.
Besha Rodell’s Australia Fare restaurant reviews appear twice a month online.