Nothing says “I love you” like a customizable algebraic equation.
Süss — German for “sweet” — is an interactive widget that allows you to tweak the algebra and customize the heart to your souls’s delight. It was created for Valentine’s Day by Imaginary, a nonprofit organization in Berlin that designs open-source mathematics programs and exhibitions.
Süss — occupying three-dimensional space, defined by the coordinates x, y and z — also incorporates a more recent concept: “extreme points,” or “singularities,” which are their own subject of study in the field of algebraic geometry.
In general, a singularity typically corresponds to a jump in an otherwise continuous process. In physics, it’s a point with an infinite value. The Big Bang singularity is the biggest singularity in the history of the universe. In general relativity, a singularity is the heart of a black hole from which one would never emerge.
Mathematically, singularities are endowed with special properties, and it’s these properties that cause problems. A singularity is fragile — it can break with very small changes to the equation; formerly joined surfaces can separate. When singularities break, “they are very difficult to grasp, to study and especially to resolve,” Dr. Matt said.
To see a singularity in action, replace the equation in the Süss widget with a different one: x²+y²-z ²-a+0.5. (But use this slightly unsightly version — x^2+y^2-z^2-a+0.5 — so it works in the widget.) Then play with the left-most slider (parameter a), and notice the point where the double cone breaks apart, and where the cones rejoin.
Before Süss was an interactive widget, it was a member of the Gallery of Singularities, a collection of algebraic surfaces created and curated in 2006 by Herwig Hauser, a geometer at the University of Vienna, and a master at resolving singularities.
Granted, some of the entities in the gallery do not seem so singular — “Sphäre,” for instance. But given the right mathematical techniques, Dr. Hauser said, he could squeeze that sphere down into a point. “Or I could sit on it,” he added.
The process of identifying intriguing algebraic surfaces that possessed singularities sometimes took Dr. Hauser and his students days. More often than not the results were incompatible: attractive equations gave rise to shapes with scant mathematical appeal. Dr. Hauser was matchmaking, essentially.
Dr. Hauser, a purist, is not fond of rendering real-life objects. In fact, he is not particularly enamored of Süss. Too many people loved it too much: It became the poster heart for algebraic surfaces — on thousands of actual posters in hundreds of Germans schools, and featured in an installation for a shopping-center car park.
Sebastian Gann, one of Dr. Hauser’s former Ph.D. students on the Gallery of Singularities project, still finds Süss more appealing.
One of the bigger questions within algebraic geometry is how to “resolve” singularities — that is, how to get rid of them. Mathematically, resolving a singularity means smoothing over the problematic peaks in a surface, but this often requires jumping to a higher dimension.
Alas, in resolving matters of the heart, that strategy seldom works.