More than a thousand inmates have been stuck in freezing cells at a federal jail on the Brooklyn waterfront that has had limited power and heat for at least this week, according to federal public defenders and leaders of the union representing the jail’s corrections officers.
“They just stay huddled up in the bed,” said June Bencebi, a case manager at the jail and the treasurer of the local chapter of the American Federation of Government Employees, which represents about 500 corrections officers at the jail.
The jail, the Metropolitan Detention Center, houses more than 1,600 inmates and lies in an industrial swath near the waterfront in Sunset Park, Brooklyn. Some inmates are linked to high-profile drug trafficking and terrorism cases, while others are comparatively anonymous New Yorkers awaiting trial.
The accounts of conditions at the jail were described to The New York Times by six lawyers and paralegals with local Federal Defenders offices, who had spoken with around three dozen inmates at M.D.C.; two union leaders; and an employee at the jail who was not authorized to speak publicly.
A spokeswoman for Herman Quay, the jail’s warden, said in an email that the building experienced a partial power outage on Saturday but denied that it had affected heat and hot water in the jail’s housing units.
In an emailed statement, the federal Bureau of Prisons confirmed that the jail was “experiencing a partial power outage” and operating on emergency power. “Cells have heat and hot water, there is lighting in the common areas and inmates are receiving hot meals,” the agency said.
Union leaders and defense lawyers also rebutted the account of the jail’s warden and the Bureau of Prisons.
Federal defenders said they were flooded with calls from inmates this week as temperatures began to drop. “Our phone was ringing off the hook,” said the lead federal defender in Brooklyn, Deirdre von Dornum. She said inmates, using a dedicated line that connects the jail to federal defenders offices, had gathered around the telephones on their floors to report poor heating, little to no hot water and no lights in their cells.
She said many inmates complained of congestion and sore throats.
The heat and power issues were unrelated, according to union leaders who spoke to facilities workers. The heating issues began when units that draw water up from the boilers froze. The workers said that the heat was on, but several units had been disabled.
The electrical problems originated in an electrical panel that blew out last month, the union leaders said. Although the panel was initially repaired, it caught fire on Sunday.
The jail switched over to emergency power, leaving the corridors lit only by dim lights, the cells dark and inmates confined to poorly heated cells during the coldest days of the winter so far. This week, the temperature plummeted to 2 degrees in New York City, as frigid weather swept over the Midwest and Northeast.
“The heat isn’t coming out properly,” Mr. Sanon said.
One inmate told a federal defender that a corrections officer had taken the temperature in a housing unit, which was warmer than the cells, and it was 34 degrees.
New York City’s Fire Department confirmed that it responded to a small electrical fire in the jail’s control room on Sunday.
But the warden’s spokesperson, who signed the name V. Logan, said in the email the power outage had “minimally impacted” housing units.
Taken together, the accounts of nearly three dozen inmates given to federal defenders painted a different picture of conditions inside the jail.
Heat was the main complaint. The heat was spotty to nonexistent, depending on the floor. Hot water was scarce. Hot food had not been served for several days, with canned food handed out cell by cell. One inmate, who kept kosher, said he had only been given canned sardines.
The inmates were promised extra blankets, but they never came. The commissary, because of the limited electricity, was closed.
The conditions were aggravated by the lack of electrical power, inmates told the lawyers and paralegals. The jail had abandoned its usual routines, with inmates kept on partial lockdown for safety reasons.
Because power outlets were not working, the inmates could not use the computers that usually allow them to communicate with relatives and place requests for prescription refills.
Legal visits and family visits had been canceled since Sunday, the lawyers said.
The recent events come on the heels of the government shutdown, which impeded the ability of lawyers to visit their clients in federal jails, including at M.D.C. It did not immediately appear that the power and heat issues were related to the shutdown.
On Thursday, the federal defenders filed an emergency motion to remove from the jail an inmate whose asthma had worsened from the cold. The inmate, Dino Sanchez, a Brooklyn man in his 40s, had recently entered the jail, a federal defender, Benjamin Yaster, said.
“He feels short of breath and is wheezing and coughing more than he normally would,” said Mr. Yaster.
The federal defenders initially requested that the M.D.C. management provide backup heating or more blankets. They later requested that inmates be moved to an adjacent building, now empty but for a few dozen female inmates.
They said they received no response. “Not only have the conditions been disgraceful but we have peppered them with questions and we get nothing but silence,” said David E. Patton, head of the federal defender office. The office represents thousands of indigent defendants.
“They might say, ‘an incident occurred,’ or ‘visiting is canceled’ but when we follow-up to ask if people have heat, hot water, or adequate access to their families or attorneys, they stonewall us,” Mr. Patton said.
The building next door, also run by the jail, has full power and heat.
Mr. Sanon, the labor union leader, said he contacted the warden beginning early last week and toured the jail with him. He was assured heat would be monitored. “To no avail,” he said on Thursday.
Representative Nydia M. Velázquez visited the jail on Friday, writing on Twitter that there was some restored heat in the facility, along with hot water and hot meals.
