WASHINGTON — President Trump’s assertion that a senior law enforcement official privately gave assurances that he is not under scrutiny in the investigations shadowing him partly served as a defense strategy but also raised new questions about how the Justice Department is conducting the inquiries.
Mr. Trump said in an interview on Thursday with The New York Times that the deputy attorney general, Rod J. Rosenstein, has told him that he was not a target of the special counsel investigation into Russia’s election interference and whether any Trump associates conspired with it. “Rod told me I’m not a target of the investigation,” he said. The president also said that Mr. Rosenstein reiterated the statement to his personal lawyers “a number of times,” but did not say when.
Questions about how law enforcement officials are navigating the inquiry have hung over the Justice Department since a separate investigation came into view in April, when F.B.I. agents raided the office, home and hotel room of Mr. Trump’s former longtime lawyer and fixer, Michael D. Cohen. The raids prompted Mr. Trump to increase his attacks on the Justice Department, raising fears among Democrats that he might shut down that inquiry or the one by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III.
But Mr. Rosenstein told the president shortly after the raid that he was not a target in either investigation, according to a Bloomberg News report citing unnamed people familiar with the matter, which prompted speculation that Mr. Rosenstein was trying to placate the president to allow the investigations to continue. People close to Mr. Trump’s legal team confirmed that account.
Spokespeople for the Justice Department, the United States attorney in Manhattan and the special counsel all declined to comment on Friday on Mr. Trump’s statements.
What do we know about Trump’s status in the investigations?
Mr. Trump was considered a subject in the Cohen inquiry, according to court filings. A subject is someone whose conduct is “within the scope of the grand jury’s investigation,” according to the United States attorneys’ manual, the guidebook for federal prosecutors. It does not mean that the person is suspected of breaking the law, but that prosecutors want to learn more to determine whether a crime has been committed.
Prosecutors sometimes tell people involved in an investigation, like when they are being interviewed, that they are neither a subject nor a target — a more serious designation that means prosecutors have gathered substantial evidence that the person committed a crime.
That suggests a few possibilities about what Mr. Rosenstein said. Mr. Trump and his lawyers could have misinterpreted or misrepresented Mr. Rosenstein’s comments. The president could have also become a subject in the Cohen inquiry after Mr. Rosenstein made his reassurances to Mr. Trump and his lawyers, and they could be operating off outdated information.
What did we learn about how Trump views the investigations?
Mr. Trump has seemed at times consumed with the investigations, attacking them for years on Twitter and deriding the Russia inquiry as a “witch hunt.” He pressed James B. Comey when he was the F.B.I. director to publicly say he was not a target in an investigation.
In early 2018, Mr. Mueller’s office told Mr. Trump that he was not a target in the investigation, according to a person close to the president’s legal team.
If Mr. Rosenstein, whose office has overseen the Russia and Cohen investigations, also privately told the president as much, it would have bolstered Mr. Trump’s sense that he was being unfairly targeted.
But it may have also helped to prevent Mr. Trump from trying to end the Mueller inquiry, which he has said he could do. And it may have helped Mr. Rosenstein keep his job after it became public in September that he had suggested taping his conversations with Mr. Trump and possibly invoking the 25th Amendment to remove him from office.
What are the implications for Mr. Trump if he is not a target of either investigation?
If Mr. Trump was told that he was neither subject nor target of those investigations, it essentially signaled at the time that he was safe from prosecution and that his conduct was not within the scope of a grand jury investigation.
But those designations can change at any time, and Mr. Trump did not say when Mr. Rosenstein last told his legal team that he was not a target.
There are also several reasons Mr. Trump might not be a target, said Joyce Vance, a former United States attorney in Alabama. The evidence might not be there to show that he crossed the line into activity defined as criminal by law. “He also might not be a target because there is a policy that you can’t indict a sitting president,” Ms. Vance said.