It’s Friday. We’re off Monday for Presidents’ Day.
Weather: A hint of spring, with highs in the mid-50s, but overcast today with a chance of rain. Sunny but cooler over the weekend.
Alternate-side parking: In effect until Monday (Presidents’ Day).
One of the biggest deals in New York City’s recent history went down in flames on Thursday when Amazon announced it was no longer going to open a major office in Queens. The news highlighted a debate over what kind of welcome, if any, we should roll out when a rich company comes to town promising new jobs.
The deal: The state and city offered nearly $3 billion in public subsidies in exchange for the company bringing at least 25,000 jobs and other investments. Amazon agreed to make some local hires and to fund some tech education. It did not agree to change its longstanding opposition to unionizing its work force.
The money: Supporters of the plan said New York would eventually reap more than $27 billion in tax revenue. Critics questioned that number and said the money spent on subsidies should have been spent on improving housing and mass transit.
The upset: Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez came to power by unseating a high-ranking incumbent in a congressional district that includes parts of Queens near Long Island City. So when she opposed this deal, lawmakers took notice. Her supporters helped organize protests of Amazon’s project and helped block one of the biggest companies in the country.
The blame: Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio, both Democrats, are longtime rivals. But they joined forces to support this deal. When Amazon pulled out, they went back to feuding. Mr. de Blasio blamed the company for leaving. Mr. Cuomo blamed Senate Democrats, whose leadership questioned the deal.
The future: Lawmakers from Staten Island to Dutchess County said they’d welcome Amazon. Mr. Cuomo’s honeymoon with Senate Democrats seems finished. And Mr. de Blasio is trying to put Amazon behind him and recoup his image as a progressive leader.
What’s taking so long to pick an M.T.A. leader?
It’s been 99 days since the Metropolitan Transportation Authority’s Joseph J. Lhota abruptly resigned as chairman. The subway is still limping along. State lawmakers are taking a hard look at congestion pricing to pay for repairs.
So why doesn’t the M.T.A. have a new permanent leader?
Governor Cuomo, who controls the system, is waiting until after the state budget is approved on April 1 to pick a new leader, according to officials in his office. The governor first wants to see whether his push for congestion pricing and other transit changes are successful.
His choice must be approved by the State Senate.
For now, the M.T.A. has a temporary leader: Fernando Ferrer, the former Bronx borough president who has served in the role before. Mr. Ferrer told reporters last month that it’s not an easy gig.
Tell us who you want to see lead the M.T.A. Email us or leave a name in the comments section.
Art of the steal: The famed art dealer Mary Boone of Manhattan was sentenced to two and a half years in prison for offenses connected to a tax fraud.
Alleged abuse by priests: Roman Catholic bishops named nearly 200 priests in New Jersey who have been found credibly accused of abusing children.
The Carters eat meat: Beyoncé and Jay-Z encourage people to eat plant-based diets, but they are not vegan.
Younger is not always better.
And size doesn’t really count.
“It’s really about finding the right match for you and your lifestyle,” said Elizabeth Jensen, the northeast regional director for the Best Friends Animal Society, an advocacy group.
She said that finding a pet is like finding a partner, which makes her a Cupid of sorts. “We do counseling and matchmaking,” she said.
And this is a busy time of year for matchmakers like Ms. Jensen.
So how do you find that perfect partner?
First: Don’t think of species. Some people may have long ago declared themselves cat people or dog people. Those labels are not as immutable as you think, Ms. Jensen said.
Second: Think lifestyle.
Ms. Jensen said pet shelters may ask prospective adoptees questions like: Do they want a pet to go jogging with them? Are they looking more for a snuggle buddy? How much time are they going to be with that pet?
Third: Younger is not always better.
Older pets “will often come with an understanding of what it’s like to be in a home environment more readily than a puppy or kitten,” Ms. Jensen said.
And last: The size of your home or pet should not be a deal-breaker.
It’s Friday — have a “pet”acular day.
I was walking along Henry Street in Brooklyn. A blind man with a white cane was walking toward me. To my right, a truck was backing into a parking spot.
Just as the man with the cane passed me on my left, I heard a bang. I turned and saw a young man poke his head out of the truck to assess the damage to the tree that had just been hit.
The man with the cane stopped and turned his head.
I took a couple of steps back.
“So it’s O.K.?” he said.
He cracked a grin.
