ACCADEMIA BIZANTINA at Alice Tully Hall (Feb. 12, 7:30 p.m.). The stylish violinist Giuliano Carmignola leads this period-instrument ensemble into the Classical period with Mozart’s precocious Symphony No. 10, his Violin Concerto No. 4 and Haydn’s Symphony No. 80.
BLUE HERON at Corpus Christi Church (Feb. 10, 4 p.m.). This continually excellent Boston-based choir and its director, Scott Metcalfe, have been perhaps more responsible than anyone else for reviving interest in the generation of British composers before Tallis and Byrd, through their recordings and performances of pieces reconstructed from the Peterhouse Partbooks. In this Music Before 1800 concert, they sing works by Robert Fayrfax, John Taverner, Arthur Chamberlayne and two of the great beneficiaries of their art, Hugh Aston and Nicholas Ludford.
VICKY CHOW at the Stone (Feb. 12-16, 8:30 p.m.). An extraordinary new-music pianist appears in a five-concert residency, which includes a concert on Tuesday that features new works by Felipe Lara and Caroline Shaw, among others. On Wednesday Chow is joined by the composers Andy Akiho and Ian David Rosenbaum to play their pieces. And perhaps most enticingly of all, Philip Glass’s Études are spread over two nights on Thursday and Feb. 15.
‘RIGOLETTO’ at the Metropolitan Opera (Feb. 12, 7:30 p.m., through March 20). Michael Mayer’s Las Vegas-themed production of Verdi’s classic returns for the first of two runs this season. (There are four performances in April and May.) Nadine Sierra is Gilda, with Vittorio Grigolo as the Duke of Mantua, at least until March 1; Bryan Hymel takes over on March 6. Roberto Frontali is Rigoletto, with Stefan Kocan as Sparafucile and Ramona Zaharia as Maddalena. Nicola Luisotti conducts the lot.
ROYAL CONCERTGEBOUW ORCHESTRA at Carnegie Hall (Feb. 14-15, 8 p.m.). These concerts were supposed to be conducted by Daniele Gatti, the Concertgebouw’s former chief conductor who was fired in August after accusations of sexual misconduct surfaced. In his place, this exceptional orchestra could do considerably worse than appoint the man who replaces him here, Daniel Harding. Thursday’s concert includes Brahms’s Symphony No. 4, Mozart’s Symphony No. 40 and Schumann’s “Manfred” Overture, to be performed with members of the National Youth Orchestra of the United States of America. Feb. 15’s concert is barely more daring, with Strauss’s “Ein Heldenleben” and Beethoven’s Piano Concerto No. 5, but at least there’s a new piece by Guillaume Connesson, “Eiréné.” Pierre-Laurent Aimard is the soloist.
