LIVERPOOL, England — For the 22 years it has existed, Wavertree, a multiethnic, mostly working-class constituency in the northern city of Liverpool, has voted exclusively for Labour. It has been a safe seat in a strongly socialist city; at the most recent general election, the party’s candidate took four-fifths of the vote.
So its local leaders were aghast when tiny Wavertree emerged as the locus of the latest feud over anti-Semitism in the Labour Party, when its member of Parliament, Luciana Berger, resigned this week after receiving anti-Semitic abuse, and with local Labour activists having called her a “disruptive Zionist” and a supporter of a “murdering” government.
Joan Ryan joined a group of seven Labour defectors who had resigned earlier this week in protest of their left-wing leader, Jeremy Corbyn, criticizing his ambiguity over Britain’s withdrawal from the European Union and accusing him of tolerating anti-Semitism in the party.
And just hours before Ms. Ryan’s defection, another Labour member of Parliament came under fire for suggesting that the seven rebel lawmakers might have had financial backing from Israel, in what critics said invoked a well-known trope.
Mr. Corbyn is a vehement and unapologetic critic of the current Israeli government, but has failed to shake off claims that he has tolerated anti-Semitism within Labour’s ranks. His supporters, many of them Jewish, deny those claims, arguing that instances of anti-Semitism in the party have fallen since he became leader and that criticism of the Israeli government does not equate to a hatred of Jews.
His critics respond that while comments made by some party members may not be overtly anti-Semitic, they represent dog-whistle politics.
“I cannot remain in a party that I have come to the sickening conclusion is institutionally anti-Semitic,” Ms. Berger said on Monday. She had been threatened with a vote of no-confidence by local party activists for her public criticisms of Mr. Corbyn, but the motion was eventually withdrawn. She then came under attack from local Labour activists in her constituency, who accused her of supporting the Israeli government’s treatment of Palestinians.
Another local Labour member, Kenneth Campbell, described Ms. Berger as a “disruptive Zionist.” Neither could be reached for comment.
In response, Tom Watson, Labour’s deputy leader, said last week that the party was investigating its Wavertree branch. On Tuesday, the Liverpool offices of both Ms. Berger and the local party were locked, and no one responded to repeated knocks on their doors.
He acknowledged that Ms. Berger, a Londoner and a centrist Labour candidate, was viewed by some locals as having been “parachuted” into Wavertree and having tenuous connections with her constituency.
Alex Scott-Samuel, the chairman of the local party, declined to comment. Earlier this month, the University of Liverpool distanced itself from Dr. Scott-Samuel after he appeared on a radio show hosted by a noted conspiracy theorist, David Icke, and talked about the role of the Rothschilds in spreading neoliberalism.
Last week, Labour’s general secretary, Jennie Formby, revealed that the party had received 673 complaints of anti-Semitism by its members in the last 10 months. In a letter, Ms. Formby said that 96 members were immediately suspended for their conduct between April 2018 and January 2019, and 12 were expelled.
The data, published by the BBC, also revealed that 146 members received a first warning and 220 cases were dropped for lack of evidence of a breach of party rules. Of the 307 members who were suspended or notified of an investigation, 44 left the party.
Still, the problem — or at least the perception of anti-Semitism festering in the party’s ranks — is as persistent as crab grass.
On Tuesday, Ruth George, a member of Parliament for a district of Derbyshire, apologized for suggesting it was “possible” that the seven lawmakers who split from Labour this week were being supported by the Israeli government.
Jewish Voice for Labour, set up in 2017 to take on allegations of anti-Semitism in the Labour Party, defended Ms. George.
Jenny Manson, a leader of the group, said in an interview that invoking conspiracy theories, while dangerous, did not necessarily equate to anti-Semitism and that they had to be taken in context.
She further said that the Conservative Party had its own problems with anti-Semitism and Islamophobia, but that those went largely unreported by the news media.
Some analysts say the criticism over anti-Semitism has been blown out of proportion by people seeking to take down Mr. Corbyn.
