New York|The L Train Smells Bad. No, Really, It Smells Very, Very Bad.
The L Train Smells Bad. No, Really, It Smells Very, Very Bad.
New York City’s subway riders are used to a spectrum of smells, most of them unpleasant.
But the mysterious fumes that have permeated the L train this week and made some subway riders and transit workers feel ill, go beyond the usual odors a New Yorker endures.
On Tuesday, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority suspended service for two and a half hours to investigate harsh fuel smells at the Graham Avenue stop in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. On Thursday, subway riders and transit workers said the odor, a dizzying chemical stench that forced some to breathe through tissues over their faces, continued to linger.
 “It was really intense,” she said, swaying side-to-side to pantomime her dizziness.
The now multiple-day episode is just the latest in a series of troubles for the city’s subway system, coming on the heels of the aborted L train shutdown and near constant complaints from the public of poor service.
While the transit authority and the state’s Department of Environmental Conservation had not yet publicly identified the source of the leak, officials and M.T.A. employees said Thursday that one potential source they were exploring was an abandoned gas station above the tracks between the Graham Avenue and Grand Street stations.
On Thursday, the station, near the intersection of Bushwick and Metropolitan avenues in East Williamsburg, was surrounded by a wooden fence. The property was littered with debris, and the building inside was covered with graffiti.
On Wednesday, the transit authority’s chief safety officer, Pat Warren, said the agency had removed “almost all” of the oil from the tracks.
Mr. Warren also said there was no health or safety threat to riders and that the transit agency had worked with experts at the Fire Department and the state’s Department of Environmental Conservation to determine that there was no risk to the public.
“The air on the L train and in the stations is 100 percent safe,” he said.
Not every subway rider was convinced. Jerry Holste, 69, said that when he got on the subway on Tuesday, he became terrified when the fumes filled the train car.
Sandhya Jain-Patel, 45, an art specialist, said the situation had made her furious.
She and other nearby parents from her children’s school hired a Lyft to take them to their children’s school in Manhattan.
“So that’s money out of my pocket in addition to the money I pay for a monthly MetroCard,” she said.
Mr. Warren told reporters on Wednesday that officials were not sure why the smell was so strong. He could not estimate when the fumes would dissipate and said he was surprised that they had lingered this long.
In the meantime, the authority has been continuously monitoring air quality in stations as complaints about the smells have continued, Mr. Warren said.
To help remove the scent, the agency placed heavy-duty fans on subway grates near the Graham Avenue station, the authority said. Workers were also using absorbent pads and blankets to soak up the oil.
Despite the authority’s efforts, station agents and subway conductors have reported feeling nauseous and suffering headaches over the past several days.
Dozens of transit workers have complained about the smell, and at least four have gone to the hospital, according to the New York City’s transit workers’ union.
He said the union had pulled workers from several locations and would "take further action” if the smell did not improve over the weekend.
On Thursday morning, the fumes continued to penetrate subway cars traveling between the Grand Street and Graham Avenue stations, upsetting riders’ stomachs and irritating their throats.
The scent appeared to have migrated as well. At the Lorimer Street stop, one stop west of Graham Avenue, the smell was so powerful that groups of riders were bunched underneath a subway grate in order to inhale fresh air. The odor was also noticeable at the Bedford Avenue station, the westernmost Brooklyn stop on the L train.
The New York City subway system has been plagued by high-profile issues recently. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo has criticized the transit agency several times in recent weeks. The system’s ridership has been in decline amid competition from ride-hailing services as well as delays caused by deteriorating infrastructure.
As a result, the transit authority has been facing a growing budget hole. But last month, after transit leaders spent months urging the need for a fare increase to fix the issue, the M.T.A.’s board delayed a vote on the fare hike.
The L train has been especially beleaguered. After the transit agency spent years preparing to shut down the subway line in order to make repairs to a tunnel between Brooklyn and Manhattan, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo halted the plan and introduced an alternative proposal that he said would be less disruptive.
Though the transit authority has said it would follow the governor’s plan, it remains unclear when the repairs would begin and exactly how service would be affected.
Olivia Gallinaro, a regular L train rider, said she learned to accept the inconvenience that has become associated with that particular subway line. She took the smelly disruption in stride.
“I was annoyed but I was like, what can we do? When can we catch a break?” Ms. Gallinaro said.
She wasn’t alone. Another rider at the Graham Avenue stop on Thursday, Sarah Feldman, said that had she not been told about the scent she would not have deemed it out of the ordinary.
