Xavier Becerra, California’s attorney general, has already sued the Trump administration more than 40 times, positioning himself on the front lines of the Golden State’s resistance to the president’s policies.
Yesterday, he added another big lawsuit to the tally.
Mr. Becerra, along with his counterparts in 15 other states, challenged President Trump’s plan to declare a national emergency in order to access billions more dollars for a border wall than Congress had granted him.
It’s a fight that could have major constitutional ramifications. And California is playing a central role.
It’s not clear whether any of the fencing President Trump seeks to build would be in California. And it definitely won’t be built in some of the other states that have joined the lawsuit, like New York or Hawaii. So what specific harm gives California the right to sue over it?
Mr. Becerra told my colleagues that California and the other states have standing because residents of those states could “lose funding that they paid for with their tax dollars, money that was destined for drug interdiction or for the Department of Defense for military men and women and military installations,” if Mr. Trump gets his way.
Still, it’s a really complicated situation. Experts say the success of the lawsuit will most likely come down to legal questions like which entities have the standing to sue in the first place, rather than questions about what’s actually happening on the border.
Is this lawsuit the only challenge to President Trump’s action?
Not even close. The Trump administration is facing a wave of lawsuits that have rolled in since the president announced his plans last week. And Congress is on a separate track to challenge the emergency declaration, which could include another lawsuit.
Where is Gov. Gavin Newsom in all this?
He’s enthusiastically onboard with the lawsuit. In a statement sent out by Mr. Becerra’s office yesterday, Mr. Newsom echoed the language he used in his State of the State address last week.
Stephen Curry was uncharacteristically not great at basketball on Sunday during the N.B.A. All-Star Game. But it didn’t matter, my colleague Scott Cacciola reported. Because Curry — who anchors a dominant Golden State Warriors squad — was in friendly territory.
The game brought Curry back to Charlotte, N.C., where he grew up and near where he went to college. Commissioner Adam Silver described the Currys as the city’s “first family.” Curry’s mother drained a half-court shot.
And even though Curry has tried to persuade his dad, Dell Curry, a former Hornets player who’s now a commentator for the team, to move to the Bay Area, the son knows his father will never leave.
“This is where home is for him,” Stephen Curry said.
