When you think of the people who built Los Angeles, the names that most likely jump to mind — William Mulholland, the Chandlers — are often those of white men. It’s not surprising, and it’s not unusual among American cities.
That’s why, when I heard Laura Atkins, a Berkeley-based children’s book author, mention Bridge Mason, known as Biddy, on an episode of the podcast East Bay Yesterday, I took note.
Ms. Mason, she said, had been born enslaved, won her freedom in a California court in the mid-1850s and eventually became a prominent downtown L.A. landowner — not to mention the growing metropolis’s richest woman.
She organized the city’s First A.M.E. church and was a philanthropist.
It’s Black History Month, so I’ve been thinking about what it means to honor the legacies of people whom history has traditionally left out.
Ms. Atkins and Arisa White, a poet, have written a book about Ms. Mason’s life, “Biddy Mason Speaks Up,” part of a series about civil rights leaders. So I asked them how they decided to write about her and about different ways of thinking about historical figures.
The book, which is illustrated by Laura Freeman, alternates between a story told from Ms. Mason’s perspective and pages that are filled with definitions of words like “power,” “race,” and “westward expansion,” as well as timelines and discussion questions for readers about how those themes play out in their own lives.
Ms. White said she was also excited to highlight a different way of building wealth. Ms. Mason worked as a midwife and a healer who used herbal remedies her enslaved grandmother had taught her.
Among her clients were some of L.A.’s richest residents, including Pio Pico, the last governor of Mexican California.
“It’s bringing to life a different kind of intelligence that I don’t think young readers access when they think about enslaved people,” she said.
Ms. Atkins said she knew that the idea of reframing history through a feminist, collectivist lens might sound a little too, well, Berkeley for a lot of educators.
But she said she had been heartened by the response.
“We’ve gotten some real love from people out in the world and appreciation for the way it empowers students to engage,” she said.
But like the Oscars, the Recording Academy has struggled to hang onto cultural relevance in the face of controversy and a changing industry.
Many of music’s biggest names (Beyoncé, Kendrick Lamar, Ariana Grande) were absent. And even though the telecast was hosted by Alicia Keys and was stacked with strong performances by female artists, it was tough to forget that the Academy was atoning for its outgoing president’s statement last year that women need to “step up,” in response to claims that it had overlooked their work.
Still, the awards shine a valuable spotlight on lesser known artists, like Ángela Aguilar, an Angeleno who was this year’s youngest nominee.
If you want to catch up, find The Times’s coverage here. And here are all the winners.
