Ariana Grande didn’t attend the Grammys, but that didn’t stop her from being at the center of the conversation about — and around — the ceremony.
When Cardi B won best rap album, Grande fired off a couple of frustrated tweets; her ex-boyfriend, Mac Miller, who died last year, was a nominee. (She later apologized and deleted all of the tweets.) And she posted several photos of herself in the custom Zac Posen dress she was going to wear during the ceremony.
This wasn’t the Grammy experience Grande was planning to have. Up until a couple of days ago, she was slated to perform on the broadcast, a plan that imploded in spectacular fashion.
After the longtime show producer Ken Ehrlich said in an interview that Grande was no longer performing because she “felt it was too late for her to pull something together,” Grande replied with barbs.
And so on the night of the Grammys, all of the noise Grande generated was heard everywhere but the actual broadcast, making her one of several artists who made loud splashes without ever setting foot in the Staples Center.
Childish Gambino, a.k.a. Donald Glover, did not come to the ceremony to accept any of the four Grammys he won for “This Is America.”Credit...
So perhaps the best place to communicate an unfettered message during the Grammys is anywhere but the actual ceremony. The show still conceives of itself as a linear television experience, when in fact the consumption of it — and especially the stars it relies upon — is wild, woolly and omnidirectional.
Consider 21 Savage, nominated for two awards for his role on Post Malone’s “Rockstar” but unable to attend because of his detention by Immigration and Customs Enforcement last week. When Post Malone performed, he didn’t mention his collaborator, which spurred a fierce backlash online. (Eventually, a photo of him wearing a 21 Savage T-shirt underneath his outfit was circulated.) Kei Henderson, one of 21 Savage’s managers, wrote on Twitter that she and others “attempted to solidify recognition for Savage during the performance of ‘Rockstar,’ it just didn’t work out that way.” The only person to mention 21 Savage during the broadcast was Ludwig Göransson, the Childish Gambino collaborator. The lack of other acknowledgment was glaring.
While plenty of stars sought a way around the Grammy telecast pipeline, others used it to its fullest potential. Cardi B, who often appears to be the only performer in any field who still experiences genuine shock and gratitude, delivered an emotional speech after winning best rap album. Brandi Carlile’s performance of “The Joke” was outlandishly good, and Alicia Keys’s hosting had several slyly intriguing moments. Following a brutally boring Grammys last year that also deeply marginalized women, it was refreshing that most of this year’s high points came from female artists.
More often, though, when the Grammys had an opportunity to celebrate one of pop’s most prominent stars, it dropped the ball. Speeches from almost all the most relevant winners — Kacey Musgraves, Cardi B, Dua Lipa — were cut short.
In no case was this more egregious than with Drake, by far the most popular artist to win a Grammy this year. Drake was offered a performance slot, but turned it down (as did Lamar and Childish Gambino). So when he popped up onstage after he was announced as the winner of best rap song, it was a true surprise.
While his appearance was magnanimous — especially after his prior critiques of the Grammys — his speech was anything but. He took a swipe at his prior best rap song Grammy win for “Hotline Bling,” which is not (really) a rap song. He drew attention to the fact that those who vote for the Grammys might not be the best equipped to “understand, you know, what a mixed-race kid from Canada has to say, or a fly Spanish girl from New York, or anybody else, or a brother from Houston,” acknowledging Cardi B and Travis Scott.
“But,” Drake continued.
The Grammys made room for plenty of time-absorbers: Alicia Keys karaoke; umpteen tributes; a long montage dedicated to the Recording Academy’s beleaguered outgoing leader, Neil Portnow. But it is the show’s stubborn curse that it’s willing to cut off the most popular and meaningful artist in pop at the knees in order to preserve its sense of self-importance — a preposterous and careless choice. It is that same hubris that allows Ariana Grande to watch the Grammys from the couch rather than be on the stage, and that ensures the Grammys will continue to be a site of protest, of dissent, and dullness for years to come, pending changes in leadership and attitude.
After the ceremony, Drake posted a photo of the victory envelope bearing his name, and added the caption “Too raw for TV.” Now more than ever, that’s a fine way to be.