In November, Democrats reclaimed control of the Assembly and the Senate for the first time in a decade, radically shifting the dynamics of power in Albany and making it easier for the Legislature to resist Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat. The governor can no longer point to Republicans to avoid legislation he disliked, or use the G.O.P. majority in the Senate as leverage with recalcitrant members of his own party.
She declined to say whether Mr. Cuomo would reject the selection of Mr. Gianaris, who represents the Queens area where Amazon would like to build a campus.
The selection of Mr. Gianaris, detailed in a brief letter obtained by The New York Times, was cheered by those who have advocated for elected leaders to try to block the agreement, which could amount to $3 billion in state and city incentives for Amazon to create 25,000 to 40,000 jobs in Queens.
In response to Ms. Lever’s comment, a spokesman for Ms. Stewart-Cousins, Mike Murphy, said that signs of an economic slowdown, highlighted by Mr. Cuomo on Monday, made it “even more imperative that we are vigilant with taxpayer money” for development projects.
Amazon declined to comment and referred questions to the state. Company executives have said they expected the development plan would not go before the board until next year. Voting members of the board are appointed to one-year terms, and Mr. Murphy said Ms. Stewart-Cousins was likely to renominate Mr. Gianaris for subsequent terms.
However, he added, he said he did not intend to use his position to seek concessions from Amazon.
Mr. Gianaris, like several local elected leaders now opposing the deal, signed a letter initially supporting city and state efforts to lure the company to New York City.
The sudden injection of uncertainty followed a troubled unveiling of the project and a concerted effort by activist organizers to rally opposition to the deal. The company, in recent weeks, has been trying its own charm offensive, engaging local business owners, lobbyists and friendly officials to sell the deal.
Last week, Amazon executives endured a barrage of questioning during a second hearing on the deal before the New York City Council, a solidly progressive Democratic body whose members have been critical of the company’s treatment of its workers. During the hearing, Brian Huseman, Amazon’s vice president for public policy, said the company would not remain neutral if its employees tried to unionize.
The comment led to criticism from Ms. Stewart-Cousins and her counterpart in the Assembly, Carl Heastie.
Experts on state government have said that the board would need to weigh in on the Amazon project too, though top officials in the Cuomo administration have delivered mixed signals.
Shortly after Amazon announced it would be building the new campus, Robert F. Mujica Jr., Mr. Cuomo’s appointee to the board and its chairman, suggested that the deal might not necessarily come before the board.
But Mr. Cuomo has since said it would play a crucial role.
