Abuse victims and their advocates held high hopes that Francis, who seemed in the last year to overcome his own blind spots on an issue on which he had repeatedly stumbled, would use his absolute authority to institute a churchwide law dismissing abusive priests and the bishops who cover up for them.
Instead, with the abuse scandals threatening the credibility of his papacy, the pope decided that the best way for the church to address the problem lay not in issuing an edict from Rome but in setting out to change the hearts and minds of church leaders at the local level around the world.
After the pope’s speech, the Vatican did announce that some specific steps that would be taken soon.
One was described by church officials as a toughening up of child-protection laws within the Vatican’s boundaries. They also spoke of a “very brief” handbook for bishops to understand their duties when it comes to abuse cases, and of new task forces of experts and canon lawyers to assist bishops in countries with less experience and resources.
But those limited measures had already been developed before the summit, and were not shaped by the meeting, Vatican officials said.
Francis had sought to tamp down expectations about the Vatican meeting, fostered by some of his own bishops, that the conference would deliver instant remedies to end the scourge. He said the meeting was intended to educate all the bishops on the gravity of the problem of sexual abuse.
Still, at times, the four-day summit did seem like a significant turning point for the church.
Outside the Vatican walls, abuse survivors marched and held rolling news conferences.
Inside, at sessions presided over by Pope Francis himself, the world’s top bishops, clad in their black cassocks and purple sashes, listened every day to the brutal testimony of abuse survivors — many of whom spoke about the indifference and complicity of church leaders like them. A Nigerian nun excoriated them for their hypocritical silence and lack of transparency.
In a bid to improve relations with the news media, the organizers invited a veteran Vatican reporter from Mexico to address the gathering.
Cardinal Daniel N. DiNardo, the president of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, said on Saturday that he was “very pleased,” even if specific action still needed to be determined.
At first, Cardinal DiNardo said, some countries did not want to admit that they had the same problems as the United States, Cardinal DiNardo said. But in the end, he said, he was impressed with the consensus that developed.
Archbishop Eamon Martin, president of the Irish Catholic Bishops’ Conference, said that the obligation to protect children in the church rightfully fell on the world’s bishops.
“I am always frightened about the thought that somehow safeguarding can be commanded from Rome,” he said on Saturday.
Archbishop Martin argued that the meeting itself had sent a strong message of what was expected of bishops, even those skeptical of how widespread the crisis is.
As a result, he said, the world’s bishops have moved “much closer” to having universal zero-tolerance rules for removing abusers from ministry.
“Every one of us must return home committed to some actions,” he said.
Archbishop Mark Benedict Coleridge, the president of the Australian Catholic Bishops Conference, said in his homily during the meeting’s closing Mass on Sunday that the church needed to believe survivors and work to bring them justice, ensure that abusers never have the opportunity “to offend” again, call to account bishops who have covered up abuse and make the church a safe place again.
“We have been our own worst enemy,” he said.
Archbishop Mark Benedict Coleridge compared the wakening of the bishops to the reality of sexual abuse to “a Copernican revolution,” and said the church needed to put the victims, like the sun, at the center of their solar system.
Some of the faithful who came to hear Pope Francis in St. Peter’s Square on Sunday were watching for what came next.
