WASHINGTON — President Trump’s legislative path to a border wall has narrowed significantly on the eve of Tuesday’s State of the Union speech, and his fallback plan to circumvent Congress by declaring a state of emergency could create a major division in his own party.
As he prepares to make his case to the largest national audience of the year, Mr. Trump appeared to be in an increasingly precarious position, unable to sway the wider public to his cause and unwilling, at least so far, to apply the persuasion and compromise that have gotten previous presidents out of political jams.
Anxiety over the damage being inflicted on the party is growing. Last week, in a one-on-one meeting with the president, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, reportedly warned Mr. Trump that declaring a national emergency to build his wall would almost certainly spark a rebellion within his party — and a vote to overrule him. House and Senate negotiators have been moving toward a bipartisan agreement as early as Friday to keep the government funded after Feb. 15 — with or without the president’s support.
But the president’s supporters continue to plead for unity.
“This is the defining moment of his presidency,” said Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican who is one of Mr. Trump’s biggest supporters on Capitol Hill, speaking at an event in Greenville on Monday.
“To every Republican, if you don’t stand behind this president, we’re not going to stand behind you when it comes to the wall,” said Mr. Graham, adding that he feared “a war within the Republican Party” if Republicans did not support Mr. Trump’s plans, including an emergency declaration.
At the same time, Mr. Trump continued to brandish the threat of an emergency declaration that would allow him to divert existing federal funding to the wall, an idea that has sparked heated opposition among Senate Republicans, who have grown increasingly comfortable in their defiance. On Monday, the Senate formally adopted an amendment to a broader Middle East policy bill, 70 to 26, that rebuked the president for what Republicans saw as a precipitous withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan and Syria.
In December, Republican senators broke with him to call for the withdrawal of American support for Saudi Arabia’s war in Yemen, as they recoiled from his inaction in the face of the kingdom’s murder of a Washington Post columnist, Jamal Khashoggi.
The Trump administration’s hard-line stance on keeping migrants out is pushing asylum seekers to take remote and dangerous routes into the United States. And a wall might not be able to fix that.
Building a border wall. It’s the holy grail of President Trump’s immigration policy. “The United States will not be a migrant camp, and it will not be a refugee holding facility. It won’t be.” But at the border, there’s a kind of chaos unfolding that a wall might not fix. The Trump administration’s hard-line stance on keeping migrants out is pushing asylum seekers to take remote and dangerous routes into the United States. Here’s how this is playing out. The border stretches nearly 2,000 miles, and these are the official ports of entry. More than 650 miles already have barriers installed. Fences, barbed wire or vehicle barricades. Over the years, that’s pushed people to try riskier routes to get across. And since 2014, more families have been arriving. And many of them are seeking asylum, a human right protected by both U.S. and international law. The Trump administration’s hard-hitting crackdown includes a tactic called “metering.” “Documents ready.” Entering through an official border crossing is one way to request asylum. But that’s become more difficult under Trump. The practice of metering allows border agents to limit the number of asylum seekers that are processed each day by delaying them from setting foot into the U.S. We can see it in action here, at the Paso del Norte crossing in El Paso, Texas. Officers are standing right at the border, trying to intercept people before they get to the border station. This tactic is deliberate. Once people reach U.S. soil, they have the right to claim asylum. But if they never cross the border, they have to come back another day. Metering is not new. But the Trump administration has taken it to a new level. “We’re metering, which means that if we don’t have the resources to let them in on a particular day, they’re going to come back. So they’re going to wait their turn.” But as the government is limiting asylum seekers, they’re still funneling people to these same ports of entry to seek asylum. “Instead migrants seeking asylum will have to present themselves lawfully at a port of entry.” This is creating bottlenecks. Here, in Tijuana, is a vivid example of how metering plays out. Thousands of migrants are stuck. Human rights observers say that some are camping in squalid and dangerous conditions. The situation is leading migrants to try riskier routes through desolate terrain, where they’re at greater risk of dehydration and other illnesses. They’re showing up in places like Antelope Wells, N.M. It’s extremely remote and mountainous. Antelope Wells is part of the El Paso border area, which has seen a dramatic increase in the number of families crossing far away from official border stations. As you can see here, this increase happened right when the practice of metering expanded. And many are crossing in groups of 100 or more, like this one that arrived in January. But these remote outposts lack facilities, especially to deal with children. 7-year-old Jakelin Caal Maquin and her father crossed here on Dec. 6, where they encountered Border Patrol. They were brought to a nearby outpost, where Jakelin got sick. It took an overnight journey with multiple stops, including a 94-mile bus ride and an air ambulance evacuation to get her to the children’s hospital in El Paso. Her condition worsened, and she later died. 12 days later, another father crossed the border in the El Paso area with his 8-year-old child. Felipe Gomez Alonzo was in custody for six days. He died from the flu on Christmas Eve. Border Patrol officials say that they’re not equipped to deal with all of this. “Our infrastructure is incompatible with this reality. Our Border Patrol stations and ports of entry were built to handle mostly male, single adults in custody, not families or children.” But the practice of metering is forcing people through more remote routes, in turn overtaxing these far-flung outposts and putting a strain on officers. It’s also leading to ever-more-dangerous consequences for migrants.

“The whole idea that a president — whether it’s President Trump or President Warren or President Sanders — can declare an emergency and then somehow usurp the separation of powers and get into the business of appropriating money for specific projects without Congress getting involved is a serious constitutional question,” Mr. Cornyn said on Monday.
Mr. McConnell, according to three people familiar with his thinking, has grown increasingly frustrated with the White House in recent days, telling associates that he thinks members of the president’s staff have failed to adequately brief him on the legislative and political perils of moving ahead with a disaster declaration.
During his White House meeting, disclosed by The Washington Post, Mr. McConnell predicted that Speaker Nancy Pelosi would have the House immediately pass a “resolution of disapproval” attempting to block him from using existing funding for the wall.
Any senator from either party could then demand a vote, because the resolution would be deemed “privileged.” Mr. McConnell told Mr. Trump that he would have no choice but to schedule a floor vote on the measure within 15 days, and Republican aides have estimated that between three and 10 Republicans would side with the chamber’s Democrats against Mr. Trump.
“He’s been talking about all this for a month, in front of the cameras,” said Don Stewart, a spokesman for Mr. McConnell, who played down the exchange.
The leader delivered a similar message to Vice President Mike Pence and the president’s son-in-law and senior adviser, Jared Kushner, three weeks ago during negotiations to reopen the government. Since then, both men have counseled the president to move cautiously on the emergency declaration, according to a senior administration official.
Democrats have begun drafting legislation that would remove the president’s ability to shift money from one project to another. Representative John Garamendi, Democrat of California, would repeal a line in the 1986 Water Resources Development Act that grants the president authority to use civil works money to respond to a national emergency.
Administration officials struck a defiant note on Monday, saying the president needed the threat of a declaration to pressure Ms. Pelosi.
“The Congress has failed to do its job — this Congress, last Congress and for quite a while to make sure that we have what we need at the southern border, which of course the centerpiece is a physical barrier, wall, steel slats,” Kellyanne Conway, the counselor to the president, told reporters.
Democrats prefer a “smart wall” made up of sensors, drones and other technology but no physical structure. Republicans say some physical barrier is necessary, though not a concrete wall from the Pacific Ocean to the Gulf of Mexico.
House Republicans on the committee spent Sunday and Monday on the border in Texas in McAllen and El Paso, accompanied by Representative Henry Cuellar, Democrat of Texas. Senator Richard C. Shelby, Republican of Alabama and the chairman of the Appropriations Committee, has also suggested bringing experts in to testify on what is needed in border security.
But all of that work could be blown up by an emergency declaration, a move that would endear Mr. Trump to the Republican base while infuriating Democrats.
