SAN FRANCISCO — Google said it would no longer force employees to settle disputes with the company in private arbitration, expanding on an earlier pledge to do away with the practice in cases of sexual harassment or assault.
Google informed its staff in an email on Thursday that the new policy would take effect globally on March 21 for current and future employees. Gina Scigliano, a Google spokeswoman, confirmed the changes.
In November, the company agreed to scrap forced arbitration in individual cases of sexual harassment or assault after 20,000 Google workers staged a walkout demanding changes to how it treats employees. The walkout was prompted by a New York Times article that revealed Google had given a senior executive, Andy Rubin, a $90 million exit package even after it found he had been credibly accused of sexual harassment.
The employee organizers behind the walkout demanded that Google also stop forcing employees into arbitration for other types of disputes. Google said it had decided to make the blanket change after comparing its policies with those of other companies. Employees who prefer to arbitrate privately will still have that option.
Google had 98,771 employees globally at the end of December.
For years, Google’s employment contracts have included a clause requiring staff to hash out grievances behind closed doors instead of suing the company in the public court system.
Arbitration is a common practice among technology companies to resolve disputes outside the courts. It has been especially controversial in cases of sexual harassment because it tends to limit victims from speaking out about their experience.
But under growing pressure from employees, companies are eliminating forced arbitration. Over the last year, Uber, Lyft and Facebook have done away with the policy totally or in part.
Google said the policy change would not apply to former employees with unresolved disputes, although current Google workers with open disputes will not be forced into arbitration.
The company said it would also do away with the practice for temporary staff, contract workers and vendors it hires — although it would not force third-party staffing companies that supply the vast majority of contractor staff used by the company to adhere to the policy.