Here’s how designers get a concept from good to must-pick-up.
Cover Stories is a series in which book designers discuss their work: concepts that didn’t make the final cut and the cover as published.
Glen David Gold’s memoir, “I Will Be Complete,” is nearly 500 pages, and recounts his 20s, his college years and his event-filled youth after his mother moved to New York and left him, at 12, temporarily alone in her San Francisco apartment. The length of the book, and the amount of ground it covers, made the prospect of designing a cover for it “a little intimidating,” said Tyler Comrie, a senior designer at Knopf who was given the task.
“The book is saying so much, it spans so much of Glen’s life. How can we incorporate all these elements?” Comrie wondered. Ensuing drafts included illustrations of items from the memoir: books, coins, chess pieces.
Another version employed a more photographic approach, with scenes from San Francisco.
After those and other attempts, Gold sent Comrie a piece of art by a friend of his, Andrew Nilsen.
It inspired Comrie, who licensed the work and shared credit with Nilsen on the final design. “At that point, it was kind of liberating: O.K., let’s just make something beautiful,” Comrie said. Beauty was a priority, but the more abstract final cover still has echoes of many elements found in the book. The Golden Gate Bridge is immediately identifiable. The rest might not be: a screen shot from the early video game Pong, an I.Q. chart, tarot cards. They’re all there, and all make appearances in Gold’s story.
“I think this is probably the best one of the bunch,” Comrie said. “Sometimes it can be a painful process, but in the end when it turns out like this, it’s really gratifying.” The final result was chosen by Matt Dorfman, the art director of The New York Times Book Review, as one of the 12 best covers of 2018.
Sometimes a designer gets the perfect cover on the first try; or just about, anyway. That’s what happened when Marina Drukman, the art director of Melville House, was working on Tom Feiling’s “The Island That Disappeared.” “I knew right away that I wanted to do a map, because I love maps, especially old maps,” she said.
The book tells the story of the small Caribbean island of Providence, off the coast of Nicaragua, where the Seaflower, a sister ship to the Mayflower, landed. Drukman started by finding an old scan of a map of the area. Her first stab at the cover “was more or less traditional, showing the actual island and all the same elements,” she said.
