HONG KONG — Some would say she cheated. Others would say she found an efficient way to finish her tedious assignment and ought to be applauded for her initiative.
The debate lit up Chinese social media this week after The Qianjiang Evening News reported that a teenage girl had found a loophole for her homework: She bought a robot that mimicked her handwriting. Instead of having to manually copy phrases or selections from a textbook dozens of times, a repetitive task common in learning Chinese, she could just teach the robot to do it for her.
On Weibo, a popular social media platform, commenters who had suffered through endless hours of similar homework themselves were split, though most appeared to be sympathetic or even impressed.
“Give her a break. How meaningful is copying anyway?” one commenter asked.
Like Bart in the opening sequence of “The Simpsons,” students can also be punished by being made to write out texts repeatedly; unlike Bart, they are often ordered to copy whole textbook chapters, not just single sentences. Chinese curriculums in both the sciences and humanities prize rote memorization.
The Chinese newspaper reported that the girl had spent about 800 renminbi, or $120, that she had saved from Lunar New Year presents to buy the robot.
She finished a number of text-copying assignments in two days, much faster than her mother expected, the newspaper reported. The mother discovered — and then smashed — the machine while cleaning the girl’s room, according to the article.
Such technology typically uses robotics to drag a pen across an anchored piece of paper. Some of the products feature preloaded handwriting styles, while some allow users to digitize and copy their own handwriting.
The robots are a modern update to a technology that has long existed. At its most basic level, it’s easy to create custom stamps that replicate a signature. Barack Obama was the first American president to use an autopen to sign legislation, though presidents since Harry Truman have used them for correspondence.
It’s also not the first time intrepid Chinese students have found ways to cut corners on their copying assignments.
“Back in the day, we already felt so smug for tying two pens together,” one Weibo commenter said.