Adia Victoria, a 32-year-old songwriter who grew up in rural South Carolina and is based in Nashville, likes to call herself a “modern blues woman.” In her music, the blues is a baseline and a frame of mind, not a genre boundary; it pushes her to take risks.
“I want to make the blues dangerous again,” she said in an interview a few days ago, sharing the back seat of a car-service van crawling through rush-hour traffic to visit Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn, where she lived in the early 2000s. Over a black outfit she wore a sleek, vivid red overcoat, a $5 find at Goodwill.
There’s nothing antiquarian or purist about Victoria’s new second album, “Silences.” She produced it with Aaron Dessner, from the majestically pensive indie-rock band the National, and its tracks deploy orchestral arrangements and synthesizers along with bluesy shuffles and a soul horn section. In a show last Friday at Rough Trade NYC in Brooklyn, Victoria’s set included songs from both the foundational Delta bluesman Robert Johnson and the English trip-hop band Portishead.
Victoria has always been ambitious. On “Silences,” she sings about fear, love, death, salvation, the devil, artistic compromise, a woman’s self-determination, the allure of the city and solitude as a refuge. Her reference points are literary as well as musical. The title of her 2016 debut album, “Beyond the Bloodhounds,” came from an 1861 memoir, “Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl,” by Harriet Jacobs. “Silences” shares its title with a book by Tillie Olsen about women whose creativity was stifled by domestic burdens.
Victoria’s music is simultaneously rooted and restless, reflecting a peripatetic life. Adia Victoria Paul — her full name — was raised in a strictly religious Seventh-day Adventist family that imbued her with biblical teachings and thoughts of mortality. She dropped out of high school and started to embark on impulsive journeys.
In 2014, she released a bluesy single: “Stuck in the South,” a song weighted with personal and regional history. “Don’t know nothin’ bout Southern belles/But I can tell you somethin’ about Southern hell,” she sang.
