ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — Saudi Arabia’s crown prince has pledged $20 billion worth of investments in Pakistan to shore up the country’s struggling economy while strengthening bilateral ties at a time when Islamabad is trying to revive its global standing.
The pledges made Sunday evening — about double what had been expected — would also help Saudi Arabia’s economy by setting up infrastructure, including an oil refinery, to secure Pakistan as a market for Saudi crude oil. The promised investments are nonbinding, however, and whether they will materialize remains to be seen. Riyadh has a long history of over-promising to please allies.
Kicking off a tour of Asia with a visit to Pakistan this week, the Saudi crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, held separate meetings with Pakistan’s prime minister, Imran Khan, and the country’s army chief, Gen. Qamar Javed Bajwa, endorsing the country’s two levers of power. Pakistani security officials gave glowing reviews of the trip, which they said was an important opportunity to strengthen military ties with Saudi Arabia, a relationship that has come under strain in recent years.
Mr. Khan and General Bajwa met Prince Mohammed as his plane landed at Islamabad’s airport Sunday night to a 21-gun salute, and the prime minister then personally drove the prince to the capital in his Mercedes sedan.
For his part, Prince Mohammed gave a strong endorsement of Mr. Khan at a dinner held in his honor Sunday night. Mr. Khan faces increasing opposition at home while Pakistan’s alliance with the United States has weakened under President Trump, who accuses the country of harboring terrorists to use as military and foreign policy tools. Pakistan denies those charges.
Such an endorsement is crucial to Pakistan, as the crown prince is seen as close to Mr. Trump.
The prince also prioritized strengthening the two countries’ security ties, which have come under strain in recent years.
Mr. Khan took office in August, taking over from the government of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif. Ties between Pakistan and Saudi Arabia grew strained under Mr. Sharif after Pakistan’s Parliament voted down a resolution to send troops to help Saudi Arabia’s military campaign in Yemen.
Pakistan’s military is seen as one of the most sophisticated in the region, while Saudi Arabia’s is not as well trained or effective.
Saudi Arabia, which like Pakistan is a majority-Sunni country, is fighting Houthi rebels in Yemen, which Riyadh says are backed by Shiite-majority Iran. But Pakistan has struggled to walk the narrow line between Saudi Arabia and Iran, the two sectarian power centers of the Middle East, trying to balance a delicate alliance with each country.
As a gesture of good will, Saudi Arabia said it would release some 2,100 Pakistanis in prisons across the kingdom. The issue is a sensitive one: Thousands of Pakistanis employed in Saudi Arabia are often denied due process in the country’s justice system, according to a recent report by Human Rights Watch.
Prince Mohammed also plans to visit India and China on his tour, an effort to bolster relations with Asian countries as alliances in the West have come under fire after the killing of the Saudi dissident Jamal Khashoggi.
The crown prince headed to New Delhi later on Monday amid an escalating dispute between India and Pakistan about a suicide attack in Kashmir that killed 40 Indian soldiers last week. Prince Mohammed is expected to play a mediating role between the countries after India accused Pakistan of being behind the attack and vowed to retaliate.
Looking to broaden Pakistan’s alliances, Mr. Khan enthusiastically courted Prince Mohammed soon after becoming prime minister. Mr. Khan gave a keynote address at an investment conference in Riyadh in October, even after dozens of attendees and sponsors withdrew from the event amid a swirl of allegations that the prince had ordered the murder of Mr. Khashoggi.
Desperate to stabilize its debt-ridden economy and to fend off a crippling deficit in foreign-exchange reserves, Pakistan has looked for support from China, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. It is also in talks with the International Monetary Fund. Pakistan holds foreign reserves worth $8.2 billion, enough for just two months of imports for a country that relies heavily on goods from abroad.
But the pledges made this week did not inspire confidence in all quarters.
