LONDON — English schools will significantly broaden sex and relationship education to cover topics including same-sex relationships, transgender people, menstruation, sexual assault, mental health, genital cutting, forced marriage, pornography and sexting, the government has announced.
The changes, the first revision of the sex education curriculum since 2000, have met with vocal opposition from some parents and religious schools that want the ability to opt out of elements they object to. But they formally became government policy when they were published on Monday, and will go into effect in September 2020.
“There is no set of guidance that you can come up with for relationship and sex education that everybody’s going to be absolutely happy with,” Damian Hinds, Britain’s education secretary, said in Parliament on Monday, after announcing the revisions.
Parents would have the ability to exclude their children from some elements, including the most explicitly sexual, but not others, and not after age 14, said Mr. Hinds, a member of the Conservative government. From age 15, it will up to the student to decide whether to participate fully.
The curriculum developed by Britain’s central government will be mandatory for any school in England that receives government funds, including religious schools; it was drafted under a 2017 law instructing the government to update the policy. Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have separate standards.
An online petition asking for parents to be given broader power to opt out had gathered more than 100,000 signatures by Monday morning, prompting Parliament to debate the matter — an airing of views that did not affect the policy — while dozens of protesters gathered outside.
But Helen Jones, a Labour lawmaker, insisted in Parliament that the new program did not advocate any particular set of views, but was designed to prepare children to deal with the world as it is.
“Young people who receive good relationship and sex education are less likely to form early sexual relationships, less likely to have an unwanted pregnancy, less likely to get pregnant early, and less likely to get a sexually transmitted disease,” she said.
Some women’s health advocates had specifically campaigned for teaching about menstrual health, arguing that girls were often unaware of the signs of painful or dangerous conditions.
Sex education already exists in most English schools, but under the 2000 policy, the curriculum is more limited and more geared toward secondary schools, and much of it is not mandatory. Children generally begin secondary school at age 11.
The new standards include mandatory primary and secondary school education on what makes a healthy or unhealthy relationship, part of an expanded focus on physical and mental health. Basic sex education late in primary school is recommended but not required.
