As the looming gray building imploded, crumbling into a pile of debris and dust, a crowd of onlookers cheered. Some wept.
The televised blast on Friday that leveled the Monaco building, the former home of the drug kingpin Pablo Escobar in Medellín, Colombia, erased a symbol of the city’s past that many have tried to forget. In its place, the city is planning a memorial park to honor the victims of his drug cartel’s crimes.
Mr. Escobar lived in the Monaco building for years until 1988, when rivals bombed it. The Escobar family abandoned the structure, and it has remained vacant ever since. But more than 25 years after Mr. Escobar’s death, the six-story building with a penthouse had still caused heated debate, as city officials weighed the potential tourist draw of the site against the urge to move on from a painful past.
The drug lord’s legacy has cast a shadow over Medellín, driven in part by new documentaries, television shows like the Netflix hit “Narcos” and books that have focused on Mr. Escobar’s life — often neglecting the details of his victims and glorifying his legacy.
In death, he has become something of a folk hero, for his meteoric rise from the working class to billionaire, and for his generosity to some, building houses and hospitals for the poor.
Medellín, called the world’s most dangerous city by Time magazine in 1988, has seen violent crime plummet and has increasingly become a tourist destination. Some have capitalized on the city’s history as a narcotics hot spot.
Tour guides — including Mr. Escobar’s top hit man, John Jairo Velásquez, known as Popeye — take customers on walks through the cartel’s old haunts. Street vendors sell T-shirts emblazoned with Mr. Escobar’s face.

The mayor of Medellín, Federico Gutiérrez, told the local news outlet El Colombiano ahead of the demolition that knocking down the structure was an important symbolic step forward for the city and the country.
He said that flipping the narrative by emphasizing victims’ stories, rather than glorifying the illegal activity of Mr. Escobar and others like him, was essential to reclaiming Colombia’s national story.
The city consulted with neighbors, academics, local artists and the families of victims to design the memorial park, he said.
On Friday, Mr. Gutiérrez joined dozens of victims’ families and members of the community for a ceremony on the grounds of a hotel near the Monaco, where they watched the building fall.
