WASHINGTON — Congressional efforts to reach a border security deal ahead of another government shutdown broke down on Sunday over Democratic demands to limit the detention of undocumented immigrants, as President Trump moved more troops to the border and prepared to rally supporters in Texas on Monday.
The 17 House and Senate negotiators had hoped to finalize a border security agreement on Monday, but hours before that deadline, communications had stopped, lawmakers and aides said.
Meantime, the Trump administration was moving on its own to fortify the southwestern border with thousands of active-duty military troops. The number of deployed troops on the Mexican border was set to exceed the high of 5,900 reached around the November elections, as about 3,700 active-duty troops were being sent to assist with the Department of Homeland Security’s border patrol efforts.
Senior officers are voicing greater worries that the deployed troops are not conducting the training needed for their regular missions, while other military units must now pick up the routine duties on behalf of their deployed colleagues.
But efforts to reach a broader, bipartisan deal on border security bogged down, days before much of the government is set to run out of funds at midnight Friday, with memories of the 35-day partial government shutdown — the nation’s longest in history — still fresh.
The impasse appears to center on Democratic demands for a limit on the number of unauthorized immigrants already in the country who could be detained by Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers, according to aides familiar with the talks. Democrats say a cap of 16,500 beds in ICE detention centers would force the Trump administration to focus on detaining undocumented immigrants with criminal records instead of using indiscriminate sweeps that drag in otherwise law-abiding residents.
Republicans demanded an exception to the cap for criminals, according to an aide familiar with the negotiations. Democrats declined, saying their 16,500-bed cap left more than enough room for real criminals.
The core of President Trump’s argument for the southern border wall has remained largely the same. But as the fight wears on, his justification has expanded and details like cost and construction materials have evolved.
“The wall or the steel barrier. They can have any name they want. But we have to have it.” President Trump often repeats the same things when talking about why he wants a southern border wall. “The crime.” “Drugs.” “American jobs.” While there is little evidence these problems are caused by unauthorized immigration or that any of this will be helped by a wall, he has remained steadfast. “I will build a great, great wall.” “You need that wall.” “We can do without a wall.” But as the fight over border security has dragged on, here’s how he’s expanded his argument. He’s always said it was about securing the border. But recently, Trump has emphasized that he believes building the wall is the moral and compassionate thing to do. “This is the cycle of human suffering that I am determined to end. ” And he says a wall will benefit people on both sides of the border, addressing what he is calling — “This is a humanitarian crisis, a crisis of the heart and a crisis of the soul.” But Democrats say the current situation at the border was escalated by Trump’s policies. “A challenge that President Trump’s own cruel and counterproductive policies have only deepened.” So who does Trump think will benefit? Over time, Trump has named many groups that he says will benefit from a wall. It started as the — “American worker.” And then expanded to — “Legal residents.” And — “And our vets.” “Our immigrant communities.” “Asian-Americans.” “Hispanic-American communities.” “African-American workers.” “It’s also what our professionals at the border want and need.” How will Trump pay for the wall? After some discrepancies regarding the wall’s price tag — “$6 billion.” “Probably $8 billion.” “Maybe $10 or $12 billion.” “$18 billion.” “$5.7 billion for a physical barrier.” Trump has modified his claim that Mexico is going to pay for the wall. “Mexico —” “will pay —” “for the wall. 100 percent.” It’s gone from — “They don’t know it yet, but they’re paying for it.” To — “It may be through reimbursement, but one way or the other Mexico will pay for the wall.” And — “The border wall would very quickly pay for itself.” And finally, what will Trump’s wall look like? Trump’s vision for the wall itself has also changed over time. Early on, Trump said the wall would be — “It’s going to be a Trump wall. It’s going to be a real wall.” “An impenetrable, physical, tall, powerful, beautiful —” “A serious wall.” “This is a wall that’s a heck of a lot higher than the ceiling.” “It’s going to be made of hardened concrete and it’s going to be made out of rebar and steel.” Now, it’s sounding more like this: “I never said I’m going to build a concrete — I said I’m going to build a wall. Just so you know, because I know you’re not into the construction business.” “Steel is stronger than concrete.” “It’s a new design, highest technology.” “Walls that you can see through.” “It will be a steel barrier rather than a concrete wall.” So, will his latest push end with a wall? There’s still a tough political fight ahead.
“They don’t even want to take muderers into custody! What’s going on?” he said, a charge that Democrats called categorically false.
The looming deadline is exposing fissures in both parties. The more liberal members of the Democratic caucus, many of whom ran on abolishing Immigration and Customs Enforcement altogether, have been lobbying their colleagues on the committee to resist any increases in ICE funding.
Democratic negotiators held a conference call on Sunday morning to discuss options, according to a Democratic aide, but did not settle on a final decision on how to move forward. Another short-term spending bill could prevent a lapse in funding on Friday, though lawmakers have expressed reluctance at punting again on a final agreement.
Still, Mr. Shelby and Senator Jon Tester, Democrat of Montana and a member of the negotiating committee, said on Sunday that they had not given up.
Other sticking points remain, including how much money to allocate for barriers at the border. Lawmakers were eyeing between $1.3 billion and $2 billion, far less than the $5.7 billion that the president demanded for his signature campaign promise — and shut down the government over in December.
Mr. Trump, who has vacillated between publicly condemning the talks as a “waste of time” and privately showing flexibility, blamed Democratic leadership for the breakdown.
Pentagon and administration officials spent the weekend preparing for another partial government shutdown — and for the possibility that the president will fulfill his threat to declare a national emergency and fund the wall without Congress. Lawmakers from both parties have expressed extreme discomfort with the prospect of a national emergency declaration, and there is almost universal aversion to another shutdown.
One proposal circulating among some White House officials in an attempt to fend off legal challenges to an emergency declaration is to claim that the wall would be built to protect the more than 6,000 active-duty and National Guard troops now operating near the southwestern border or deploying there soon.
President Trump says construction for the wall is underway. We mapped the current fencing and what his administration has done so far.
“The Wall will get built one way or the other!” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter on Saturday afternoon.
During the last lapse in funding, hundreds of thousands of workers were either furloughed or worked without pay, and it cost the United States economy $11 billion. Another shutdown would hit some agencies at an even worse time. The Internal Revenue Service, for instance, is just entering tax season.
Lawmakers held out the possibility that Mr. Trump could find some face-saving way to fortify border security and build some structures without resorting to a precedent-setting emergency declaration. Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff, said the president had asked him to “comb through the law” and “go find money in any place we could” to fully fund a wall.
In what one Defense Department official described as a surreal scramble, Pentagon officials met on Friday and over the weekend to identify which Army Corps of Engineers construction projects would be tapped for money to help build Mr. Trump’s wall if the president declared a national emergency.
Officials scoured the language of multiple draft declarations that Mr. Trump might invoke if a deal is not reached or he rejects what lawmakers agree upon. Mr. Trump’s top national security aides are scheduled to meet on Monday to discuss the matter. Mr. Trump is then to convene a full cabinet meeting on Tuesday, officials said.
If Mr. Trump declares a national emergency to build the wall, Democrats are expected to sue to block construction and halt any shifting of funds. House Democrats are preparing legislation that would limit the president’s ability to unilaterally commandeer wall funding.
Mr. Trump is set to hold a rally in El Paso on Monday night, using the border city as evidence for his exaggerated claim that a wall would reduce crime.
Prominent Democrats from the area, including Beto O’Rourke, a possible Democratic presidential candidate and former representative for most of the city, and his freshman successor, Representative Veronica Escobar, have denounced Mr. Trump’s claims that El Paso became a safe city only after a physical barrier was built there. Ms. Escobar called the president a liar.
Ms. Escobar was one of a group of lawmakers, including Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, the majority leader, who visited the area before Mr. Trump’s rally.
