Movies|‘High Flying Bird’ Is Rich With Historical References. Here’s a Closer Look.
‘High Flying Bird’ Is Rich With Historical References. Here’s a Closer Look.
The film’s dense but fast-moving script, written by the playwright Tarell Alvin McCraney (“Moonlight”), is also replete with references to the game’s history — not least to the currents of protest and politics that have coursed through pro basketball since it was segregated. There’s a rich subtext here, much of it only hinted at. Below is a spoiler-filled guide.
What were the all-black leagues?
As in baseball, football and most areas of American life, segregation kept black players out of the white pro basketball leagues, confined to amateur and semipro all-black teams, which formed in schools, churches, community centers and the like. Games were frequently paired with ragtime dances to make for a full evening of entertainment.
The best known of these barnstorming teams, often called “Black Fives” by historians, were the New York Renaissance and the Harlem Globetrotters. The Renaissance — or, as they were better known, the Rens — were so impressive that in 1947, Coach Joe Lapchick of the New York Knicks lobbied the Basketball Association of America to admit the team into the young league, a precursor of the National Basketball Association. The owners voted him down. The next year, a competing league, the National Basketball League, brought the team in instead.
How did the Harlem Globetrotters help spur integration?
Indirectly. The Rens and the Globetrotters, in particular, were internationally known for their dazzling play, often besting white teams when matched up for exhibition games. The Rens, for example, beat the all-white Oshkosh All-Stars in the first integrated tournament championship in 1939; the Globetrotters beat the Minnesota Lakers in a celebrated 1948 exhibition game that The Chicago Tribune pinpointed as key to the integration of the game.
How did the N.B.A. integrate?
Talking to The Times in 2008, Lloyd told stories of being heckled and spat upon by fans, although the abuse he encountered was “no comparison,” he said, to what Jackie Robinson withstood three years earlier in professional baseball.
Wasn’t there an actual N.B.A. lockout?
Yes — in fact, there were four. (One lasted only a few hours.) In the first dialogue scene of “High Flying Bird,” the sports agent Ray Burke (André Holland) tells a client, “Last time this happened, folks was broke left and right!” That “last time” was the 2011 lockout, which lasted five months and resulted in the loss of 16 regular-season games, the entire preseason and an estimated $400 million in revenue for team owners and players.
A 10-year deal was announced late that November, which heavily favored owners. It reduced player salaries by nearly $300 million and shifted an estimated $3 billion to the owners over the course of the contract. The truncated 66-game season finally got underway on Christmas Day.
What about those exhibition games?
Much screen time in “High Flying Bird” is spent contemplating the legality of public appearances and exhibition games by league-signed players during the lockout. The 2011 lockout was threaded with similar concerns. The film’s fictional team owners grouse over the attention attracted by a “lockout street ball event in Las Vegas,” presumably inspired by the “lockout league” in Vegas, which comprised two weeks of pickup games with more than 70 N.B.A. players in September 2011, according to The Las Vegas Sun. (Profits from ticket sales were donated to charity).
Who is Michele Roberts?
Who is Dr. Harry Edwards?
In the film’s first scene, Ray gives a client a mysterious package, calling it “the Bible.” It contains the book “The Revolt of the Black Athlete” by the sports sociologist and civil rights advocate Dr. Harry Edwards, who also appears briefly in Ray’s office near the end of the film. Edwards first came to national prominence for organizing the Olympic Project for Human Rights, whose members Tommie Smith and John Carlos made headlines for raising their gloved fists while receiving medals at the 1968 Olympics.
What’s the story behind the music?
“High Flying Bird” is bookended by recordings of two folk-rock classics, both performed by Richie Havens as part of his opening set at Woodstock. The title track, Havens’s recording of a folk song written by Billy Edd Wheeler, was praised by the musicologist Richie Unterberger for its “arresting minor-keyed melody and brooding lyrics, contrasting the freedom of a bird to the singer’s earthbound misery.” It isn’t hard to connect those lyrics to Ray’s notion that his clients should free themselves from the earthbound constraints of the sports industry and bring the game back to its roots.
