WASHINGTON — Standing before a diverse new class of House Democrats, in the shadow of their new female speaker, President Trump showed on Tuesday how he planned to govern in a divided Washington.
The answer, judging by his words, is no differently than he did before.
Mr. Trump briefly acknowledged Nancy Pelosi as “Madam Speaker,” but dispensed with even perfunctory congratulations. He all but ignored the midterm elections that swept the Republican Party out of power in the House. And he vowed that the United States “will never be a socialist country,” likening the progressive Democrats in the chamber to the discredited leader of Venezuela.
The president did issue a call for bipartisan cooperation, and he invoked the heroism of World War II to celebrate a shared history. But on the issues that have rived Washington during Mr. Trump’s turbulent presidency, he did not give an inch.
Whether it was the border wall, which he insisted would be built; abortion, where he tried to fan conservative anger over comments made by Virginia’s governor; or the investigations of his presidential campaign’s ties to Russia, which he dismissed as “ridiculous” and “partisan,” Mr. Trump chose to appeal to his political base rather than trying to build bridges to Democrats.
Save for the majesty of the setting, the president’s adherence to his script, and a single unscripted moment when Mr. Trump tipped his hat to the scores of Democratic women elected to Congress last November, parts of this State of the Union speech could have been drawn from one of his “Make America Great Again” rallies.
President Trump delivered his second State of the Union address on Tuesday night. Here are the highlights.
We meet tonight at a moment of unlimited potential. Our new U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement — the U.S.M.C.A. — will replace Nafta and deliver for American workers like they haven’t had delivered to for a long time.  In the past, most of the people in this room voted for a wall. But the proper wall never got built. I will get it built. [applause] No issue better illustrates the divide between America’s working class and America’s political class than illegal immigration. Wealthy politicians and donors push for open borders while living their lives behind walls and gates and guards. All Americans can be proud that we have more women in the workforce than ever before. [applause] You also have more women serving in Congress than at any time before. [cheering] To defend the dignity of every person, I am asking Congress to pass legislation to prohibit the late-term abortion of children who can feel pain in the mother’s womb. [cheering] Great nations do not fight endless wars. If I had not been elected president of the United States, we would right now, in my opinion, be in a major war with North Korea.” Chairman Kim and I will meet again on Feb. 27 and 28 in Vietnam. When I took office, ISIS controlled more than 20,000 square miles in Iraq and Syria. Just two years ago. Today, we have liberated virtually all of the territory from the grip of these bloodthirsty monsters. Now, as we work with our allies to destroy the remnants of ISIS, it is time to give our brave warriors in Syria a warm welcome home.
“No issue better illustrates the divide between America’s working class and political class than illegal immigration,” he said.
In front of him, however, the divide was between the mostly male Republicans, who applauded his red-meat lines, and the Democrats, many of them women, who were clad in white to signify the women’s suffrage movement.
As for how the Republicans and Democrats might work together, Mr. Trump revived his proposal for infrastructure legislation, calling it “not an option” but a “necessity.” But he offered no details and breezed through the proposal, which is less popular among Republicans, in barely three lines, half as much time as he gave his campaign to reduce the price of prescription drugs.
Even Mr. Trump’s conciliatory phrases carried a partisan sting. He said, for example, “the agenda I will lay out this evening is not a Republican agenda or a Democrat agenda,” using a shortened form of Democratic that some Republicans favor as a mild slur against the opposing party.
For a president whose party lost 40 seats in the House three months ago, and who just lost a battle with Ms. Pelosi over the 35-day government shutdown, Mr. Trump behaved like the insurgent who rode into Washington two years ago with a congressional majority and a mandate to upend the establishment.
New York Times reporters analyzed the 45th president’s second State of the Union Speech on Tuesday.
In addressing Congress on Tuesday, Mr. Trump found himself in an identical position to his three immediate predecessors, Barack Obama, George W. Bush and Bill Clinton — facing a hostile Congress after a devastating midterm defeat.
How each confronted the moment offers a window into their presidencies; together, they stand as a stark contrast to the current occupant of the Oval Office.
In 1995, Mr. Clinton responded to the Republican Revolution of the previous November by pivoting to the center and giving credence to the small-government agenda of Newt Gingrich and his fellow warriors. He admitted to missteps in his first two years in office, which had allowed his Republican opponents to caricature him as a tax-and-spend liberal.
It was a grace note for Mr. Bush, who was fighting to salvage his legacy after midterm elections that served as a referendum on the Iraq war and his bungled handling of Hurricane Katrina. Mr. Trump, by contrast, appeared to rush his opening remarks to deny Ms. Pelosi the chance to introduce him.
Like Mr. Bush and Mr. Clinton, he appealed to Republicans to find common ground — in his case behind a national project to make the United States more competitive in a rapidly changing global economy.
Mr. Trump referred to outspending and out-innovating major competitors, too, but he put it in the context of building nuclear weapons, after explaining why he pulled the United States out of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty.
For presidents, State of the Union speeches rarely grease the wheels of bipartisanship. Mr. Clinton clashed repeatedly with Republicans after their congressional takeover, outmaneuvering Mr. Gingrich after he precipitated a government shutdown, though he made a historic deal on welfare overhaul that set the stage for his re-election in 1996.
Mr. Bush stuck to his troop surge in Iraq, reaping unexpected gains. But with the exception of a deal with the Democrats late in his term on the fiscal crisis, his legislative agenda was over by the time he spoke in 2007.
Mr. Obama’s call for bipartisanship went nowhere in the Republican Senate, where the leader, Senator Mitch McConnell, vowed to make Mr. Obama a one-term president. He failed to strike a grand bargain on fiscal policy with Speaker John A. Boehner, with both sides blaming the other for bad faith in the failed negotiation.
For Mr. Trump, the portents for cooperation seem even less promising. He offered no tangible compromise on the border wall, he faces a newly energized Democratic Party and he is heading into a presidential election year.
“We must choose between greatness and gridlock, results or resistance, vision or vengeance, incredible progress or pointless destruction,” Mr. Trump said.
The president implored his audience to choose “greatness,” but he gave them no road map for pursuing it.