WASHINGTON — President Trump plans to nominate David Malpass, the under secretary of the Treasury for international affairs, to head the World Bank, picking an outspoken critic of the institution who has pushed to overhaul its longstanding practices, administration officials said on Monday.
The officials, who insisted on anonymity to confirm the choice before the formal announcement, said the president will unveil his selection on Wednesday. The nomination must be ratified by the bank’s board, but by tradition, the United States, the largest shareholder, has long named its president.
That viewpoint squares with a broader skepticism that Mr. Trump’s administration has shown toward various structures of what is often called the liberal international order, including the World Trade Organization, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the European Union and any number of international agreements. Just last week, the administration announced that it has suspended a nuclear arms treaty negotiated by President Ronald Reagan in 1987, citing Russian cheating.
The World Bank, controlled by the world’s most developed nations, lends money to developing nations for infrastructure and development projects. From his role at the Treasury Department, Mr. Malpass pressed the World Bank last year to commit to a series of changes even as it moved to increase its capital.
Mr. Malpass, whose loyalty to the president runs deep, has also been the Treasury Department’s point person on trade talks with China and traveled to Beijing last month to set the framework for last week’s talks in Washington. He was then a member of the delegation that met with Chinese officials as part of an effort to reach an agreement by March 1.
During that same session, Mr. Malpass denied that the president’s “America First” approach to international institutions amounted to isolationism.
The United States has privately tested Mr. Malpass’s selection with other major bank shareholders and received positive feedback, according to one of the administration officials. They presented Mr. Malpass as a constructive reformer who, despite his criticisms, will work with other shareholders.
If confirmed, Mr. Malpass would fill the position being vacated by Jim Yong Kim, who abruptly announced last month that he would resign his post as World Bank president nearly three years before his term’s expiration.
Mr. Malpass, 62, who served on Mr. Trump’s transition team, was the chief economist at Bear Stearns, the defunct investment bank, from 1993 until its collapse in 2008. In 2010, Mr. Malpass ran unsuccessfully as a Republican candidate for the United States Senate in New York. He previously worked as the deputy assistant secretary of state under President George Bush and as deputy assistant secretary of the Treasury under Mr. Reagan.
The process of choosing a successor to Mr. Kim was overseen by Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary; Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff; and Ivanka Trump, the president’s eldest daughter. The president personally met with finalists for the position.
Others whose names were considered included Indra K. Nooyi, the former chief executive of PepsiCo; Ray Washburne, the president of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation; and Heidi Cruz, a Goldman Sachs executive and the wife of Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas.
Ms. Trump’s role in the process has drawn some criticism from ethics watchdogs, who said that it could pose a conflict of interest for the president’s daughter to be involved in international economic matters when she has not completely divested from her assets.
The choice of Mr. Malpass was reported earlier on Monday by Politico and other news outlets.