Theodore Isaac Rubin, a psychoanalyst and writer whose short novel “Lisa and David,” about two teenagers finding love at a therapeutic school, was made into an Academy Award-nominated movie, and who became the public face of psychotherapy in postwar American popular culture, died on Saturday at a hospice in Manhattan. He was 95.
His son Dr. Jeffrey Rubin confirmed the death.
Dr. Rubin, a psychiatrist who spent most of his long career in private practice in Manhattan, was a young analyst in the late 1950s when he found his literary calling — writing a novella, “Jordi,” about a troubled boy. The character was based in part on a child who was being assisted by his wife, a special-education teacher.
He followed that book with “Lisa and David,” which examined the inner lives of two young people with severe mental distress.
Mr. Perry was nominated for an Oscar as best director. Eleanor Perry, his wife at the time, was nominated for the screenplay.
Oprah Winfrey produced a television drama of the same name in 1998, based on the original screenplay, with Lukas Haas, Brittany Murphy and Sidney Poitier.
The success of the book and movie propelled Dr. Rubin, known as Ted, into another career. He went on to write some 30 books — fiction, nonfiction and self-help. He had a regular column in Ladies’ Home Journal and often appeared on TV to discuss mental health, therapy and people’s daily emotional struggles.
“Once he saw that he could write about these things, I mean, he just took off like a rocket, writing more and more,” his son Jeffrey said.
He added to the psychoanalytic literature in 1975 with his book “Compassion and Self-Hate.” For many analysts, self-hatred was a concept centered on the loathing, put-downs and recriminations people turn on themselves. Dr. Rubin argued that the category should be expanded, to include any attempt to deny or forcibly undo uncomfortable emotions like sadness, grief or anger. Those are also attacks on the self, he wrote, and compassion for oneself is the healthy way to resolve them.
Dr. Rubin was born in Brooklyn on April 11, 1923, the second child of Nathan Rubin, a pharmacist, and Esther (Marcus) Rubin, who ran the household.
In addition to his son Jeffrey, a psychiatrist, he is survived by two other children, Dr. Trudy Rubin and Dr. Eugene Rubin, also psychiatrists; six grandchildren; and a great-grandson. His older sister, Blanche, died in 2005; his wife, Eleanor (Katz) Rubin, died in 2017.
After graduating from Far Rockaway High School in Queens, Theodore attended Brooklyn College, completing his degree in 1946. He served in the Navy in New York and got his medical degree in 1951 from the University of Lausanne, in Switzerland. He did his residency at the Los Angeles V.A. Hospital before completing his specialty in psychiatry at Downstate Medical School in Brooklyn.
Dr. Rubin trained in analysis at the American Institute for Psychoanalysis, the Manhattan center founded by the prominent German-American analyst Karen Horney, whose work he admired. He became a fixture there, joining the faculty in the early 1960s and serving for many years as the institute’s president.
He also kept a private practice in Manhattan as long as he was able and continued writing. He kept a log of favorite aphorisms he had written, which his son Jeffrey said contained some 1,500 entries.
