By Amie Tsang, Chad Bray and Landon Thomas Jr.
The Janus Capital Group and the Henderson Group, a large London-based investment manager, said on Monday that they would merge in an all-stock deal that would create an asset manager with greater global scale and about $320 billion of assets under management.
The deal — creating a company to be called Janus Henderson Global Investors — highlights the extent to which smaller mutual fund companies that focus on actively managed investment offerings are feeling the pressure from the explosive growth of lower cost, passive strategies like exchange traded funds.
The companies said on Monday that combined they would be more stable through market cycles and would have greater geographic reach. They said the merger would also result in annual cost savings of $110 million.
Janus, which lured William H. Gross after he left Pimco two years ago, is strong in North America, with $149 billion in assets under management in the United States. Henderson, which is based in London, is a large investment manager in Europe with about $91 billion in assets under management in Britain and Continental Europe.
Andrew Formica, the Henderson chief executive, told analysts on a conference call Monday that the merger talks grew out of conversations beginning in February with Richard M. Weil, the chief executive of Janus, about issues affecting the industry.
Janus, based in Denver, was one of the industry’s most dynamic outfits in the 1990s, with an expertise in investing in fast-growing companies. The firm was hit hard following the financial crisis. It has lost $30 billion from its mutual funds since 2008, according to Morningstar, as investors have piled into better performing E.T.F.s that track a variety of stock and bond indexes.
Although Janus has begun to introduce a suite of E.T.F.s, they have not yet been able to attract significant assets.
Janus has also not had a huge inflow of cash after its decision to offer Mr. Gross a home following his departure from its rival Pimco.
The size of Mr. Gross’s benchmark unconstrained fund is $1.5 billion and has not budged much from this level in the last year.
In an emailed statement, Mr. Gross expressed his support for the merger and went out of his way to remark that his fund was beating a similarly themed fund at Pimco.
According to data from Morningstar, Mr. Gross’s fund has gained 4.9 percent through this year to date, compared with 3.8 percent for Pimco’s unconstrained bond fund.
Mr. Gross remains embroiled in a bitter lawsuit with his former employer and has made it clear that beating Pimco’s similar offering is a major motivating factor for him.
Under the terms of the deal announced on Monday, each share in Janus, which has a market capitalization of about $2.61 billion, would be exchanged for 4.719 new Henderson shares, giving Henderson shareholders about 57 percent of the new company.
The transaction is expected to close in the second quarter of next year and is subject to shareholder and regulatory approval.
The combined company would be based in London and would have had revenue of more than $2.2 billion in 2015. It will have about 2,300 employees at 29 locations worldwide.
Mr. Weil and Mr. Formica would serve as joint chief executives of the combined company.
Mr. Formica said that keeping the combined company’s headquarters in London made sense given its expanded global footprint.
Mr. Formica said that Britain’s referendum in June to leave the European Union, known as Brexit, did not drive the discussions.
On a pro forma basis, about 54 percent of the company’s assets under management would come from the United States; about 31 percent would come from Europe, the Middle East and Africa; and 15 percent would come from Asia.
Michael Werner, a UBS analyst, said that the merger appeared to be complementary “in many respects,” given Janus’s position in the Americas and Henderson’s scale. The two companies also had differing asset portfolios, with Janus more heavily invested in American equities and Henderson having more in global and European stocks.
Dai-ichi Life, the Japanese insurer that is Janus’s largest shareholder, has agreed to vote in favor of the merger and would hold about 9 percent of the combined company, according to the news release. Dai-ichi Life intends to invest further in the combined company, aiming to increase its ownership interest to at least 15 percent.