Act I: Friendship. Act II: Love. Act III: Marriage.
For more than two decades, Susan Graham has made the world her stage, her sumptuous mezzo-soprano and magical presence celebrated at the Metropolitan Opera in New York, the Royal Opera House in London and the Théâtre du Châtelet in Paris.
But a piece of her heart never quite left the oil-rich plains of West Texas — not Midland, where she spent her adolescence, or Lubbock, where she attended Texas Tech University. She would send her itinerary to her Friends and Family List, so that if she were singing in Vienna or Sydney or Timbuktu and someone from home happened to be there, they could connect.
Clay Brakeley long held a place of honor on that list. They had met at college in 1983 (she was a graduate student in music; he was an undergraduate in theater — as part of a boisterous social scene that gravitated toward Ms. Graham’s place, known as the Party Hut.
Soon they were an item (“She chased me till I caught her,” is how he likes to put it) in that haphazard way that college couples often are. When in 1985 she moved to New York to attend the Manhattan School of Music, he visited a few times, and their relationship fell back into its carefree rhythms.
But eventually distance and careers divided them, and they sought love in closer proximity.
“We both understood that we were moving in different circles at that point, but there was always a little something underneath when we would see each other,” Mr. Brakeley said.
His own life turned peripatetic when he moved to Los Angeles and began working in lighting and stagecraft for Bonnie Raitt, Neil Diamond, Bon Jovi and the Jacksons (Michael and Janet).
And as Ms. Graham’s itineraries kept arriving — first as letters, then as emails — their paths would occasionally intersect: Lunch in Chicago. A rock concert in San Francisco. Her stellar performance of a signature role, Octavian in Strauss’s “ Rosenkavalier,” at the Met.
In 2000, Mr. Brakeley was married. Six years later he and his wife had twins — a son, Finn, and a daughter, Sydney. Meanwhile, Ms. Graham, her career soaring, thought that marriage and children were not an option.
In February 2010, Mr. Brakeley, by now separated and working in production for auto shows, discovered that he and Ms. Graham would be in Chicago at the same time. So he called and offered to cook her dinner at the apartment she was staying in while performing with the Lyric Opera.
She, in turn, invited him to escort her that weekend to the opera’s gala, with instructions to meet her at the stage door.
Guiding her with his hand on her back, he instinctively understood whom she wanted to talk to and whom they should avoid. And she had forgotten how well he could move until he twirled her across the floor. The after-party, at which the women reclined on sofas while dangling their pumps from their toes and the men loosened their ties and drank Scotch, reminded them of a champagne ad. But mostly they were intoxicated with each other.
At four in the morning, he kissed her good night in front of her apartment building, then walked to his hotel across the street. But as the time approached for them to attend a Super Bowl party later that afternoon, Ms. Graham started to worry.
“I thought, O.K., this is a big decision-making point — because last night was great and do we go forward like we’re dating? Or do we go forward like we’re still just buddies and last night didn’t really have the import that it might have had?” she said.
But she also realized that she didn’t want to lose him again, and decided to take the leap. With their mutual passion for music and theater as well as an understanding of the stress that accompanies a major career, they found that their lives blended seamlessly. And on the rare occasion when she acted the diva, he sweetly reminded her that he had worked for Michael Jackson, who was an even bigger star than she was.
Two years later, it was Ms. Graham who sought a commitment and Mr. Brakeley who was reluctant to give it. But when it became clear that they were going to be together, with or without marriage, she made peace with their arrangement.
On July 23, 2015, Ms. Graham, who had been touring Australia, met Mr. Brakeley and his twins on Maui. It was her 55th birthday, and at the end of the festivities, he presented her with one last gift: a box holding three diamond bands in white, yellow and rose gold, symbolizing Mr. Brakeley and each of his children.
“If you take one of us, you get all three of us,” he told the stunned Ms. Graham as he proposed, with an elated Finn and Sydney, now 10, jumping up and down in the background.
On Sept. 17, Ms. Graham and Mr. Brakeley were married at Las Campanas Country Club in Santa Fe, the Sangre de Cristo Mountains silhouetted in the distance beneath a harvest moon.
Irene Swain, a nondenominational minister, officiated at a ceremony filled with poetry written for the couple by Arnold Adoff and a Native American blessing in honor of the New Mexican landscape (both the bride and groom were born in the state).
Ms. Graham’s eyes welled up, she later recalled, as Mr. Brakeley spoke to her generous spirit and beautiful nature, and she compared him to her deceased father, whom she likened to a towering redwood, during their vows.
“You are the only man since my father on whom I know I can rely to be for me and take care of me when I need it, and even when I don’t think that I do,” she said.
The mezzo-soprano Sasha Cooke sang Jake Heggie’s “My True Love Hath My Heart” during the ceremony. The soprano Renée Fleming serenaded the couple with a cover of Etta James’s “At Last” for their first dance.
The couple honeymooned briefly in Santa Fe before heading to performances in Boston, after which Ms. Graham headed alone to Toledo, Spain. These were their first journeys in a married life that will find them reconnecting as a family in New York or Burbank, Calif., where Mr. Brakeley lives with his twins (who, to the delight of their new stepmother, are members of the Los Angeles Children’s Chorus and appeared in the Los Angeles Opera production of Puccini’s “La Bohème” last spring).
