On Thursday, Hillary Clinton took a break from fund-raising in Los Angeles to appear on “The Ellen DeGeneres Show.” On Friday, she will fly to Seattle for a private fund-raiser, and on Monday, Billy Crystal, along with Matthew Broderick and Lin-Manuel Miranda, will host a Broadway-themed donor soiree on Mrs. Clinton’s behalf.
With Donald J. Trump plunging in the polls amid new allegations of sexual assault and the continuing furor over the “Access Hollywood” recording, what Mrs. Clinton will not do is anything that could rattle a race that has shifted solidly in her favor.
She enters the final stretch of the presidential campaign with cautious optimism about the outcome. Unlike most presidential candidates, who spend the last weeks before Election Day holding a succession of big rallies, Mrs. Clinton seems to see no reason to pack her public schedule. After Thursday, the Democratic nominee had no public appearances scheduled for the rest of the week, and her campaign has not announced additional events before next Wednesday’s third debate with Mr. Trump, in Las Vegas.
Aides point to rallies in Florida, Colorado and Arizona this week and say Mrs. Clinton has spent her downtime preparing for the debates. They have criticized Mr. Trump for shunning debate preparation, to his detriment. But her relatively light schedule also signals a newfound confidence inside the campaign as Mrs. Clinton seeks to get out the vote among specific constituencies and avoid making any unforced errors.
After a shaky September, Mrs. Clinton has surged to an 11-point lead over Mr. Trump in a four-way race, up from a six-point advantage last month, according to an NBC News/Wall Street journal poll conducted over the weekend. Democrats expect that lead to widen in the aftermath of the second presidential debate, the tape that surfaced last week in which Mr. Trump can be heard making lewd comments about women, and the new accusations of sexual assault.
On Monday, Mrs. Clinton drew her largest crowd yet, 18,500 people, to an outdoor evening rally at Ohio State University in Columbus. Nearly 2,700 voters came to a rally on Wednesday in Pueblo, Colo. Campaign aides attribute the larger crowds to fury over what they call Mr. Trump’s scorched-earth tactics.
But in a fractured news media landscape, a boisterous campaign rally packs less punch than it used to and aides said they can more effectively target voters through other means. And the headlines about Mr. Trump of late underscore the Clinton campaign’s long-held assumption that dominating the national news is not always a good thing.
Rallies can also be fraught with risks.
A conservative radio host and Trump supporter, Alex Jones, has offered a cash prize to anyone who will interrupt Clinton events with chants accusing Bill Clinton of rape. Two protesters were escorted out of Mrs. Clinton’s rally in Miami on Monday, where she and Al Gore talked about climate change at an event focused on young voters.
Mrs. Clinton has a cadre of Democratic leaders to campaign on her behalf, including her husband; President Obama and Michelle Obama; Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.; Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts; and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.
Indeed, the Clinton campaign has gleefully watched as Mr. Trump has escalated his war with the Republican establishment, publishing a web video on Wednesday called “The Final Meltdown” that features a montage of Mr. Trump’s latest insults.
Ever since Mrs. Clinton had to take a few days off the campaign trail to recover from pneumonia last month, Democrats are sensitive about the implication that she is taking it easy.
“By the way, let Hillary Clinton stand up here for an hour and talk the way I talk and let’s see how long she lasts, folks,” Mr. Trump told a crowd in Ocala, Fla., on Wednesday.
Mrs. Clinton has held 19 rallies in the 38 days since Labor Day, the official kickoff of the general election campaign, compared with Mr. Trump’s 32 rallies, according to a New York Times tally. But she has had a stream of high-dollar fund-raisers, stops at community centers and small round-table discussions targeted at specific voters.
In Charlotte, N.C., this month, Mrs. Clinton spoke at a black church and then had a round-table discussion with community leaders about the recent police shooting of Keith Lamont Scott and ensuing unrest in the city.
Direct outreach to voters like Mr. Corbett can be more valuable than rallies with already-devoted crowds. “It’s got to be quality over quantity, return on investment,” said Tracy Sefl, a Democratic strategist who advises the campaign on women’s outreach.
Mrs. Clinton’s campaign expects at least 40 percent of votes in battleground states to be cast early. “We actually think that states like Nevada, North Carolina and Florida could be decided before Election Day,” said Robby Mook, the campaign manager.
Democrats say that despite Mrs. Clinton’s solid performance in the first two debates, she will still attend her usual “debate camp” and grueling preparation sessions with aides in Westchester, N.Y., and Las Vegas.
After the final debate, Mrs. Clinton is expected to make her closing argument with a more robust schedule of rallies, and may even make stops in long-shot states like Georgia and Arizona where the margin has tightened..
