I grew up a St. Louis Cardinals fan in rural Mattoon, Ill., and played baseball in the backyard with friends. But there was a fence, and an angry dog behind it. If a baseball sailed into the neighbor’s yard, it was lost. And the cost of lost baseballs added up fast.
So we went cheap. We went Wiffle. The Wiffle ball was perfect because it was expendable and, man, did it curve. If you could hit a Wiffle ball, you could hit anything. No other earthly object moves like a Wiffle ball.
I’m a parent now, and trying to keep my sons active and off the Pokémon Go. Not long ago, I made an executive decision as a father to spend more time in the backyard, sans the iOS9. Which means my two sons and I have also gone Wiffle. And it’s made me think a lot more about baseball, and the world, than I ever could have imagined thinking as a kid.
Wiffle ball, as described by David J. and Stephen A. Mullany at the Wiffle Ball website, was invented by their grandfather in Connecticut in the summer of 1953. He watched his son (David and Stephen’s father) and a friend play a game in the backyard with a plastic golf ball and a broomstick handle. “They had given up on baseball and softball — not enough players for two teams, not enough space for a field, and too many broken windows,” the website says.
Today it’s the same ball as in 1953: a plastic ball with eight oblong holes cut out of it, designed to make it twist and curve in the air, unlike an actual baseball. When thrown correctly, it seems to defy the laws of modern physics: It is like a knuckleball in a hurricane.
My sons took to it immediately, and not just because they had no electronics, or choice, really. What struck them most was that, to master a Wiffle ball, you have to conquer nature. Even the person throwing the Wiffle ball has no idea what it’s going to do, basically turning it into a plastic drone you operate while blindfolded.
They think it’s magic, and they may be right. (Even the Mullanys confess, “We don’t know exactly why it works.”) This makes the game incredibly difficult, and my children, like most children, deep down want a challenge. Because they want to defeat it.
How do you defeat a Wiffle ball? The first step is to somehow hit it. The same holes that make the ball dance when thrown create, when the ball is hit dead-solid perfect, a high-pitched whistling sound that I’ve found myself otherwise unable to re-create.
The best I can come up with is that it’s like a particularly snarling, yet somehow whimsical, insect whizzing right past your head. THHHHHHHWHIRRRRRR!!!!!!!! It is a unique sound. I fully expect it to one day form the hook of a hugely successful rap song.
This sound is rare. You have to hit the ball exactly right, squarely on the barrel of your plastic bat. You don’t get it very often, even if you manage to hit it hard: It takes a perfect strike. Thus, when we play games in the backyard, we worry less about doubles, or strikeouts, or whether the oak tree by the shed is in fair territory or foul.
We just try to produce the sound. That’s the goal. If you make that sound, it doesn’t matter whether the result is a base hit, an out or anything else. If you make that sound, you did something right. You kept your eye on the ball, you had a level swing, and THHHHHHHWHIRRRRRR!!!!!!!!
It is process over result. Now, I couldn’t have possibly appreciated that as a kid. I just wanted a game to play with my neighbors that wouldn’t have to stop just because we just lost the only baseball we had.
But my sons took to it instantly. All they wanted to do was hit the ball solid. They failed often … they failed constantly. But when they got one, when they really drilled one, it didn’t matter where the ball went, whether I caught it, whether it happened to plant itself in their father’s groin. They got the sound. And they beamed and screamed and danced as if they’d just won the World Series. They still do. They call it the Sound.
It’s changed how we watch baseball. When we rooted for our beloved — and tragically postseason-less — St. Louis Cardinals, my older son, William, shouted things like, “C’mon, Carpenter, make the Sound!” He knew (at least I think he knew) a major-league baseball would make its own crack but not in fact the Wiffle ball sound.
And he knew that hitting a baseball square was the same process as making the Sound: It meant doing everything right.
William can produce that sound more consistently than his little brother, though the younger one can reproduce it vocally more easily (much to the chagrin of his parents).
Soon, my sons are going to be playing organized baseball, with uniforms, sponsors, tryouts, competition and misguided coaches who replace their young players’ dreams with ones of their own that they have lost. They will fill their heads with all sorts of bad ideas, and maybe some good ones, but all of which are far more complicated than that basic backyard reality of just throwing the ball around and trying to hit it dead-solid perfect. To make the Sound. THHHHHHHWHIRRRRRR!!!!!!!!
But both my sons know what the Sound means: They hit it right, and therefore they want to go out and hit it like that again. It’s simple: Control what you can, and don’t sweat the rest. You can curve it, you can float it, you can spin it, but when you hit it right, you know. All we can ask for, and hope for, is to hit THHHHHHHWHIRRRRRR!!!!!!!!