An undated photograph of Mr. Wainwright as a young man.Credit...
He hid below deck until the boat was well out to sea — too far out to return to port.
Night had fallen. Only then, three hours after he had stolen aboard, did the stowaway slip out of hiding and reveal himself to the captain.
He emerged for a reason, though it was neither to make a political statement nor to try to seize control of the ship, the S.S. Queen of Bermuda. Carroll L. Wainwright Jr. — seasoned world traveler and scion of one of wealthiest and most distinguished families in the United States — was, quite simply, hungry for his supper.
Master Wainwright was 8 years old.
A descendant of the railroad magnate and financier Jay Gould on his mother’s side, and of Peter Stuyvesant on his father’s, Mr. Wainwright, who died on Monday at 90, grew up to become a prominent lawyer. He was a partner in the New York firm Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy, and a trustee of some of the country’s foremost nonprofit institutions, among them the American Museum of Natural History.
But the young Mr. Wainwright’s clandestine journey from Bermuda to New York in November 1934 very likely garnered more ink than any of his considerable later achievements, making headlines worldwide for months afterward. “The Silk-Stockinged Stowaway,” the papers called him.
But as Carroll had already made plain in the press, the reasons for his voyage were far more personal: Unhappy in Bermuda with his mother and stepfather, a British nobleman, he pined to return home to his grandmother in New York. That he lacked the money for passage did not deter him in the slightest.
The youngest child of Carroll Livingston Wainwright, a painter, and the former Edith Kingdon Gould, a granddaughter of Jay Gould, Carroll Livingston Wainwright Jr. was born on the streets of New York City, in a Pierce-Arrow, on Dec. 28, 1925.
His arrival aboard a conveyance (his mother was returning from a party when she went into labor) was in keeping with family tradition: She herself had been born on her father’s yacht.
The precipitate marriage of Carroll Jr.’s parents in 1920, one day after his mother’s graduation from Miss Spence’s School in New York, had been the subject of fevered coverage in the newspapers.
The marriage was not to last. On Jan. 25, 1932, in a development avidly chronicled in the papers, Mrs. Wainwright divorced her husband in Reno, Nev., and, hours later, married Sir Hector Murray MacNeal, a shipping magnate.
For the next few years, Carroll and his older siblings, Stuyvesant and Caroline, moved around the world, wherever their stepfather’s work took him. In late 1934, with his older brother away at boarding school, Carroll, his sister and their mother, now Lady MacNeal, arrived in Bermuda for the winter.
Carroll was having none of it.
On Nov. 28, 1934, Carroll, telling no one, rode his bicycle to the waterfront in Hamilton, the capital. He knew the Queen of Bermuda was sailing for New York that day.
Stopped by the crew as he sauntered up the gangplank, Carroll said he was there to see relatives off. He was well dressed and well spoken, and they let him aboard. Then he hid.
What he had not bargained for was the effect his disappearance would have on his mother and stepfather. The terrible fate of the Lindbergh baby, kidnapped and murdered just two years before, was still fresh in the public mind, and the couple, fearing Carroll had been abducted for ransom, called in the Bermuda police.
The police were stymied until someone thought to radio the ship. The captain radioed back that Carroll was aboard, safe and sound.
When the Queen of Bermuda docked in New York on Nov. 30, Carroll’s grandmother was there to meet him, along with a flock of reporters.
What was more, Carroll had the company of a youthful fellow traveler: By coincidence, a 16-year-old William L. Hires, a nephew of Charles E. Hires, the root beer baron, had also stowed away on that voyage.
Carroll’s grandmother paid his passage — first class — before taking him home with her.
He did not return to Bermuda. In the coming years he would divide his time between the Malcolm Gordon School, a boarding school in Garrison, N.Y., and the home of an uncle, Loudon Wainwright (grandfather of the singer and songwriter Loudon Wainwright III), in Hewlett, on Long Island.
The arrangement continued after the death of Carroll’s mother in 1937, at 36, from alcohol-related liver disease.
Lying about his age to enlist at 17, a young Mr. Wainwright served stateside as a Marine Corps pilot during World War II. He earned a bachelor’s degree in American studies from Yale in 1949 and a law degree from Harvard in 1952.
From 1959 to 1960, Mr. Wainwright served as assistant general counsel to Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller of New York. At Milbank, Tweed, he specialized in trusts and estates for clients including the Rockefeller family. He was the lead lawyer overseeing the sale of a controlling interest in Rockefeller Center to the Mitsubishi Estate Company in 1989.
Mr. Wainwright was a member of the New York State Commission on Judicial Conduct from its inception in 1974 until 1983. From 1990 to 1997, he was an adjunct professor of law at Washington and Lee University in Lexington, Va.
The many boards on which he sat included that of the Greater Yellowstone Coalition, devoted to conserving the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem of Idaho, Montana and Wyoming. His work there included helping reintroduce wolves into the region in the 1990s.
Mr. Wainwright’s death, at his home in East Hampton, on Long Island, was announced by his family. His survivors include his wife, the former Nina Walker, whom he married in 1948; two sons, D. Walker Wainwright and Mark L. Wainwright; four grandchildren; and three great-grandchildren.
Mr. Wainwright’s sister, Caroline Wainwright Shean, died in 1969. His brother, Stuyvesant Wainwright II, a Republican who represented eastern Long Island in Congress from 1953 to 1961, died in 2010.
An enthusiastic outdoorsman, Mr. Wainwright was for decades a keen traveler throughout the United States and far beyond. To the end of his life, he paid his own passage.