The Big 12 Conference announced Monday that it would not expand from its current stable of 10 teams, rejecting a potential realignment that had ignited the ambitions of nearly two dozen suitors from less remunerative and competitive conferences. The spurned programs had hoped that membership in a high-profile league would vault them into the top tier of college sports.
The conference’s vote, which Boren said was unanimous, did not address any specific institutions but rather represented a decision simply not to expand.
The Big 12 dashed the hopes of prominent institutions like Cincinnati, Connecticut and Houston, which are members of the American Athletic Conference. Brigham Young, which is independent, and 11 institutions from several so-called Group of 5 conferences, including Air Force and Tulane, had made the Big 12’s final cut, The Associated Press reported.
However, those universities will most likely struggle to remain competitive — particularly in football — without the revenue that a major conference offers. Last fiscal year, the A.A.C. paid roughly $3 million to each member; the Big 12 distributed approximately $30 million to each member.
The Big 12 is an amalgam of two defunct conferences, the Southwest and the Big Eight. In recent years, it lost Nebraska to the Big Ten, Colorado to the Pacific-12, and Texas A&M and Missouri to the Southeastern Conference. As a result, the Big 12 has been dogged by a sense of instability and fears that its most prominent members, Texas and Oklahoma, could bolt at the next opportunity, most likely in about a decade.
“No one’s looking to walk away from this conference,” said Boren, who once called the Big 12 “psychologically disadvantaged” because of its small membership.
The Big 12 will remain the smallest Power 5 conference, a distinction that hurt it in 2014 when its size prevented it from staging a conference championship game. That in turn kept its co-champions, Baylor and Texas Christian, from participating in the first four-team College Football Playoff. The conference has since received approval to stage a championship game next season.
In July, the Big 12’s members unanimously authorized their commissioner, Bob Bowlsby, to vet candidates for expansion after consultants had advised the members that the conference would fare better with 12 teams.
The Big 12 also remains the only Power 5 conference without its own cable network. Bowlsby said that because of market conditions — most likely a reference in part to Texas’ deal with ESPN for its own Longhorn Network — there were no immediate plans to form a network.
The Big 12’s decision against expansion should keep intact the A.A.C., which has tried to present itself as the sixth power conference — a moniker it may deserve competitively but falls far short of financially. The A.A.C. is also not one of the five conferences to which the N.C.A.A. has granted autonomy in areas such as scholarship limits.