PHOENIX — A Colorado woman who completed a nearly 82-mile swim across Lake Powell in 56 hours said Friday that the vast distance was not her biggest fear.
Thomas, who was still in bed after sleeping nearly 12 hours, said she credits the “little bit of caffeine” in the liquid carbohydrate and electrolyte mixtures she consumed every 30 minutes during the swim for helping her to keep going.
Thomas, 34, did not stop swimming or get out of the water the entire time, allowing her to qualify for a possible record for an unassisted marathon swim. A team of 13 people traveled by houseboat with her and gave her food every half-hour via a water bottle tied to a cord.
Thomas swam mostly freestyle but occasionally switched to backstroke or breaststroke to loosen up. The grueling swim made it difficult to walk afterward because her feet and body were so shaky.
Exhausted and hungry, her first postswim meal was not until breakfast the next day.
Thomas had done six major marathon swims since 2010, including efforts in Lake Tahoe and the English Channel. But none were as long as her journey on Lake Powell along the Arizona-Utah border.
She initially planned to swim in the Pacific Ocean off the California coast but decided a lake might be better and began a search for the right one.
“There are not a lot of lakes that are big enough and logistically make sense,” she said.
She chose Lake Powell for its amenities and its proximity to Conifer, Colo., her hometown. Her training consisted of at least 25 hours of swimming each week since April. At the peak, she averaged 50 miles a week.
She said she was able to commit the time to training partly because she was able to work from home in her job as a hospital recruiter.
The task of verifying Thomas’s swim will fall to the San Francisco-based Marathon Swimmers Federation. Evan Morrison, the federation’s co-founder, said two independent observers who are also marathon swimmers were present to see her swim.
A federation panel of 16 members from the United States and other countries will review logs, GPS tracking data and any photos and video.
Morrison expects everything to pass muster, calling Thomas one of the most “well-respected and well-known swimmers” of recent years.
The current record-holder for an unassisted solo, open-water swim is the Australian swimmer Chloe McCardel. In October 2014, she swam 77.3 miles in the Atlantic Ocean in the Bahamas in a little over 41 hours.
Thomas’s swim took place in a body of water with no current affecting her.
Thomas has no plans for more marathons until the Cook Strait in New Zealand in 2018. In the meantime, she plans to just keep swimming. Distance, not speed, has always been the draw for her.
“I may not be the fastest, but I’m happy to keep going and going,” she said.