BEIJING — With tensions between the United States and China on the rise over issues such as the South China Sea and cyberespionage, one might think the citizens of the two nations have an increasingly hostile view of the other.
Yet, Chinese have a more favorable view of the United States than they did a year ago, according to the results of a global survey released by the Pew Research Center on Wednesday. They hold that perspective even as many cite the United States as a major threat to China, Pew said.
The report also said that although three-quarters of Chinese say their country is playing a larger role in the world than it did a decade ago, most want their government to focus on domestic issues rather than helping other nations.
And more than three-quarters say their way of life needs to be protected from foreign influence — a 13 percentage-point increase from 2002.
The results are among many in the report that reflect complex Chinese sentiments about the world. Pew Research Center, a think tank based in the United States, conducts regular global attitude surveys and breaks out data to write reports that spotlight certain countries. China has been a focus for years.
In recent years, the Chinese perspective on the United States has fluctuated annually, according to survey results. This year, half the respondents said they had a favorable view of the United States, compared with 44 percent last year. In 2014, half also held a favorable view.
Forty-five percent of respondents said that United States power and influence posed the leading international threat to China, an increase over the 39 percent who felt that way in 2013. The United States topped the list of seven potential threats listed in the survey, including global economic instability and climate change. Only the Japanese expressed more concern about the potential challenge posed by the United States.
In the survey, Chinese expressed anxiety over matters that anyone living in China constantly hears complaints about. About half of the respondents said corrupt officials were a big problem. The proportion of people expressing worry about the safety of medicines and food has increased over the years.
More than three in 10 Chinese consider water and air pollution to be very big problems, and about seven in 10 consider them to be moderately big problems, the report said. Half of the Chinese surveyed said they would trade economic growth for cleaner air.
China is undergoing an economic slowdown, but nine in 10 Chinese said the economy was in good shape. Still, many complained about rising inequality.
The enormous gap between ordinary citizens and wealthy Chinese, many of whom are members of the ruling Communist Party, is judged by the party to be one of the most delicate issues, given that the party’s origins are rooted in class struggle and revolution. Chinese officials now regularly warn foreign news organizations not to report on the family wealth of senior party officials and punish those that have done so by withholding journalist visas.
