AUSTIN, Tex. — Attorney General Ken Paxton of Texas, who is fighting criminal charges of personally duping wealthy investors before taking office, has won a major court victory after a judge dismissed a nearly identical civil case brought against him by the federal government.
A federal judge on Friday gave the Securities and Exchange Commission two weeks to refile charges against Mr. Paxton, but for now, he has shed one of two cases that have marred his political rise.
Mr. Paxton, a Republican, has spent most of his 20 months on the job under felony indictment. He has pleaded not guilty in the criminal case while trying to preserve a high profile nationally, leading lawsuits against the Obama administration over immigration, transgender rights and Syrian refugees.
The collapse of the civil case gives Mr. Paxton a long-sought court victory over allegations that he deceived investors in a high-tech start-up called Servergy Inc. by not disclosing that the company was paying him. He has twice failed in his attempts to have the July 2015 criminal indictments against him thrown out and is trying again before the state’s highest criminal court.
The federal district judge, Amos L. Mazzant III, who “conditionally granted” the dismissal of the civil suit barring a second effort by the S.E.C., said federal regulators lacked enough facts to keep their case moving forward.
Mr. Paxton had been accused of raising $840,000 in 2011 by betraying friends and using high-pressure tactics to secure investors. At the time, he was a state legislator from suburban Dallas, and one investor he was accused of misleading was a fellow Republican lawmaker.
“Paxton did not have a legal obligation to disclose his financial arrangement,” Judge Mazzant wrote.
Mr. Paxton now hopes for a similar outcome in the state’s highest criminal court. The Texas Court of Criminal Appeals, which this year dismissed a felony abuse-of-power case against former Gov. Rick Perry, has not yet decided if it will hear Mr. Paxton’s appeal.
Special prosecutors in the criminal case against Mr. Paxton said the federal ruling would have no bearing on their case.
The felony securities fraud charges against Mr. Paxton carry a possible sentence of five to 99 years in prison. He is likely to stand trial in 2017 unless the charges are thrown out.
At the heart of Judge Mazzant’s decision was his assertion that the S.E.C. failed to prove that Mr. Paxton had a “fiduciary relationship” with the investors he recruited and was obliged to tell them that he was being paid by Servergy in the form of 100,000 shares.