This – after seven years – is my last Numberplay column for The Times. It’s been a terrific, wild ride, full of new friendships and rewarding discovery. But it’s now time to focus on new projects: teaching a course on the art of logic in Shanghai, developing an online program on the psychology of reasoning at Stanford and helping to create a national math tournament in Nigeria.
Before my experience with Numberplay, I thought I understood problem-solving. I’d studied physics and engineering, taught at M.I.T. and Stanford, and was a huge fan of logic puzzles. But exploring tough problems alongside some of the world’s best mathematicians for the last few years has rewired my brain.
We’re also in the middle of a revolution in the understanding of insight. The disciplines of decision-making and problem-solving are being completely transformed. We now have crisp distinctions and tools that just a few years ago were muddled and fuzzy. Einsteins are still Einsteins, but tools for perspective-shifting — for asking new questions as opposed to solving existing problems — are much more clear.
Among these tools is the ability to shift between problem-solving levels — a concept behind many of the more challenging Numberplay puzzles.
A ball and a bat cost $1.10. The bat costs $1.00 more than the ball. How much does the ball cost?
The Casual Solver sees this as a subtraction problem, and notices the two values $1.10 and $1.00. The answer must be the difference, or 10 cents.
The Mapmaker first focuses on the structure of the problem, seeing that the dollar is extra information. The problem is actually about two equal things that add up to ten. Each must be half of that total.
Which problem-solving personality is most effective? I’ve found each has its place, and the best problem-solvers are able to move between each, or partner up with someone to complement their own style.
But here’s what’s amazing. As recently as a few years ago, it was widely assumed that only the second personality — the Technician — was worth studying. The Casual Solver approach was just dismissed as sloppy thinking, and the Mapmaking approach was seen as too individualistic or imprecise. We’re now in a transformation period in problem-solving, where all three personalities are being recognized as important.
Let’s now move on to our challenge for the week.
If it takes 5 machines 5 minutes to make 5 widgets, how long would it take 100 machines to make 100 widgets?