CHICAGO — When Friday afternoon rolls around, barricades will go up on the streets around Wrigley Field, garbage cans will be removed from the sidewalks, the police will be out in force and many bars will begin serving drinks only in plastic cups — no cans, bottles or glasses.
All of this will be in preparation for the opening playoff act of what could be, might be — their fans’ jittery fingers crossed — the first World Series title for the Chicago Cubs since 1908.
But that’s Friday. On Wednesday night, Wrigleyville was much as it always is on the 280 or so days each year when there is no baseball being played here: quaint brownstones; narrow, tree-lined streets; the faint rumble of elevated trains; young adults walking dogs or small children; and neighborhood bars that are, well, neighborhood bars.
At one of those bars, Murphy’s Bleachers, at the corner of Sheffield and Waveland, directly across the street from Wrigley’s center-field bleachers, the tables and bar stools that will be removed Friday were still in place. There was the nightly special of $3 grilled brats. And instead of the typical Wednesday night bingo, every TV in the place was tuned to the National League wild-card playoff game between the Mets and the San Francisco Giants, the winner advancing to play the Cubs.
Outside, the marquee asked a question of Cubs fans: Who do you want to face?
Inside, there seemed to be little doubt: It didn’t really matter.
“Six of one, half-dozen of the other,” said Dean Masini, after the Giants dispatched the plucky Mets, 3-0, on Madison Bumgarner’s sublime pitching and Conor Gillaspie’s stunning home run.
Masini’s confidence is born of watching the young, talented Cubs blossom into a team that won 103 games this season, by far the most in baseball. He wears that assurance on his sleeve with a tattoo commemorating the Cubs’ world championships: 1907, 1908 and 201_ — with the final digit waiting to be added.
Masini waved away the suggestion that, given the Cubs’ history of misfortune, he might have left another digit blank. He puts as little stock in goat curses as he does in the mojo the Giants seem to carry after having won the last three World Series that were played in even years: 2010, 2012 and 2014. Now 2016 beckons.
“I’m not superstitious,” Masini said, a good thing since he was born in 1969, the year the Cubs famously collapsed and were passed by the Mets in the second half of the regular season.
It figures then that inside a watering hole that sits in the heart of a gentrified neighborhood that memories do not run all that deep. While some fans at Murphy’s were hoping the Cubs would play the Mets, it seemed to be simply about retaliating for last year’s defeat in the National League Championship Series, when the Mets blitzed the Cubs in a four-game sweep.
It had little do with avenging 1969, or the tense rivalry between the Cubs and the Mets in the 1980s or even, in most cases, avoiding the mystic Giants.
At a table nearby, as Bumgarner matched zeros with the Mets’ Noah Syndergaard, a group of recent college graduates took a more pragmatic view as the game unfolded.
Pat Schuetz said he wanted the Cubs to face the Mets and their depleted pitching rotation. His friend Devon Raden was a little bit anxious about going up against the Giants, despite their shaky bullpen, in an even year. “That scares me,” he said.
And when Gillaspie’s home run cleared the wall, there were cheers — a sign that Cubs fans would settle for their Mets misery anyway it was served.
“San Francisco it is,” said Chris Galloway, a can of beer in his hand.
Squirreled away in the bar were Bill Dillon and Mike Mitchell. Dillon, who grew up in Jersey City, moved to Chicago 30 years ago, lives nearby and counts the Cubs’ general manager, Theo Epstein, as his neighbor. But he could not abandon his love of the Mets. Mitchell is a rare bird on the North Side: a White Sox fan.
Neither showed any outward signs of their allegiance — at least not until Gillaspie’s home run. Both their heads dropped.
“Make sure you write that Gillaspie was with the White Sox and they let him go,” Mitchell said.
For Dillon, the Giants’ victory meant saying goodbye to the Mets this season. He had hoped for a reprise of last year, when he watched the Mets advance to the World Series from his seats at Wrigley Field, but he would make do.
He and a lot of others, many of whom will fill the streets around Wrigley on Friday and then all the seats inside as the Cubs take on Wednesday’s winner, the Giants. The odds favor the Cubs, but, as it was duly noted in Murphy’s, it is an even year.