RENTON, Wash. — The players filed past a table and picked up the electronic wristbands as casually as any of other piece of equipment designed to make the Seattle Seahawks perform at their peak.
But rather than protect or help them power through a game, this new one, distributed to the players at practice on Monday, is aimed at a more subtle effect. Very subtle.
“Get your nine hours of sleep!” receiver Doug Baldwin shouted to Trevone Boykin, the backup quarterback, as Boykin fiddled with his band, a motion-sensing monitor designed to ensure he does just that.
The Seahawks want to become sleeping giants.
N.F.L. teams obsessively track almost everything they can about a player: weight, muscle mass, hand-eye coordination and more.
Yet in recent years, in the never-ending search for an edge, teams have opened their eyes to sleep as a priority, backed up by science that increasingly points to its importance for physical and mental health. A solid night in the sack particularly helps players recover from the inevitable wear and tear of a taxing season.
Several other teams besides the Seahawks have also been focusing on sleep. And it has caught on in other sports — some N.B.A. players, for instance, take naps during the day to remain fresh for night games. Basketball and hockey teams adjust their flight schedules to allow their players more time to sleep. And New England quarterback Tom Brady made waves two years ago when he said he goes to sleep at 8:30 p.m.
It is partly out of necessity. The Seahawks are hours by plane from their nearest rivals and regularly log more miles than any other N.F.L. team. On Friday, for example, they flew five hours to New Jersey for their game against the Jets.
The focus on sleep also flows from the team’s holistic approach to player health, which encompasses, among other things, blood tests, meditation, and yoga. The team, 2-1, has been among the best in the N.F.L. in recent years, including a Super Bowl win in 2014.
The bands the players collected on Monday are the latest version of those the team first tried in 2011 but had to stop using last season after the players’ union raised concerns about the intrusiveness of a device used outside games and practices. In July, the league and players settled their differences and allowed the bands if the teams received the union’s approval.
About 40 Seattle players now wear the monitors, up from 20 a few years ago.
Ramsden and his staff have used the bands as a tool to find out why a player might be sleeping poorly. In many cases, the reason is obvious: a baby that kept a player up all night, for example.
But Ramsden has also referred chronic light sleepers to doctors who have discovered that the players have had conditions such as sleep apnea, a serious disorder that can cause a range of heart and brain problems. And if many players were running short on sleep, he suggested that the coaches trim a practice or adjust the team’s travel schedule.
The devices used by the Seahawks, called Readibands, are made by a Canadian company called Fatigue Science and include motion sensors that calculate how long and how deeply the players have slept. Another algorithm, developed by the American military and others, converts the sleep data into a number correlated to the player’s alertness.
The wristbands send the data to the players’ smartphones, allowing them to monitor their sleep better and make adjustments on their own.
A player with a score of around 90 on the 100-point scale has about a 10 percent reduction in alertness — nothing serious. A player with a score of 70, by contrast, will have a 43 percent reduction in reaction time — a significant impairment to his performance.
Many Seahawks say they are now getting to bed before 10 p.m. during the week, and credit the sleep bands with keeping them on track.

Russell Wilson, the quarterback, has used the hashtag “#NoTime2Sleep” on his Twitter account and said that he is fine with five or six hours of sleep even though doctors recommend several hours more.
Coach Pete Carroll, too, had to come around to the idea that his players need their rest.
