It was roughly 15 years ago that a high school student from Virginia named Ryan Speedo Green first visited the Metropolitan Opera on a school trip.
At the time, he was working to put his life back on track after a rough childhood that included a harrowing two months in juvenile detention. But he set himself an unlikely goal. “I am going to sing at the Met,” he told one of his teachers.
Mr. Green sings “Vecchia zimarra” from Act IV of Puccini’s opera.
Backstage after the curtain calls, Mr. Green greeted some of the people who had helped him get there. There was Betty Hughes, who had taught him in an elementary school class made up of the most troubled children in his district, and who had not given up on him when he hurled his desk in anger on the first day. There was her husband, Leon, who ran the arts high school in Norfolk, Va., where Mr. Green studied singing. And there was Denyce Graves, the mezzo-soprano who sang the title role in the Met performance of “Carmen” that he had heard on that high school trip — his introduction to opera.
“You changed my entire life,” Mr. Green, who now stands 6-foot-5 and has a rich, resonant voice both when he speaks and when he sings, told her.
That Ms. Graves was African-American, like him, had first given Mr. Green the idea that he, too, could sing opera one day. She had received his class warmly when they visited her backstage, in the same room where he was now embracing her.
It was a heady capstone to a major month for Mr. Green. His life story and the new book about it have been featured in recent days by “CBS This Morning,” NPR’s “Fresh Air,” and a range of newspapers including The Washington Post and The New York Post.
The book, which grew out of a 2011 article that Mr. Bergner wrote for The New York Times Magazine, recounts in unsparing detail Mr. Green’s difficult childhood and family life, including his time in juvenile detention at the age of 12 for threatening his mother and brother, parts of which were spent in solitary confinement.
But the book describes how he went on to turn his life around, and how, with the help of dedicated teachers, he painstakingly learned to sing opera: getting two music degrees; winning the Met’s prestigious National Council Auditions in 2011; joining its demanding Lindemann Young Artist Development Program, where he had to make up for lost time in a field where many singers receive training from early childhood; and joining the Vienna State Opera as a member of the ensemble.
Sharing the painful, personal stories in the book had helped Mr. Green begin to come to terms with his history.
He said that he hoped that by sharing his story, he might inspire troubled children and their families, as well as the teachers and professionals who work with them. He has started to advocate for more funding for children’s mental health and returned with Mr. Bergner to speak with children in the detention center where he was held. He plans to go back in December.
Mr. Bergner said that when he began the book there had been no guarantee that Mr. Green’s career would take off. But he said that Mr. Green had by then come so far that it was already an uplifting story.
The book also offers a candid look at race in the opera world. Mr. Green describes the pain he has felt when, after singing arias by Verdi, Puccini or Mozart, white audiences regularly ask him at recitals or parties to sing “Ol’ Man River.” He said that at a moment when the nation was confronting issues of race in so many areas, it was important to speak frankly about it in classical music.
He noted that at 30, he is still young for a bass-baritone and still working to establish himself in a tough field. But when Mr. Bergner, researching the book, showed him logs that the juvenile facility had kept on him, Mr. Green said it was staggering to reflect on them.
