BUDAPEST — Roland Baksa, an investigative reporter at Hungary’s largest opposition newspaper, packed up his computer on Friday. The publication’s parent company had announced that it would move offices over the weekend, and the editor in chief had promised pizza on Sunday to celebrate the move.
But on Saturday, Mr. Baksa found that he could access neither his work email nor the newspaper’s website, including its archives. Mediaworks, the parent company, had replaced the website of the newspaper, Nepszabadsag, with an announcement that it was suspending publication immediately, because of steep circulation losses over the last decade.
Mr. Baksa and many of his roughly 50 colleagues, whose jobs are now in limbo, suspect another motivation: interference from the government of Hungary’s populist, right-wing prime minister, Viktor Orban, which has reined in government-run media and appears to be wielding increasing influence over privately run news companies as well.
In the newspaper’s final week, it reported that the head of Mr. Orban’s cabinet office had flown to a celebrity wedding by helicopter — an exorbitant expense that he had initially denied. The same week, Mr. Baksa revealed that the governor of the central bank was living in a luxury apartment owned by the president of the Hungarian Banking Association. Earlier, he had reported on the governor’s romance with a young woman who was consequently hired by the central bank for a record salary.
The state minister for government communication, Bence Tuzson, rejected those accusations.
“The true violation of freedom of the press would be if the government interfered with the decision of a media owner,” he said in an interview, denying any role by Mr. Orban’s government.
Szilard Nemeth, the co-chairman of Fidesz, Mr. Orban’s political party, noted that Nepszabadsag was the Communist Party’s mouthpiece from 1956 — when the Soviet Union cracked down on a Hungarian uprising that threatened to challenge its sway over Eastern Europe — until 1989, when communism fell. “My humble opinion is that it was high time Nepszabadsag shut down unexpectedly,” he told reporters.
Hungarians do not seem convinced by the official explanation. Social media pages have filled with expressions of support for the newspaper. On Saturday night, several thousand people protested in front of Parliament, some of them demanding that Mr. Orban resign.
Judit Bayer, a media lawyer who teaches at Budapest Business School, said Mr. Orban, in office since 2010, had learned from his previous stint as prime minister, from 1998 to 2002. His government passed a law in 2010 that tightened control over media outlets, prompting hand-wringing among European Union officials who feared that Hungary was violating the bloc’s guarantees of a free press.
Criticism of Mr. Orban is not unheard-of. His former ally and business partner Lajos Simicska — he was once his university roommate — owns two newspapers, one of them a weekly, as well as a radio station and a TV station. The two men had a rift last year, and Mr. Simicska’s companies have become critical of Mr. Orban.
Gabor Polyak, an analyst at Mertek Media Monitor, a watchdog organization, said that the Hungarian media landscape was constantly changing and had recently come under the influence of a new type of wealthy oligarchs closer to Mr. Orban.
Last year, the country’s second-largest TV channel, previously owned by a German company, was sold to a Hungarian-American film producer — who is also a government official — and its editorial stance became strongly pro-government. But Mr. Polyak said Nepszabadsag was too much of an established brand to be converted into a pro-government title.
Mediaworks, the parent company of Nepszabadsag, is owned by Vienna Capital Partners, an Austrian-based private equity firm. Heinrich Pecina, its principal owner, did not respond to messages requesting comment on the decision to close the paper.
Andras Petho, a former reporter at Origo, a news website whose editor was forced out in 2014 after exposing lavish travel abroad by one of Mr. Orban’s ministers, said he was “not surprised by what happened to Nepszabadsag.” His former employer, under new ownership, is no longer critical of the government.
“It definitely seems to fit in a familiar pattern,” said Mr. Petho, who now runs an investigative journalism website, Direkt36, that relies on reader donations and grants from institutions like the Open Society Foundations, set up by George Soros.
Gabor Borokai, the chief editor at Heti Valasz, a right-leaning weekly partly owned by Mr. Simicska, said it had lost 10 percent to 15 percent of its annual revenues after the falling-out between Mr. Simicska and Mr. Orban. “If Nepszabadsag’s owners acted rationally, they would have cut the number of pages,” rather than close the newspaper after investing in a redesign, Mr. Borokai said. He theorized that the company had been sold to a new owner.