The conventional wisdom surrounding American college life these days views campuses as hotbeds of intolerance for free speech, with students themselves leading the charge.
But a new report by PEN America, to be released on Monday, questions that story line while warning of a different danger: a growing perception among young people that cries of “free speech” are too often used as a cudgel against them.
The report, titled “And Campus for All: Diversity, Inclusion and Freedom of Speech at U.S. Universities,” covers a broad range of hot-button topics, including trigger warnings, microaggressions, safe spaces and controversial campus speakers. While it cites “troubling incidents of speech curtailed,” it finds no “pervasive” crisis.
But it does worry about an “apparent chasm” between free speech advocates and student activists, thanks in part to a conversation that sometimes dismisses students’ demands for equity and inclusion instead of parsing how they do, or don’t, infringe on the “bedrock principles” of free speech.
Campus speech debates are somewhat new territory for PEN, a writers’ organization that historically has been concerned with protecting authors and journalists around the world, whether from censorship and imprisonment or more amorphous threats like electronic surveillance.
But Suzanne Nossel, the group’s executive director, said the report was consistent with PEN’s broad mission, which includes promoting more diverse voices through projects like its annual World Voices Festival of International Literature.
The report arrives at a moment when many free-speech advocates see a growing, and troubling, generational divide. A Gallup poll last spring showed that college students were overwhelming in favor of free expression on campus in general but also significantly in favor of some restrictions on “intentionally offensive” speech.
“From an old-fashioned free-speech perspective, it strikes one as contradictory,” said Alberto Ibargüen, the chief executive of the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation, a sponsor of the poll.
The PEN report digs right into those seeming contradictions. It outlines the cases for and against demands for safe spaces, trigger warnings (which some students demand be given with class assignments relating to difficult topics, like sexual assault) and campaigns against so-called microaggressions (small, often unintentional racial or other slights), and then explores the ways they do, or don’t, conflict with free expression.
Jerry Kang, the vice chancellor for equity, diversity and inclusion at the University of California, Los Angeles, said he appreciated PEN’s efforts to understand students’ point of view.
But some prominent free-speech advocates who have seen the report had a more mixed reaction.
The report’s three main case studies cover complex conflicts on three campuses that drew intense media coverage in the past year: over the line between criticism of Israel and anti-Semitism at U.C.L.A.; over sexual harassment, academic freedom and Title IX protections at Northwestern University; and over free speech and Halloween costumes at Yale University.
But at Yale, the report suggests, the students who protested against an administrator who sent a now-famous email questioning prohibitions on offensive Halloween costumes were not attacking free speech rights, but exercising their own.
Greg Lukianoff, the president and chief executive of FIRE, said that he welcomed PEN’s report, some of which was described to him by a reporter.
But he questioned both the thrust of its account of the Yale incident, as well as the perception among many progressive students and faculty that the campaigns to protect free speech rights have been put in service of a right-wing agenda.
Storm Ervin, a co-founder of Concerned Student 1950, a group at the University of Missouri that organized protests last fall against what many students saw as a racially hostile environment, said that she recognizes the importance of free speech.
“Free speech is the reason we were allowed to protest,” she said in an interview.
But Ms. Ervin, like many fellow students, does not see untrammeled free expression as always the paramount value, or one that is easily reconciled with equality and inclusion.
