The former “Late Show” host on the liberation of retirement: shaving optional, shopping solo and coming to terms with a certain late-night feud.
Why does David Letterman have a beard? To put it more precisely: Why did Mr. Letterman, after stepping down from CBS’s “Late Show” and a 33-year career in late-night television and all but disappearing from public life, spend the past year and a half cultivating a fleecy and prodigious mound of facial hair, which, depending on your disposition, makes this 69-year-old entertainer look like either a lanky Santa Claus or an escapee from an asylum?
Did he grow these imposing bristles to keep the world at bay while he withdrew into retirement? Was it his way of saying he was no longer the man who had spent 6,000 evenings reading 4,600 Top 10 lists and interviewing 20,000 guests, and would we now please leave him alone?
While Mr. Letterman was still on the air, he projected a fascinating mix of ambition and insecurity, and the tension of those two impulses gave rise to a smart, caustic comedy sensibility that influenced a generation, in a way that no current late-night host has been able to do. He may not have a desk or a microphone for the moment, but he still has the drive and the sarcasm (not to mention the ambivalence), though he is unsure what to do with any of it.
The observatory, which he was visiting for the first time, was a place for him to reflect on what more he could do with his life now that he does not have the daily obligation of standing on a stage, telling jokes and talking to famous people.
He can appreciate the quotidian activities he’s rarely engaged in since the 1980s, like shopping at CVS and Walgreens or riding the train into Grand Central Terminal. Or he can take 11 days, as he did earlier this year, to travel to India and report on climate change for the season premiere of “Years of Living Dangerously,” a documentary series that the National Geographic Channel will show on Sunday, Oct. 30.
But, with years of vitality left, he has been trying, since his “Late Show” farewell in May 2015, to figure out what his next step should be.
Looking inconspicuously average in a long-sleeve T-shirt, slacks and sneakers, with no audience to play to and no house band to punctuate his one-liners, Mr. Letterman said there was one path he would not go back down.
There are few examples of whom Mr. Letterman might try to emulate now. One, as fate would have it, is Mr. Leno, who since leaving “The Tonight Show,” has continued to perform stand-up and host a CNBC show, “Jay Leno’s Garage.” Or, given his longstanding admiration for Mr. Carson, who essentially rode into the sunset, Mr. Shaffer said it was plausible Mr. Letterman might follow that route.
“You thought, chances are, he might do what Johnny did — just realize I have said what I need to say, and I’m out,” Mr. Shaffer explained.
Mr. Letterman did not make many prominent public appearances after he left “Late Show”: a surprise Top 10 list routine at a concert performed by his friends Martin Short and Steve Martin; a live interview with the filmmakers Spike Jonze and Bennett Miller at Ball State University, his alma mater; an unfortunate paparazzi photo that caught him off guard, jogging on the Caribbean island of St. Barts.
The creators of “Years of Living Dangerously,” which uses correspondents like Matt Damon and America Ferrera to explore environmental issues around the world, had noticed that Mr. Letterman had been hosting guests like James E. Hansen, the prominent climate scientist. When the producers asked Mr. Letterman if he would participate in the series, they found he was eager to be involved and passionate about the subject matter.
Mr. Letterman, who has a 12-year-old son, Harry, with his wife, Regina, said he has spent a lot of time thinking about what kind of planet their child will inherit.
But by lending his celebrity and his curiosity to “Years of Living Dangerously,” Mr. Letterman felt he might help educate viewers on a topic with lasting consequences.
This past winter, Mr. Letterman and a production crew flew to Indira Gandhi International Airport in New Delhi (“Two years in a row, the No. 1 airport in the world,” he said). He visited the city and the state of Uttar Pradesh to see firsthand how India’s swelling population was dealing with energy shortages, trying to reduce its dependency on coal and bring power to regions that still lack it.
There were many moments of found comedy, like when Mr. Letterman visited a tailor to be fitted for a kurta; he also conducted a serious-minded interview with Prime Minister Narendra Modi (that nonetheless ended, off-camera, with Mr. Letterman complimenting Mr. Modi on his beard).
What has stuck with Mr. Letterman about the trip, all these months later, is how completely different India is from anything he has experienced in America, and what he regards as the fundamentally hopeful nature of the Indian people he encountered.
Now that Mr. Letterman has had a taste of doing television that aims to educate a mass audience on serious subjects, he said it was something he would like to do more of, though he is unsure what form that might take.
What he is clear he does not want, and does not miss, is the platform provided by a nightly talk show, where he and Mr. Shaffer could riff on current events — “Something about it, it just left us,” he said. Not even the final throes of a presidential election whose undulations grow wilder by the day made him nostalgic for this.
Mr. Letterman said he does not really keep up with any of the current late-night hosts — not Stephen Colbert, who replaced him at CBS, or any of the others whose chummy dynamics elude him.
Still, Mr. Letterman second-guesses himself constantly about how strong or lenient an influence he should be in Harry’s life, and he wonders whether trying to steer him in any direction will only cause his son to rebel against him.
