WASHINGTON — Outside, a ribbon of lights swept up Pennsylvania Avenue toward the Capitol, and there was not a protester in sight. Inside the month-old Trump International Hotel, a Romanesque Revival structure just as grand, the second presidential debate had begun.
About 150 people — Donald Trump supporters mostly — had come Sunday night to watch the Fox News strain of the event, broadcast on four screens behind Benjamin’s Bar & Lounge, which occupies about a third of the vast lobby floor.
It was an odd assemblage of out-of-town tourists and locals out for a lark. But the Pilsner Urquell was ice-cold. A distinctive rosé from Lebanon, resembling a pinot noir, could be had for $15 a glass. To eat, there was the surprisingly good smashed avocado on toast (a happy hour bargain, $5!) the East and West Coast oysters ($38 a dozen) and the four-shrimp cocktail ($24).
All could be enjoyed while nestling in high-back bar stools of navy blue tufted velvet. Channing DeVoueroix came early to claim one, and to sip Trump sparkling wine, approvingly. Ms. DeVoueroix, a retired teacher and interior designer from Virginia, splits her time between Coronado, Calif., and the Kalorama neighborhood of Washington. Like many of the other patrons in the bar, she was not staying at the hotel but thought its bar would be a good place to watch the candidates clash.
Before that schoolyard brawl even started, she had already grown weary of the Trump campaign’s latest controversy, she said, generated by the Republican candidate’s “hot mike” moment on a bus shared with Billy Bush, who was egging him on.
Ms. DeVoueroix, who is divorced and has four children, said she counted Ronald Reagan as a friend, and met Hillary Clinton at a first ladies luncheon, when Bill Clinton occupied the Oval Office. “I hope Hillary says something different tonight, something specific, about how she’s going to deal the national debt, North Korea or the Middle East, not just those empty slogans about the environment and education,” she said.
Then, Ms. DeVoueroix turned her attention to her oysters.
Those not seated at the bar milled about, bewildered, like spectators at a rock concert in a high school gym: happy to be there, but not quite sure what to expect. Sturdy carts of cheese and charcuterie trundled past, pushed by unsure waiters making infrequent stops.
Already, the place seemed like a tourist attraction, where spectacle could be had, with two kids in tow, for the cost of a David Burke dry-aged burger. As for said burger, a bartender waved off one ordered medium-rare, mindful of out-of-town tastes, and instead it arrived medium, dry and dull.
Working on his second margarita, Steven Brignoli, a bearded former Special Forces officer, thrust his fists into the air and thundered, “Yes!” as Mr. Trump declared himself “a gentleman,” and, if elected, promised to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate Mrs. Clinton’s emails. “Yes!” Mr. Brignoli yelled back at the screen.
As has been widely reported, Mr. Trump spent $200 million transforming the building, the Old Post Office Pavilion, the city’s main post office until 1914. During the debate, very few guests checked in, and only a handful of people descended the elevators. The hotel’s steakhouse, BLT Prime by David Burke, sat virtually empty. With the exception of one man at the bar wearing a football sweatshirt, the only African-Americans were staff members.
As the debate neared its close, Mrs. Clinton talked renewable energy. “Bring back coal!” blurted out a young guy in hipster dress or something as close to that as Washington can muster, to loud applause. A middle-age woman wearing a standard Washington-issue strand of pearls said: “We’re being asked to support a liar or a rogue. Go rogue!” She drew whoops of endorsement.
“I respect the Second Amendment,” Mrs. Clinton said.
“You do not!” two young men in plaid shirts and drinking white wine hollered in unison.
Looking glum, Anderson Cooper and Martha Raddatz signed off, as the bartenders in Benjamin’s passed around free glasses of Trump sparkling wine, which were quickly drained.
