Should We See Everything a Cop Sees?
Body cameras have been promoted as a solution to police misconduct. But the strange two-year saga of Seattle shows just how complicated total transparency can be.
On his first day on the job in the Seattle Police Department, Mike Wagers was invited to an urgent meeting about transparency. It was July 28, 2014, little more than a week after Eric Garner was killed on Staten Island, less than two weeks before Michael Brown was killed in Ferguson, Mo., and police departments around the country were facing a new era of public scrutiny. Wagers, who has a Ph.D. in criminal justice from Rutgers, was the Seattle department’s new chief operating officer, a 42-year-old civilian in jeans and square-rimmed glasses. He’d left his wife and two kids in Virginia and come alone to Seattle, a city he didn’t know — where it rained but cultural norms, he’d read, didn’t allow you to use an umbrella — because the job was what he called “the chance of a lifetime.” Seattle was the first big-city police department in a decade to have come under what is known as a consent decree — police reform by federal fiat — after a string of violent police actions against black, Latino and Native American people were caught on camera in 2009 and 2010. Wagers and his new boss, Chief Kathleen O’Toole, herself just arrived in Seattle, would use the best new thinking and the best new technology to lead the turnaround. And then Wagers would go home.
O’Toole’s eighth-floor conference room, which has views of City Hall and Elliott Bay and the snow-capped Olympic Mountains, was packed with top police and city officials. All eyes were on a lawyer from the city attorney’s office named Mary Perry. A former naval officer in her 60s, Perry was small and soft-spoken and favored pearls, and she was the city’s unrivaled expert in the seemingly mundane intricacies of the state’s Public Records Act. She was briefing the room on the potential fallout from a landmark case she had just argued and lost before the Washington State Supreme Court. The case stemmed from a series of public-records requests by a reporter for the local television station KOMO, Tracy Vedder, who began filing them after the same high-profile incidents that would lead to the consent decree. She asked for user manuals to the department’s new system of in-car dashboard cameras, then for lists of dashcam recordings, then for some of the recordings themselves. After the department denied every one of them, Vedder sued it for violating the Public Records Act.
The act, which dates to 1972, when governments ran on paper and our modern torrent of electronic data was unimaginable, is one of the strongest in the country. Washington State agencies cannot deny requests for records because the requester is anonymous or the request is too broad, nor can they deny requests simply in order to protect an individual’s privacy; instead, agencies must redact only the details deemed sensitive under state code — for example, some addresses, sometimes the face of a minor — and disclose the rest. Before the court, Perry had argued that a different law, the state’s Privacy Act, which allows departments to withhold recordings until related criminal or civil cases are resolved, should take precedent and the Seattle Police should be allowed to broadly deny Vedder’s requests until the relevant statute of limitations ran out. The court disagreed.
The second problem was privacy. Dashcam videos were already a concern, but Seattle had also been considering using body cameras. In fact, the Police Department was now preparing a small pilot program involving a dozen officers from a single precinct to test the hardware. Any footage that bodycams gathered, Perry warned, would also be subject to the Public Records Act. The department would have even more video to manage and release, but most worrisome was how fundamentally different, and more intrusive, this video would be. Unlike dashcams, bodycams, which are attached to an officer’s uniform or purpose-built glasses, can go into homes and hotel rooms. Unlike dashcams, their default view during an arrest, or during a simple conversation with a victim or witness or informant, is an intimate close-up. Many people think of body cameras as a tool for police accountability, but the primary subject of their surveillance isn’t the police — it’s the public.
“I believe in open government, I really do,” Perry told me, “but I don’t think people have really wrapped their heads around all the implications.” If the bodycam pilot was deemed a success, and the city expanded the program to the rest of its 850 front-line officers, all of them now walking surveillance cameras, what then?
Day 1 of his record attempt was a fluke. He was in the vicinity of the Space Needle and bored, so he took the elevator to the top. Something about being able to see the whole city at once captivated him. The next day, Clemans bought a $50 season pass. He learned of the previous record — 60 consecutive days — and vowed to beat it. He came daily by bus and foot, an hourlong commute, often arriving early and staying late into the night.
The Space Needle blooms out of the grounds of the 1962 World’s Fair, a site north of downtown that is now known as Seattle Center. It is 605 feet tall. You enter through a plaza choked with Korean tourists and Andean flute musicians and Marine marching bands, then shuffle up a ramp to the east, above the gift shop and not far from a lineup of idling tour buses. Before handing over your ticket, you are asked to pose for a photo, then board one of three external elevators. When the elevator starts its ascent and the city comes into view, the people inside either fall silent or gasp out loud.
From the observation deck, you can see mountains in four directions, water in two and, just to the south, a forest of skyscrapers. You also see a tangle of cranes; a city increasingly built by the likes of Jeff Bezos and Bill Gates is booming.  Bulk carriers glide into port.  Helicopters float by. The lights of the radio towers on adjacent Queen Anne Hill, a seeming stone’s throw away, blink on and off. Inside, a giant digital wall displays a shifting collage of visitor selfies, along with tourists’ names and cities of origins. A joystick controls a high-definition camera mounted somewhere on the tower, allowing anyone to pan and zoom in on the unsuspecting people below, like a drone operator.
The Space Needle became Clemans’s office and his sanctuary. He brought his laptop, stuffing it into his backpack along with a toothbrush and toothpaste and self-help and business books, and got online with a wireless card. He exercised by walking laps around the outer deck. He offered to take tourists’ photos, posed with them and answered their questions. He wrote code and blog entries. He stared at the city. It made sense from up there. It had patterns. Even its famously chaotic traffic had a predictable ebb and flow.
After almost 160 days, Clemans had an altercation with a Space Needle employee. Before he could get on the elevator, she asked him to pose for a photo in the booth at the top of the ramp, just like the tourists. He had been asked to do it a hundred times. It was senseless, and it enraged him. “I blew up at her,” he says. Just like that, the world-record holder was banned from the Space Needle for life.
Adrift, he disappeared from public view. He worked on code, dabbled in robotics and considered a career as a paramedic. He was pulled over for reckless driving and hired a lawyer known for his successful dashcam requests and, he claims, the video didn’t entirely match the police report, so the court reduced the charges. He met a woman on OKCupid, getting her attention by suggesting that they go build sand castles together.
“It was like a D.D.O.S. attack,” Wagers says, comparing Clemans’s first email to a distributed denial of service attack, in which hackers send so much traffic to a website that it crashes. “It was going to seize up the system.” The request was simple, but it was just what Perry had warned about: Clemans wanted every single video the Seattle Police Department ever recorded, everything not tied up in an investigation. That September, Clemans sent similar messages to almost every police department in the state. Worried the police would retaliate if they could find him, he used an untraceable email address |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Some police departments started sending videos immediately, some proposed installment plans and some announced they were delaying their bodycam programs. In Poulsbo, a town of 9,500 people across the Puget Sound from Seattle, the mayor desperately emailed her local state legislator and asked him to do something about the cameras and the Public Records Act.
Unlike its smaller counterparts, the Seattle department did not give its unknown nemesis any footage. Clemans responded by programming a bot. It scraped the department’s website for new case numbers, then automatically requested the corresponding police reports, firing off emails 10 times a day. The more the authorities denied him, the more his appetite grew. He asked the University of Washington for all its records dating back to “the formation of the Earth 4.54 billion years ago.” He filed requests with another 60 state agencies, demanding every email they had ever sent — 600 million messages in all, according to a state estimate. The Department of Agriculture informed Clemans it would need 132 years to complete the job.
But Wagers offered to “do you one better,” and he tweeted a phone number. “Here’s my cell,” he wrote. “I give it out to everyone. Call me & happy to answer questions.” It was 6:57 p.m. One minute later, Wagers’s phone rang. It was Clemans. He still didn’t give his real name — he had been overwhelmed by media interest in his transparency fight — but readily accepted when Wagers invited him to lunch.
The next day, Clemans met Wagers and Mary Perry at Police Headquarters. They ordered a pizza. Perry tried to explain that it was technically impossible for the department to release all its archived video anytime soon. Clemans countered with an idea he had. He called it “overredaction.” If the system was paralyzed by the need for frame-by-frame redactions, he wondered, why not automatically redact everything? That is, instead of jockeying with requesters, painstakingly reviewing each video, blurring out the protected parts and burning the results onto DVD after DVD, the department could just use software to lightly blur everything, then proactively publish each blurred video online. Push, not pull. Viewers would be able to make out enough to know if footage merited a specific records request and a more precise manual redaction, and they would presumably ask for only the segments they thought they needed; and no longer would the department be buried under its own video. He agreed to drop his mass requests if the department would try it out.
In fact, Clemans said, he had stayed up all night writing a very rough version of the overredaction code and printed it out. He showed them what he had done.
The cameras that Seattle planned to use in its pilot program — which would be worn on patrol by a dozen officers in its East Precinct, their video uploaded to a server at the end of every shift — were from two local companies: Vievu, which was founded by a former Seattle SWAT officer, Steve Ward, in 2007, and its main rival, Axon, a division of Taser that is responsible for the reliable spike in the parent company’s stock after major police shootings. Together the two companies dominate a market that analysts believe will soon be worth a billion dollars a year, with much of the value coming from software and storage. Both Vievu and Axon offered bundles that paired their cameras with editing programs that ran in the cloud, processing them on computers maintained by Amazon Web Services or Microsoft’s Azure, which are also Seattle-area companies.
But neither bundle came cheap. The millions of dollars that major police departments were beginning to spend on bodycam contracts were millions they weren’t spending on better training or new officers, and neither company had come close to perfecting automated redaction, without which Seattle Police would simply be collecting more footage without any better way to share it with requesters. Seattle needed an end-to-end software fix, Wagers realized, and Seattle was also a city full of programmers. So the day before the pilot program started, he also tried another experiment: With help from Clemans, he held the department’s first-ever hackathon.
The overflow crowd of 80 people was “straight out of central casting,” Wagers says. “Skinny jeans. Hoodies. People who had sued the department. People I know I’d seen on the protest line the previous week.” Clemans demonstrated his overredaction program: the world as if filmed through a beer glass, fuzzy but familiar, in which it was still possible (too possible, some worried) to tell who was tall and who was short and who was male and who was female and who was black and who was white and who was running and who was chasing. It was well received, and several programmers in the room offered to help Clemans improve the algorithm. But Clemans, volunteering his time and his skills, would be the linchpin. The pilot would run for six months, and if it went well, 12 officers would soon become 850.
The next day, on Dec. 20, as TV stations aired reports on the department’s innovative approach to transparency, the bodycam pilot began. Clemans and the department soon developed a rhythm: Some of the videos coming in from the East Precinct were saved to U.S.B. sticks, and Clemans, unpaid and on food stamps at the time, came downtown by bus to pick them up. He processed them on his bedroom computer, tweaking the overredaction program as he went, trying to code in the right balance of concealment and transparency.
Even as he helped run Seattle’s experiment in open government, Clemans continued to receive hundreds of hours of dashcam and bodycam video from other police departments around the state, much of it unredacted. And, just as he had promised to do in his records requests, he was continuing to upload it — unredacted — to YouTube. The first videos he posted show, with perfect clarity, drunken-driving stops from the towns Renton and Tukwila, south of Seattle, and include disturbing footage of a young white man being shocked with a Taser in the dark beneath the tree where he had just crashed his car, the scene illuminated by flashing lights. In another video, two officers rush to help a man suffering from a heart attack on a freeway overpass, saving his life. Others depict foot chases or friendly interactions with homeless people, and they gave Clemans more respect for the police and the difficulties they face every day. “Policing is just really hard,” he says. But he didn’t watch all the footage himself, because he didn’t have time and new projects beckoned.
I watched more than a dozen hours of the video. There were no shootings. Most of it was routine police work, which may be why it was so disturbing to see online. In one set of videos that Clemans posted, a well-dressed white mother of two is pulled over late on a Friday night. She is composed until she fails a sobriety test. Then she pleads for a chance to call the babysitter — according to Facebook, where I found her because the video also revealed her name, she has a young daughter and younger son — before breaking down in loud screams and sobs in the back of a patrol car.
Elsewhere in the state, also on YouTube, a body camera captures the inside of a woman’s home as she explains how her accused stalker has been ignoring a restraining order. A father pleads with two officers to check in on his adult daughter, who he says has intellectual disabilities and has become involved with a man he believes is dangerous. Two college roommates accuse each other of theft and intimidation in their living room. A white woman apparently overdosing on meth, who cries out that she’s pregnant, is restrained and given medical attention. A middle-aged black man opens his apartment door for a group of officers who inform him that he has been screaming all night. Slurring his words, he admits he’s suffering from PTSD and that he has a history of heroin use. He refuses to let them take him to the hospital. He refuses even when an officer reminds him that he has been screaming like this off and on for a month. But now you can hear the fear in his voice. “Am I screaming right now?” he wonders.
He begins filling out a form — Escort Face Sheet — on a clipboard. She answers every question, sharing the intimate details of her life. She tells him about her relationship with her boyfriend, her clashes with her strict father, her time as a runaway, her drift from strip clubs to Backpage.com escort ads, her few regular johns. She claims she’s new to this work. She explains that she charges per hour or half-hour. She has a dog, she says. She can rely on her parents in times of need, she says. She gives him their street address. She gives him her full name. She shares her private email address and phone number. She shares all this with the camera too.
When the interview is done, she asks about it. Is the image clear? “It’s pretty clear, yeah,” the officer says, but “if the press wanted it, we can redact faces — can blur out the faces and whatnot.” Body cameras are new to his city, and he doesn’t know that what he just told her isn’t entirely true. A lawyer will decide that the video is in no part exempt from the Public Records Act, and the officer will later be shocked to see it on YouTube. He will try and fail to have it taken down. The woman in the video is easy to find in her other internet life. She’s on Facebook, Twitter and Pinterest, where she chats with friends and posts images of dresses and animals and nail polish. You can visit her parents’ house on Google Street View.
One of the first people revealed to the public by Clemans’s transparency quest was Clemans himself. His mass records requests had drawn the interest of local reporters, who started filing requests of their own to the Police Department, seeking his identity. After they got his phone number, Clemans pre-emptively outed himself, embracing the role of tech seer. He published a letter in January 2015 explaining his mission on the website of the Seattle Privacy Coalition. “I pushed the envelope,” he wrote, “so we as a society can once and for all address accurately recording of the truth, who should have access to the truth and what we are to do with the truth.” He told the local news site Crosscut that the Public Records Act did need to be amended. “It’s not going to change until it becomes a massive problem,” he said. He told Seattle Weekly that his experience with police videos had convinced him that certain things shouldn’t be made public. He left the footage on YouTube precisely to make that point. “I don’t think people are going to deal with this until they have an emotional reaction,” he said.
The growing national welter of contradictory state laws and department policies signals that there is no settled answer. Some allow officers to view it before writing their reports. (That was the central issue earlier this month in Portland, Ore., that caused protesters to storm its City Hall, where police officers met them with bursts of pepper spray.) Some do not. Some treat all bodycam videos as public records; some limit their release. Some mandate a quick deletion of police video; some have no requirements to delete it at all. Some restrict the use of facial recognition software; most allow it. A technology meant for one purpose, once unleashed, is soon used for many others.
One commissioner, Jay Hollingsworth of the Mohegan tribe, the chairman of the John T. Williams Organizing Committee, named for a hard-of-hearing Native American whose 2010 shooting was partly captured on dashcam, answered Keenan’s “when” question simply: Bodycams should always be on. To his right, another commissioner, Jennifer Shaw, the deputy director of the A.C.L.U. of Washington, said that she agreed in theory but that her organization supported the cameras only if they were used exclusively for police accountability. Next, Ron Smith, a detective who then headed the Seattle Police Officers’ Guild, said that he was also in favor of bodycams because he believed they would exonerate officers from complaints. But the cameras went into homes and on lunch and bathroom breaks, and officers absolutely had to be able to switch them on and off.
At the end of the table were two activists, Marissa Johnson and Dan Bash. Johnson later became nationally known for leaping onstage at a Bernie Sanders rally, claiming the candidate’s microphone and telling him he needed to do more to acknowledge the Black Lives Matter movement.  Forget the policy details. She did not consent to being recorded at all. She did not trust the police to do the right thing with the footage. Most of all, she did not trust prosecutors to use it to prosecute officers. “Why do I need a home video of my abuse that’s going to be filmed by my oppressor?” she asked.
An uncomfortable silence filled the room. Then Hollingsworth announced that the other panelists had made him change his mind, leaving the two employees of the Police Department, Wagers and Smith, two white men, the only people onstage who clearly supported bodycams. The mood became tense, and members of the crowd interrupted the next speaker and soon assumed control of the room, taking turns denouncing police brutality and glaring at Smith, who was eventually escorted to his car by another officer.
Much of the moral case for bodycams, that they reduce police violence, rests on a single experiment: the 2012 Rialto study that Wagers referenced. Rialto is a city of almost 100,000 people, most of them Latino but with significant black and Pacific Islander minorities, that sits in the desert and sprawl east of Los Angeles. Its population is much smaller and more diverse than Seattle’s, its police force is much smaller and its murder rate is significantly higher. Of its 115 sworn police officers at the time of the study, 54 regularly conducted patrols, and all 54 were issued body cameras courtesy of Taser. For a full year, half of the front-line officers on a given 12-hour shift were randomly assigned to wear their cameras, while the other half served as the control. The data from nearly 1,000 shifts and 50,000 hours of police-public interactions showed that when officers wore bodycams, they were less likely to use batons, Tasers, firearms and pepper spray or to have confrontations that resulted in police-dog bites, and they were far less likely to receive civilian complaints about their conduct.
In an essay published shortly after the White House announced its $75 million in bodycam funding in 2014, two authors of the study, Barak Ariel and Alex Sutherland, hypothesized that it was not cameras alone that drove the positive results; it was the fact that before every interaction with a citizen, officers in the trial were required to announce that they were recording. There may have been a “self-awareness effect”: Both parties were reminded at the moment of contact that they were under surveillance and that they should behave accordingly. One question was whether the effect would hold up if officers did not announce the cameras’ presence. Another was whether it would hold up when the cameras lost their novelty.
Ariel and Sutherland also worried about anyone basing decisions on a single study, which, no matter how rigorous, could well be a fluke, “the statistical equivalent of ‘luck,’ ” they wrote. The Rialto sample was small. The notable drop in citizen complaints, for instance, was from 28 in the yearlong period before the study to 3 while it was underway. At least 40 reasonably scientific studies have followed Rialto, but many, according to a recent survey carried out by George Mason University, have yet to be published.
Rialto suggests a drop in the use of force. A study from Arizona suggests a drop in arrests but a rise in citations. A separate Arizona study, along with one from London, suggests a rise in arrests. When Temple University researchers recently sifted through a Washington Post database of 986 deadly shootings of civilians by police in 2015, they found that when officers wore body cameras, civilians were 3.64 percent more likely to die. The increase was more pronounced, 3.75 percent, in the deaths of African-Americans and Hispanics and a barely measurable 0.67 percent in the deaths of Caucasians and Asians. They hypothesized that a different kind of self-awareness was at work: Officers, aware of their bodycams and more certain their use of deadly force would be seen as justified, were less likely to hesitate.
The Seattle Police Department introduced its new YouTube channel, “S.P.D. BodyWornVideo,” on Feb. 23, 2015, less than two weeks after the Community Police Commission warned about unintended consequences in its news release. Featuring footage from the pilot program, with the images automatically blurred and the audio muted, it was a national first, and tens of thousands of people tuned in. The earliest videos were of Seattle’s explosive Martin Luther King Day demonstrations the previous month, and they appeared on the channel as a kind of fever dream. Protesters, rendered in fog and grayscale and digitally stripped of their voices, were mostly unrecognizable as they marched onto a freeway demanding justice for Michael Brown and were arrested and shackled on the ground and then trundled into police cruisers.
Wagers began receiving calls and email from departments around the country. The future of policing, he saw, was now more than ever reliant on what technology the police could afford to buy from companies like those that built modern Seattle. He pledged that Clemans’s code, once completed, would be open-source and freely shared so that smaller agencies, which didn’t have the staff to handle video-records requests, let alone the money for bundled bodycam contracts, could stay on the cutting edge. In one overredaction test, the department processed 2,400 videos in three hours on rented Amazon Web Services computers in the cloud, a task that would have gummed up the public-disclosure unit of the Seattle Police for weeks had the files been redacted manually. The computer rental cost the department $1.20 — 40 cents an hour — Wagers marveled. To meet the demands of the Public Records Act, all Clemans needed to do was get his algorithm to redact only faces and other private details, rather than the full frame.
Clemans was now an employee: The department had offered him a six-month contract at $22.60 an hour. But when the pilot program ended in July, and the question of whether to expand it loomed, he still had not perfected his code. He was trying to solve a problem, mostly by himself, that teams of professional engineers at Taser and its rivals have yet to fully crack. Distracted, he noticed other inefficiencies at Police Headquarters and he felt increasingly compelled to fix them. After visiting the understaffed 911 center, then in the news for its slow response times, he came up with a new idea: a program that automatically highlighted the most pressing calls, allowing dispatchers to be more efficient. But the captain in charge of the 911 center didn’t welcome his intrusion, and he belittled the idea at a tense late-August meeting brokered by their superiors. Clemans, by his own admission, “got really mad.” He swore at the captain. He yelled until he had to be escorted from the building. And just like that, in an echo of his Space Needle blowup, he was exiled from headquarters. He made a threat on his way out: “I’m going to P.D.R.” — public-disclosure request — “the [expletive] out of you,” he shouted.
In September 2015, when Seattle won a $600,000 Justice Department grant to expand the bodycam program to the rest of the police force, which the mayor pledged to more than match, Clemans wasn’t there to help celebrate. He was working remotely, back in his bedroom or hunched over a laptop at the Starbucks he now frequented on the 40th floor of Columbia Center, the tallest building in town, where the views were stunning and free.
Days after the grant announcement, Attorney General Loretta Lynch came to Seattle to declare it a national model for police reform. The federal monitor overseeing the consent decree, who had previously lauded the overredaction experiment when calling for rapid deployment of bodycams, now praised the department’s systematic approach to investigating any use of force — a significant change from the cursory reporting of the past. Wagers, meanwhile, was helping Chief O’Toole to select his replacement. He had by then been in Seattle and away from his wife and children for more than a year.
On Oct. 29, 2015, a week after Wagers announced he was leaving the department, Clemans texted in his own resignation. He no longer believed the department could ever truly be transparent on its own, he told me. His time inside the department, far from co-opting him, had weaponized him after his blowup with the 911 captain: He knew even better which records to request. He wrote a new bot capable of sending the department up to 10,000 requests in 24 hours. He asked for 911 records, “tables & columns of all databases,” all front-facing dashcam video from 2014 and “all computer codes written by Tim Clemans.” Over the next few days, he piled on, requesting “all roll-call notes,” text records from the department’s license-plate scanners, the source codes of key department software and “all Outlook calendars of supervisors, managers & command staff.” He also started building a website where he would publish it all, which he called the People’s NSA. He expanded his demands to include every public record in every format — paper, tape or digital — the City of Seattle had. He soon asked 39 neighboring cities for the same. By the end of 2015, according to a study on public-records requests he obtained via a public-records request, Clemans had filed 2,272 requests to the Seattle Police Department alone, making him again its No. 1 antagonist. One day at her office, Mary Perry showed me a printout of the latest ones, five pages long. “We’re being crippled,” she said. Wagers was on his way home, Clemans was making more demands than ever and she was back where she started.
This summer, I joined Clemans at a Black Lives Matter march in Seattle. He was there to watch the police as protesters demanded justice for Philando Castile and Alton Sterling, whose deaths were captured not by bodycams but by citizens’ phones. His overredaction code was about to be revived. Wagers had taken a job at the Virginia offices of Amazon Web Services, the hidden architecture behind America’s police-video revolution, where he was contacted by a company that wanted to merge Clemans’s software with the website crimereports.com. Now, a prototype was in the works, with support and partial funding from Amazon.
Searching for blurred video of a crime down your block may someday be as easy as searching for a restaurant on Google Maps. But a new state law making footage harder to request in bulk — the Tim Clemans Act, his friends called it — had just gone into effect thanks to the efforts of Poulsbo, the small town that had contacted its state representative. Clemans had also been studying YouTube’s privacy policy, and he would soon decide to remove the videos he posted there from public view. For now, though, he wore his own D.I.Y. bodycam, a cellphone strapped to a chest harness, and was streaming live to the internet as he followed the protesters and the police on a borrowed bicycle.
The protesters gathered outside the department’s East Precinct. An old man, homeless, busking below a mural, quickly collected his things before any violence could break out. But none did. According to the judge who would preside over the latest consent-decree hearing a few weeks later, notably saying the words “black lives matter” from the bench, the department was making steady strides toward an exit from federal oversight: Its de-escalation tactics were a national model, he said, and its use of force was substantially down. He never mentioned bodycams.
As the light drained from the sky, I watched a bicycle officer help Clemans pump up his tires and fix his brakes. Young black women and men took turns at the bullhorn, their voices loud, their demand — stop killing us — clear, and the officers hung back. The only people filming anything were the other activists. Fifteen months after its pilot program ended, Seattle has yet to agree on its answer to the simple question about bodycams: Whom do they serve?