Op-eds don’t make good operas. That much was clear from Friday’s performance of “The Hunger” at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, a fully staged work by the composer Donnacha Dennehy about the Irish famine of 1845-52, in which at least one million people died and another million were driven to emigrate. The subject could make a compelling background to a drama peopled with flesh-and-blood characters. But “The Hunger” is more of a lecture than an opera: Dramatically static and musically amorphous, the work is interspersed with filmed interviews in which academics invoke the evils of capitalism and colonialism.
At least Mr. Dennehy found a fascinating protagonist in the historical figure Asenath Nicholson. She was an American schoolteacher and boardinghouse keeper who traveled extensively throughout Ireland in the 1840s and bore witness to the suffering she encountered there with fierce clarity and compassion. But while the British soprano Katherine Manley sang her part with chiseled grace and silken tone, her texts, recalling scenes of grinding poverty and desperation, always maintained a retrospective distance to the events she describes.
The opera’s only other character, whose role is sung in Gaelic by the magnificently expressive Irish folk singer Iarla O Lionaird, is a nameless famine victim who sends arching laments and prayers toward heaven. The parallel vocal worlds represented by her shapely lyricism and his emotionally raw, guttural keening created an interesting musical tension that might have been exploited more effectively.
But too much of the text is bathed in a sympathetic wash of orchestral writing that ultimately weakens the emotional impact. The stellar ensemble Alarm Will Sound, conducted by Alan Pierson, brought flow and nuanced color to the score, which contains extensive passages of Minimalist chugging and sighing, wilting gestures that echo the plangency of Mr. O Lionaird’s traditional songs.
The set by Jim Findlay consisted of a wedge-shaped grassy slope that looked like a miniature version of the Irish Hunger Memorial in Lower Manhattan, except instead of wildflowers it sprouted flat-screen monitors. These sprang to life intermittently to display snippets of interviews the show’s director, Tom Creed, had conducted with economists and historians, including Noam Chomsky, Paul Krugman and Branko Milanovic.
Together they created the fairly preposterous impression that most historians of the Great Famine lay the blame with the Irish. In fact, few viewers will have objected to the underlying message that it is not crop failure but intransigent and ideologically blinkered humans who cause most famines. But the didactic contributions by these experts quickly grew irritating — as did Mr. Findlay’s decision to have these images flit from one screen to the next so that the talking heads seemed to rear up from the heath like rabbits.