The architect Francis Kéré was born in a poor village in Burkina Faso where there was no school, no electricity and no access to clean drinking water. His father, the village chief, decided that his son should be the first in the family to learn how to read and write, so he sent him at age 7 to live with an uncle in a distant city, where he sat with 150 other students in an unventilated classroom in 110-degree heat. During his free time, like many of his peers, Mr. Kéré had to work, spending hours fixing crudely built homes, which were in a perpetual state of disrepair. “In my heart, I felt even then that I wanted to build things better one day, so that kids like me would be free to learn,” he said.
Mr. Kéré won a scholarship to study in Germany and worked his way into architecture school at the Technical University of Berlin. For his first student project, in 2001, he raised $50,000 to build an elementary school in his native village of Gando. He enlisted the help of local villagers, drawing blueprints for them in the sand. He dug up red clay and compressed it into bricks.
Fifteen years on, the school has grown into a large educational complex, and Mr. Kéré, 51, has earned many laurels for his pathbreaking designs, including the prestigious Aga Khan architectural award. While he is based in Berlin, has taught at Harvard and exhibited at the Venice Biennale, most of Mr. Kéré’s architectural activity is still concentrated in West Africa, where he has built not only a number of schools but also medical centers, cultural spaces and, in Mali, even a national park.
Recently, Mr. Kéré has been devising ways of rebuilding the parliament building in Burkina Faso’s capital of Ouagadougou, which was set on fire during the country’s 2014 uprising. In the following edited interview, Mr. Kéré explains how his style of community architecture can play a part in preventing further violent clashes while also giving people the tools to improve their lives.
Q. One of the key ideas behind your work is that you’re not importing architecture to Africa or relying on foreign companies or NGOs. Instead, you try to empower local people to build from existing materials, techniques, traditions.
A. That’s true, but I also try to give them a powerful new meaning — a sense of modernity, a sense of “Wow, this is the same material that we know, but we’re using it differently.” I want to show people that you can build a structure from wood from the eucalyptus tree which they’ve only used for firewood. Or that you can make durable bricks out of clay, which they thought was a “poor people’s” building material. I want people to question the old ways of doing things. That’s the only way that things will ever change.
Q. Everyone can understand the value of building a school in a small village like Gando. But how do you balance essential humanitarian projects like that with something like the Opera Village, your collaboration with the late German theater and film director Christoph Schlingensief, which calls for a “world-class performance center” in a very remote area of the country? Is an opera what Burkina Faso, one of the world’s poorest countries, needs most?
A. When I first met Christoph, I was trying to build schools — little schools — and there wasn’t enough money even to do that. And he came to me and said, I want to build an opera in Africa. I thought the idea was just a provocation and that Christoph was this crazy dreamer. But he pushed me, and it was a very moving experience working with him. With time, I began to understand him, that he didn’t want to just replicate a Western-style opera house. He wanted to create a structure that could collect what the country had in terms of art, cinema, theater and promote it and exchange it with the outside world. And that’s what we’re building, but we also have artist housing, a primary school for more than 200 children that’s focused on art education and a medical center.
Q. You are involved in the effort to rebuild Burkina Faso’s parliament building, and there have been reports that you’re discouraging the government from constructing a Western-style official building. What do you see in its place?
A. You have to understand that the economy, the social behavior, the traditions in Burkina Faso are completely different than those in Europe or the United States. The main meeting structure in Burkina Faso is the tree. Even in the city, that is where people meet, sitting under the shade, to discuss things. I want to create a structure that is also a kind of organic meeting point, where everyone can go, rather than an isolated structure with high walls and security and a fence to keep people out of it. Gathering spaces are almost nonexistent in the capital. Why couldn’t we have one on top of the parliament, with a green roof that people could walk onto?
Q. Do you think turning an official building into a public space is a political statement?
A. I try to tell people that if you don’t create opportunity, if you don’t create a space that welcomes them, they can easily think you’re making decisions without them, and one day the people will rise up like they did in 2014. Even with guns and walls, they were not able to protect the old building from being destroyed.
Q. Almost immediately after starting your architecture studies, you came back to your native village and started building a school. What made you return so quickly?
A. I had a really big heart for my community and I was just naïve. I said to myself, “let’s go home and show to the family what you have learned in Germany.” I wanted to go and just do it. In a way I am happy that I was so naïve. You know people in Africa are dreaming for America, are dreaming for Europe, to have structures like in the western world. But often we are missing the knowledge of how to do it, and when they can they import that knowledge, and it’s very expensive. In Gando, we are a very poor village but we have the people and we have clay, and sand, and gravel, and I wanted to use them to create something that is so new that my people would be inspired. And I was lucky enough that it happened.