U.S.|California Today: The Drought Isn’t Going Away. What You Can Do.
California Today: The Drought Isn’t Going Away. What You Can Do.
The drought is not going away.
Adam Nagourney, the Los Angeles bureau chief, traveled to a Central Valley farming community that became a national symbol of the drought. He wrote on Wednesday about a setback in Californians’ efforts to conserve water that has some experts worried.
While the situation has improved since last year, meteorologists say we are a long way from replenishing our groundwater supplies and reservoirs. And the drought shows no sign of ending.
What does this all mean for Californians?
• What should individual Californians be doing right now to help relieve the drought?
Two things: replace inefficient appliances in our homes, businesses and farms, and change our water-using behaviors. The first option results in permanent improvements in water-use efficiency. The second offers temporary savings. For example, letting your lawn go brown is a temporary savings, but replacing your water-hogging lawn with a beautiful garden of drought-tolerant plants is a permanent improvement.
• Is this a typical cyclical drought?
No. Its length and severity are, in many ways, unprecedented, but perhaps the most significant new factor is the growing influence of human-caused climate change in the form of rising temperatures and changing storm patterns. The fingerprints of climate change are evident now and are forcing water managers to rethink old assumptions about how to tackle California’s water problems.
• What’s the worst that can happen if things don’t turn around?
We already face a real risk that a wide range of fish species will go extinct. A continuing drought will lead to a reduction in the acreage we can reliably irrigate. And we may see rising numbers of people, especially in disadvantaged communities in the Central Valley, without access to safe and affordable water.
• What’s the most important step the state can take to mitigate the drought?
Three critical steps: Improve water conservation and efficiency; expand the use of nontraditional sources of water, especially storm water and treatment and reuse of wastewater, and communicate to the public about the need to play a role in improving our water use.
• How long can I take shower for without feeling guilty?
Ha. A 10-minute shower with an old five-gallons-per-minute shower head uses 50 gallons.  So the first step toward a guilt-free shower is replace your old shower head. After that, just don’t linger!
This week, a new musical that celebrates and lampoons Silicon Valley starts a limited run in San Francisco. The show, “South of Market: The Musical,” features a cast of professional actors and actual techies. There are jokes about working in the on-demand economy, the struggles of women in technology, Dolores Park and brunch.
“It’s everything that’s amazing about San Francisco and everything unique about tech and where they clash,” said Pat Blute, the show’s producer and writer.
The musical revolves around Riley, a founder of a fictional start-up who is in crisis because at almost 30 he hasn’t made a single “30 under 30” list. His co-founder, Delia, is dealing with the frustrations of being a woman in a male-dominated industry.
One recurring joke – and a common complaint among women in the tech industry – is that Riley can bloviate about strategy and use impenetrable jargon, but whenever Delia makes a statement it instantly gets challenged by the various men in the room.
Mr. Blute is poking fun with love. He lives in San Francisco and does marketing and event promotion for a stable of tech company clients. The cast has a number of people who work at companies like Dropbox and Yammer.
There will also be some notable cameos, including a brief appearance by Aileen Lee, who coined the now-ubiquitous term “Unicorn” to describe a start-up valued in excess of $1 billion.
The show runs from Thursday to Sunday, and is itself a kind of start-up. Mr. Blute said he’s talking with investors about a producing a bigger version of the show with hopes for an extended run.
