TORONTO — A boot print. A lab report. A missing file.
These were the main components of a chewy hunk of dialogue that Hayley Atwell kept delivering over several takes on the set of the new ABC drama “Conviction.” It wasn’t Shakespeare, but it didn’t need to be: Her dialogue drew the requisite road map of legal procedurals — you know, that scene where people sit around a table and try to solve the case.
“Exposition party!” Ms. Atwell joked with her co-stars between takes.
“Conviction,” having its premiere Monday, Oct. 3, is network TV at its networkiest: a talky true-crime office drama with a steady moral compass. Not that there’s anything wrong with that, but Ms. Atwell comes from the London stage and pedigreed British film and television costume dramas like the 2008 “Brideshead Revisited” remake and the 2010 Bafta-winning series “Any Human Heart.” So around the fifth time she repeated the boot-print line, a sincere question arose: What’s an actress like you doing on a show like this?
It’s not the first time that query has seemed germane to Ms. Atwell’s career arc. She’s best known to American audiences from the Marvel blockbuster world, where she has played Agent Peggy Carter, in films and on television. But though we non-stars tend to imagine that celebrated actors sit before a buffet of roles, plucking their choices, Ms. Atwell scoffed at the supposition. She loves and needs to work, she said, but the nature of that work is not always hers to determine.
Ms. Atwell, 34, was in her trailer, with her character’s leopard print stilettos strewn on the floor and her foster dog, a Chihuahua-dachshund mix named Howard, making himself comfortable in a reporter’s lap. Ms. Atwell is the daughter of parents who met at a Dale Carnegie seminar, and in person, she seemed very much “in process,” her big-laugh, expletive-streaked brazenness punctuated by moments of wandering introspection.
A lucrative paycheck might be enough to lure any actor to a network show, but Ms. Atwell was captivated by the character of Morrison, whom Ms. Friedman describes as “Chelsea Clinton by way of the Bush twins.” In the first episode, she’s charged with cocaine possession and released from jail after cutting a deal with the district attorney (Eddie Cahill) and agreeing to lead the conviction integrity unit.
Though she has a dialogue coach to nail the accent (Ms. Clinton was an influence), Ms. Atwell is actually half-American. Her parents divorced when she was 2, and her American father went back to the United States to train in shamanism and work as a massage therapist. She grew up in grittier precincts within the Notting Hill neighborhood of London with her mother, who was a motivational speaker. (At a personal empowerment seminar at the age of 9, Ms. Atwell walked across hot coals.) In the summers, she would visit her father in Kansas City, Mo., where she caught fireflies in a jar and delighted in Fourth of July fireworks.
Ms. Atwell looks back on her decade as a working actor with a kind of melancholy, saying there have been moments of depression as she’s wondered if she made the right choice of a profession.
“This industry can breed self-obsession, narcissism, such a fragile sense of self, and I’ve been guilty myself of feeling that the validation of my audiences validates me as a human being,” she said.
She quickly rebooted to her art-loving default. “But the best thing about this industry is the potential to have moments of freedom from the bondage of myself, which is what acting is, to be out of my own hell, my self-inflicted doubt,” she said.
In May, “Agent Carter” was canceled and “Conviction” greenlit. Relocated to Toronto for the shoot, Ms. Atwell is gratefully single. “I need to focus fully on learning from this,” she said. While more equitable for women than film, TV remains a male-dominated industry, and “Conviction” is the rare drama created and run by two women (with Mark Gordon producing). On the set, Ms. Atwell is watching and asking questions, considering a shift into directing and producing.
