The Hungarian prime minster, Viktor Orban, celebrated the referendum's outcome Sunday, which showed overwhelming support for his hard line on immigration, though too few voters turned out for the results to be legally valid.
BUDAPEST — Hungarians handed the country’s autocratic prime minister, Viktor Orban, a partial victory on Sunday by overwhelmingly voting “no” in a national referendum on whether to accept more migrants, but without giving him the turnout for a valid result. What Mr. Orban intends to do now, however, remains a mystery.
The referendum — on which the government spent at least 10 billion Hungarian forint, or about $36 million — included no specifics about legislation or government action.
“What will happen after the referendum will depend partly on the results themselves, but also on what is happening on the international scene,” said Zoltan Kovacs, Mr. Orban’s chief international spokesman, who declined to provide any more details.
Despite the failure to meet the turnout threshold, Mr. Orban said he considered the vote a mandate for the government to pursue its anti-immigrant policies.
In 2015, Mr. Orban made a name for himself by building a heavily guarded, razor-wire fence across the country’s southern borders to stem the flood of migrants into Hungary. He is the leader of one of a growing number of nationalistic, right-wing parties spreading across Europe, fueled by fear of migrants and resentment about the centralization of the European Union’s power.
Leaders across the Continent were closely watching the outcome of the vote and what actions Mr. Orban would take afterward.
Poland’s foreign minister, Witold Waszczykowski, recently echoed Mr. Orban’s call for restructuring the European Union to return more power to individual nations. “Our proposals are quite radical,” Mr. Waszczykowski said.
Further fueling populist leaders, Mr. Fodor said, is the reality that Europe’s economy is less robust than it was in the 1990s.
Even Europe’s most powerful leader, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, is in real danger of falling to this nationalist tide in next year’s elections.
But Mr. Orban has not been specific about what those steps will be. Instead, rumors swirl: There is talk of an amendment to Hungary’s Constitution preventing the European Union from imposing rules on the country without the approval of Parliament. Some say Mr. Orban is likely to hold early elections to take advantage of the referendum’s momentum.
Mr. Orban wants more autonomy from the European Union, but he also does not want to threaten the flow of desperately needed aid from the bloc’s headquarters in Brussels.
Whether Mr. Orban will storm up the Danube and lay siege to Brussels, or whether this was just a very expensive exercise in rallying domestic support, is the subject of much debate here.
But as the flow of migrants into Hungary has slowed in recent months — largely because of Mr. Orban’s border fence — the issue has slipped from public consciousness.
Mr. Orban was aided by a lack of unity among the opposition, mainly because there is little popular support anywhere for admitting more migrants.
Most left-wing parties had urged their supporters to stay home on Sunday, hoping to deny Mr. Orban the turnout he needed for a valid vote — although there remained questions about what that meant for a referendum that demanded no specific actions by the government other than opposing European Union refugee policies.
Amid a migrant crisis and discontent with the European Union, many far-right parties have achieved electoral success. Here are eight of the most noteworthy.
In failing to meet the legal threshold, Mr. Orban’s government found itself hoisted by its own petard. In 2011, the government raised the level of voter turnout necessary for a referendum to be considered valid to 50 percent, from 25 percent. Critics said the move was intended to stifle popular efforts to overturn Mr. Orban’s policies.
The prankster Two-Tailed Dog Party, which has fought the government with irreverent humor, had urged people to purposely cast an invalid ballot, which, in sufficient numbers, they hoped would deny the government its 50 percent threshold.
Voting on Sunday morning in Budapest, Mr. Orban said that while a valid result was certainly better than an invalid one, there would be “legal consequences” in either event, as long as there were more “no” votes than “yes” votes.
Only Mr. Fodor’s tiny Liberal Party urged citizens to vote “yes,” arguing that the referendum should be seen as a measure of support for the European Union.