Philosophy is generally concerned with higher truths. But this week, conversation in the profession turned to decidedly lower-order functions, after word emerged that four philosophers loosely connected through a long-running, multisided argument with one of the field’s most vocal figures had been sent packages filled with excrement.
The mailings, which were received over the summer, were reported on Thursday by BuzzFeed. They involved three professors in the United States and one in Canada, all of whom have pushed back against what they and many others see as the field’s hostility to women and minorities as well as its overly brutal style of argument.
Within hours, comments — and more than a few unprintable jokes — were flying, along with speculation about who was responsible, as well whether the fecal mailings were symbolic, or merely redolent of, the broader controversies roiling the field.
For his part, Mr. Weinberg took a rigorously empirical stance.
“What’s likely happened is that one person who has problems sent their feces to other philosophers,” he said.
Those philosophers include Sally Haslanger at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, J. David Velleman of New York University, Carolyn Dicey Jennings of the University of California at Merced and Carrie Ichikawa Jenkins of the University of British Columbia.
“There is no pleasure for me in knowing there is someone out there so obsessed with me and so deranged that they would pull a vile stunt like this,” he added in an email.
Some in the field have come to Mr. Leiter’s defense against accusations that he was involved with the mailings. David Wallace, a philosopher of science at the University of Southern California, in a long comment thread on Daily Nous disputed the suggestion in that thread that Mr. Leiter may have sent the feces.
In an interview, Ms. Jennings said she couldn’t be sure that Mr. Leiter was involved but that the incident still reflected on him.
Mr. Weinberg echoed that view. “I don’t think he did it. But the fact that a not-trivial number of people are entertaining the idea tells you something about him and the kind of culture he’s fostered in the discipline, more than it tells us something about philosophy as a whole,” he said.
Ms. Haslanger said that while she had no idea who had sent the feces, the packages were intended to send a very distinct message.
