With “Joanne,” the inscrutable pop performer reveals her most arresting character yet: herself.
One afternoon this past July, in the West Village, in Electric Lady Studios, Jimi Hendrix’s old dream, I met Lady Gaga. She came up a flight of steps and was through the door almost before I could stand up, hugging me. 
The 30-year-old performer was in New York, in this temple of music, recording her new album, “Joanne.” She said we might as well begin by listening to some songs from it and led the way into an inner studio of large electronic boards and glass. She sat on a stool by one of the boards and plugged in her iPhone. A cameraman — she is making a documentary about the new project — filmed the whole time.
The first song she played, the lead single, “Perfect Illusion,” is a driving, flat-out, dance-a-mess tune. A ballad followed, a tribute to her aunt Joanne, whom she never knew but was named for. (She was born Stefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta.) Joanne died at age 19, of complications from lupus, and Gaga said, tears in her eyes as the touching song hung in the air, that her family never stopped grieving the loss.
To snap us out of it, she selected another upbeat number. Right off, she turned toward me and hit the air guitar, lip-syncing, rocking her shoulders. At one point, she was up on her Doc Martens, bopping, then thrashing around, a woman possessed. It is impossible to resist Gaga churning it up, maxing out, only a few feet away — and why would you want to? As with, it seems, every room she walks into, Gaga came into this one and put it all on the line. In her work, her trust is as vivid as the risks she takes.
Gaga, who grew up in New York, on the Upper West Side, was 13 years old and trying on clothes at a neighborhood boutique when the guy who ran the shop heard her singing to herself. He thought she had an amazing voice and suggested she reach out to his uncle, Don Lawrence, a vocal coach who’d worked with Christina Aguilera, Mick Jagger and Billy Joel. Gaga said she was shaking when they first spoke. Lawrence gave her an appointment. She sang Mariah Carey’s “Hero” for him, and he told her that he would make room in his schedule for her, and give her a special rate, if she practiced every day. She promised she would.
Seventeen years later, Lawrence is still putting her through her scales “like an army.” He trained her for the Oscars; he was there for her “Star-Spangled Banner” at Super Bowl 50; he was listening to her downstairs at Electric Lady Studios only two days before. Family is the most important thing in the world to Gaga, and Lawrence is family.
To perform is not a need for her, it is a must: “My whole life is a theater piece.” She doesn’t remember herself as being different from her classmates, though she will concede that they may have felt it in her eagerness to practice, in her willingness to miss out on the fun, to be in almost every school show, the jazz band, to study piano, take ballet and tap classes. Her career answered them.
New York’s various undergrounds can make for a disciplined apprenticeship, and Gaga takes pride in her earliest fan base of art, fashion and music students. (“My artpop could mean anything,” a song of hers goes.) Her eclectic music videos are theatrical: full of depth, volume, costume and color, every move thought out to the edges of the frame. She has collaborated with Robert Wilson, master of avant-garde theater, making in 2013 the controversial video “Flying,” in which she is bound nude and hoisted aloft. (“Do what you want with my body,” she sang in another song. “You can’t stop my voice.”) In a series of video portraits, also from 2013, Wilson had Gaga portray, among other images from European painting, the head of John the Baptist on a charger.
And she keeps branching out; she can’t see spending her life keeping up with the kids. “I wanted to become a woman,” she said of the album of jazz standards she released in 2014 with Tony Bennett. “My audience went, ‘Wait, why is she singing jazz? What’s going on?’ And then they went, ‘Oh, because she can. Because she loves it.’ And jazz, a music invented by the African-American community, is the greatest art form, I believe, to have ever come out of this country.” She knows the history, and what it means to be a white artist singing jazz, but when she was a kid she did not “process music in a racial way or in a gender way.” She was, she said, just listening.
