In this episode, a Haggler intervention and then a pair of updates about previous columns. There is a lot of ground to cover and consumer justice to dispense. So let’s go.
Q. In August of last year, I purchased three bean bag chairs for my kids from PBTeen, Pottery Barn’s teen-targeted store. In March, I realized that one of the inserts had burst, because when I unzipped the cover, thousands of those little white foam beads scattered all over the place. I called PBTeen’s customer service and spoke with a representative, who said I needed to send a photo of the defective insert to an email address. I did that.
After hearing nothing for a couple of months, I called again. A different rep said that PBTeen doesn’t make those inserts anymore. I asked for a refund, but she said that wasn’t possible. I asked to speak to her supervisor, but she refused to put me through and then hung up. I called back and spoke to yet another rep and was told that, actually, PBTeen does still make those inserts, and I’d be sent one within 10 days.
That was weeks ago. The last rep I spoke with said that all of PBTeen’s customer service reps work from home and therefore no supervisors are available to assist customers. I’ve tried looking for corporate info from PBTeen or its parent, Williams-Sonoma, but I haven’t been able to reach anyone who can help.
Maybe you can prompt this large public company to act.
A. Let’s break with tradition and start the answer with the end of this tale. The same day the Haggler contacted the director of public relations for Pottery Barn, the company called Mr. Hauptman.
The Haggler has since done a bit of research on Pottery Barn and its publicly traded parent company, Williams-Sonoma. (Wave to the crowd, Laura J. Alber, C.E.O.). Pottery Barn, the Haggler learned, provokes a lot of angry muttering from customers. Consumer Affairs has posted hundreds of very detailed complaints about the company, many of them describing pretty lousy service from phone representatives.
The head of Pottery Barn’s public relations department, Kimberly Terry, told the Haggler via email that Mr. Hauptman’s experience was “certainly not up to the standard of service we strive to provide.” She also said that while some of the company’s phone reps worked from home, they all had the ability to forward issues to a supervisor.
The logistics of selling sofas, chairs and thousands of other items are surely a challenge. Finding phone representatives who know how to interact with consumers, and perhaps placate the irritated ones, seems like the easy part. And it’s not as though Pottery Barn doesn’t know what good customer service looks like. The happy end to Mr. Hauptman’s case proves this company can deliver, and fast, when it is motivated.
Now those updates.
The first concerns the Premier Cru wine case. You may recall that since the store, in Berkeley, Calif., went bankrupt, victims of what the authorities call a “wine Ponzi scheme” have had trouble getting chargebacks from their credit cards. (The store closed owing $45 million in orders to roughly 4,500 people.) American Express has cited a 540-day limit on claims — even though there is nothing about a 540-day limit in any user agreement.
The Haggler found a legal expert who could opine on this question: Do these customers have a legal claim to a refund from American Express? Yes, said Adam Levitin, a professor at the Georgetown University Law Center, citing a Truth in Lending statute, though only for those who live in California or 100 miles from the store. A few days after the column ran, however, he changed his mind.
That’s a problem far too large for the Haggler. So time for update No. 2.
On Sept. 28, two law firms filed a class-action lawsuit against Payless Car Rental and its parent company, Avis Budget. The plaintiffs’ lawyers claim that Payless customers were charged for fuel, insurance and roadside assistance, even after declining the add-ons.
None of this will surprise regular readers of this column, which, in recent months, has given Payless a recurring role in this space — a bit like a guest star in a sitcom who catches on and keeps turning up.
Wait, that analogy stinks. Payless won this recurring role by incensing customers, not entertaining them. Some plaintiffs, according to the New Jersey lawyers who brought the case, were charged as much as $185 for fuel, even after bringing the car back with a full tank of gas. When these and other renters complained, they were told to call a Payless number and open a ticket with the help desk. But here’s the thing about Payless’s help desk: It doesn’t help. The lawyers say Payless representatives routinely sent a perfunctory message saying, in effect, Tough luck: You owe the money. Pay it.
The Haggler asked a public relations representative at Avis Budget, which owns Payless — and is led by Larry D. De Shon, its C.E.O. — to say anything about the lawsuit. The company declined to comment.