Within a few decades of founding New Amsterdam, the Dutch built a wall, first to keep out the Indians, then the British. But because the Dutch came to the New World to make money — rather than to proselytize or escape religious persecution — they let in just about everybody else.
Call it tolerance or indifference, that reception distinguished New York. Coupled with the wall, though, it also symbolized the city’s enduring ambivalence about immigration.
Tyler Anbinder’s “City of Dreams: The 400-Year Epic History of Immigrant New York” (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, $35) reviews this legacy and the continuing tale of the city’s unique demographic upheaval. It’s a welcome addition in a campaign season when, it seems, many Americans need reminding of how most of us got here.
The author admittedly gives short shrift to some earlier immigrant groups (Greeks and Indians) and to newcomers (as a historian he prizes the perspective of hindsight). But while Dr. Anbinder, who teaches history at George Washington University, offers no sweeping revelations or revolutionary doctrine, his exhaustive narrative provides a timely overview richly flecked with fascinating nuggets and enlightening profiles.
“City of Dreams” opens in 1892 when an Irish teenager, Annie Moore, and her brothers became the first arrivals on Ellis Island. (The first- and second-class passengers went directly to Pier 38 at West Houston Street.) He fleshes out a familiar story with enriching factoids.
Rather than migrating to Texas and dying in a railroad accident as had long been assumed, Annie married the son of a Manhattan baker who patented a peanut-and-fig-filled macaroon and lived and died on the Lower East Side (where the most crowded precincts were more densely populated than the most congested neighborhoods in Mumbai today).
The city’s share of foreign-born is nearing its 20th century peak of about 40 percent, but far below the 55 percent in 1855, not long after Samuel F. B. Morse ran for mayor on the Native American ticket (warning that Catholic immigrants were organizing sleeper cells to strike a blow for Rome when the time was ripe).
Immigrants still come for the same reasons they did four centuries ago. Today, about nine in 10 of the city’s cabdrivers, garment workers, dishwashers and tile setters are foreign-born. On Sept. 11, 2001, none of the 19 terrorists were immigrants; about one in five of the victims were.
Is this one we can keep?
Is this one still out of reach?