The New York Philharmonic nearly lost Contact!.
The orchestra had quietly decided to suspend the Contact! new-music series, a defining feature of the Alan Gilbert era at the orchestra, just as Mr. Gilbert was beginning his eighth and final season as the Philharmonic’s music director, in an effort to save money.
But after Mr. Gilbert expressed his disappointment at its pending cancellation, a very unusual group of donors got together at the last minute to salvage at least a curtailed Contact! season. The donors who stepped up to keep the series alive come from the orchestra itself: Matthew VanBesien, the orchestra’s president, who had reluctantly made the decision to suspend it; Mr. Gilbert, the music director; Jaap van Zweden, who will succeed him as music director; and Esa-Pekka Salonen, the orchestra’s composer in residence.
“It kind of needed that 11th-hour moment to crystallize what we could do,” Mr. VanBesien said.
Although the Contact! series has been small — it involves a handful of concerts each season in which the Philharmonic leaves Lincoln Center to play contemporary chamber works and pieces for small ensembles in less formal settings — it helped give the orchestra vital new-music cred. So its fate took on added importance amid questions over how committed the Philharmonic would remain to new music after the departure of Mr. Gilbert, who has raised its profile during his tenure. Like many other orchestras, the Philharmonic has been grappling with questions of how to broaden the repertoire and reach new audiences while facing fiscal pressures. The orchestra has run deficits for more than a decade.
The Philharmonic had decided over the summer to end the series and to focus its new-music resources on larger-scale projects and symphonic commissions. The costs of the series were not very high — Mr. VanBesien said it added between $150,000 and $200,000 in expenses each year — but it required significant staff time and planning, and reached only about 800 people a year, since concerts were given in small spaces.
His successor, Mr. van Zweden, agreed. Mr. van Zweden, who had faced questions about his commitment to new music when he was appointed, was dismayed when he heard that the Contact! series was being canceled and agreed to contribute his own money to help save it. “This is something he believes in,” said his spokeswoman, Mary Lou Falcone, who said he hoped to continue it when he arrives.
This curtailed Contact! series this season will probably involve a pair of chamber music concerts this spring, possibly at National Sawdust in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, Mr. VanBesien said. Plans for a concert this fall and works for a chamber-size orchestra have been scrapped.
Other new-music initiatives at the Philharmonic are continuing, officials said, including its composer-in-residence program and the NY Phil Biennial, the contemporary-music festival that Mr. Gilbert started in 2014. Mr. VanBesien said that discussions about the 2018 biennial, which Mr. Gilbert is helping plan, were already underway and that he had already spoken about the 2020 installment with Mr. van Zweden.
