The artist Pedro Reyes is a biting social critic whose pieces often hold out hope — in the face of overwhelming evidence to the contrary — that things will get better.
In “Palas por Pistolas” (“Shovels for Guns”), in 2008, he set up a program that allowed residents of Culiacán, Mexico, a city devastated by shootings, to trade in their guns for food stamps or household appliances; the guns, more than 1,500 of them, were melted down and turned into shovels. In a 2013 work with similar implications for good but a much higher threshold for rethinking, he came up with the Grass-Whopper, a burger made with plentiful, crunchy grasshopper protein instead of beef.
But when he and the New York public art organization Creative Time began discussing a piece to coincide with the homestretch of the American presidential campaign, Mr. Reyes settled on an idea that allowed little in the way of light: the professional haunted house, an essentially American creation (by way of Grand Guignol and Victorian ghostiana) for generating shock and fear.
If that seems like a bleak metaphor for Clinton vs. Trump — or “Brexit,” or the failed Syrian cease-fire, or the surprise electoral defeat of the Colombian peace plan or any number of world political morasses — it well could be.
“The strange thing about this project is that the worse things are in the news, the better it is for us,” Mr. Reyes, 44, said early this week in Brooklyn, preparing for final run-throughs with a group of nearly 50 actors, under the direction of Meghan Finn, who will play all manner of ghouls — business executives, police officers, poll workers, drone pilots, overprescribing doctors — within the haunted house.
But Mr. Reyes added that the house’s half-dozen fright scenarios are less about the failures of political leaders and more about systems at work in the world economy — the military complex, the financial industry, the gun industry, the fast-food industry and Big Pharma, just to name some headliners — that have become so vast they seem to govern themselves, rendering political control almost ineffectual. And making satire a tall order.
In the interest of avoiding spoilers (something a visual-arts reporter rarely has to worry about), some of the scenarios in the piece are probably best undescribed.
There will be a classroom presided over by a racially shape-shifting computer avatar spouting corporate come-ons through a large computer screen — “I Googled ‘classroom of the future,’ and that’s pretty much what it looked like,” Mr. Reyes said — and a fake cocktail party hosted by a rich couple who are having their own spaceship built.
