In an interview with The New York Times, he also contended that infidelity was “never a problem” during his three marriages, though his first ended in an ugly divorce after Mr. Trump began a relationship with the woman who became his second wife.
Mr. Trump said that Mrs. Clinton, who has portrayed Ms. Machado as a victim of Mr. Trump’s cruel insults, had “made this young lady into a girl scout when she was the exact opposite.” He asserted, without offering any evidence, that Ms. Machado had once participated in a sex tape.
Mr. Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, argued that Mrs. Clinton’s support for Ms. Machado was part of a pattern by the Democrat of treating women to suit her own political ends, and raised Mrs. Clinton’s criticism of women who had been involved with her husband, such as Monica Lewinsky and Gennifer Flowers.
A Clinton campaign spokesman on Friday night described Mr. Trump as “unhinged” in his attacks on Mrs. Clinton over Ms. Machado. “As Hillary has said, Donald Trump can say whatever he wants about her, but she will not be bullied out of defending Alicia and the many other women Trump has attacked and demeaned,” said the campaign spokesman, Brian Fallon.
Mr. Trump’s sharply negative attacks on the Clintons, and on Ms. Machado, pose a significant political risk to his own appeal: Two-thirds of voters already see him unfavorably, according to polls, and he is struggling to win over female voters — including white women, a majority of whom have historically supported the Republican candidate in presidential elections.
The Clinton campaign is running a new attack ad against Mr. Trump featuring his insults of women over the years and has aggressively defended Ms. Machado; Mrs. Clinton called her on Friday to offer thanks “for all she had done and the courage she has shown, particularly as this became elevated through a war of some pretty unpleasant words,” according to Nick Merrill, a campaign spokesman.
But Mr. Trump is also scrambling for ways to rebound from his widely panned performance in the first general-election debate on Monday, when he frequently interrupted Mrs. Clinton and failed to raise issues that he wanted to discuss, like her ties to wealthy donors to the Clinton Foundation and the attacks on the American diplomatic compound in Benghazi, Libya.
Mrs. Clinton’s team, Democrats supporting her and many senior Republicans have braced for an attack on the Clintons’ marital history, seeing it as inevitable — particularly now that Mr. Trump is being advised by several people connected to efforts in the late 1990s to reveal Mr. Clinton’s affair with Ms. Lewinsky and to the subsequent impeachment battle.
David Bossie, Mr. Trump’s deputy campaign manager, is the president of the conservative group Citizens United, and worked as an investigator who searched Arkansas for evidence of Mr. Clinton’s personal misdeeds during the 1992 presidential campaign.
Mr. Trump, however, has struggled to articulate that concept, and around 5 a.m. Friday he released a series of posts on Twitter attacking Ms. Machado once again.
In the interview Friday afternoon, Mr. Trump said he would begin preparing as soon as this weekend for the next debate, on Oct. 9, and would be plotting ways to attack Mrs. Clinton on policy issues like trade and national security, as well as to unnerve her with possible targets like her husband’s past.
As for his own vulnerabilities, Mr. Trump insisted that he did not think he bungled a question at his first debate about not releasing his tax returns, when he argued at one point that he was “smart” to have avoided paying any federal income tax earlier in his career. “I started getting such negative and unfair questions,” Mr. Trump complained.
Mr. Trump said that he did pay some federal income tax last year, but declined to specify the amount, and continued to cite a federal audit as an excuse not to release his tax returns. People are free to release returns when they are under audit, and most presidential candidates have released their returns since the 1970s.
Looking broadly at the race, Mr. Trump said he was pleased that he was running close to Mrs. Clinton in many polls and expressed optimism that he would prevail in Ohio and Florida and ultimately take the presidency.
