Navratilova bristled, and had good reason to. While she also thinks Kaepernick’s decision to kneel during the national anthem to protest police brutality and racial inequality “may be somewhat disrespectful,” she told me that athletes like him should be praised for speaking out on social issues — not shamed for it — especially when they do so in a peaceful way, as Kaepernick has.
Athletes across the country, in the professional leagues, at the college level and even in high schools, have joined Kaepernick in his protest. It’s still a minority, but the sports landscape is changing faster than ever. Lately, it has changed by the week.
More professional athletes than ever are feeling bold enough to delve into issues once considered taboo in their field because no one wanted to upset the fans, who buy tickets, or the owners, who sign paychecks, or the coaches, who decide who will play and who won’t.
Just look at LeBron James’s endorsement of Hillary Clinton, and the W.N.B.A.’s growing silent protests, which included some teams wearing T-shirts that support the Black Lives Matter movement. Top athletes don’t have to use their fame for something bigger and deeper than sports, and they shouldn’t have to, but it’s encouraging to see several who want to do it in this tense and delicate time in the United States.
It’s amazing to think it has taken this long for this point to come, and even more amazing to think that more than three decades have gone by since Navratilova — who won 18 Grand Slam singles titles, including a record nine Wimbledon titles — began using her power in sports as a pulpit to preach about issues she cared about. She said she could never have silenced herself, given how and where she grew up.
Navratilova, who turns 60 on Tuesday, was born in Czechoslovakia, to parents she said were kicked out of their university for their anti-Communist views. When she was a child, she often read the newspaper her father brought home from work every day because she craved information about the world.
When she was 18, in 1975, she defected to the United States so she could play tennis “when I want and where I want,” leaving behind her family — and a totalitarian regime — and remaining stateless for six years before the United States accepted her as one of its own. In 1981, after gaining U.S. citizenship, she came out as a bisexual and later identified herself as a lesbian, becoming one of the first openly gay athletes. It was a move she said cost her millions of dollars in endorsements.
After she had gone through all that, speaking out on other issues became easy, she said.
“I was always controversial, being gay, so nothing was more controversial than that,” Navratilova said, adding that it might have been easier to speak her mind than it would have been if she had played a team sport.
So Navratilova said what she felt — often loudly and clearly. She also has rarely, if ever, backed away from anything she has said, unlike Justice Ginsburg, who in a statement on Friday said she had been “inappropriately dismissive and harsh” about Kaepernick’s protest.
Navratilova has also fought for causes like children’s rights, animal rights and, of course, gay rights, and she spoke at the 1993 march on Washington for gay rights. She also is a proponent of marriage equality, which makes sense because she got married two years ago but had to exchange vows in New York City because it wasn’t yet legal in Florida, where she lives.
Last Thursday, Navratilova’s subject of the day was human rights. At an event at the State Department convened to discuss how to improve human rights at large international sports events, she called on entities like the International Olympic Committee and FIFA, soccer’s world governing body, to ensure that their events are safe and open to everyone, without discrimination, and said it was a responsibility they can’t continue to shirk.
Nikki Dryden, a former Olympic swimmer for Canada who became a human rights and immigration lawyer, sat in the audience and couldn’t believe what she was hearing.
In 2012, Navratilova opened a Twitter account. On her feed, there’s a flurry of posts every day, sometimes every hour. But don’t look for her to talk much tennis.
In July, she stopped reading her Twitter responses because some were just too toxic. More times than she can count, she said, people have told her to go back to her home country, accusing her of hating the United States. They have said much worse things, she said, things unprintable in this column, regarding her sexual orientation.
I asked her if Trump had replied on Twitter. She said she didn’t think so.
