Pity the playwrights. Many of them make so little money, they can’t afford tickets to plays.
Now some of the nation’s leading regional theaters, saying it is essential to the art form that writers see work by their colleagues and predecessors, have a solution: They will offer free last-minute seats to their shows.
Theaters from Atlanta to Seattle have signed on, agreeing to make unsold tickets available, on the day of a performance, to student and professional writers who belong to the Dramatists Guild, a national association of about 7,000 playwrights, composers and lyricists.
The initiative, which is underway at some theaters and is being announced this week, was organized by two Pulitzer Prize-winning playwrights — Marsha Norman, co-director of the playwrights program at the Juilliard School, and Doug Wright, president of the Dramatists Guild of America — and Bruce Lazarus, executive director of Samuel French, a leading publisher of play scripts.
Mr. Wright added that theaters often have the extra space, and playwrights the appetite.
Among the 22 participants are many of the best-known theaters in the country, including the Alliance Theater in Atlanta, the Goodman Theater in Chicago, the Huntington Theater in Boston, and the La Jolla Playhouse and the Berkeley Repertory Theater, both in California. In New York, the Atlantic Theater Company, the Roundabout Theater Company and the Vineyard Theater have agreed to participate.
Emily Mann, artistic director of the McCarter Theater Center in Princeton, N.J., signed on early, agreeing that her theater would make unused tickets available to writers.
The program, called Playwrights Welcome, came about when Ms. Norman, the author of “’Night, Mother,” was talking with Mr. Lazarus about challenges facing playwrights.
Although Ms. Norman thought she was just ranting, Mr. Lazarus took her seriously. His company, Samuel French, agreed to let members of the Dramatists Guild read plays free through an online app, and then started reaching out to other publishing companies, the guild and theaters to put together the free-access-to-plays initiative.
