From my hotel room’s balcony, Skopje, the capital of Macedonia, lay before me like a curiosity shop at the crossroads of antiquity and absurdity. Its shelves were crammed with symbols of long-gone epochs, genuine collectibles and dubious tchotchkes. An Eiffel Tower topped one building. A Statue of Liberty adorned a hotel. Beyond them, authentic monuments like the crenelated Kale Fortress, with sixth-century foundations, the minimalist Museum of Contemporary Art and the domed St. Clement of Ohrid Church crowded the vista.
But it was the city center’s new hodgepodge of mammoth monuments and appliqué wedding-cake facades that demanded my attention. Hellenic statues held watch over squares and streets. Macedonia’s main government complex, recently recast as a copy-and-paste White House, complete with square portico and tympanum, begged for recognition.
This novel retro collection was part of a controversial urban-renewal project, starting in 2010, called “Skopje 2014.” For some, the undertaking, which includes statues, buildings and renovations, was an attempt to refashion the center and attract tourism. For others, it was a political scheme to leave an inappropriate stamp on the culture’s legacy — with a ballooning price tag.
According to a database created by the Balkan Investigative Reporting Network, 136 structures were built for more than $700 million — a sizable sum for one of Europe’s poorest countries. The strategy is a curious one for a city with a 2,500-year history spanning the Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman empires.
On a crisp spring day, I headed for the center, alongside men in shirt sleeves carrying leather man-bags (omnipresent in Southeastern Europe) and women with oversize sunglasses and defiantly high heels. I passed through the recently erected Arc de Triomphe-like Triumphal Arch. The Paris-cum-Skopje monument was still meringue white, not yet the blank canvas for protest — against growing concerns about corruption within the ruling party — it would become a week later.
In Macedonia Square, the city’s main quad, I made my way through the gaudy, government-sanctioned statues. A 72-foot bronze, sword-thrusting likeness of an Alexander the Great on horseback (officially named “Equestrian Warrior”), it was unveiled in 2011) towered above pedestrians. Four representations of Olympias, his mother, sat at a fountain’s edge.
At Gallery Osten, a venue dedicated to drawings with monthly exhibitions and permanent pieces by Salvador Dalí and Pablo Picasso, I met Angel Sitnovski, a local architect. We went around the corner to Gostilnica Kaj Jole, a restaurant with traditional dishes like tas kebab, slow-cooked pork and onions, which cost 280 denars, or about $5. In the same building as the Macedonia Writers’ Association, the bohemian hub was established in 1963, when an earthquake rocked the city center and killed more than 1,000 people. I ordered the stew and a local pilsner called Skopsko.
A list of suggestions in hand, I set out. At sunset, I crossed the Vardar River, which bisects town, to the Ottoman-era quarter, known as Carsija. I stood atop the Stone Bridge, built in the 15th century on Roman footings. Behind me, the fountain beneath Alexander was now illuminated by a kaleidoscopic light show as Wagner’s “Ride of the Valkyries” blasted on a loop. Looking forward (northeast), the warrior’s father, a Brobdingnagian Philip II, stood at the edge of Carsija with a fist raised in salute to his Day-Glo son.
An aha moment washed over me. To discover Skopje’s core, one must crack its shell and dig into its neighborhoods to peel back the layers of this unexpectedly delicious city, renowned for fresh food and venues spotlighting Macedonia’s musicality.
I entered the old bazaar district, the center of life during a 500-year Ottoman rule beginning in 1392. Stone-block medieval mosques and minarets anchored flagstone streets lined with terra cotta-roofed shops selling jewelry, copper coffee sets and leather goods. Today, former hammams and hans (inns) serve as galleries and museums.
I walked up a steep alley, past tiers of bar patios, to Sveti Spas Church, which contains a 30-foot, intricately carved iconostasis and a 17th-century fresco. Next door, I took a seat at Pivnica Star Grad, which opened in 2009, brews 10 beers and had a band playing American rock to a packed terrace. I ordered an IPA.
Two neighboring sites, on the edge of Carsija, occupy diametrical ends of that diversity. The Kale Fortress (free entry), Skopje’s calling card, was built upon the city’s original settlement, likely from the Bronze Age. The medieval ramparts one walks today, with sweeping views, were fortified many times from the sixth century to the Ottoman Empire.
The Museum of Contemporary Art, which opened in 1970 behind the fortress, is perhaps Skopje’s best-kept secret. Natural light floods the three-wing, 32,000-square-foot exhibition space containing 3,000 pieces from 65 countries. Artists include Alexander Calder, Picasso and the photographer Robert Adams.
Our path took us below the cable car ferrying families to the summit and the 216-foot Millennium Cross, built in 2002. We stared down into the center and the denture-white, Skopje 2014 structures surrounded by comparatively tasteful Communist-era Brutalist architecture.
Back in town we headed to the Debar Maalo neighborhood, a 10-minute walk from the main square, but a world away. Bistros and cafes lined leafy streets. Tattooed parents pushed baby carriages. Friends clinked wineglasses at streetside lounges.
For dinner we walked across the main thoroughfare, Bulevar Partizanski Odredi, to Gostilnica Toto, where locals squeeze into the taverns and spill onto its curbside terrace. We ordered simple, hearty dishes: green salads, roasted zucchini and red peppers, blocks of cheese, warm bread, stuffed grape leaves, bowls of a homemade purée called pindzur (green peppers, garlic and eggplant), and sausages, called kepabi. We drank half liters of Zlaten Dab beer. We sipped grappa. The bill for two came to $22.
Across Southeastern Europe, even among hard-to-impress neighboring countries, generalizations about Macedonia — slightly larger than Vermont, population 2.1 million — persist. One is the landscape’s dense beauty. Another is the diversity of its music.
As my week came to a close, I put aside a day to visit two places that highlight the city’s strengths: Matka Canyon and Sektor 909, a seminal nightclub opened in 2003. I first headed to the canyon, 10 miles southwest of Skopje. The gorge, cut by the Treska River, covers nearly 20 square miles. Around the river and lake, created by the Matka Dam, trails wind through forests that act as arboretums with 77 butterfly species. Trekking along one path, I watched climbers and a kayak competition. I passed three monasteries, wedged into rocky nooks, built between the 14th and 17th centuries.
By the time I arrived back in Skopje, there were already murmurings of marches to protest the country’s ruling party, which was under investigation for offenses including wiretapping, blackmail and electoral fraud. However, when I walked into Sektor 909, thoughts of protests dissolved with the beats pulsing through the mirrored space bathed in seductive red strobes.
The Colorful Revolution, as it has become known, began the next day. Men and women, young and old, all took to the streets. Frustration and creativity intersected in the form of peaceful marching, plastic whistles and, definitively, paint.
Within a week the bedizened emblems of kitsch became vehicles for Pollock-esque, purposeful art as protesters hurled balloons filled with paint on government buildings, the Equestrian Warrior, the Triumphal Arch. The symbols of corruption became the substrata for liberation. The shell was cracked. Beneath the surface, an ancient capital on the verge of a Renaissance was making its debut.