For many Americans, navigating the modern workplace can be like traversing a minefield of time-crunched, stressed-out colleagues who prefer to keep one another at a safe distance rather than form bonds.
That’s tricky enough, but what happens when you come across someone who makes your workday a living hell? The subject of handling toxic co-workers is a popular one on workplace-focused websites and discussion boards, mostly because it’s a tricky subject, and most of us still have to coexist peacefully.
Jean Fitzpatrick and Rachel Sussman, two New York City-based relationship therapists, offered a few tips for dealing with a tough working relationship.
A toxic work relationship can leave a lasting impression, so it’s important to figure out what’s bothering you, Ms. Sussman said.
There are many types of uncomfortable work relationships, but there are a few types of bad behavior that can send up red flags: Beware the colleague who talks badly about other people, or the person who complains nonstop. The person who needs to be given credit for everything — or shuts you out of meetings — can also be a bad sign.
You may catch yourself “constantly thinking about someone or constantly complaining to your friends about that person,” Ms. Sussman said.
In this process, self-awareness will be important: You don’t know what the person is going through.
“Recognizing that other people are fighting their own battles in life and it’s not always about you is one great step” toward achieving peace of mind about a bad situation, according to Ms. Fitzpatrick.
If the conflict is long-lasting, there are several ways to cope.
You can try calmly confronting your colleague by addressing the issue and asking him or her how to work together to fix it.
If this doesn’t work, distancing yourself is not a bad idea.
Another powerful tactic, Ms. Fitzpatrick said, is to take the high road when you’re confronted with negativity.
You might even compliment the colleague who tries to undermine you.
But what if you’re the problem?
We don’t often think that we may be contributing to our own toxic work environments.
If you’re sensing conflict, try to put yourself in a colleague’s shoes. Think about how you’re coming across. Clear communication is important when it comes to relating to others, too.
