An extraordinary backstage confrontation between Donald J. Trump’s campaign and the staff of the Presidential Commission on Debates unfolded just minutes before the debate on Sunday night after Mr. Trump tried to give seats in his V.I.P. box to a group of women who have accused former President Bill Clinton of making unwanted sexual advances.
The situation de-escalated only after the commission threatened to call security to remove the women if they tried to sit in the box, where they would have been right next to Mr. Clinton and in Hillary Clinton’s line of sight from the stage — a spectacle that Mr. Trump and his top advisers tried to engineer for maximum shock effect just as tens of millions of people would be tuning in from around the world.
With little other option to avoid a physical scuffle, however, the Trump campaign relented.
The episode was the latest in a string of threats, taunts and gamesmanship over the debates from both campaigns.
The incident in St. Louis on Sunday night, reported earlier by The Washington Post, rose to the highest levels of the Trump campaign and the debate commission. Moments before the kerfuffle over seating, Mr. Trump and his campaign chief executive, Stephen K. Bannon, had surprised reporters by staging an impromptu news conference with the Republican nominee and three women who have claimed that Mr. and Mrs. Clinton minimized and belittled their claims of sexual misconduct. Among them were Paula Jones, whose sexual harassment lawsuit against Mr. Clinton helped force his impeachment, and Juanita Broaddrick, who has accused the former president of raping her in 1978. A fourth woman, who said she was raped as a child by a man Hillary Clinton defended at trial in 1975, also appeared at the impromptu panel.
The Trump campaign, which paid for the women to travel to St. Louis, kept the news conference tightly under wraps, going so far as to tell the reporters they took into the room, where Ms. Jones, Ms. Broaddrick and the others were waiting, that they were about to witness Mr. Trump’s debate preparations.
There was little the debate commission could do to stop Mr. Trump and Mr. Bannon’s news conference. But when the co-chairman of the commission, Mr. Fahrenkopf, a former Republican National Committee chairman, got word that the campaign was going to try to put the women in the Trump V.I.P. box just as the last of the audience members were taking their seats, he objected.
“He said I will get security and yank them out of there,” said one Republican with firsthand knowledge of the episode.
From the Trump campaign’s perspective, it was utilizing its four seats in the V.I.P. box as it should. But Mr. Fahrenkopf insisted that the agreement with the commission and the two campaigns allowed only family members in those seats. The commission denied the Clintons’ request that Senator Claire McCaskill of Missouri be seated in their box.
Kellyanne Conway, Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, said in an interview with CBS News on Monday morning that she still did not understand why Mr. Fahrenkopf would not allow the women to be seated where Mr. Trump wanted them.
Before the first debate at Hofstra University on Long Island last month, the Clinton and Trump campaigns bickered over their guests. Mrs. Clinton’s aides invited Mark Cuban, the reality TV entrepreneur and frequent Trump antagonist, and said he would be sitting in the front row.
Mr. Trump, never one to be upstaged in creating a flamboyant diversion, threatened to invite another woman from Mr. Clinton’s past, Gennifer Flowers, and seat her in the front row. Ms. Flowers, who has said she carried on a long-running affair with the former president, did not attend. Mr. Trump, it appeared, let the cooler heads inside his campaign prevail.
But by Sunday night, all bets were off.