Donald J. Trump implored supporters on Thursday to rally behind him by portraying himself as a victim of “false smears” from a growing number of women accusing him of making unwanted advances — a brazen attempt to stabilize his campaign amid a new round of criticism from Republican allies and a searing denunciation by Michelle Obama.
By Thursday night, at least six women had publicly accused Mr. Trump of groping and forcibly kissing them over the decades, a pattern of sexual assault that he denied in the presidential debate on Sunday after bragging about such behavior in a 2005 recording that was unearthed last week.
Mr. Trump dismissed all the allegations on Thursday and even lashed out at one of the women, a former writer for People magazine, seemingly implying that she was not attractive enough for him.
The allegations about Mr. Trump’s treatment of women became the all-consuming focus of the political world, a remarkable turn as the sexual history of a presidential nominee became a dominant and unavoidable issue in the final weeks of the race. Rarely, too, has a candidate in a general election so darkly insinuated that a conspiracy of forces was trying to undermine him and his admirers, as Mr. Trump did Thursday at events in the battleground states of Florida and Ohio.
Since a 2005 recording of comments by Donald J. Trump about women went public, survivors of sexual assault are speaking out in unprecedented numbers.
The New York Times reported on Wednesday night that two women said Mr. Trump had touched them inappropriately, forcefully groping or kissing them. Their stories echoed a 2005 recording on which Mr. Trump boasts of being able to sexually assault women because of his celebrity.
Other news organizations, including The Palm Beach Post, BuzzFeed and People magazine, also reported on women who had troubling encounters with Mr. Trump, who said at the debate Sunday that he had never acted on his “locker room talk” in the 2005 recording.
In a series of messages posted on Twitter on Thursday morning, Mr. Trump called the Times article a “total fabrication” and denied charges by the People magazine writer, Natasha Stoynoff, that he had forced his tongue down her throat while she was working on an assignment about his first anniversary with his wife, Melania.
But at his rallies in West Palm Beach and later in Cincinnati, Mr. Trump also unveiled a new campaign strategy, beseeching his supporters to view him as a political martyr for their cause and stick by him in the face of ugly accusations about his personal conduct.
Mr. Trump said that “a conspiracy against you, the American people” was underfoot, charging that the Clinton campaign, the news media and other forces were trying to vilify parts of the electorate that did not share their views.
And he spoke about how Mrs. Clinton had met “in secret with international banks to plot the destruction of U.S. sovereignty in order to enrich these global financial powers, her special-interest friends and her donors,” phrasing that drew criticism from the Anti-Defamation League as reminiscent of historical slurs against Jews.
Mr. Trump also warned through his lawyer that he might sue The Times for libel if it did not retract the article and apologize.
“If Mr. Trump disagrees, if he believes that American citizens had no right to hear what these women had to say and that the law of this country forces us and those who would dare to criticize him to stand silent or be punished, we welcome the opportunity to have a court set him straight,” Mr. McCraw wrote.
The Clinton campaign said that the latest allegations showed that Mr. Trump was unfit to be president and that he lied in the debate Sunday. Mrs. Clinton, at a fund-raiser in San Francisco on Thursday, leveled a broad attack on Mr. Trump over his past insults and treatment of people.
At the rally in New Hampshire, Mrs. Obama was particularly withering about how Mr. Trump’s treatment of women was, in her view, a sign of weakness.
The Trump campaign has been thrown into turmoil by the allegations and the damage that the recording has done to his standing among women and with the Republican leaders who have disavowed him or revoked their endorsements.
National and state polls show Mr. Trump’s support has plummeted in the last two weeks. In an effort to turn things around, he has stepped up his personal attacks on Mrs. Clinton and her husband, former President Bill Clinton, over his marital infidelity. Mr. Trump also dispatched his daughter Ivanka to the Pennsylvania suburbs on Thursday in the hope that she could lift his standing in the crucial swing state.
Some of Mr. Trump’s staunchest allies have been unusually critical of him during the most difficult stretch of his campaign.
Newt Gingrich, the former House speaker and presidential candidate in 2012 who wanted to be Mr. Trump’s running mate, suggested on Thursday that there were two Donald Trumps.
But at Mr. Trump’s rally in West Palm Beach, the candidate’s most ardent fans stood by him.
Mr. Trump appeared to take comfort from the cheering crowd as he lamented the hurtfulness of the attacks he has been facing.
