Susannah Vila lives in a large studio on the parlor floor of a townhouse in the East Village, but who’s to say how long she’ll be there.
A serial subletter, Ms. Vila, 31, sticks with apartments in much the way Henry VIII stuck with wives. Yes, it’s true she did once manage to stay put for a full year — the current record — in a two-bedroom place near Union Square. But balance that against the apartment above a restaurant in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, where Ms. Vila departed after just one month — another personal record.
Since transferring from George Washington University to New York University 11 years ago, Ms. Vila, an entrepreneur, has lived in 15 apartments in New York — in neighborhoods including Greenpoint, Fort Greene and Clinton Hill in Brooklyn; and Union Square, the West Village, Hamilton Heights, Morningside Heights, Chelsea and Chinatown in Manhattan.
But Ms. Vila’s moves have not all been domestic. She lived for brief periods — and also sublet — in Mexico City, Peru and Cairo, where she was a founder of the Engine Room, an organization that consults on the use of technology for social change.
If her name is on a lease, after a few months she tries to arrange for someone to take it over so she can sublet elsewhere. When she locates a place to sublet, she finds a reason to abandon ship so she can sublet somewhere else. Her bank account has sometimes suffered.
If she were so inclined, she could blame the whole thing on dear old dad. She’s a daughter of Bob Vila, the home-improvement television host, “and in our family it was the norm to move a lot,” Ms. Vila said.
Her own particular moves have been motivated by circumstances, like a breakup; by a realization that a particular apartment is in an area that is too much of a party scene; by a simple desire for a fresh start; or sometimes by a chance to occupy what Ms. Vila views as the holy grail: a unique space.
In Williamsburg, for example, she sublet first in a former rocket factory, then a few years later in a former pillow factory. Three apartments ago she lived in a converted seminary in Clinton Hill, last year in the basement of an active synagogue in Chinatown.
Along the way there have been a few illegal sublets, “but nothing to keep me up at night,” she said.
“You have to try different places to learn what you want,” continued Ms. Vila, who has, with partners, turned her residential restlessness into a business, Flip, that helps people find sublets.
She’s never regretted bailing on an apartment, she said. After all, her peregrinations have made her a true citizen of the city.
Ms. Vila’s home at the moment is a studio downtown. “You have to try different places to learn what you want,” she says.
Of course, these people have asked Ms. Vila other questions: What gives with all the moving? When are you going to settle down? Have you considered that you may have commitment issues?
Yes, she’s considered it. Yes, she has problems in that area personally, academically (she did transfer, after all) and professionally.
Ms. Vila has a one-year lease on her current apartment in the East Village. She loves her garbage disposal, the built-in niche with bookcases around the bed and the large backyard.
She’s acutely aware that family and friends are skeptical. “They’re saying, ‘You will move in with him just so you can move into another apartment,’ ” Ms. Vila said.
