When Julius Eastman died in 1990, almost no one knew. It wasn’t until an obituary appeared in The Village Voice eight months later that his friends and colleagues got the news.
A composer of visionary power, a singer with a cavernous bass voice, a collaborator with the diverse likes of Meredith Monk and Pierre Boulez, Eastman had long been a fixture of the New York music scene. His sprawling, propulsive works had titles that ranged from the bluntly provocative (“Evil Nigger”) to the winking (“If You’re So Smart, Why Aren’t You Rich?”).
An archival recording of one of his finest pieces, the peculiarly spelled “Femenine,” from 1974, was released last month on the Frozen Reeds label, and it shows what all the fuss was about. Ecstatically bustling, it’s perhaps the most plainly beautiful thing Eastman wrote in a career spent challenging his audiences.
Contemporary music has hardly been without significant black and queer artists. But the story of Minimalism, in particular, has been dominated by straight white men — La Monte Young, Terry Riley, Steve Reich, Philip Glass — and Eastman is a vital addition to their company, even if his take on the style was idiosyncratic and perhaps ahead of its time.
But in his final years, he got caught up in drugs, or mental illness, or both. When he was evicted from his East Village apartment, many of his scores were scattered and lost. He drifted from his brother’s home in Brooklyn to his mother’s in Ithaca, N.Y., and back, and for a while, it seems, spent nights in Tompkins Square Park. Then, in a Buffalo hospital, he died; cardiac arrest was given as the official cause.
Declaring that Eastman’s music “seethes with tension, hatred, triumph,” Mr. Gann’s obituary was for a long time pretty much the final word. Without extant scores, his works couldn’t be performed; without commercial recordings, they could hardly be heard.
It was through the curiosity and persistence of Mary Jane Leach, a composer and performer who had worked with Eastman in the 1980s, that things began to change. Spreading the word, starting in the late 1990s, that she was looking for Eastmania, she became a clearinghouse for information, bits of scores and audio, and in 2005 helped organize the first commercial release of his work, a gripping three-disc, three-hour set called “Unjust Malaise,” on New World Records.
Eastman performances are burgeoning, including a concert planned for February at the Burchfield Penney Art Center in Buffalo, where he spent his most productive years. The Philadelphia new-music organization Bowerbird is in the midst of a multiyear Eastman retrospective and is planning a festival for May that the group hopes to repeat in New York next fall. Bowerbird is also working to create dependable editions of his most important works to avoid the errors that have crept into some recent performances.
Part of the pleasure of Eastman’s rediscovery has been the belated, deserving reinsertion of a black, gay figure into music history. With additive, slowly transforming repetitions at the heart of his major pieces, Eastman has a clear connection to the Minimalist canon. But in the early 1970s, well before many others, he was using those repetitions as a structure to contain improvisation, as well as rhythms and harmonies borrowed from pop.
Born in 1940, Eastman was raised by his mother in middle-class Ithaca. A gifted pianist from an early age, he started out as an accompanist for dance classes. After graduating from the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia, where he was a talented if restless student, he made his way to the new-music hotbed then flourishing around the State University of New York at Buffalo. There, the composer and conductor Lukas Foss, the influential music director of the Buffalo Philharmonic, had helped establish a vibrant system of artist residencies and concerts.
Buffalo and its resources gave Eastman the opportunity to experiment in works like the jazz-inflected, wailing “Thruway” (1970), an archival recording of which can be heard at the university’s music library. (No video footage exists, alas, of what one review described as “the chorus walking through the audience as though blind.”) In “Trumpet” (1970), for seven high brass or wind instruments, a drone of stratospherically pitched dissonance gradually calms itself into shifting harmonies.
“Macle” (1971), the score and a recording of which are available at the library, is a riot. Influenced by John Cage, the score consists of large pages divided into squares of enigmatic instructions for the four vocalists: “Sharp stabbing sounds” and harsh daubs of ink in one box, for example; “Your favorite pop tune” in another. In the recording, screams are interspersed with electronic buzzes and chants of “Take heart,” the work’s recurring, unofficial motto.
Eastman gradually moved from the chaos of those early pieces toward a kind of aggressive elegance. At the core of “Stay on It” (1973) is a bright, relentless riff over which a vocalist merrily sings the title. But improvised, wheezing, almost trippy passages emerge; the tight rhythmic order dissolves. When the opening riff returns, it’s slower and warmer, proceeding through chromatic transformations that are sometimes queasily dissonant, sometimes hopeful. By the end, there’s just a single piano playing, and, finally, the constant vibrating pulse of a tambourine.
The cover of a 2015 book of essays on Julius Eastman.
A small, pearly ensemble twitters, pipes up, coils, sings and surges over the bells, as a piano provides a rich, mellow grounding. Around 45 minutes in, the piece gets to a genuinely blissed-out place, expansive and swirling.
The angelic quality of “Femenine” — not just quiet, peaceful angels, but the energetic, trumpeting kind, too — marked a climax in Eastman’s work. It was in the wake of his growing frustration with Buffalo and his subsequent move to New York City that Eastman wrote, in the late 1970s, a handful of forlorn, raging pieces, with incendiary titles.
Their pounding, extravagantly impassioned repetitions and rushing rapids of fury create a mood somehow simultaneously implacable and changeable. Eastman captures at once society’s dehumanizing coldness and the possibility of sustained, agile resistance to its strictures.
As the 1980s progressed, Eastman’s behavior grew more unreliable. He didn’t get a hoped-for faculty appointment at Cornell University and squabbled with his family in wake of a beloved grandmother’s death. He was said at some points to be living outdoors, at others in a homeless shelter. Gaining some steadiness, he worked for a few months in the late ’80s, at the Tower Records on Fourth Street and Broadway.
The dissemination of Eastman’s music remains a bit shaggy, with his estate controlled by his younger brother, Gerry, a jazz musician. In a phone interview, Gerry Eastman said that he had recently finalized his brother’s posthumous membership in Ascap, the music-licensing agency. But after years spent trying to corral Julius’s widely strewn output, he said he doubted a publisher would be interested in taking over that project and “investing those kinds of resources.” For the time being, those interested in performing Eastman works must still negotiate terms, one by one, directly with him.
