Yes, we’re still talking about sex. Sigh.
On Tuesday night, during a fiery — and quite frankly, bizarre — interview on Fox News, the Trump supporter, walking contradiction and inflated ego Newt Gingrich yelled at the host, Megyn Kelly, about Trump’s own statements about sexually assaulting women and multiple women’s accusations that he had assaulted them.
This was an obscene spectacle, and not only because Gingrich has confessed to cheating on his wife at the same time that he was leading impeachment proceedings against Bill Clinton for perjury and obstruction of justice related to having an affair. It was also obscene because of the continued tone deafness and abject ignorance within the Trump campaign and among its allies about the canyon of difference between sex and assault.
Sex, in all its range of expressions, including kissing and intimate touching, is consensual. Any forcible touching of another person’s body is sexual assault.
One should always be wary of people who don’t intuitively recognize that difference.
But this would have been a blip, a curiosity, merely an act in the media circus, if it had simply remained a squabble between television personalities. But, of course, it didn’t. On Wednesday, Donald Trump couldn’t help weighing in, once again turning attention away from issues that could strengthen his struggling campaign and back to his monthslong quarrel with Kelly and his history of issues with women.
With that statement, Trump elevated and endorsed Gingrich’s behavior and reignited the debate about Trump and his campaign’s dismissal of the very idea of sexual assault. With that statement, every woman and every parent of a daughter and sibling of a sister is forced to bring Trump’s braggadocio about kissing and groping women back to the fore. With that statement, everyone is forced to consider the vindictive side of the man who has — to put it mildly — a spotty track record with women.
Trump, according to his own words, objectifies women, prioritizes fighting and “winning,” and fetishizes adoration.
Let’s instead focus for the purposes of this discussion on character, or the lack thereof. Let’s focus on what we know about this man from the words that have come out of his own mouth. Let’s focus on the clarity of his darkness, his illusory deceptions, his insatiable avarice and his colossal conceit.
When you view the man with clear eyes, he shrinks and withers.
What is left when the facade is removed is a shallow narcissist who is also a misogynist, bigot, nativist and xenophobe. That keeps coming up, but that’s the root of the thing. We can never tire of saying that because it is in fatigue that hatred and intolerance gain a foothold that can quickly morph into a stranglehold.
Vigilance is not optional; it’s obligatory.
Just this week, The New York Times reported on tapes of Trump recorded by the biographer Michael D’Antonio. To hear the accompanying podcast in which portions of the recordings are played, along with a discussion with D’Antonio, is to descend into the mind of an egomaniacal fame addict who is painfully un-self-aware even as he boasts of his own personal achievements.
Yes, this is one man’s assessment, but it feels to me like an astute one, and a fundamentally frightening one.
And this brings us back to his inability to resist patting Gingrich on the back for his verbal tirade against Kelly. Trump lacks not only self-awareness, but also self-control. He could have let that television exchange pass without comment, and he should have, but he didn’t.
Everything in him is so caught up with the idea of who he’s fighting with that he doesn’t seem to have a principled grasp on what he is fighting for. That’s not someone who should be a great nation’s president; that’s someone who would benefit from being a great therapist’s patient.