After taking over as coach of the underperforming Pittsburgh Penguins last December, Mike Sullivan assessed his personnel, as any other new coach would do in any other sport. He figured that the best way for the Penguins to improve quickly was to rely more on the team’s speed.
Centers Sidney Crosby and Evgeni Malkin, forward Phil Kessel and defenseman Kris Letang, in addition to being the Penguins’ top players, were among the team’s top skaters. Sullivan simplified the Penguins’ attack so they could launch breakouts from their own zone.
Fortified by the acquisition in January of one of the N.H.L.’s fastest skaters, forward Carl Hagelin, the Penguins rolled to victory in 33 of 54 regular-season games and 16 of 24 playoff games under Sullivan to capture the franchise’s first Stanley Cup in seven years.
It was further evidence that teams that do not stock up on players who can skate well risk being left in the trails of their opponents. Hockey is not so much about muscle now as it is about speed — or, to be more accurate, playing at a faster pace.
Scoring is actually down; the team average of 2.71 goals per game in the 2015-16 season was the lowest since 2003-4, the year before a season-killing lockout. When the N.H.L. returned in 2005-6 with a revised set of rules to promote offense, teams scored an average of 3.08 goals per game.
With rules changes discouraging obstruction, which led to a sluggish and thuggish style of play, many teams tried to become faster because that became a proven way to separate themselves from opponents. The bottoms of rosters now offer spots for speedsters, not fighters.
The Rangers were one of four playoff teams eliminated by the Penguins. One of the Rangers’ free-agent signings was Michael Grabner, a wing from Austria who is especially fast and can kill penalties. In the old days, the Rangers might have added a so-called enforcer.
The Rangers split the first two playoff games with the Penguins in Pittsburgh last April, but then the Penguins outscored the Rangers in the final three games, 14-4.
The Rangers’ off-season strategy was built around team speed. They traded center Derick Brassard to Ottawa to free up money to keep three restricted free-agent forwards, all 25 or younger: Chris Kreider, J. T. Miller and Kevin Hayes. The center who was acquired for Brassard, Mika Zibanejad, is 23, six years younger than Brassard.
The most notable N.H.L. rules change made for this season focused on slimming down the equipment worn by goaltenders, in an effort to boost the league’s anemic scoring averages. Fighting has already been reduced drastically; teams cannot afford to keep enforcers around.
As recently as the 2010-11 N.H.L. season, 38 players had at least 10 fighting majors. Last season, only four players had 10 fighting majors. With so many tight games, teams have to stay within a framework, or at least avoid breakdowns.
Staal, 29, one of four hockey-playing brothers from Thunder Bay, Ontario, is entering his 10th N.H.L. season. Even though he has acquired the knowledge of a veteran, Staal said his off-season emphasis was the same this year as always: to be powerful and, of course, fast.
The Penguins won the Cup in 2009 after a midseason coaching change from Michel Therrien to Dan Bylsma. The Penguins may have benefited from a coaching change last season, although Sullivan does not regard himself as a trendsetter.
