The program created to help homeowners in New York recover from Hurricane Sandy will not meet its year-end deadline, officials said this week, the latest setback for the yearslong effort to rebuild thousands of homes in the city that were damaged in the storm.
In a report issued on Wednesday, Mayor Bill de Blasio said that only 75 percent of the single-family homes being rebuilt would be done by the end of 2016, despite his pledge last year to have the program completed by then.
“We will fall short of that goal, for which my team and I take personal responsibility,” the mayor wrote.
Cost overruns will require the reallocation of $500 million from the city’s budget, a spokeswoman from the mayor’s office said, on top of the $1.7 billion in federal funds that have already been budgeted. The Wall Street Journal first reported the reallocations in September.
The program, Build It Back, was created in the wake of the 2012 storm by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg with the ambition of serving as a national model for disaster recovery for other cities. Instead, homeowners looking for assistance from the program have often found themselves mired in delays and complications.
Lawmakers were harshly critical of the latest delay, which comes on the eve of the storm’s four-year-anniversary in New York. At a hearing on Thursday, members of the City Council said that despite repeated inquiries, they had not been notified that the project would need an additional influx of money to complete its mission.
“From an administration that prides itself on transparency, the cavalier disregard shown for this body’s oversight authority was truly shameful,” said Councilman Mark Treyger, a Democrat from Brooklyn and the chairman of the Council’s Committee on Recovery and Resiliency.
Raul A. Contreras, a spokesman for the mayor, who is a Democrat, attributed the delays and overruns to the complications of rebuilding old housing stock in flood-prone areas of the city. City officials said they did not have a new date for the expected completion of the program.
More than 90 percent of program participants will have received reimbursement checks or have had construction begun on their properties by the end of the year, Mr. de Blasio wrote.