Mike Hazen, who was the assistant general manager for the Boston Red Sox during their World Series victory in 2013, was named executive vice president and general manager of the Arizona Diamondbacks on Sunday.
Hazen replaced Dave Stewart, who, with Manager Chip Hale, was fired a day after the team finished 69-93.
“Mike’s reputation throughout the game is impeccable, and his championship experience gives us great confidence in naming him to this position,” said Ken Kendrick, the Diamondbacks’ managing general partner.
Hazen, 40, served as senior vice president and general manager of the Red Sox this season after four years as the team’s assistant general manager.
Charlie Austin, a former bricklayer and amateur player in England’s ninth-tier league, scored twice as Southampton beat visiting Burnley, 3-1.
Austin knocked in his own rebound in the 52nd minute, then scored from the penalty spot in the 66th, giving him seven goals in six games this season.
RED BULLS TOP CREW Bradley Wright-Phillips scored his 22nd and 23rd goals of the season, and the Red Bulls beat visiting Columbus, 3-2, and secured a spot in the M.L.S. Cup conference semifinals.
NEW YORK CITY F.C. FALLS David Villa scored on a penalty kick in the 72nd minute for his 22nd goal of the season for New York City F.C. in a 3-1 loss at D.C. United.
Trinity Gay, the 15-year-old daughter of the Olympic sprinter Tyson Gay, was fatally shot around 4 a.m. near the campus of the University of Kentucky in Lexington. The police said one person had been arrested in connection with an exchange of gunfire in a restaurant parking lot.
Trinity Gay finished fourth in the 100 meters at the Kentucky Class 3A high school track meet in May.
Carlota Ciganda overcame an early five-stroke deficit, then blew a late five-stroke lead before beating Alison Lee in a playoff at the KEB HanaBank Championship in Incheon, South Korea, for her first L.P.G.A. Tour title.
A RALLY IN NAPA A year after being undone by a 40 on the back nine at Silverado in Napa, Calif., Brendan Steele rallied from four shots back and won the Safeway Open for his first PGA Tour victory in more than five years.
AROUND GOLF Alex Noren won the British Masters in Watford, England, his third European Tour title in his last eight tournaments. Nicole Broch Larsen won the Symetra Tour Championship in Longwood, Fla., in a playoff over Alley McDonald.
Ryan O’Reilly had two goals and two assists as visiting Buffalo pounded Edmonton, 6-2, for its first victory of the season.
Benoit Pouliot and Milan Lucic scored for the Oilers, who had won two straight games to open the season.
Andy Murray closed the gap on top-ranked Novak Djokovic by beating Roberto Bautista Agut, 7-6 (1), 6-1, at the Shanghai Masters to match his season-high total of six titles in 2009.
Kevin Harvick moved to the front on a late restart and won the Hollywood Casino 400 at Kansas Speedway in Kansas City, Kan., to earn a spot in the next round of the Chase for the Sprint Cup. Jimmie Johnson, the winner last weekend in Charlotte, N.C., has also reached the round of eight.