Brendan and Mary Burke and their 2-year-old daughter, Quinn, moved into a third-floor apartment in the Park Slope neighborhood of Brooklyn last month.
It is only a 15-minute walk from Brendan’s new office, the Barclays Center, where he is MSG’s new announcer for Islanders telecasts.
That short journey is the culmination of a 10-year odyssey to his first job with a major professional team.
Burke had paid his dues. He thinks he got his first job in broadcasting, at $1,000 a month, because no one else was interested. He worked on the baseball grounds crew on nights he was not on the air and later called games from a bed set up by a sponsor. For two years, he called the games of a hockey team that finished in last place.
Burke, who grew up in Fair Lawn, N.J., played hockey at Paramus Catholic High School and for the club team at Ithaca College. But he was soaked in sports culture from an early age because his father, Don, covered the Yankees and the Mets for The Record and The Star-Ledger. Through his father, Brendan made many contacts in broadcasting.
Brendan Burke was so determined to succeed that he decided to attend Ithaca rather than Syracuse University, which is more famous for sports broadcasting, because Ithaca’s smaller program offered more opportunities to get on the air.
Burke had wanted to be a broadcaster since he was 9, but he had never been on the air. He was way behind other freshmen. So he attended meetings at the college radio station and volunteered for everything. He remembers holding his arm up for entire meetings.
That led to doing sports updates, to halftime soccer radio shows and finally to broadcasts of Ithaca College baseball games — “which you only get seven or eight a year that don’t get snowed out,” he said.
Burke moved through the ranks at Ithaca and decided he wanted to make a living as a broadcaster. He landed his first job at another student radio station — at the College at Brockport, a State University of New York campus not far from Rochester.
The job was to call the road games of the nearby Batavia Muckdogs, then the New York-Penn League affiliate of the Philadelphia Phillies. When the Muckdogs played at home, he would be the in-game M.C., officiating dizzy-bat races and helping with the infield tarpaulin.
“I was probably half his audience,” Don Burke said.
At the end of the Muckdogs’ season, Brendan Burke learned that the announcer who was calling the games of the Wheeling Nailers, a team in the E.C.H.L., comparable to Class AA in baseball, had moved on. He sent a demo tape of a Cornell women’s hockey game he had called on a Saturday morning into a disk recorder.
He learned quickly that a minor league announcer has other responsibilities, including assembling game notes for other broadcasters and reporters. Although the Nailers won only 22 of 72 games in his second season, Burke was the E.C.H.L.’s Broadcaster of the Year.
Burke landed another job in baseball, calling the games of the Phillies’ Class A affiliate in Lakewood, N.J. It was in Lakewood where he called a game or two from a bed set up in the concourse by Sleepy’s, one of the team’s sponsors. He pulled the tarp there, too, first sending the broadcast back to the station so it could fill rain delays with music.
After Wheeling, Burke called the games of the Rivermen, the St. Louis Blues’ American Hockey League affiliate in Peoria, Ill.
He spent five years in Peoria. He and Mary had dated since they met in college, but Mary pursued a career in nursing while living at his mother’s home in New Jersey. She moved to Peoria after they got married in 2012.
But the Blues sold the Rivermen to the Vancouver Canucks at the end of the 2013 season. The Canucks decided to relocate the A.H.L. franchise to Utica, N.Y., which happened to be Mary’s hometown. Burke landed the job calling the games of the Utica Comets.
The Burkes were in Utica for three years. Brendan wanted to call N.H.L. games, but only one or two N.H.L. broadcasting jobs — if that many — open per year. He had landed some work calling college football games for Fox Sports Net and thought about walking away from Utica.
“He had a lot of people rooting for him, and I’ve given him many a pep talk,” said Mary Burke, who is expecting the couple’s second child, a son, in February.
On May 18, Howie Rose, the Islanders’ TV play-by-play announcer since 1995, told MSG that he was leaving. Rose, 62, who also calls Mets games on radio, wanted to reduce his workload. Burke said his agent was in touch with MSG the next day. Sportscasters like Mike Breen and Kenny Albert, whom Burke had met along the way, provided references.
MSG announced Aug. 11 that it had hired Burke to replace Rose.
The Burkes moved to Brooklyn in September, and he made his debut in an Oct. 4 preseason game in Brooklyn against the Rangers.
