ORLANDO, Fla. — The Capriles were seeking asylum again.
They had been seeking it for over a year in the United States, having fled Venezuela last year from what they described as politically motivated persecution. But on Thursday afternoon, as Hurricane Matthew barreled toward Central Florida and the Capriles considered their old apartment and 10-month-old daughter, their place of asylum was much more immediate: the cafeteria at Odyssey Middle School.
It was everything that a middle school cafeteria promised: hard chairs; bright lights; fall decorations; colorful posters gently nagging students to behave well; chicken Florentine and cheese calzones — or at least that was the menu for Friday’s lunch, replaced by snack packages.
As of Friday morning, about 22,000 people were spread among roughly 145 shelters around Florida, Gov. Rick Scott said in a news conference. There were six shelters here in Orange County, where major amusement parks were closed. On Friday, however, officials in the county said they were assessing what appeared to be minimal damage. Only about 49,000 of Orange County’s approximately 600,000 customers lacked power on Friday, state officials said. Nearly 827,000 customers statewide had lost electricity by Friday afternoon, officials reported, and more than half of customers in Brevard, Flagler, Indian River and Volusia Counties lacked power.
The crowd at the Odyssey Middle School cafeteria, having spent the night on the hard floors or chairs if they had not brought any bedding with them, was already starting to dwindle.
Rosa Rodriguez was reunited with her Chihuahua, Brandy, who had not been allowed inside and had to ride out the night in a van in the parking lot. Ken Goodman, whose girlfriend worked for Orange County and insisted that he spend the night in a shelter, was considering how, exactly, he would leave; his girlfriend — who had the car — was still hard at work.
Making occasional exits for a smoke break was Fred Day, 74, a cocktail lounge pianist who left his mobile home Thursday afternoon with a hastily chosen battered paperback — “The Art of Loving” by Erich Fromm — and memories of the last time a hurricane came to town. It was Hurricane Charley in 2004, which at the time was one of the costliest hurricanes in United States history.
As people looked out at the rain and windswept parking lot, they spoke of past hurricanes like tragic old flames.
By early Friday morning, the sentiment took hold that this was not going to be one of the big heartbreakers. The trickle of exits began with two older women shortly before 9 a.m. and picked up through the morning as a steady stream of people headed to their cars with their bags and blankets. Those who stuck around mulled the possibility that the storm would turn back after heading out to the Atlantic.
The Capriles were staying.
“We are just starting out in this country,” said Jorge Capriles, 28. In early 2015, he had a good life in Venezuela. He had been running a food distribution company, and his wife, Carmen, had a good job at a pharmaceutical laboratory. But he was also a cousin of a high-profile opposition candidate with a surname that government police recognized.
As he ate a cinnamon bun in the Odyssey Middle School cafeteria on a blanket with his wife, his daughter, Victoria, and some visiting cousins, Mr. Capriles recalled how in March 2015, the police detained him without charges. He sat in jail for more than a day, while his wife worked her connections to have him released. Mr. Capriles was eventually freed, but probably very temporarily. Two months later, when the family came to the United States for a previously scheduled vacation, they never went back. They are awaiting word on their application for asylum.
The Capriles moved to an apartment in Orlando, the one that Carmen believed would not stand up to a hurricane. Mr. Capriles went to work in construction at Walt Disney World. In recent weeks, they watched as Matthew lashed the coast of their old home, Venezuela, then made its way toward their new one.
They looked around their apartment for safe places to ride out a storm, but there were none. Ms. Capriles drove around Orlando looking for sandbags on Thursday, but there were none. She asked friends about shelters, and they said Odyssey Middle School.
And so here they were on a floor full of strangers, except for some neighbors and a man Mr. Capriles knew from work. Mr. Capriles looked over at his little girl, who was gingerly stepping around scattered blankets on the floor toward the open arms of one of his cousins.
