LOS ANGELES — Derrick Rose testified on Tuesday that a woman had welcomed him and two friends into her apartment on the night that she said the three raped her, as he maintained that the sex they had was consensual.
In his second day of testimony in a lawsuit brought by the woman, who is seeking $21.5 million, Rose, the N.B.A. star who was acquired by the Knicks this summer, said she had invited the three men individually into her bedroom early one morning in 2013 after a night of drinking at Rose’s rental house in Beverly Hills, Calif.
“If somebody tells you to come in one at a time and you’re a guy, what is that?” Rose said, asserting that the sex was consensual.
Rose said he conversed cordially with the woman, whom he had known for about two years, after the encounter. “Afterward, she was peaceful. Like, relaxed,” he said.
Rose characterized her as sober that night. She has said that she was intoxicated and unable to grant consent.
The woman testified last week that she considered herself to be in a relationship with Rose, but he painted a different picture on Tuesday.
In asserting that she had given consent, Rose referred to an exchange of text messages between him and the woman nearly 24 hours before the encounter, including one in which the woman said he caused her to be sexually aroused.
He said that previously such exchanges would “end with sex” about 99 percent of the time.
Rose’s pattern of low-key, succinct answers was broken once when Waukeen McCoy, a lawyer for the woman, opened a question with what Rose interpreted as a sarcastic reference to how his mother taught him to treat women.
Rose also recalled advice from a rookie symposium when he joined the N.B.A. in 2008. When McCoy asserted that Rose had taken home a used condom from the apartment in order to remove potential evidence of wrongdoing, Rose said, “I was trained to do it” to eliminate the risk that sexual partners would keep the condom.
The trial proceeded even as Judge Michael Fitzgerald agreed to consider the defense’s request for a mistrial or a dismissal.
The lawyers for the three men have claimed that McCoy withheld from them three significant text messages until Friday, four days into the trial, that should have been provided months earlier. They contend that the messages should have been included in exhibits submitted as evidence.
Judge Fitzgerald withheld a ruling on the motion until he hears a further explanation from the woman’s lawyers on Wednesday morning.
He expressed reluctance to declare a mistrial, noting that the current case was timed to avoid the N.B.A.’s regular season. Rose was expected to miss a third exhibition game with the Knicks on Saturday.
“I’m not thrilled that Mr. Rose might miss games,” the judge said, adding that his concern was not related to the player’s celebrity status.