With the Russian doping scandal still roiling international sports and dividing its leaders, Olympic officials met in Switzerland on Saturday to discuss overhauling the world’s antidoping system. They emerged with a plan to increase the power of the World Anti-Doping Agency, affirming that organization’s central role in the fight against cheating.
After a four-hour, closed-door meeting with some 20 sports officials, Thomas Bach, the president of the International Olympic Committee, announced the creation of a new drug-testing authority to operate under WADA and handle doping control at the Games — a responsibility that has long rested with the I.O.C.
Surprising some antidoping officials who worried WADA would become a scapegoat, Mr. Bach expressed broad support for the agency, the 17-year-old regulator of drugs in sports. Mr. Bach called for WADA to be fortified but deferred to the agency itself on specifics, including how much more money it would need to carry out its expanded mandate. WADA is expected to take up the topic at executive meetings next month, and I.O.C. officials will most likely review the decisions in December.
Advocating the independent adjudication of doping offenses, Mr. Bach also proposed that the Court of Arbitration for Sport should assume primary responsibility in imposing penalties for drug violations. Currently, the governing bodies for individual sports decide on sanctions, and athletes have the option of appealing those penalties to the arbitration court.
“It is up to WADA to discuss the implementation of the reforms, to develop a business plan,” Mr. Bach said, emphasizing the collaboration of national governments and sports organizations — WADA’s joint funders, who were ready, he said, to contribute more money.
That support was a marked reversal from the messages of recent months, when Mr. Bach and several of the participants in Saturday’s meeting had roundly criticized WADA and its response to revelations of state-sponsored doping in Russia.
While WADA took years to investigate whistle-blower tips about Russia, the agency ultimately commissioned multiple inquiries and advocated disciplining the country before the Rio Games this year.
WADA has defended the yearslong delay by pointing to its limited resources and investigative power, and it has requested more funding and broader authority.
With the I.O.C.’s decision to divorce itself from carrying out drug testing at the Games, it will assign to WADA a responsibility that has been fraught with controversy in recent months.
In July, mere weeks before the Rio Games, WADA published a scathing report detailing how doping control at the preceding Olympics had been breached, certifying the account of a Russian whistle-blower who told The New York Times about government-ordered cheating at the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi, Russia.
The Sochi lab — where the urine samples of Russian athletes were passed through a hand-size hole in the wall and tampered with, to conceal doping violations — had been accredited and inspected by WADA but managed by the I.O.C.
After that report, WADA urged the I.O.C. to bar Russia from the Rio Games. Although more than 100 Russian athletes were kept from competing and no Russian government officials were allowed to attend the Games, the I.O.C. stopped short of entirely shutting out the nation.
Saturday’s meeting, however, appeared to restore some harmony in the sports world as supporters of WADA reacted positively to Mr. Bach’s support of the agency.
Before Saturday’s meeting, hopeful that Mr. Bach would articulate the support that he ultimately did, Mr. de Pencier’s organization and WADA had called for strengthening the existing framework.
Inquiries into Russian doping, focusing on which athletes may have doped at Sochi and in other competitions, are continuing, with the second part of the WADA-commissioned investigation expected to conclude in the coming weeks.
Mr. Bach said Saturday that he expected the new Olympic drug-testing organization would be up and running in time for the 2018 Games and that he had spoken with Mr. Reedie, who agreed to that goal. “Testing will be independent whether this is in place or not,” Mr. Bach said.
After the Rio Games, leaders of 17 national antidoping agencies made public a detailed set of proposals aimed at making WADA more independent and enhancing its ability to investigate and impose penalties. Those proposals appeared to have strongly informed Mr. Bach’s broad guidelines.
Among the antidoping authorities’ recommendations was a provision that WADA’s leaders be prohibited from holding overlapping leadership positions in the sports world, to minimize possible conflicts of interest — promoting the Olympic brand while simultaneously policing offenses that could tarnish it. Until August, Mr. Reedie also served as a top executive of the I.O.C.
“We want to see the issues of conflict of interest and integrity addressed in the proper way,” Mr. Bach said. He said the meeting had not discussed specific individuals and did not indicate if there had been any discussion about who might lead WADA after Mr. Reedie’s three-year term expires at the end of this year.
The meeting was attended by the top Olympic officials of China, Russia and the United States, along with the presidents of six major international sports federations, including those of soccer, swimming and track and field.
WADA officials are to meet in Scotland next month to decide on specific courses of action, informed by Saturday’s meeting and by a WADA conference last month.
“People who want to fight doping should focus on strengthening WADA, not weakening it,” said Thorhild Widvey, Norway’s minister of culture and a member of WADA’s executive committee.
