As a group, the most successful of the old-school broadcast-network producers — people like Dick Wolf, Chuck Lorre and Jerry Bruckheimer — have resisted the lure of the streaming services. Mr. Kelley used to be in that league, but his last real hit was “Boston Legal” eight years ago. So when “Goliath” was announced, you could hope that the creative freedom offered by a short-season online production (which Amazon took straight to series, without requiring a pilot) would have a rejuvenating effect. Through two episodes, the jury is still out.
It’s a David and Goliath story, as the title half-indicates, though the main character, Mr. Thornton’s Billy McBride, is definitely the David. The action begins with a series of quick scenes establishing how down and out he is: released from jail, missing a court date, told to shape up by his teenage daughter, sitting on a beachside bench and pulling a bottle of whiskey out of a paper bag.
But then there’s the other half of the show’s odd bordering-on-bizarre split personality. The Goliath of the story is a behemoth of a law firm where McBride was once a partner; whenever the scene shifts there, the tone and rhythm change.
Suddenly we’re in an arch, slick, hyped-up TV legal show, with lawyers marching in formation and exchanging withering put-downs. The staff includes a dragon-lady associate (Molly Parker), a faint reminder of “Ally McBeal”; and a young lawyer (Olivia Thirlby) with an anxiety disorder who stutters in court.
In contrast to Mr. Thornton’s naturalistic portrayal of McBride, we get William Hurt breathing hard as McBride’s nemesis, a ghoulish figure with a scarred face who sits in a red-lighted room watching surveillance video of his employees. Clearly, Mr. Kelley and Mr. Shapiro are trying to accentuate the contrast between their David and their Goliath, but they have ended up with what feels like two different shows.
Some things we can probably count on. Mr. Kelley and Mr. Shapiro (they worked together on “The Practice” and “Boston Legal”) will serve up a snappy piece of dialogue every few minutes. Mr. Thornton, even in one of his more routine performances, will be a pleasure to watch.
And while many of the actresses have trouble animating their slightly cartoonish roles — Ms. Parker, Ms. Thirlby and Tania Raymonde as a combination prostitute and legal secretary — Nina Arianda will continue to be the best reason to watch the show.
She’s fearless and hilarious as the low-rent lawyer and real estate agent who drags McBride into the case. When she deadpans, “He’ll be here, the hooker just texted,” it could be “L.A. Law” all over again.