In a city as thick with history as New York, it is inevitable that some public events will echo the past. In the case of Deborah Danner, a mentally ill woman fatally shot by the police on Tuesday night in the Bronx, that echo was Eleanor Bumpurs.
It was Oct. 29, 1984, and a team from the New York Police Department’s elite Emergency Services Unit arrived at Ms. Bumpurs’s apartment in a public housing complex, summoned by officials who were trying to evict her.
When the officers stormed her fourth-floor apartment in the Sedgwick Houses in the Bronx, they found Ms. Bumpurs, who weighed about 260 pounds, brandishing a 10-inch kitchen knife. One of them tried to restrain her with a special Y-shaped metal pole. Two others, behind their plastic shields, advanced on her and tried to pin the hand in which she held the knife against a wall.
Ms. Bumpurs swiped at the pole with her knife, knocking it aside. Freed from restraint, she went after one of the police officers, according to court testimony.
That was when Officer Stephen Sullivan reacted. Standing behind his colleagues, he fired two blasts at Ms. Bumpurs with his 12-gauge single-barrel shotgun. The first shot struck Ms. Bumpurs in the hand. The second slammed into her chest and killed her.
The episode, interwoven with race, mental illness and law enforcement, was a seminal moment for the Police Department and its use-of-force policy. And the debate it started about how to handle emotionally disturbed people — or what the police called E.D.P.s — continues to this day.
After Ms. Bumpurs’s death, the police commissioner at the time, Benjamin Ward, revised the official guidelines for handling the emotionally disturbed. Under one change, street-level officers were required to wait until a supervisor arrived before confronting an emotionally disturbed person. The department’s Patrol Guide was also rewritten, ordering officers to isolate and contain suspects in mental distress and to establish “a zone of safety” around them.
The episode caused widespread outrage, especially in the city’s black communities. Mario Merola, the Bronx district attorney, sought charges against Officer Sullivan, claiming at one point that “it was anatomically impossible” for Ms. Bumpurs to have held on to the knife after being shot in the hand. Officer Sullivan was charged with second-degree manslaughter and criminally negligent homicide. He was tried and acquitted in 1987.
