A visit with the artist reveals him to be every bit as brilliant, confounding and heartbreakingly soulful as the pictures he makes.
I ARRIVE AT THE Eggleston Artistic Trust building at just after 1 on a sweltering, humid Memphis afternoon. I am met at the door by the charismatic son of the photographer William Eggleston, Winston, who is the director of the trust as well as its official archivist. He ushers me into the cool, darkened rear office where his father sits at one of two substantial desks that are positioned face to face, occupying the center of the room. Large photographic proof sheets hang on the walls along with old Coke signs. An illuminated jukebox sits in the corner beside a red midcentury sofa.
 He smells like bourbon and body lotion. He wears a Cartier watch, two minutes slow. I ask if he likes to talk about photography. Eggleston closes his eyes. “It’s tricky,” he says. “Words and pictures don’t — they’re like two different animals. They don’t particularly like each other.” He speaks in almost a whisper, his dapper Southern drawl relaxed further with a slur.
A day in the life of the photographer, accompanied by the artist Wolfgang Tillmans.
In another famous shot, a naked man stands in a blood-red bedroom. It feels slightly hallucinogenic and also somewhat sinister: Why is he naked? Why is the room a mess? I ask Eggleston about the man. “He was my best friend in the world,” he tells me, before adding, “He was murdered. Somebody hit him in the head with an ax.” Of yet another famous photo — depicting a longhaired girl lying on the grass, eyes closed, a camera in her left hand — he tells me she wasn’t sleeping, she was on Quaaludes.
A period of silence ensues but he does not appear uncomfortable or impatient in the least. I realize it doesn’t matter what we talk about, or if we talk at all. “The only thing one can do is really look at the damn things. It’s just not making much sense to talk about them,” he says.
This makes sense. While I may not be able to imagine Eggleston navigating through the mundanities of life, such as shopping for groceries or filling out a form of any kind, I can imagine a sober, sharpened, parallel-universe version of him scribbling out a Unified Theory of Everything on a paper napkin and then tucking it as a kind favor into Albert Einstein’s astonished hand. The flow of endless cigarettes, bottomless drinks, continuous images, the “why try to explain it?”-ness of the man himself: These qualities testify to something indefinable and Schrödinger’s-cat-like woven into his very nature. The Eggleston of this universe is a self-taught photographer who has succeeded in proving all his savage, elitist and uncomprehending original critics — including The New York Times — utterly, deliciously wrong. In his pressed suit he stands vindicated, fire bursting from his fingertips as he lights another American Spirit, a flesh-and-blood world changer. Everywhere he looks he notices things others miss. “I see great pictures all the time,” he says, and that is unequivocally dazzling.
With a fresh drink beading water atop his piano, Eggleston plays “Ol’ Man River” from the Broadway musical “Show Boat.” At times, I recognize the piece, but then beneath Eggleston’s deft fingers it wanders off, meandering and exploring. He plays for 20 minutes, never quite beginning or ending but also never hitting a single sour note.
“Are you a genius?” I ask him. His fingers instantly leave the piano keys, suspended in midair above them, and he swivels toward me with an expression of bald incredulity, as if I have asked, “Do you use toilet paper?” His eyes are grayish-blue until just before the pupil where the color becomes something close to honey, and they are fixed on my own. He replies in a breathy, almost pitying drawl, “Well, yes.” The unspoken message is clear: You’ve spent all day with me and you even have to ask?