ALBANY — The New York State Health Department has signaled that it intends to allow transgender youths to receive Medicaid coverage for hormones that forestall puberty, wiping away prohibitions that have been criticized by lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender groups.
In the proposed rule, the department stated that its concerns about safety and efficacy were supplanted after it “had the opportunity to talk to a number of practitioners who treat minors” with gender dysphoria, who uniformly agreed that hormone therapies were medically justifiable for young people who feel that their birth sex is not their true gender.
New York is not the only state to allow Medicaid — a joint federal and state program — to cover such hormone treatments, said Sasha Buchert, a staff lawyer with the Transgender Law Center in California, which has long had such coverage.
But advocates have been emboldened in recent years by both a broader cultural acceptance of transgender people and actions by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat, including in late 2014 when he instructed the Department of Financial Services to guarantee insurance coverage for gender dysphoria. Last fall, the governor also announced anti-discrimination measures for transgender people in housing and other areas, using his executive power to overcome a legislative logjam in the Republican-led State Senate.
In March 2015, the Health Department, already facing legal action, adopted rules that allowed for some coverage, including gender reassignment surgery for adults displaying “a persistent and well-documented case of gender dysphoria,” but stopped short of covering minors and certain treatments the state considered cosmetic, rather than medically necessary.
In July, however, a federal judge in Manhattan, Jed S. Rakoff, of United States District Court, ruled that such restrictions on the so-called cosmetic procedures were not legally defensible, but wanted a trial for the issue of whether treatment for youths was medically necessary. More legal arguments are planned for this month, but the proposed rule on youth coverage could satisfy the court.
The state’s action on Wednesday would also appear to be aimed at addressing the judge’s concerns, by clarifying the state’s intent to allow Medicaid coverage for a wide variety of treatments including mastectomies, hysterectomies and breast augmentations, as well as electrolysis — which is often expensive — in certain cases.
The legal team pushing for the changes — including Legal Aid, the Sylvia Rivera Law Project and Willkie Farr & Gallagher — says it will continue to push the state for fast action on the proposed rule. “Without a judgment from the court, there’s nothing to say the state can’t make another change,” Ms. Garcia said.
Many surgical procedures would not necessarily be appropriate for minors — “It’s rare that people are getting surgery under 18,” Ms. Garcia said — though they could be covered in some cases under the department’s proposed rule.
But the major benefit for transgender youths would primarily be the hormone treatments, according to medical professionals.
“Once male puberty has occurred, it’s very hard to reverse those changes,” Dr. Wolf-Gould said, noting the genital and facial changes and hair growth that usually occur during that period, along with physical bulking.
There is also, however, a major emotional benefit to allowing “a youth to go through puberty in their affirmed gender,” Dr. Wolf-Gould said.
