MANILA — After President Rodrigo Duterte publicly named him as a drug suspect last summer, the mayor of a small Philippine town said he was not worried.
“If you are not guilty, why should you be afraid?” the mayor, Samsudin Dimaukom, told The New York Times in August.
On Friday, he and nine other men were shot dead at a highway police checkpoint, in what the police described as an antidrug operation.
Mr. Dimaukom and his companions are among about 2,000 people who have been killed in Mr. Duterte’s campaign against drugs since he took office on June 30.
The bloody campaign has been criticized by foreign governments, including the United States, as well as by the United Nations and international human rights groups. But it has proved very popular in the Philippines, where residents say the killing of crime suspects has made the streets safer.
According to the police, Mr. Dimaukom, the mayor of Datu Saudi-Ampatuan, a town of about 20,000 on the restive southern island of Mindanao, was killed after his guards opened fire on officers.
Chief Inspector Elias Colonia, a spokesman for the local police, said the authorities had information that Mr. Dimaukom and his group were transporting a shipment of shabu, a cheap form of methamphetamine widely sold in the Philippines.
According to the police, a checkpoint was set up along his expected route in the town of Makilala, about 70 miles east of Datu Saudi-Ampatuan by road. The mayor and his party approached around 4 a.m., Mr. Colonia said.
Photographs taken at the scene showed various weapons and what appeared to be sachets of shabu near an S.U.V. with bullet holes in the front windshield.
No police officers were harmed, the police said.
Most of those killed in the antidrug campaign to date have been poor and on the margins of society. Suspected of using or selling methamphetamine, they were shot by the police, ostensibly after they resisted arrest.
But in August, Mr. Duterte identified a number of officials he said were involved in the illegal drug trade, including judges, police officers, military officials, mayors and members of Congress, and threatened to go after them. That group included Mr. Dimaukom.
On Thursday Mr. Duterte said his campaign had entered a new phase and would now target such officials.
Contending that “narcopolitics” had taken hold in the country, he said that he had compiled the names of 5,000 village leaders and 6,000 police officers involved in the narcotics business.
Mr. Duterte has not made the full list public, and critics have assailed his approach as McCarthyism, raising questions about how the names were compiled and why charges were not filed instead.
It was not clear whether the police checkpoint that ensnared Mr. Dimaukom was part of the campaign’s new phase.
In August, when Mr. Dimaukom heard his name announced on national television as a drug suspect, he said he was shocked.
He said he had been wrongly placed on the list of drug suspects because of false accusations spread by his political rivals. He said he was not afraid of an investigation.
Mr. Duterte had ordered those he named to turn themselves in within 24 hours or be hunted down.
Taking no chances, Mr. Dimaukom reported to the local police hours later. In an abundance of caution, he flew to Manila to meet with top police officials the next morning and said he would cooperate with any investigation.
He said that people in his town knew that he was not involved in the drug trade and that they welcomed him back on his return from Manila. As a backer of the antidrug campaign, he said, he had called for mandatory drug testing of all town employees.
“I am prepared for a lifestyle check, or a drug test or any other investigation that we will be subjected to,” he said then.
But he objected to the name-and-shame approach.
