Last November, a week after I had last seen him, my father passed out while sweeping the driveway (he’s the kind of man who sweeps the driveway, the kind of man who thinks something like passing out is caused by either having had too much coffee or not enough coffee), and within 24 hours of being admitted to the emergency room, he was told he had leukemia. The doctors said that, without treatment, he had about six weeks to live. He was 58.
He decided to go for it — of course he did. He felt fine, he said, bragging that he had never taken a sick day from work in his life, that he was otherwise exceptionally healthy. One doctor tried to warn us that my father would be receiving “the strongest chemotherapy on the planet.” Whatever, we thought: This doctor did not know my dad the way we knew him. He is tough, mean even; chemotherapy should be afraid of him, I thought.
We were so optimistic that our biggest worry early on was how we were going to keep my father entertained during the minimum four-week stay in the hospital. This was my father’s biggest worry as well. “I have no excuse now, huh?” he said to me just as this all started, weeks before he would end up on a ventilator and on dialysis, machines doing the work his lungs and kidneys couldn’t do. “I gotta read your books now, don’t I?” He didn’t mean because I might die. His excuse had always been that he was too busy to read my books, that his work as an electrical inspector for the city left him too drained.
The double whammy of his having cancer and his admitting he would have to read my work made me think, This is it. This is what it took. We will finally learn how to talk to each other and he will no longer be this cold mystery to me. I decided this was the kind of positive thinking the doctors were encouraging us to have.
Very soon after that, things got much worse, and so he never read the books. That makes it sound as if he died, but that’s not what happened (though he almost died a couple of times) — he is, in fact, as of May, in remission. But he never read my work because, ultimately, he just didn’t want to, for reasons he probably won’t ever explain to me, for reasons that will probably haunt everything I ever write.
“He’s going to a place where he feels confident,” the psychologist assigned to our family told us the day before my father had to be placed on a ventilator. We couldn’t believe it: Even in his delirium, even as he slipped closer to the possible end of his life, my father was going to work.
At the end of May, our family spent a week together at the beach, an impromptu celebration with the stated aim of helping us relax after everything we’d been through.
Over pizza one night, I got brave enough to ask my father what he planned on changing about his life now that he was healthy.
I didn’t know what to say to this, so I posed the question to my sister: What about you, you have three months to really live — what would you do with it?
“Are you serious?” I pressed my fingers to the sides of my nose.
“Spain is really cool, I love Spain,” my sister said. Of the four of us, she’s the only one who’s been there, and she tends to remind us of this fact whenever that country comes up in conversation.
My father leaned forward and rubbed his hands over his whole face and head, his palms scrubbing the hair that had already grown back.
Three months felt like nothing, and without warning and before I could articulate an answer, I started to cry. “What?” my mom said, laughing sweetly at my sudden tears.
When our time in the hospital started — while my dad was still relatively well, before the effects of chemo had floored him entirely — I found myself trying to keep us all entertained with a personality quiz. Reading from the list of questions, I asked my father what three things he was better at than most people.
His first, immediate answer: driving.
My sister and I tried to hide our surprise at how plainly he’d stated this, at the fact that he saw this as a strength. My mom nodded, not surprised at all. And I wrote all of this down as precisely as I could, as I always have, doing the work of filling more pages he will never make himself read.