In a statement, Judge Moore called the decision corrupt. “This was a politically motivated effort by radical homosexual and transgender groups to remove me as chief justice of the Supreme Court because of outspoken opposition to their immoral agenda,” he said.
Mathew D. Staver, Judge Moore’s lawyer and the founder of Liberty Counsel, a legal group that has fought against same-sex marriage, called the decision illegal and said he was appealing to the Alabama Supreme Court.
Judge Moore filed a similar appeal after the Court of the Judiciary’s decision in 2003. The justices recused themselves in that case and selected at random a panel of retired judges to hear it. The judges upheld Judge Moore’s removal.
Judge Roy S. Moore listened to closing arguments in his ethics trial in Montgomery on Wednesday.Credit...
Richard Cohen, the president of the Montgomery-based Southern Poverty Law Center, which filed complaints that led to Judge Moore’s trial, welcomed Friday’s decision, calling suspension without pay the same as removal for all practical purposes.
“The bottom line is he can’t exercise any judicial authority or power,” Mr. Cohen said.
No one expects Judge Moore, a major figure in the culture wars since before he entered statewide office, to depart quietly from the political scene. In the years after his first removal, he ran for governor twice, though he finished far behind in the Republican primaries. He considered running for president in 2012 but decided instead to run, again, for chief justice. His victory without a runoff in the 2012 Republican primary rattled the state’s political establishment, and many high-profile Republicans openly supported the Democrat in the general election. Judge Moore won with a slim majority.
In Judge Moore’s view, the Supreme Court’s decision guaranteeing same-sex couples the right to marry was not binding on Alabama. Despite a Federal District Court’s order to the state’s probate judges, Mr. Moore insisted that until a final ruling by the Alabama Supreme Court, the matter was still unresolved.
In January he issued his order to the probate judges, informing them that they had a “ministerial duty” to refuse licenses to same-sex couples until a state-level decision was handed down.
It was this action that brought charges from the Judicial Inquiry Commission, a state oversight body, that he was violating Alabama’s canon of judicial ethics.
While what Judge Moore will do next is a matter of speculation, most everyone agrees that his time in the public eye is not over.
