Hurricane Matthew churned north along the coast of Florida on Friday, staying far enough offshore to spare the state a direct hit, but still caused flooding, wind damage and power failures. By Friday evening, it was a Category 2 storm, with sustained winds of up to 110 miles per hour, and government officials and forecasters shifted their focus to the threat of more serious damage on Saturday as the storm approaches Savannah and Charleston.
The storm was blamed for the deaths of more than 800 people in Haiti, according to a Reuters report based on information from civil protection and local officials.
For much of the day, officials warned that Jacksonville could suffer the worst damage. But while there was flooding in the area, the eye of the storm remained about 40 miles offshore as it passed Jacksonville.
Dispatches from our reporters on the ground; a live storm tracker map; and answers to reader questions will be updated below.
Hurricane Matthew weakened to a Category 3 storm and moved beyond the Florida Coast. Three states remained under a state of emergency, and President Obama and local governors spoke about persistent danger.
■ At 10 p.m., the hurricane’s center was 50 miles east-southeast of St. Simons Island, Ga., and 90 miles south-southeast of Savannah, Ga. The storm was moving at about 12 m.p.h., with maximum sustained winds of 110 m.p.h.
■ It was predicted to continue to parallel the coast into Georgia and the Carolinas, putting Savannah; Charleston, S.C.; and Wilmington, N.C., at risk, before turning out to sea.
■ Florida officials blamed the storm for at least five deaths: three in St. Lucie County, one in Volusia County and one in Putnam County. Early on Friday, the St. Lucie County fire service received a call to aid a woman who had suffered a heart attack, but winds approaching hurricane force prevented emergency vehicles from responding. An older couple running a generator inside a garage died from carbon monoxide poisoning, the county said in a social media post. Around noon, another woman was killed in Volusia, Fla., when a tree fell on her after she went outside to feed animals, according to James T. Dinneen, the Volusia County manager. In Putnam County, between Gainesville and Daytona Beach, the sheriff’s office said a woman had been killed when a tree fell onto a camper. Another man was injured.
■ Florida officials said Friday afternoon that more than 1 million customers were without electricity.
■ Significant flooding hit cities south of Jacksonville, including St. Augustine and Ormond Beach, on Friday.
■ The National Weather Service extended its hurricane warning northward into North Carolina. The Weather Service downgraded the hurricane warning for Florida’s south-central coast to a tropical storm warning, and lifted the tropical storm warning for the state’s southern coast.
■ President Obama warned against complacency. “I just want to emphasize to everybody that this is still a really dangerous hurricane, that the potential for storm surge, flooding, loss of life and severe property damage continues to exist,” he told reporters at the White House. “Pay attention to what your local officials are telling you. If they tell you to evacuate, you need to get out of there and move to higher ground.” The president has declared a state of emergency in Florida, Georgia and South Carolina, allowing federal agencies to coordinate relief efforts.
■ To cover the storm and its aftermath, The New York Times has journalists deployed along the path of Hurricane Matthew. Follow our correspondents on Twitter.
Miami may have been spared the wrath of Hurricane Matthew, but for residents of the city’s Little Haiti neighborhood the anxiety over the storm was acute. Haiti, birth nation to most of the people in the Miami enclave, was devastated by the storm, which killed hundreds of people on the island and left fears of an even greater toll.
As the chairman of the Haitian-American Chamber of Commerce, which he founded in 2005, Mr. Aimé said he was trying raise money to buy enough food to fill a container, with the intention of sending it to Les Cayes.
Sitting with a friend in a small park at the intersection of 62nd Street and North Miami Avenue, Maximin Raphael, 59, closed his eyes and pursed his lips as he thought about his 43-year-old sister, Gyslaine Joseph, in Les Cayes, and what she went through during the hurricane.
Mr. Raphael, who has lived in the United States for 34 years, had finally managed to reach her by telephone on Friday morning, after days of trying.
At the Piman Bouk Bakery, murals, both inside and out, portray a verdant and abundant Haiti in the manner of much of the country’s art. But the crushing realities of life there, made even more so by frequent batterings it takes from natural calamities like storms and earthquakes, were all too plain to the customers — almost invariably Haitian immigrants — who lined up Friday afternoon to buy goods.
High winds upended trees as it passed through Florida’s Ormond Beach community.
Could Hurricane Loop Back?
On Friday afternoon in Charleston, S.C., officials warned of potentially record-setting high tides, urged people to evacuate if they had not done so and set a curfew, from midnight until 6 a.m. Saturday, for those who remained.
But as the wind whistled and rain began to spit on this peninsular city, those who remained here seemed remarkably relaxed.
To Ms. Norton and many others here, the emptiness of Charleston’s palm-tree-lined streets, where antebellum architecture is dotted with hidden courtyards and lush window boxes, was a refreshing break, because the city is usually brimming with tourists.
“It’s so pleasant just hearing the birds,” Ms. Norton said.
A few streets over, Normandy Farm Bakery had filled the case it normally reserved for oysters — of which there were only three left — with hot dogs and beer, and strung up a random assortment of celebratory balloons outside to signal they were staying open.
Nearby, Jerome Monroe, a local handy man, closed the shutters on a fine arts gallery. He was planning to ride out the storm inside the Footlight Player’s Theater, where he would use a ShopVac to try to minimize flooding, though he knew he was powerless to prevent it entirely.
“When the water comes,” Mr. Monroe said, “you’re not stopping it.” — JESSICA BIDGOOD in Charleston, S.C.
John Schwartz, a New York Times reporter who covers climate change and the environment, is answering reader questions about the storm. He rode out his first hurricane, Carla, in his hometown, Galveston, Tex., at age 4. He has covered the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, as well as other storms for The Times.
Ask your hurricane questions here.
The conservative approach isn’t about liability, Jim, it’s about saving lives. The storm track that Matthew has followed has been well within the range of possibilities that the National Hurricane Center has been talking about all along. This is still a dangerous storm, and just because some stretches of the Florida coast have not been hit as catastrophically as was possible, that does not mean the rest of Florida or Georgia or South Carolina are in the clear.
Chris W. Landsea, science and operations officer for the National Hurricane Center, said that while the storm has weakened somewhat, it is now spread over a larger area, and “a larger hurricane can cause more storm surge,” and a larger wind field; the wind damage, in other words, can be felt over a larger area. So a slightly weaker but larger storm is “kind of a wash, as far as impacts,” he said.
There have always been hurricanes, and many have been profoundly destructive. The Great Storm of 1900 killed at least 6,000 people on Galveston Island, and remains the deadliest natural disaster in United States history.
But climate change isn’t about these isolated incidents. It’s the long-term trend, and the long-term trend is not good.
People remember the 1900 storm — and the haunting song about it, Wasn’t that a Mighty Storm? and Erik Larson’s book “Isaac’s Storm” — because it stands out in the damage that it did. What climate change is doing is dumping more heat into the oceans and more moisture into the air — conditions that are likely, over time, to make the strong storms that do develop become more powerful, and possibly more frequent, as well.
Katharine Hayhoe, a climate scientist at Texas Tech University, noted that while global average temperatures are rising, “20 times more heat is going into the ocean” than into the atmosphere, and so that’s a lot of power in the sea for hurricanes to draw on. And, in fact, while the 1900 storm was terribly destructive, much of that tragedy could be blamed on the lack of warning in those pre-satellite times.
It’s hard to attribute any single weather event to climate change, but it’s clear that climate change sets up conditions that can lead to more 1900 storms, more Katrinas, more Sandys. When I wrote about the science of attribution last year, Andrew E. Dessler, a climate researcher at Texas A & M, told me determining whether an extreme weather event like a flood is caused by climate change is like trying to figure out which of Barry Bonds’s home runs were caused by his steroid use.
