292 pp. Free Press. $28.
Offers of aid were leveraged by Nasser to extract better terms from the Soviet Union, his preferred military partner. Pressure on Israel did not impress Nasser, who wanted a permanent crisis he could exploit to mobilize Arab opinion behind him. Forcing Britain out of the canal zone in the mid-50s enabled Nasser to grab the canal itself in 1956. Rather than use his radio network to warn Arabs against Communism, Nasser employed it to inflame Arab opinion against the West’s most reliable regional allies, the Hashemite monarchies, helping to topple Iraq’s regime in 1958 and very nearly finishing off Jordan’s.
Eisenhower left office with anti-American regimes in power not only in Cairo, but also in Damascus and Baghdad. Eisenhower’s humiliation of Britain and France in the Suez crisis of November 1956 weakened two allies — without gaining an iota of good will from Arab nationalists. Rather than cooperate with the United States against the Soviet Union, the Arab world’s new nationalist strongmen were transfixed by their rivalries with one another. It was instead formerly despised Israel that emerged not only as America’s most reliable ally but also as far and away the region’s most capable military power. “I never should have pressured Israel to evacuate the Sinai,” Eisenhower lamented in 1965. He endorsed Israel’s pre-emptive Six Day War of 1967 in an interview a few weeks after the fighting.
As an enriched and empowered Iran becomes more aggressive abroad and more repressive at home, will such regrets eventually haunt President Obama too? That may depend more on the personality of the president than any external event.
Eisenhower was a pragmatist in the strictest philosophical sense: someone who judges the truth of theories according to their success or failure in practice. He came to office holding one view of the Middle East. When that view failed, he discarded it in favor of another.
But pragmatism of that kind is a very unusual trait, and especially unusual in politicians. Eisenhower may have rethought his gamble on Nasser. The subordinates who executed the policy, however, insisted to the end that any failure was somebody else’s fault. Their self-justifications have reverberated into journalism and history.
Americans wish to solve problems — and they are accordingly always quick to assume that problems must have solutions. Does a nation express grievances against the United States? Mollify them with concessions and compromises. Do the grievances sound irrational? Begin a process of trust-building that can lead to more fruitful dialogue. Do they traffic in imperial fantasies and threats of genocidal violence? Downplay those as overheated rhetoric for domestic consumption.
Doran’s profoundly humbling message will not be very welcome to ambitious policy makers of any political stripe. For that reason, it is all the more valuable as the Obama administration leaves office unchastened by adverse experience — and its potential successors assess the grim options they inherit.
David Frum, a senior editor at The Atlantic and chairman of the British think tank Policy Exchange, was a speechwriter for President George W. Bush in 2001-02.
Illustrated. 534 pp. Harper/HarperCollins Publishers. $32.50.
In the mid-19th century, the historian Thomas Carlyle popularized the Great Man Theory, arguing that history was made by the heroism of soldiers and statesmen. The Great Man Theory has long since been junked by academics, if not popular historians. The course of history, the scholars say, owes more to impersonal forces and serendipity than to the efforts of some dead white males. That is true enough, but from time to time, at critical instances, great men have made a difference, for better or for worse.
The Suez crisis of 1956 was one of the moments. It began as a last gasp of colonialism, a plot by Britain and France, working with Israel, to reclaim the Suez Canal, recently nationalized by Egypt. The scheme was the fruit of human folly, principally and most notably that of the British prime minister, Anthony Eden.
The grand conspiracy was doomed to fail. The canal was blocked for months, causing a crippling oil shortage in Europe. The Arab-Israeli conflict worsened, and the Muslim world was inflamed against its old overlords in the West with lasting consequences. The botched invasion occurred just as the Soviet Union was crushing a rebellion in Hungary, its Eastern bloc satellite. When the Kremlin, seeing the opportunity to divert international attention from its own outrages, issued a letter widely interpreted as a threat to attack London and Paris with nuclear weapons, the great powers seemed for an instant to be lurching toward World War III.
The turmoil and danger created by the Suez crisis and the Hungarian rebellion have largely faded from popular memory. With “Blood and Sand,” Alex von Tunzelmann, an Oxford-educated historian with an eye for human detail as well as a sure-handed grasp of the larger picture, does a marvelous job of recreating the tension and bungling that swept up Cairo, London, Moscow, Budapest, Paris and Washington during the harrowing two weeks of Oct. 22 to Nov. 6, 1956.
The background of the crisis was complex, and some readers may get slightly dizzy as the author corkscrews back in time from her gripping narrative. But the ultimate reward is a deeper understanding of the forces at work, as well as a wild ride down a zigzag trail left by the flailing of men with bloated and broken egos.
Von Tunzelmann begins her yarn with an arresting anecdote related by Anthony Nutting, a minister in the British Foreign Office. It was March 1956, and Nutting had been working on a plan to lessen the influence of Gamal Abdel Nasser, the charismatic president of postcolonial Egypt. Interrupted at dinner at the Savoy Hotel, Nutting took a call from Prime Minister Eden. “What’s all this nonsense about isolating Nasser or ‘neutralizing’ him, as you call it?” Eden said, shouting over the phone. “I want him murdered, can’t you understand?” Nutting (in his own telling) began to protest but Eden insisted: “I don’t want an alternative.  Then the prime minister hung up.
Eden is a tragic if rather unappealing figure in von Tunzelmann’s account. Bred to his class at Eton and Oxford, he looked the part of a perfect gentleman. He took first-class honors in Persian and Arabic at Oxford, and during his career at the Foreign Office, he had shown sensitivity to the emergence of nationalism in the Middle East. He had served bravely on the Western Front in World War I and capably as Winston Churchill’s foreign secretary during World War II.
He was obsessed with Egypt’s Nasser, the leader of a group of nationalist army officers who had deposed the pro-British monarchy in 1952 and seized the British- and French-controlled Suez Canal in July 1956. About two-thirds of Europe’s oil was transported through the canal; Nasser had his “thumb on our windpipe,” Eden fumed. Eden made Nasser “a scapegoat for all his problems: the sinking empire, the sluggish economy, the collapse of his reputation within his party and his dwindling popularity in the country at large,” von Tunzelmann writes. Resentment sharpened into vendetta. Over the summer and fall, Eden concocted a cockamamie scheme, called Operation Musketeer, to stage an Israeli invasion of Egypt, followed by an Anglo-French peacekeeping force for the “protection” of the canal. The Israeli and French conspirators had their own foolish reasons for going along; significantly, the United States was kept in the dark.
Fortunately, when the crisis broke, Eden’s recklessness was foiled by the calm resolve of the American president, Dwight Eisenhower. Genial in public and so fond of golf that he installed a putting green outside the Oval Office, Eisenhower was easy to underestimate. But having liberated Western Europe as supreme allied commander and seen firsthand the waste of war, he was determined as president to keep the United States out of armed conflict. He also had an “instinctive sympathy with the postcolonial predicament,” von Tunzelmann writes.
Eisenhower was not always well served by the rhetoric of Secretary of State John Foster Dulles or the machinations of his brother, Allen Dulles, the director of central intelligence. And Eisenhower had a temper. “Bombs, by God,” he shouted when the British began striking Egyptian air fields. “What does Anthony think he’s doing? Why is he doing this to me?” But Eisenhower was shrewd and he could be coldly calculating. Understanding that the British would need to buy American oil, he quietly put Britain into a financial squeeze, forcing Eden to back off the invasion.
When others were losing their heads, Eisenhower kept his. Though never explicitly stated, the take-away from von Tunzelmann’s book is obvious: When it comes to national leadership in chaotic times, temperament matters. Which makes her book not only exciting and satisfying but also timely.
Evan Thomas, the author of “Ike’s Bluff” and “Being Nixon,” is working on an authorized biography of Sandra Day O’Connor.