Sometimes the gender gap has been yuge and sometimes more modestly endowed, but for months now men have remained pretty much for Donald J. Trump and women for Hillary Clinton. Last week’s debate, when Mrs. Clinton got a chance to bring up her opponent’s habit of calling women pigs, slobs and dogs, did nothing to narrow that divide.
But the danger of focusing, as we so often do, on the differences between men and women is that it assumes women themselves are all on the same page.
In fact, we are less a monolith and more a monster sorority, patched together from disparate viewpoints and dissimilar experiences. A New York Times/CBS News poll last month found instances of a sisterhood gap that in some ways is more revealing than the gender gap.
In addition to gauging views on the election, the poll asked women how they viewed their lives, their roles in society and society’s views about them. 
Take the issue of leadership. Black women are far more likely than white women to see themselves as leaders — by a margin of 40 percent to 26 percent. Correspondingly, they are much more likely to be glad a woman is on the presidential ticket (80 percent to 57 percent) and that the woman in question is Mrs. Clinton.
This could well be connected to material realities: 71 percent of employed black women said they are the primary wage earners in their households, compared with 48 percent of white women who work. And yet the women themselves had their own explanations.
There were also pronounced differences in how black and white women saw the importance of appearance. In the survey women were asked to place a value on success at work; religion or spirituality; education; and appearance. They were first asked how important these things were to them personally, and then how important they were for women as society viewed them.
Most white women placed success at work and education well above appearance and spirituality to them personally, while most black women rated all four as “very important” to them. When the question switched to society’s views, however, women had much more in common: Appearance shot to the top of the heap for everyone.
One other group was almost as likely as black women to say that their own appearance was very important to them: women over 64.
We expected to see gaps between older and younger women. The “Bernie revolution” suggested that younger women would be more critical of Mrs. Clinton, but that was not the case. Millennials are more likely than baby boomers to say that a Clinton presidency would be “good for women,” and about twice as likely as women over 64 to say that Mrs. Clinton is judged more harshly because she is a woman. Women ages 18 to 29 are also much more likely than women over 64 to say that men in general have advantages over women (58 percent to 38 percent).
Asked whether more had been done in the last 20 years to combat racism or sexism, women, black and white, said by about a two to one margin that more had been done to combat sexism. But there was a sisterhood gap here, too. Women over 64 were more likely than any other demographic to say that less had been done to combat sexism.
“I think racism is easier to define and better understood by the majority of people, and sexism can be so subjective that it is murky for a lot of people,” said Barbara Jedlicka, 68, a white retired nurse in Las Vegas.
We’ll see, sister. We’ll see.