“The idea was to repurpose the home and turn it into a work of art,” said Rhea McCauley, Ms. Parks’ niece, who helped arrange the project.
The interest in a previously unknown home, where Ms. Parks spent only a short while, comes at a time when issues of race and identity are at the forefront in the United States — including a focus on African-American history, with the opening of the long-awaited National Museum of African American History and Culture in Washington.
But interest in Ms. Parks’s story has been high for years, even internationally, and her courageous refusal to move to the back of a bus in Montgomery, Ala., in 1955 has been honored in books and films, museums and works of art.
What is unusual about the exhibit, planned by the artist Ryan Mendoza, is that it sheds light on a part of Ms. Parks’s life that is not widely known: her time in Detroit, living with family, and her struggle to find both work and an affordable place to live after she had fled the South.
The house was believed to be one of Ms. Parks’s first stops after fleeing the South and making Detroit her adopted home. After Dec. 1, 1955, when she refused to give up her seat to a white man on a city bus in Montgomery, Ala., she was besieged by threats, spurring her move in 1957 to Detroit, where her brother, Sylvester McCauley, was living. She later lived elsewhere in Detroit, and died there at 92 in 2005.
The first years in Detroit were marked by poverty. Ms. Parks lived with family members, including Mr. McCauley, her niece and neighbors have said.
“She was running from abuses in the South, and she was penniless,” Ms. McCauley said.
Ms. Parks spent many days leaving the house in the morning, wearing a proper hat and gloves — “always neat as a pin,” her niece said — catching a city bus and looking for work, to no avail. She sometimes helped with the cooking, preparing baked chicken with paprika and blueberry cobbler.
She worked from the basement of the house tailoring clothes to earn money, said a next-door neighbor, Nelline Baldwin, who is now 87. Ms. Parks taught her how to sew, Ms. Baldwin said.
In recent decades, the house fell into disrepair as Detroit suffered from cascading job loss and depopulation. Ms. McCauley, who lives in Ann Arbor, Mich., learned the house was facing demolition and, in 2014, bought it for $500. She cleaned it and dreamed of turning it into a museum.
But she did not find enough financial backing for the project, and turned instead to Mr. Mendoza, an American artist in Berlin. Mr. Mendoza had already repurposed the facade of another empty Detroit home and displayed it at an art fair in the Netherlands.
He believes it will take him three months to reconstruct the house, piece by piece, though he is not sure what the finished product will look like. He dreams that Michelle Obama will arrange to install it on the White House lawn.
