It is certainly possible to enjoy the second volume of Riad Sattouf’s graphic memoir, “The Arab of the Future 2: A Childhood in the Middle East, 1984-1985,” without having read its predecessor. Even without a shard of context, Mr. Sattouf’s story and storytelling would be irresistible.
But there’s little point, really. After reading it, you’re going to feel compelled to read the first volume anyway.
That book, which covers the first six years of Mr. Sattouf’s life, came out in France nearly two years ago. It captivated the public, putting Mr. Sattouf, who lives in Paris, in the rather awkward and unwanted position of contemporary Arab ethnographer rather than modestly outrageous cartoonist. (From 2004 to 2014, he did a weekly comic strip for Charlie Hebdo called “The Secret Life of Youth.”) The first volume takes place mainly in Libya and Syria, where Mr. Sattouf’s father, Abdel-Razak, moves his French-born wife — they met at the Sorbonne — and young Riad in order to teach. A native of a Syrian village near Homs, Abdel-Razak is enraptured and emboldened by the promise of pan-Arabism.
“Look at this airport, built by Arabs!” he exclaims as the family disembarks in Tripoli, ignoring the cigarette butts freckling the ground.
Abdel-Razak was without a doubt one of the most memorable problem fathers to emerge in the literature of 2014. He is at once a baron of bluster and a princeling of tiny grievances, the sort who declaims too quickly, laughs too nervously and argues too gustily with the news on the radio. He obsesses over status. (On the Mercedes he dreams of flaunting: “I’ll drive very slowly up the driveway, to savor the sweetness.”) Strongmen enthrall him. (“Saddam Hussein is a visionary! A real man!”) Proud, delusional and quick to bruise, he can sometimes be a scary father. His son is too young to understand that he’s a vulnerable buffoon.
But Mr. Sattouf communicates that idea visually. Abdel-Razak cuts a marvelous, preposterous graphic figure. He is almost always in profile, his nose a broomstick, his jutting hairdo the silhouette of a gun.
Critics of the first “Arab of the Future” have argued that the book walks across the street and around the corner to reify the worst stereotypes of the Arab world: That it’s uncivilized, narrow-minded, thuggish, corrupt, anti-Semitic.
And viewed through small-framed spectacles, perhaps: The Tripoli of Mr. Sattouf’s memory is poor and dilapidated; its children play with pistols; the dispatches from the radio are propaganda so ripe they make his mother, Clémentine, laugh. When Abdel-Razak relocates everyone to Ter Maaleh, his childhood village in Syria, Riad’s nastier, more slow-witted cousins instantly call him “Yahudi!” (“Jew!”) on account of his blond hair; the women are forced to eat the remains of the men’s meals; there’s human excrement in the streets.
By way of extension, I would add: People forget that “The Arab of the Future” is a story told from the point of the view of a very small child. Mr. Sattouf’s “cartoony” style alone — his characters have potatoes for noses and peas for eyes — conveys a sense of both reality and unreality. Like the italicized commentary in Mary McCarthy’s “Memories of a Catholic Girlhood,” it says to the reader: What you’re witnessing may be a caricature of memory.
Also? The series is very funny. Particularly this second installment, which takes place over the course of a single year, 1984-85.
So again, on the opening page of Volume 2, we meet the young author, ever adorable, just as we did on the opening page of Volume 1. His family still lives in the village of Ter Maaleh. Clémentine, his mother, is still tolerating his father’s idealism.
But now young Riad must go to school, an eventuality he feared. He makes a few friends — it’s very sweet — and takes great pleasure in learning to read and write Arabic. But some of the children are vicious, and so is his teacher, a hillock of a woman who speaks softly and does, in fact, carry a big stick that she regularly wields. She’s as suspicious of Mr. Sattouf’s origins as his bully cousins.
It’s a wonder Abdel-Razak doesn’t discharge his frustrations at his family more often. Though when he does, it’s hard not to see a connection between autocratic regimes and autocratic fathers.
Her resistance is a preview of what’s to come. In the third book of this series, just released in France this month, Clémentine has had enough. She wants to bring her family home.
Living betwixt and between cultures may be Mr. Sattouf’s destiny. It was hard on him as a child, and it may remain so in adulthood. But it makes for exceptionally good art.