Love|Jennifer Toyzer and Alex Rothberg: Snow Was in the Air. Love, Too.
Jennifer Toyzer and Alex Rothberg: Snow Was in the Air. Love, Too.
Jennifer Erin Toyzer, a daughter of Gwen Toyzer of Havertown, Pa., and Dr. Barry J. Toyzer of Wynnewood, Pa., was married Oct. 29 to Alex Geoffrey Rothberg, the son of Sheila B. Alderman and Henry B. Rothberg of Jupiter Island, Fla. Rabbi George Scott Matous officiated at the Liberty Warehouse, an event space in Brooklyn.
Ms. Toyzer, 28, is keeping her name. She is an associate working in the principal investing area of Goldman Sachs in Manhattan. She graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, from which she received two bachelor’s degrees, in economics and in management science.
Mr. Rothberg, 29, is a senior scientist and software engineer at 4Catalyzer, a medical device start-up based in Guilford, Conn. He also graduated from M.I.T., and received two bachelor’s degrees, in computer science and in economics.
Though Ms. Toyzer and Mr. Rothberg never formally met at M.I.T., despite taking some of the same classes, she remembered him as “a bit of nerd” who once talked about a relationship that deeply concerned him.
After graduating in June 2010, Ms. Toyzer moved to Manhattan to begin working as an analyst at an investment bank. The next month, Mr. Rothberg arrived in Manhattan, having transferred from his job as a stock options trader at a Chicago firm.
As it turned out, they were living a few blocks from each other in Lower Manhattan. They also shared the same gym, which is where they crossed paths during a major snowstorm in December 2010. Ms. Toyzer had just finished working out and was leaving when Mr. Rothberg and his roommate, who were just arriving, brushed past her.
That same night, Mr. Rothberg went home and thumbed through M.I.T.’s alumni directory to be sure that the woman he had seen was indeed Ms. Toyzer. The moment he saw her Manhattan address, he contacted her on Facebook.
They played “Facebook tag,” as Mr. Rothberg called it, for about a month before Ms. Toyzer invited him to a friend’s birthday celebration at a bar in Little Italy.
They spent much of the evening catching up before sharing a cab home. The next night they met at another Manhattan restaurant, with Ms. Toyzer bringing along a friend.
“He ordered a really nice bottle of wine and seemed to know a lot about food,” said Ms. Toyzer, who told Mr. Rothberg that she had been making a list of the restaurants she most wanted to dine at since arriving in Manhattan.
They got together again the next night, this time, just the two of them.
On March 25, 2011, which was Ms. Toyzer’s birthday, Mr. Rothberg surprised her with a choice of exclusive Manhattan restaurants at which to celebrate, Daniel or Eleven Madison Park — the top two on her restaurant wish list.
Ms. Toyzer chose Daniel, then told her mother the same day of an even bigger choice she had made.
“I told her that this was it, this was the guy I was going to marry,” she said.