GLENDALE, Ariz. — The Jets will cling to the hypothetical because that is what they, as prideful athletes, are conditioned to do.
They will treat the improbable as conceivable because that, with 10 games remaining in this dreadful season, is what will help make the daily grind more bearable.
They will lean on faith and fortitude because that, in the absence of any tangible reason to believe, can nourish them until they are officially eliminated from playoff contention.
The Jets’ latest embarrassment, by 28-3 to the Arizona Cardinals on Monday night, accelerated that timetable. They have lost five of six games, including the last four in four stadiums, a nationwide tour of ineptitude.
The fans at the University of Phoenix Stadium were treated to the traditional elements of a Jets defeat — offensive malaise, a red-zone interception, defensive resignation — but for no extra cost received a bonus that the good folks in Kansas City, Mo.; East Rutherford, N.J.; and Pittsburgh missed out on.
With 8 minutes 20 seconds left, Coach Todd Bowles reached his threshold for suffering. He yanked Ryan Fitzpatrick, who had led the Jets to only a field goal in nine possessions, for the backup quarterback Geno Smith, who had lapsed into what amounted to a mini-tantrum on the sideline after Fitzpatrick’s third-quarter interception.
Bowles quashed any uncertainty about the position afterward by declaring that Fitzpatrick would start Sunday against Baltimore. The Jets’ atrocious pass protection and running game (14 carries, 33 yards) would have undermined any quarterback, Bowles said, not just Fitzpatrick. And with the Jets trailing by 25 points, Bowles said, he wanted to give Smith some snaps.
But this situation will continue to simmer. The Jets’ record, achieved by a compilation of mishaps that even a blooper reel would reject, will ensure as much. Fitzpatrick’s struggles — 11 interceptions, 5 touchdowns, 57 percent completion rate — are just one component. Another is Smith’s reaction, a cap-tossing, ice-flinging outburst that he attributed afterward to general frustration with the stacking losses — and not, say, his general frustration with not playing.
Smith has lost his job twice to Fitzpatrick — in August 2015, when Ikemefuna Enemkpali punched him, and on the eve of training camp, when the Jets’ contract stalemate with Fitzpatrick ended. Regardless of what he said, Smith’s body language portrayed a man growing increasingly irritated by what he perceives to be a lack of opportunities.
The way that Smith rolled on Monday, in his one series, did nothing to demonstrate that he did or did not merit a chance to prove himself beyond the practice field — other than wearing a jersey that did not say “Fitzpatrick” on the back. Smith did throw an interception, on 4th-and-11, but that just might have been out of solidarity.
Just two weeks ago, Brandon Marshall proclaimed that he would be “going down in a boat” with Fitzpatrick, so confident was he in the incumbent. That support indeed extends throughout the locker room, and Marshall reiterated it Monday night. Bowles said he had not considered benching Fitzpatrick, who has been unable to generate any sustained drives but remains entrusted with rescuing a season careening toward irrelevance.
Instead of overcoming a treacherous schedule, the Jets capitulated to it. Every team they have lost to so far — Cincinnati, Kansas City, Seattle, Pittsburgh and, now, Arizona — reached the playoffs last season. But with the exception of the opening loss to the Bengals, the Jets have barely been competitive, losing the last four by a combined 110-36.
Outplayed and outcoached, they reside alone in last place in the A.F.C. East, four games behind New England (5-1) and three behind Rex Ryan’s Buffalo Bills (4-2).
Reality, then: Of the 92 teams that had started 1-5 since 1990, only one reached the postseason, according to the Elias Sports Bureau. That team, last season’s Kansas City Chiefs, capitalized on a forgiving schedule, an efficient quarterback and the league’s best turnover margin over the final 10 games.
That blueprint could apply to the Jets, too, if only they had — what?
Perhaps a time machine to address an offensive line that has labored to provide even meager protection for Fitzpatrick and creases for the running backs. Or to bolster a defense shredded Monday by David Johnson, who gashed the Jets for 111 yards and three touchdowns, and that endured such long drives that Arizona quarterback Carson Palmer’s hamstring cramped from dehydration. Or to reconsider an off-season quarterback plan that fixated on Fitzpatrick, whose regression to the mean after a revelatory 2015 has torpedoed their season.
The Jets gained nine first downs in Fitzpatrick’s nine drives. Under his stewardship during this four-game losing streak, the Jets have scored touchdowns on three of 41 possessions and, in 240 minutes of play, have led for exactly 12 minutes 47 seconds. In the second halves of games, the Jets have been outscored by 51-7.
By Marshall’s logic, the Jets might not field a team next week. The Cardinals entered the game as the only team not to score in the first quarter all season. Antidote, thy name is Jets.
On the first play of Arizona’s second series, David Johnson cut left, juked his way past Erin Henderson, slipped through a tangle of defenders and bolted down the sideline for a 58-yard score, the fifth touchdown of at least 50 yards the Jets have allowed this season.
By contrast, the Jets have not gained that many yards even once. Their first-quarter possessions Monday deteriorated into a blur of incompetence — 27 yards, one first down and five accepted penalties, including false starts on consecutive plays. In all, they converted 2 of 13 third downs, running their two-game total to 4 of 24.
Marshall has tried to remain optimistic over the past month, pumping up teammates and last week passing out motivational T-shirts he had printed. “Due Season,” they read.
“Meaning, it’s time,” said Marshall, who wore one Monday night.
By that, Marshall meant time for the Jets to benefit from their diligence and preparation, from all those allegedly good practices that puff them with hope during the week but look more like mirages come game days. Not time to succumb to mental blunders and missed tackles, poor throws and foolish penalties.
His team flailing, Bowles returned to Arizona no less certain in his abilities than when he left his post as the Cardinals’ defensive coordinator — and confidant to his mentor, Coach Bruce Arians — in January 2015 to take over the Jets. It was Arians who, when he coached Bowles at Temple more than 30 years ago, inculcated a message that resonates still.
By now, 22 games into his tenure, Bowles is familiar with a good pummeling. He and the Jets were thumped for a fourth consecutive game, and now the season is on the brink.
