“Tick, Tick…Boom!” revived by the Keen Company in an affectionate, emotionally slight production, is a youthful work by a musical theater composer who never got to grow old.
Jonathan Larson, who later transformed Broadway with “Rent,” used to perform this musical as a one-man show. After Larson’s early death, in 1996, the playwright David Auburn helped to transform it into a three-character piece, with the role of Jonathan, a struggling songsmith, initially played by Raúl Esparza.
The year is 1990. Jonathan (Nick Blaemire) is about to turn 30 — apparently that used to be practically ancient then — and he isn’t handling it well. “I always thought by the time I was 30 I’d either have a hit show or a really lucrative sellout career, but I’ve got neither,” he complains to his girlfriend, Susan (Ciara Renée).
His best friend, Michael (George Salazar), is trying to lure him into the high-flying world of Madison Avenue consultancy; Susan is attempting to entice him to move to Massachusetts. Jonathan just wants fame and fortune and a Broadway berth for his new rock musical, “Superbia.” He might settle for no longer having to wait tables at the local diner. The score, here performed by an onstage band, is a combination of pop, rock and Sondheim pastiche.
George Salazar, Nick Blaemire, Ciara Renée sing "Johnny Can't Decide" from the revival of Jonathan Larson’s musical, at the Acorn Theater.
Mr. Salazar and Ms. Renée seem less suited to their roles. Mr. Salazar, a sturdy and genial presence, is not entirely persuasive as a hotshot management consultant. Ms. Renée, lovely of face and voice, does not seem like the sort of woman who longs for the woods of New England. She and Mr. Blaemire have very little chemistry; the friendship between Michael and Jonathan is similarly inert here.
Is this the fault of the actors? Or is it rather a tic of Jonathan’s tick-tocking character, so absorbed in his own internal metronome that he can’t extend himself to the people he loves?
You can sense the director Jonathan Silverstein’s enthusiasm for the material in the bright pacing, the sprightly use of the onstage band, the generosity toward the performers. But surely the show would resonate more richly if he had helped them realize the relationships more fully.
Those relationships are more fully realized in “Rent,” of course, and just as it’s impossible to avoid reading “Tick, Tick…Boom!” autobiographically, it’s also impossible not to read it retrospectively. There’s a saddish moment in the show when Jonathan’s agent summarizes the discouraging reaction to the “Superbia” workshop. “I think everyone was just so intrigued by your talent, and they can’t wait to see what happens next,” she says.
What happened was “Rent,” a musical whose blend of rock and romance and realism has proved so influential that a predecessor like “Tick, Tick…Boom!” now feels a little passé. That’s a paradox Larson should have lived to enjoy.