Pro Football|Odell Beckham Jr.? Steamed. The Giants’ Defense? Rolled.
Odell Beckham Jr.? Steamed. The Giants’ Defense? Rolled.
MINNEAPOLIS — Four games into Ben McAdoo’s tenure as head coach, the Giants face a number of troubling problems, all of which contributed to a 24-10 loss to the Minnesota Vikings on Monday night.
The gist: too many penalties, too few takeaways, mounting injuries (tight end Larry Donnell’s first-half concussion the latest), two more turnovers, and wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr.’s inability to control his temper.
For the fourth consecutive week, the Giants’ defense failed to force a turnover. The depleted secondary, with safeties Darian Thompson (foot) and Nat Berhe (concussion) and cornerback Eli Apple (hamstring) all inactive, allowed Vikings quarterback Sam Bradford — who did not join the Vikings until the week before the season opener — to complete 26 of 36 passes for 262 yards and one touchdown.
The Giants fell behind by 14-0 in the first half, the first touchdown coming after Dwayne Harris mishandled a punt. And the offense, while missing running back Rashad Jennings (thumb) for the second consecutive week, struggled in the deafening cacophony of U.S. Bank Stadium, converting only two of 12 on third down.
Not until early in the fourth quarter, when the rookie Paul Perkins turned a swing pass from quarterback Eli Manning into a twisting 67-yard gain, did the Giants snap the ball inside the Vikings’ 20-yard line. Orleans Darkwa’s 1-yard touchdown run cut Minnesota’s lead to 17-10 with 13 minutes 42 seconds to play.
But Bradford directed the Vikings (4-0) right down the field. He found wide receiver Charles Johnson for a 40-yard gain to the Giants’ 4, where Jerick McKinnon ran it in with 9:20 to play. Nine Vikings caught passes from Bradford, who has not thrown an interception since joining the team in a trade from Philadelphia.
The Vikings limited Beckham to three catches for 23 yards, none until the Giants were down two touchdowns. Beckham lost his cool after his first catch, in the second quarter, jawing with the physical Vikings cornerback Xavier Rhodes and drawing an unsportsmanlike-conduct penalty for taunting. That was one of eight penalties by the Giants for 69 yards, coming one week after they committed 11 against Washington.
The penalties irritated McAdoo more than the Giants’ inability to force turnovers.
Manning said Beckham needed to keep his emotions in check.
Manning had a tough night even though the Vikings never sacked him, going 25 of 45 for 261 yards. He and Beckham appeared to miscommunicate on Rhodes’s interception in the third quarter, with Manning throwing to the outside while Beckham, following contact with Rhodes, cut inside on a post route.
This was Minnesota’s second regular-season game in cavernous U.S. Bank Stadium, a $1.1 billion fixed-roof stadium with a glass wall facing the downtown skyline, built on the former site of the Metrodome.
Four times in the last eight seasons, the Giants faced the Vikings on the road, each in a different stadium: the Metrodome in 2009; Detroit’s Ford Field in 2010, after the Metrodome roof collapsed under heavy snow; last year at the University of Minnesota’s TCF Bank Stadium, the Vikings’ temporary home; and the new stadium Monday night.
The Metrodome used to be one of the N.F.L.’s loudest buildings, and the noise level in the new stadium matched it. Early on, the Giants strained to hear Manning call signals. On one first-quarter play, with a full-house backfield, two running backs walked up to Manning before the snap because they could not hear him.
A sluggish start by the Giants, featuring a special-teams turnover and three penalties in the first nine minutes, helped the Vikings score first. Harris dropped a punt with the Vikings gunner Cordarrelle Patterson bearing down on him, and Marcus Sherels recovered for Minnesota on the Giants’ 41.
A pass-interference penalty on Janoris Jenkins, who shoved Patterson from behind, gave Minnesota first-and-goal at the 1, and Matt Asiata barreled over for the score — the first rushing touchdown of the season for the Vikings, the league’s worst rushing team.
Bradford, acquired for two draft choices to replace the injured Teddy Bridgewater (dislocated knee), threw a 7-yard touchdown pass to tight end Kyle Rudolph to make it 14-0.
Beckham and Rhodes went at it on the next series. Beckham objected to Rhodes’s drilling him along the sideline after a catch and demanded a late-hit penalty from the line judge Tom Symonette. Beckham was flagged instead for unsportsmanlike conduct. Beckham jawed again with Rhodes on his next catch, briefly. Vikings coaches and players grabbed Rhodes and led him away.
The last of the six penalties by the Giants in the first half, for delay of game, lengthened Josh Brown’s field-goal attempt just before halftime, but he converted from 40 yards. Minnesota’s struggling kicker, Blair Walsh, connected from 44 yards in the third quarter after having pulled a 46-yard attempt wide left on the previous series.
The game would have matched two undefeated teams had the Giants not blown a 21-9 lead last week in a 29-27 loss to Washington, done in by too many penalties (11 for 128 yards) and a severe shortage of takeaways.
Through three games, the Giants’ defense was the only one in the N.F.L. that had not forced a turnover; one fumble recovery came on special teams. The last time the Giants went three games into the season without intercepting a pass was 1934, when the team played at the Polo Grounds.
Minnesota’s emerging defense, meanwhile, entered Week 4 leading the league with 15 sacks, eight of them last week against Carolina’s Cam Newton. Vikings Coach Mike Zimmer made the team’s seven-game losing streak on “Monday Night Football” a point of emphasis this week. The streak began in 2009, and the Giants delivered two of those losses — 21-3 at Ford Field in 2010 and 23-7 at MetLife Stadium in 2013.
