WASHINGTON — President Obama ridiculed Donald J. Trump on Tuesday for saying that the presidential election was rigged against him, telling Mr. Trump, the Republican nominee, to “stop whining and go try to make his case” to win more votes than Hillary Clinton.
By turns mocking and grave, Mr. Obama said the claims demonstrated that Mr. Trump lacked the leadership or toughness to be president. But he warned that the charges, which Mr. Trump repeated to cheers at a rally in Colorado later in the day, would undermine the nation’s purest expression of democracy, a popular vote respected by the vanquished as well as the victors.
His sharp words reflected rising concerns among Democratic and Republican leaders that Mr. Trump’s drumbeat of accusations was resonating with his supporters. Many worry that if Mrs. Clinton wins and Mr. Trump refuses to accept the result, his stand will undermine her authority going into office and sow doubts about the legitimacy of the process.
On Tuesday, Mr. Trump did not heed Mr. Obama’s warning. While he did not address the president directly, he repeated his claims of an election stolen through voter fraud — singling out, with no evidence, African-American communities as the likely culprits of the fraud.

Mrs. Clinton was off the campaign trail on Tuesday, preparing for her final debate with Mr. Trump on Wednesday, so it fell to Mr. Obama to rebut Mr. Trump’s assertions. The president did so with obvious relish.
There is no evidence, he said, that a presidential election has ever been rigged. He said there was little indication that it could be, given that elections are run by state and local authorities, with people from both parties supervising polling sites and ballot counting.
Mr. Obama has been a happy warrior for Mrs. Clinton on the stump, not hesitating to tar Mr. Trump for his judgment, veracity and fitness for office. At first, though, he said he was reluctant to use the setting of the Rose Garden — where he stood next to Prime Minister Matteo Renzi of Italy — to deliver another broadside against Mr. Trump.
But when the subject returned to the Republican nominee — and the issue of voter fraud — Mr. Obama cast off his restraint.
“I’d invite Mr. Trump to stop whining and go try to make his case to get votes,” he said. If Mr. Trump won, the president added, Mrs. Clinton would deliver a concession speech and he would escort Mr. Trump to the Capitol for the time-honored ritual of a peaceful transfer of power.
Many Republicans have responded with a chorus of criticism, including the House speaker, Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, the titular head of the party. On Monday night, Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, a primary challenger of Mr. Trump’s, joined in during a debate in Orlando with his Democratic senatorial challenger, Representative Patrick Murphy.
The latest tempest overshadowed Mr. Obama’s meeting with Mr. Renzi, a charismatic young Italian leader whom the president welcomed with a flourish. On Tuesday night, he and Mrs. Obama were to honor Mr. Renzi and his wife, Agnese Landini, at the final state dinner of the Obama administration, with a menu by the celebrity chef Mario Batali and entertainment by the pop star Gwen Stefani.
Mr. Obama touched on another political issue — this one with implications for Mrs. Clinton’s campaign. He denied reports that the State Department and the F.B.I. had discussed a quid pro quo to settle a dispute over how one of Mrs. Clinton’s emails should be classified. The exchange between the F.B.I. official and a senior State Department official, Patrick F. Kennedy, was part of a routine give-and-take between agencies, he said.
