U.S.|Turn Onto Old Dixie. After a Long, Rocky Stretch, It Becomes Obama Highway.
Turn Onto Old Dixie. After a Long, Rocky Stretch, It Becomes Obama Highway.
A main thoroughfare in the predominantly black town of Riviera Beach, Fla., was once called Old Dixie Highway. But now the road has a new name: President Barack Obama Highway.
RIVIERA BEACH, Fla. — The rechristened road runs beside a railroad freight line, slicing across a modest corner of Palm Beach County and a considerable section of the Southern psyche. It used to be called Old Dixie Highway.
But now this two-mile stretch, coursing through the mostly black community of Riviera Beach, goes by a new name. Now, when visitors want to eat takeout from Rodney’s Crabs, or worship at the Miracle Revival Deliverance Church, they turn onto President Barack Obama Highway.
Our national journey along this highway is nearing its end, these eight years a blur and a crawl. That historic inauguration of hope. Those siren calls for change. The grand ambitions tempered or blocked by recession and time, an inflexible Congress and a man’s aloofness.
War, economic recovery, Obamacare, Osama bin Laden. The mass shootings, in a nightclub, in a church — in an elementary school. The realization of so much still to overcome, given all the Fergusons; given all those who shamelessly questioned whether our first black president was even American by birth.
His towering oratory. His jump shot. His graying hair. His family. His wit. His tears.
The presidency of Mr. Obama, which ends in three months, will be memorialized in many grand ways, most notably by the planned construction of a presidential library in Chicago. But in crowded and isolated places across the country, his name has also been quietly incorporated into the everyday local patter, in ways far removed from politics and world affairs.
You can find a trapdoor spider (Aptostichus barackobamai) inching across certain parts of Northern California, or see a bright orange spangled darter (Etheostoma obama) swimming in a Tennessee river, or come upon a lichen (Caloplaca obamae) the color of gold on Santa Rosa Island, off the California coast.
You can visit the Barack Obama Academy in Plainfield, N.J., or the Barack Obama Male Leadership Academy in Dallas, or the Barack Obama Academy of International Studies in Pittsburgh. You can drive down Barack Obama Avenue in East St. Louis, or Obama Way in Seaside, Calif. — or President Barack Obama Highway here in Riviera Beach, just 10 miles and another reality from the stately pleasure-dome Mar-a-Lago.
This Obama road runs through the complex reality of America: the family-owned businesses and the ghostly vacant storefronts, a church here, a liquor store there, gas stations, convenience stores, a football field, a day care center, a medium-size manufacturing business that is expanding and hiring.
“Everything the president fought for and is fighting for — it’s there,” says the mayor, Thomas Masters.
With time came change. In 1962, F. Malcolm Cunningham Sr. became the first black person elected to the City Council — and, some claim, the first black elected official in the South since Reconstruction. By the end of that decade, the city was predominantly black, and by 1975, it had its first black mayor.
The notion of renaming the highway after the country’s first black president popped up at a City Council meeting shortly after Mr. Obama’s 2008 victory. A citizen raised the prospect before moving on to discussing a local supermarket. The suggestion went nowhere.
It was resurrected a couple of years ago by the indefatigable Mayor Masters, 64, who has followed a circuitous path to politics. A bishop in a nondenominational church, he began preaching at the age of 4 — he was once known as the “Wonder Boy Preacher” — and has demonstrated a talent for publicity ever since.
Mr. Masters is not a Riviera Beach native; he moved here from California nearly 30 years ago. But as a black man, he was bothered that a constant celebration of “Old Dixie” ran through the center of his predominantly African-American city. “Dixie meant slavery, bigotry, the K.K.K.,” he says.
Mr. Masters resolved to have the stretch of the highway in his city renamed, gathered community support and put it to the City Council. The vote was 4-to-1 in favor, and the sole dissenting member was also the sole white member: Dawn Pardo. But do not prejudge.
Ms. Pardo, who grew up in New York, says she voted against the plan because she envisioned a grander, more ambitious tribute, perhaps at the city’s recently renovated, multimillion-dollar marina. The monument or renaming could also honor various black trailblazers in Riviera Beach’s past.
“If we’re going to honor him, let’s make it great,” she remembers arguing.
But the mayor prevailed.  This meant, among other things, that traffic would flow through an intersection of Riviera Beach streets named after the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Mr. Obama.
But the reality of America again imposed. News of the name change had spread well beyond Florida, and now came the emails and telephone calls.
And there was much, much worse. Bad enough for Mr. Masters to alert the Secret Service.
The angry calls and emails became distant shouts, leaving Riviera Beach to incorporate into its lexicon a street name that was nearly the opposite of “Old Dixie.” It has meant changes to stationery, of course, but also challenges for businesses trying to direct customers.
“Everybody from here knows Old Dixie, you feel me?” says Rodney Saunders. He owns Rodney’s Crabs, a takeout restaurant on the highway, a few dozen yards from where the gray cinder block remnants of the old Monroe Heights decline in the shadows of sea grape trees.
Some along the highway call the renaming a nice but benign gesture. Some say they never took umbrage with Old Dixie; it was just a name. Some simply shrug, as if to suggest the new street name means more to out-of-towners than it does to locals.
But Mr. Calloway, the legendary coach and mentor with failing vision, says he can see into the future — 20, 30, 40 years from now — when a long-ago decision will have children wanting to know the story behind the name on a sign.