LAS VEGAS — The fight to get professional football to Nevada is actually a story of inside baseball.
The Oakland Raiders want to move to Las Vegas, and the city’s politicians, business leaders and legions of football fans are salivating. The catch, as usual, is the price tag. The Raiders want a new, 65,000-seat stadium as part of the deal, and they’re asking for the state to pitch in to cover the nearly $2 billion cost using a tax on Vegas-area hotel rooms.
The Raiders’ owner, Mark Davis, has pledged $500 million, and the casino magnate Sheldon Adelson has offered $650 million. But both offers are contingent on the Nevada government’s ponying up the remaining $750 million. Gov. Brian Sandoval, a Republican, has called a special session of the Legislature next week to decide.
On the surface, this might look like a good deal. Private money will provide the majority of the funds, and Las Vegas will get a new stadium and an N.F.L. team. But that $750 million would be one of the largest-ever public subsidies for an N.F.L. stadium. And many folks know it: The most recent poll shows public opinion split down the middle on the room-tax plan.
Backers are betting on the fact that Las Vegas is already mad for pro sports, despite the lack of pro teams. A Sunday afternoon in a packed casino sports book lounge, with local and visiting gamblers gathering in swarms to ponder point spreads, attests to the city’s enthusiasm.
Las Vegas’s first professional sports team, a yet-to-be-named National Hockey League expansion outfit, will debut next year, and with more than 15,000 deposits already made on season tickets, it is clear the city is excited about the arrival of professional sports franchises.
But there’s a difference between the proposed Raiders stadium and the new, privately funded site where the N.H.L. team will play, T-Mobile Arena. Hockey teams play 41 regular-season games at home; N.F.L. teams play just eight. The Rebels of the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, will use the Raiders stadium too, but altogether it will host only about 46 events a year.
Economists overwhelmingly agree that stadiums are not good economic investments for cities, but supporters claim the stadium could produce up to $800 million in new economic activity each year. But it’s unclear how that can happen, since so few events will produce little job growth, and investors have made it clear the public will not share in any stadium profits.
What’s more, the N.F.L. has a history of holding cities hostage to pay for stadiums. St. Louis is still paying debts (about $144 million, including maintenance costs) on the stadium it built in 1995 for the Rams, which this season returned to Los Angeles. The owners of the San Diego Chargers are arranging a ballot measure that would devote public money to a new stadium, even though the city is still in the red from its stadium renovation in 1997.
Supporters respond that the public funds in Vegas will come from an increased tax on hotel rooms, which means, they say, that tourists will foot the bill.
But Nevadans will pay indirectly, since a large part of the room tax is supposed to pay for education. Raising it now to cover a stadium will make it harder to raise in the future to cover schools, in a state already infamous for its poor public education.
And because room tax revenue is largely dependent on a thriving tourism industry and strong economy, there is a huge risk that those taxes won’t be enough if a recession hits.
Three groups in Nevada have voiced their disapproval of the stadium financing in its current form: the Nevada Taxpayers Association, Nevadans for the Common Good (a nonpartisan group of religious and community leaders) and the state’s largest union, Culinary Local 226.
Despite the growing coalition of the opposition, it is an underdog versus Mr. Adelson, one of the most powerful people in the state. He has been adamant that the stadium is a “must do” — so much so that after the board of his casino company, Las Vegas Sands, denied his request to invest in the stadium, he offered up financing from his own personal fortune, an estimated $28 billion.
And Mr. Adelson has much of the Vegas business and political community on his side. Last month the influential Southern Nevada Tourism Infrastructure Committee, which is made up of local business and civic leaders, endorsed the deal — not just with a news release, but with a Raiders bus and cheerleaders. On Twitter, Mayor Carolyn Goodman, a Democrat, recently showed off her Raiders game football and a thank-you note from Mr. Davis.
In a country where football is king, no one — particularly not local politicians — wants to be responsible for passing up an N.F.L. franchise.
Since the introduction of the stadium proposal in the spring, legislators including the State Senate majority leader, Michael Roberson, a Republican, have made it clear that they would not approve previously recommended projects without also approving the stadium proposal (like many state politicians in both parties, Mr. Roberson has received political donations from the Las Vegas Sands).
Next week, it’s a good bet that the stadium will pass, simply because stadium politics — whether in Las Vegas or San Diego — bring out two of America’s deepest manias: sports fanaticism, and the feeding frenzy set off whenever wealthy investors dangle money in front of politicians.
Lost in both is any consideration of what the people actually want, let alone need.