David Antin, whose improvised performances, which he called “talk poems,” introduced a radical new form into American poetry in the 1970s, died on Oct. 11 in San Diego. He was 84.
The cause was complications of a broken neck that he suffered in a fall, his wife, the artist Eleanor Antin, said. He had been living with Parkinson’s disease for several years.
In his restless search for a new poetic language, Mr. Antin began experimenting in the early 1970s with a style of performance that was part lecture, part stand-up routine and part Homeric recitation.
After editing his tape-recorded performances, he committed his poems to the page, first in the collection “Talking” (1972) and later in “Talking at the Boundaries” (1976) and “What It Means to Be Avant-Garde” (1993). His revision of late modernist poetry, rejected by writers like Robert Pinsky and critics like Harold Bloom as no poetry at all, favored an open line, absurdism and a direct connection to the oral poetry of the ancient bards.
He preferred pauses to punctuation. To him, poetry was a process, not a finished product.
“Antin’s tapestry of interrelated anecdotes, stories, meditations, narratives, musings, ruminations, philosophical investigations, psychological explorations and linguistic experiments provide a complex and often delightful oral history of one man’s journey through reality and consciousness via language,” the poet Mark Tursi wrote of the collection “I Never Knew What Time It Was” for The Review of Contemporary Fiction in 2005.
David Abraham Antin was born on Feb. 1, 1932, in Brooklyn. After his father, Max, died when he was 2, his mother, the former Mollie Kitzes, worked as an examiner in the dress business.
After graduating from Brooklyn Technical High School, he earned a bachelor’s degree in English and speech from the City College of New York in 1955 and, after working for several years as a translator of German and Russian scientific texts, studied linguistics at New York University, from which he received a master’s degree in 1966. He took a special interest in the language experiments of Gertrude Stein.
His early work, associated with Deep Image poets like Robert Kelly and Mr. Antin’s good friend Jerome Rothenberg, was a kind of collage, an assemblage of phrase strings and received language plucked from the cultural atmosphere.
In the collection “Definitions” (1967), Mr. Antin explored the reach of scientific language. “Code of Flag Behavior,” published a year later, reflected a fascination with the Pop Art strategies of Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein and Tom Wesselmann. Its title poem, for example, consisted of phrases taken from government guidelines on the care and handling of the American flag — “the flag should never be displayed with the union down except/as a sign of distress,” one line read — that assumed a larger resonance as American involvement in the Vietnam War intensified.
Mr. Antin wrote extensively on modern art. His 1966 essay “The Silver Tenement,” in Art News, was one of the first serious considerations of Warhol’s art. He was an early appreciator of the art of Robert Morris, Carl Andre and Sol LeWitt. Many of his articles on art were collected in “Radical Coherency: Selected Essays on Art and Literature, 1966-2005,” published in 2011.
After working as an educational curator at the Institute of Contemporary Art in Boston, Mr. Antin took a teaching position at the University of California, San Diego, in its new department of visual arts. He lectured on art history and art criticism and, from 1968 to 1972, directed the school’s Mandeville Art Gallery.
In addition to his wife, he is survived by his son, Blaise, and two grandchildren. He lived in Del Mar, Calif.
