354 pp. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. $26.
The best moment of “The Wangs vs. the World” comes when young Andrew Wang attempts his first stand-up open mike. He talks honestly about his family, privilege and Chinese-American identity, but it’s only when he does an impression of his father’s broken English that he finally gets “a single shout of laughter.” The entire scene is hilariously cringeworthy, especially when Andrew becomes ashamed mid-act for imitating his father. “You know what white people really, really, really love?” he asks the audience. “When Asian comedians make fun of their parents. Yep, because you guys just want an excuse to laugh at Asian accents.” The crowd is uncomfortable; as a reader, I was overjoyed. “The Wangs vs. the World” is not a book where you laugh at Asian accents — you laugh at the people who would laugh at Asian accents.
Jade Chang is unendingly clever in her generous debut novel about the comedy of racial identity. If there is a stereotype that Asian-Americans kids are quiet, unpopular and studious, that their parents are strict disciplinarians (think Tiger Mom), then Chang has conjured up the Wangs to prove otherwise. All the Wang kids are creative and popular: There’s Andrew, the sensitive jock and wannabe comedian who is beloved by women but wants to save his virginity for his future first love; the older sister, Saina, a conceptual artist who is humiliatingly dumped by her artist boyfriend; and the younger sister, Grace, a precocious teenager and fashion blogger. At the center of it all is the patriarch Charles, the owner of an extremely lucrative cosmetics business. His embrace of American ideals extends to his parenting: He’s not a dad who wants his kids to master the violin or study for the SATs; he instead urges them to “play the guitar and get laid,” a parody of what he believes America stands for.
That is until a combination of his own hubris and bad timing (the 2008 financial crisis) causes the Wangs to lose everything — from rags to riches to rags again. Having lost their Bel-Air estate and newly disillusioned by the American dream, Charles decides to pull his kids out of school and drive them to Saina’s home in upstate New York. As much as “The Wangs vs. the World” is about Asian-American identity, it is also a sprawling family adventure compressed into a road trip novel. The result is a manic, consistently funny book of alternating perspectives as the Wangs make various cross-country stopovers in their ’80s station wagon. The teasing-but-loving dynamic of all three kids on the phone together illustrates Chang’s aptitude for writing dialogue and characters; as in the stand-up scene, she is at her finest when playing with the different expectations of an Asian audience and a white one.
It’s just too bad the end of the novel is such a mess. Unsatisfying resolutions for all of the Wang children feel forced when they are sent to the other end of the earth. The one plotline that is convincingly finished is Charles’s, as he tackles the book’s strongest idea: “Every immigrant is the person he might have been and the person he is, and his homeland is at once the place it would have been to him from the inside and the place it must be to him from the outside.” It’s in this moment that we understand the novel’s title more clearly: Even as the Wangs have defied the traditional arc of the immigrant story, there is no one place for them in the world. To be a first- or second-generation immigrant means wrestling with the reality that no place is ever truly home. In Chang’s compassionate and bright-eyed novel, she proves that struggling with that identity can at least be funny and strange, especially when you struggle together with family.