At a rally in Delaware, Ohio, Donald J. Trump said he would accept the outcome of the Nov. 8 vote if it falls in his favor.
Donald J. Trump insisted on Thursday that he would not cede the right to contest the outcome of the presidential election, even as Democrats and Republicans expressed concern that his position threatened to upend America’s tradition of peaceful power transfers. But in a small gesture of civility, he suggested that he would not dispute the result if the outcome of the race was clear.
Mr. Trump’s reluctance to pledge absolutely that he would honor the election outcome follows a rocky performance in the third and last presidential debate and comes as the candidates set off for the frenzied final stretch of campaigning ahead of the Nov. 8 election. On Thursday, Mr. Trump continued to rally his supporters with conspiracy theories about how the race was rigged against him, but he did make clear that there was one result that he would not challenge under any circumstance.
“I will totally accept the results of this great and historic presidential election — if I win,” Mr. Trump said to cheers at a rally in Delaware, Ohio.
Saying that George W. Bush might have lost the 2000 election to Al Gore if he had made a pre-election pledge not to challenge results, Mr. Trump said he would not take that option off the table. He did, however, try to ease concerns that he was planning to throw the country into postelection turmoil.
Polls show Mr. Trump trailing Hillary Clinton in many crucial battleground states and facing close races in states that usually back Republicans, increasing the possibility that he could lose the election by a big margin in the Electoral College. Since contested election results must happen on a state-by-state basis, a stinging defeat could render Mr. Trump’s threats to dispute the results a moot point.
To emphasize that, the Clinton campaign initiated a new fund-raising pitch imploring supporters to help run up the score.
Mrs. Clinton’s running mate, Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, said he hoped voters would give the Democratic ticket “a mandate” in the election so that Mr. Trump could not cast doubt on the outcome.
Democrats seized on Mr. Trump’s comments Thursday as evidence that he ws not fit to be president.
President Obama, speaking at a rally in Miami, skewered Mr. Trump for complaining of a rigged system and rejected the notion that an election in a country as large as the United States could be manipulated. He said that Mr. Trump was weakening the country by casting doubts about the validity of the election.
Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Kaine both said Mr. Trump’s defiant comments were far beyond the political mainstream. Mrs. Clinton, who called the remarks “horrifying” during Wednesday night’s debate, repeated that criticism on board her campaign plane in Las Vegas, and said Mr. Trump was bucking centuries of American political decorum.
Mr. Kaine went further in a series of television interviews Thursday, saying Mr. Trump was trying to take down a “central pillar” of the political system because he is on track for defeat.
The uproar over Mr. Trump’s potential unwillingness to abide by the results of the election threatens to further unravel a candidacy already in sharp decline. Mr. Trump has fallen well behind Mrs. Clinton in the polls after her three strong debate performances, and as Mr. Trump has faced escalating accusations that he sexually assaulted women.
A new accuser came forward on Thursday and described a 1998 encounter in which Mr. Trump grabbed her arm and touched her breast after making coarse remarks about her appearance to his male friends. The woman, Karena Virginia, was the 10th to accuse Mr. Trump of inappropriate sexual advances since the release of a tape on which he boasted of such behavior.
With many Republicans having abandoned his campaign, Mr. Trump has spent most of the last week railing against what he has called a rigged election. He has said, without evidence, that there could be widespread fraud at the polls, including by undocumented immigrants, and claimed there is a conspiracy among Mrs. Clinton, international corporations and the news media to block his candidacy.
After Wednesday night’s debate, several Republican members of Congress stepped forward to chastise Mr. Trump, including Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, who said on social media that Mr. Trump was “doing the party and country a great disservice” by attacking the election’s integrity.
Senators John McCain, Ben Sasse and Jeff Flake, all Republicans who have been critical of Mr. Trump, chided him on Thursday for undermining America’s system of self-government.
But Mr. Trump may be unlikely to bow to the backlash. He already effectively overruled his advisers by saying on the debate stage that he would leave the country in suspense as to how he would handle defeat.
Some supporters of Mr. Trump, such as the conservative talk radio host Rush Limbaugh, sympathized with his cause, arguing that he would be conceding defeat and disappointing his supporters if he said that he was prepared to lose. However, even Mr. Limbaugh expressed dismay on Thursday at Mr. Trump’s uneven debate performance.
