In the modern electoral circus, politicians need pop stars, and pop stars need bling.
So when Katy Perry took the stage at the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia this summer, she wore an eye-catching diamond necklace in patriotic red, white and blue.
The $800,000 necklace wasn’t new. The rare vintage piece was created in 1971 by Bulgari and was on loan from Eleuteri, a new jewelry boutique on East 69th Street that has become a favorite among celebrities, socialites, visiting San Francisco technocrats and others who don’t bother consulting the price tag before buying.
The 100-square-foot storefront, near Madison Avenue, was opened last year by 28-year-old Wagner Eleuteri, a third-generation jeweler whose family operates an exclusive chain of vintage jewelry stores in Italy, including in Rome, Venice, Milan and Cortina d’Ampezzo.
Dressed in suede moccasins, pale blue shirt and Ecru linen pants, Mr. Eleuteri stood just over six feet tall, with cheek of tan, an impeccable manicure and a string of teeth that stand proudly apart from one another, like islands in the Tuscan archipelago.
That includes, he said, “forgotten old Roman masters such as Cazzaniga” and “northern Italian jewelers like Fasano and Frascarolo,” and Art Deco pieces, and international names like David Webb, Van Cleef & Arpels and Cartier. If you can picture a small dressing room shared by Marlene Dietrich, Jacqueline Susann and Mr. T, that’s this store.
Visitors have included Mary-Kate Olsen and Grace Hightower, and staff members report having seen Amal Clooney and Kris Jenner browse the window. The society philanthropist and noted jewelry collector Susan Gutfreund recently went in to look for a present for her daughter-in-law.
A pair of opera glasses, decorated with diamonds and rubies, recently sold for $70,000. And Mr. Eleuteri said one woman recently diverted her private jet to Rome (on the way from Moscow to London) because she had to have a diamond tiara for 50,000 euros (around $54,400) that she had seen weeks earlier.
Like the Bulgari family, the Eleuteris were Greek immigrants to Italy. Their business started in 1897 as a lavishly furnished Gran Bar in Rome, but retailing the antique décor proved more lucrative than serving espresso and Negronis.
During the 1960s (the heyday of Cinecittà glamour, when customers included Sophia Loren and Anna Magnani), Mr. Eleuteri’s grandfather Pietro closed the bar and refined the trade to vintage jewelry.
Mark Emanuel, a noted New York gem dealer who has worked with the family for 30 years, said that Eleuteri’s opening on East 69th Street represented the arrival of bella figura, a term used by the Italians to express an extravagant or showy style, whether in clothing, jewelry, cars or lifestyle.
That is the nature of the vintage jewelry market, he added: Recently outmoded fashion is considered undesirable, but the passage of time restores its allure.
Mr. Eleuteri said that customers sometimes ask for a discount on unsold stock becalmed in the passé doldrums between new and vintage, but he always declines. “No, it’s not like a sale of bags,” he said, his tone making clear his opinion of the relative status of vintage jewelry versus mere accessories.
“The fact that it hasn’t been sold for 20 years doesn’t mean that it’s not nice,” he said. “It just didn’t meet the right person yet.