She was in a senior staff meeting with Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, a Republican, who was upset that reporters and legislators were continuing to ask questions about the mysterious lane closings at the George Washington Bridge three months earlier, and whether they had been done to punish a local mayor who had declined to endorse the governor’s re-election.
Anyone who knew anything about those closings, she recalled Mr. Christie as saying, had one hour to report it to his chief counsel or chief of staff.
Ms. Kelly sat quietly confused, she testified in federal court here on Monday. Mr. Christie already knew — she had told him about the closings, which had been sold to her as a traffic study, before they began in September, Ms. Kelly said, and at least twice during the week they were taking place. She had told him the mayor had complained that he was being punished, and the governor, she testified, had brushed off the complaints.
Ms. Kelly testified that she had told the governor’s chief of staff, Kevin O’Dowd, and reminded him of their conversation the night before the meeting.
Ms. Kelly, a former deputy chief of staff to the governor, is accused of conspiring with two former Christie aides at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which runs the bridge, to close the lanes to punish the Democratic mayor of Fort Lee, N.J., and then covering it up as a traffic study. Bill Baroni, a former Christie ad ministration official, is also on trial.
Taking the witness stand in her own defense for the second time, Ms. Kelly gave an intimate view of the panicky days of December 2013, as the Christie administration tried to fend off legislative subpoenas and intensifying media scrutiny of the lane closings.
She recalled watching Mr. Christie say in two news conferences that he had known nothing about the closings — much less any intent to punish the mayor. When she tried to remind Mr. O’Dowd and the governor that they, in fact, knew about the closings beforehand, she testified, they ignored her.
Ms. Kelly testified on Friday that she had been told by David Wildstein, one of her alleged co-conspirators, who has pleaded guilty and is now the prosecution’s chief witness, that the lanes were closed as part of a traffic study.
Mr. Wildstein told her to clear the study with the governor, and she did, Ms. Kelly said.
On the third day of the lane closings, Ms. Kelly told the governor there had been complaints about traffic. Mr. Christie had just spoken to Mr. Wildstein at a Sept. 11 memorial service, she testified, and told her that the Port Authority would handle any complaints. The next day, she told the governor that the mayor had complained of retribution. Again, she said, Mr. Christie repeated that Mr. Wildstein had told her he would handle it.
On Dec. 2, nearly three months later, Mr. Christie held a news conference and joked that he himself had moved the cones to close the lanes. Then he said, seriously, that he had no knowledge of it.
Her questions began to pile up.
On Dec. 5, Mr. Wildstein resigned, but told her he had been promised a job in Mr. Christie’s presidential campaign. Four days later, the executive director of the Port Authority, Patrick J. Foye, told the New Jersey Legislature that Mr. Wildstein was the “culprit” behind the closings, and that no study had been completed.
On Dec. 11, she recalled, the governor sat in his office and bragged to aides that he had told Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, a Democrat who had appointed Mr. Foye, to tell Mr. Foye to back off, using a vulgarity.
Ms. Kelly said she had discussed what she knew with Mr. O’Dowd again the next day, and the day after that, after Mr. Christie’s stern words at the meeting. That morning, Dec. 13, she gave Mr. O’Dowd an email in which the mayor mentioned his concerns about retribution. She told Mr. O’Dowd she deleted some emails, but suggested to him and Mr. Christie’s campaign manager, Bill Stepien, that they talk to Mr. Wildstein, to see if other emails existed. Mr. Stepien and Mr. O’Dowd had Mr. Christie’s chief political strategist, Michael DuHaime, talk to Mr. Wildstein, who confirmed that other emails existed.
Within the hour, Ms. Kelly said, she heard the governor say at a news conference that he had been assured that no one on his senior staff, nor Mr. Stepien, had any knowledge of the shutdown.
She tried to reach Mr. O’Dowd several times that day to correct his recollection, she testified, but he did not return her messages.
Ms. Kelly said she tried again on Jan. 9, after she was fired. She was hoping to talk to Mr. Christie, she testified. What, her lawyer asked, did you think you could accomplish by talking to the governor?
