Japanese men haven’t traditionally been caregivers. But for Masami Hayata, it’s a crucial part of raising his family.
Japan is a hyper-aging society. People are living longer, and the birthrate is extremely low. For a culture steeped in oya-koko, or filial piety, fewer children has led to a crisis in caregiving. Elder care has traditionally fallen to family members and specifically to daughters and daughters-in-law. With more women working, an unprecedented number of men are breaking with tradition to take hands-on caregiving responsibilities for their families. They often do so in the prime of their careers and many are unable to reconcile their devotion to family with Japan’s intensely competitive workplace culture.
In this film, we follow one of those men, Masami Hayata, whose days are spent balancing a demanding career as a Tokyo advertising executive with caring for his ailing mother and young son. I came to Hayata-san’s story as a new mother trying to navigate my own work-life balance. I had planned on savoring motherhood and letting it wash over my art. Instead, I felt stuck in triage mode, only tending to the daily demands of a two-year-old and a freelance career, missing the forest for the trees.
As part of the Harbers Storytelling Project, two years ago I heard the former United States poet laureate Billy Collins share “The Lanyard,” his poem about the debt we owe our mothers. I was captivated. In it, he riffs on a gift he made as a boy at summer camp for his mother and playfully contrasts it with the gifts his mother has given him. One of his final lines is, “the archaic truth, that you can never repay your mother.” I remember selfishly thinking that I sure hoped my son would at least try, and then remembering how lovingly my own father cared for his mother in her final decade.
As I started to think about how I could explore our obligations to family through film, “Tokyo Story,” Yasujiro Ozu’s classic 1953 film, quickly came to mind. Its look at the strains of modernization on Japanese families and the quiet heartbreak of the parents in the film who felt abandoned by their children has always stayed with me. More than half a century later, the film still feels universally relevant. Japan is experiencing these pressures more acutely than ever and possibly more intensely than anywhere, but around the world so many of us must make excruciating choices between work and caring for family.
In both Hayata-san’s world and mine, I’m encouraged by growing support for paid family leave, talk of changing workplace cultures to make room for the personal realities of our lives and the increasing number of men who are taking the lead in family caregiving and adding their voices to the call for flexibility and support. Spending time with Hayata-san also helped me look at the demands I put on myself in a new way. Hayata-san’s days are pressure-filled, but he lives with a sense of the continuum of life and of family across generations that grounds him. I try to keep my focus on the time I engage deeply with my work and my family rather than when I miss a deadline or send my son out in the world wearing dirty socks. I hope audiences will find something personally meaningful in Hayata-san’s story and that, like Ozu and Collins, we’ve managed to take a small story and scratch at a few of the big universal themes that connect us all.