Arnold Schwarzenegger plays a cyborg who is sent back in time to assassinate a young waitress before she can give birth to the man who is destined to save humanity from the machines. Since the movie’s release in 1984, its title has become shorthand for the nightmare scenario of what will happen when artificial intelligence meets weapons.
“Ender’s Game,” by Orson Scott Card, is often cited by Robert O. Work, the deputy defense secretary.
To counter insectlike aliens, the military trains children in hopes of nurturing the master tacticians who can save humanity. The book, and the movie based on it, is often mentioned by Robert O. Work, the deputy defense secretary, who cites the creativity of the child warriors to explain how his vision of blending man and machine can keep the United States military ahead of its rivals. Critics of autonomous weapons might be less thrilled about the book’s ending, which involves the destruction of an entire species.
The comic book — and now Hollywood franchise — is about a billionaire inventor who, after being kidnapped and forced to build a weapon of mass destruction, instead builds a powered suit to escape. He goes on to become a superhero.
This is the short story collection in which Isaac Asimov introduced his “Three Laws of Robotics,” which have influenced both science fiction and real-life debates about managing artificial intelligence. The laws, briefly: A robot may not harm a human being, must obey orders from humans and must protect its own existence. Each rule trumps the one that comes after it, so, for instance, a robot will not follow orders or protect itself if doing so would bring harm to humans.
This 2013 science fiction movie, directed by Spike Jonze, is about a futuristic computer operating system with an A.I.-based personality. It is a telling fable about the consequences of human-machine collaboration that may unfold in the near future.
Daniel Suarez’s novel starts in a Stanford computer science building and explores artificial intelligence and the future of warfare using robots and drones.
Set in a crowded, neon-laced Los Angeles of the future, the film follows a detective who hunts down androids that are trying to pass as humans. It is based on the novel “Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?” by Philip K. Dick.
“Ghost Fleet” was written by August Cole, a former journalist, and P. W. Singer, an expert on military affairs.
This novel about World War III includes robot fighter jets, teenage hackers and American veterans who go low-tech to battle their high-tech foes. It is written by August Cole, a former journalist, and P. W. Singer, an expert on military affairs who turned to fiction to make his case that the United States is failing to prepare for the next war.