For 34 seasons, the Center for Contemporary Opera has been grappling with what opera can be today. This genre has evolved over centuries, along with musical and theatrical styles. Yet shouldn’t certain basic elements of the art form remain?
There is no house policy about this issue. Rather, the center presents contemporary works, large and small, that involve all kinds of musical and dramatic approaches, and lets audiences decide. This mission was on vivid display in the first two (of five) offerings during its current festival season, which runs through Nov. 2.
On Oct. 15 at National Sawdust in Brooklyn, the center presented a double-bill of boundary-blurring musical-dramatic works by the Dutch Modernist master Louis Andriessen. “Anaïs Nin” is a 30-minute monodrama for a female voice and eight-piece ensemble (conducted here by Neal Goren). The text mostly comes from Nin’s memoirs, in which she speaks of love affairs in 1930s Paris; and also some disturbing passages from “Incest,” a journal about her charged relationship with her abusive father. The other Andriessen work, “Odysseus’ Women,” for four female voices and synthesizer, draws its text from Homer’s descriptions of Odysseus’ amorous adventures during his long journey home to Ithaca after the Trojan War.
The second offering, which opened on Thursday at Hunter College’s Kaye Playhouse, could not have been more different: the premiere of the American composer Louis Karchin’s “Jane Eyre,” with a libretto by Diane Osen based on the Charlotte Brontë novel. Though Mr. Karchin’s restless score is pungently contemporary, the opera over all takes a traditional approach to music drama. Here is a three-act adaptation of a classic novel, for a nine-person cast and 40-piece orchestra, with big arias that end with flourishes and invite applause.
Considered as operas, the Andriessen works may be very unconventional. Yet the music, especially in “Anaïs Nin,” is so alive and inventive, with hints of Kurt Weill cabaret and jazz folded in, and the words set with such acute feeling, that this 60-minute program felt entirely operatic.
Ms. Caso was first seen crawling on the floor in her underwear under a platform with plastic-wrap siding. Ripping at the walls, she eventually emerged looking shattered. During the harrowing scene when Nin speaks of her relationship with her father, recalling his creepy words (“I’ve met the woman of my life, and it’s my daughter”), Odysseus’ women slowly removed Ms. Caso’s clothing as this vulnerable Nin stood naked, and then lay atop the platform. Ms. Caso’s acting and her expressive, poignant singing combined for a courageous performance.
The challenge with taking an old-fashioned approach to opera, as the composer and librettist do in “Jane Eyre,” is that the resulting work invites comparisons with classic masterpieces. Brontë began Jane’s story in her miserable childhood, as an orphan raised by a spiteful, abusive aunt. The opera begins later in the tale, when Jane has become a governess at the estate of the secretive, volatile but dashing Edward Rochester, and we see the kindling of their romantic feelings.
As Jane, the compelling, rich-voiced soprano Jennifer Zetlan has an early aria in which she recounts the character’s childhood in detail; inevitably, this traditional device seems out of sync with Mr. Karchin’s piercing, contemporary music. The score bustles constantly, rather in the vein of Janacek, though crucial arias and scenes build to glittering radiance that recalls Richard Strauss, moments that seemed derivative. I liked the opera best when Mr. Karchin’s score calmed down, thinned out and depicted incidents with more mystery and subtlety.
The cast members gave their all, especially Ryan MacPherson as Rochester and Thomas Meglioranza as St. John Rivers, a minister who appears later in the story. Sara Jobin conducted a colorful, bristling account of the score. The director Kristine McIntyre incorporated some effective video elements into a basically simple, traditional staging. Still, I wonder what could have been had Mr. Karchin and his librettist taken more chances and fashioned a dramatic structure that better suited the contemporary style of the music.
What matters in contemporary opera, finally, is the quality and power of the individual works. The Andriessen production may have stretched the definition of opera. But it was gripping music theater.