The New York Times grabbed a few modest headlines earlier this week when it purchased a popular website called The Wirecutter that recommends a variety of consumer products to its customers. The Times paid an estimated $30 million, a relatively small sum for a media giant that takes in that much revenue every seven days.
And so the news came and went fairly quickly — big company buys small start-up, foothold gained in new market, meager profits expected soon.
That’s how it may look, but much more than that is in store. The acquisition of Wirecutter could not only usher in a new revenue model for The Times, it could also introduce a significant new dimension to The Times’s deeply ingrained relationship with its readers.
For The Times, struggling with declining advertising in both print and digital, affiliate links offer a promising model for tapping new revenue. The company has purchased not merely a successful website but also a path into the product recommendation business. And soon, it will be spreading the concept all over The Times’s site, from areas like cooking to personal technology. The Times already has a handful of such affiliate links on its site — on the books best-seller list, for example, and on theater reviews. But they’re minimal compared with what’s coming.
This is a significant change from the trifecta that has sustained journalism for centuries: the news organization, the reader and the advertiser. Traditionally, newsrooms focused on journalism and mostly stayed away from recommending consumer goods. Advertisers did the product recommending, by purchasing ads adjacent to the news. The readers, meanwhile, either found the ads useful or accepted them as part of the price for getting quality news.
With the old financial model crumbling, it’s understandable why The Times needs to search for new revenue. But if it’s going to start giving the thumbs-up to the best toaster oven — while making money off the sale — it had better be sure readers fully understand how the arrangement works and are ready to embrace it. Readers have a deep understanding of the current revenue model, a comfort level gained over a lifetime. The new one may take some getting used to, judging by the emails to my inbox this week.
I don’t worry that this new venture will affect the rigor or seriousness of The Times’s news report, but I understand why these readers worry. It could produce a jolt when product reviews start landing on the pages of The Times.
As the leadership rushes forward, I hope three issues will be front of mind: First, radical transparency to ensure readers understand exactly how the product reviews are done and how The Times makes money off them; second, a robust effort to explain to readers why the paper thinks this is a good idea; and third, clear sitewide rules for affiliate links, including their placement and their usage — from books to batteries.
From my conversations internally, it’s evident that, at least on the issue of radical transparency, the newsroom intends to be upfront with readers about how affiliate links work. The Times’s model? The Wirecutter’s current website, which prominently explains to readers how products are reviewed and how the financial arrangement works. Let’s hope it remains that easy to find in the future.
A significant part of the conversation circled around transparency with readers, Corbett said, assuring me that both the business and news side recognizes the importance of that.
As for my other two points — getting reader feedback, and setting clear sitewide rules for affiliate links — I don’t know whether such efforts are in the works yet, but if they’re not, I hope they will be soon.
I’m not abjectly against The Times dipping into product recommendation. If it is done well — with serious attention paid to the reader and the quality of the recommendation — it could be of value to The Times’s audience. Clearly Wirecutter’s audience felt that way.
But I hope The Times will move cautiously, not merely assuming readers will view this as a useful new service but actually asking them whether they do. The Times has a lot to gain. And also to lose.