Isaiah Thomas had 25 points and 9 assists, and Al Horford pitched in 11 points in his Boston debut on Wednesday night as the Celtics survived a late scare to beat the visiting Nets, 122-117, in the season opener for both teams.
Bojan Bogdanovic scored 21 points for the Nets, hitting a 3-pointer that made the score 120-117 with 47 seconds left after the Nets had erased most of a 23-point deficit against the Boston bench. Joe Harris then intercepted a cross-court pass from Thomas, but Bogdanovic missed with a chance to tie the game, and the Celtics were able to hold on.
Justin Hamilton came off the bench to score 19 points and grab 10 rebounds for the Nets in Coach Kenny Atkinson’s debut.
BIG GAME WASTED New Orleans forward Anthony Davis had 50 points, 16 rebounds, 7 steals, 5 assists and 4 blocks in a 107-102 loss to visiting Denver.
Two men have been arrested on suspicion of breaking into the home of Denver Broncos linebacker DeMarcus Ware and stealing his Super Bowl 50 championship ring.
The break-in happened while Ware was at Monday night’s game against Houston. A Denver police spokesman said Ware’s missing property had been recovered.
The arrests came the same day that Ware, who had been out since breaking his right forearm in a game on Sept. 18, returned to practice.
ROMO RETURNS Cowboys quarterback Tony Romo participated in throwing drills at practice for the first time since breaking a bone in his back in the preseason. The Cowboys have won five straight with the rookie Dak Prescott starting at quarterback.
RETHINKING CONCUSSIONS Carolina quarterback Cam Newton, who last month played down concerns over the long-term effects of repeated blows to the head, said the concussion he sustained on Oct. 2 had changed his mind. Newton said he was considering working to educate younger players about concussions.
Brandon Pirri scored twice to help the Rangers beat the visiting Boston Bruins, 5-2.
Rick Nash, Kevin Hayes and Jimmy Vesey also scored for the Rangers. Henrik Lundqvist stopped 27 shots as the Rangers overcame a 2-0 deficit to win their third straight.
Boston’s Zane McIntyre, making his first N.H.L. start, made 26 saves. The Bruins have lost three straight.
CANADIENS EDGE ISLES A late power-play goal by Shea Weber lifted the visiting Montreal Canadiens to their fifth straight victory, a 3-2 win over the Islanders.
John Tavares and Dennis Seidenberg scored for the Islanders. Thomas Greiss had 26 saves.
Svetlana Kuznetsova secured a spot in the semifinals of the WTA Finals in Singapore with a victory over Karolina Pliskova in round-robin play.
Kuznetsova beat Pliskova, 3-6, 6-2, 7-6 (6), to improve to 2-0 for the week. She was assured a place in the semifinals when Agnieszka Radwanska, the defending champion, eliminated Garbiñe Muguruza with a 7-6 (1), 6-3 victory. Radwanska and Pliskova, both 1-1, will play Friday for the other semifinal berth from the White Group.
The four players from the Red Group — top-ranked Angelique Kerber (2-0), Simona Halep (1-1), Madison Keys (1-1) and Dominika Cibulkova (0-2) — will vie for the other two semifinal spots in round-robin matches on Thursday.
Toronto Up Next for New York City F.C.
Sebastian Giovinco had a goal and two assists to lead Toronto F.C. to its first M.L.S. playoff victory in its history, a 3-1 win over the visiting Philadelphia Union in a knockout game. Toronto will host New York City F.C. on Sunday in the opener of the two-legged Eastern Conference semifinal.