You see them everywhere, and maybe, sometimes, you click: those rows of links under web articles, often augmented with eye-catching photos and curiosity-stoking headlines about the latest health tips, celebrity news or ways to escape financial stress.
Usually grouped together under a label like “Promoted Stories” or “Around the Web,” these links are often advertisements dressed up to look like stories people might want to read. They have long provided much-needed revenue for publishers and given a wide range of advertisers a relatively affordable way to reach large and often premium audiences.
Typical Outbrain ads. Readers are starting to express discontent about this sort of advertising.
But now, some publishers are wondering about the effect these so-called content ads may be having on their brands and readers. This month, these ads stopped appearing on Slate. And The New Yorker, which restricted placement of such ads to its humor articles, recently removed them from its website altogether.
Among the reasons: The links can lead to questionable websites, run by unknown entities. Sometimes the information they present is false. Recently Chandler Riggs, an actor on “The Walking Dead,” posted screenshots on Twitter of two such ads — “Young Actors Who Quietly Passed Away This Year” and “Young TV Star Found Dead” — featuring a photo of his face.
“It is not the right look if you’re trying to say you’re a high-quality, upper-tier website — if you have something like this on it — and I think it’s time for us to be honest about that,” said Keith Hernandez, Slate’s president.
These ads are “built on a premise for publishers to maximize revenue — it’s not built on a premise of finding the next great things for your readers to do,” he added.
A report in September from the nonprofit ChangeAdvertising.org found that 41 of the top 50 news sites — including The Guardian, CNN, Time and Forbes — embed widgets from so-called content-recommendation companies. Several of those that do not, including The New York Times, pay for content created with advertisers in-house to appear in the widgets to increase traffic to their own sites.
ChangeAdvertising.org analyzed the content ads on those 41 news websites and found that 61 percent came from advertisers or other prominent publishers. But 26 percent led to “clickbait” sites that were covered in more ads and lower-quality recommendation widgets featuring sexually suggestive or interruptive images. Almost all of those sites, which appear to be paying for placement, then profiting from their own ads once people visit, hid their domain registrations.
Such is the disconnect between the content ad industry’s expressed hopes for what it wants to provide and what internet users end up seeing.
“The vision is to index the entire web and bring the best, most personalized stuff to people,” Adam Singolda, Taboola’s founder and chief executive, said in an interview. “For the most part, a lot of the value Taboola brings is to introduce you to things people may not even know about but like.” He listed examples like new TV shows, blogs and even music from Brooklyn D.J.s.
“We have been told from major, major publishers that we have become their No. 1 revenue provider,” he said, declining to name specific companies.
Outbrain and Taboola both say they offer tools for publishers to remove potentially problematic content. Additionally, the companies employ teams of people who vet content before it is introduced onto their networks, though they admitted it was a challenge to police those who alter campaigns and redirect URLs after approval. And then there’s the problem of sheer scale.
Outbrain, which says it serves 200 billion recommendations a month, employs a “fairly large content editorial team that’s about 17 to 20 people,” said Eric Hadley, Outbrain’s head of marketing. (The company also said that its partnership with Slate, which began in 2010, did not end because of a poor reader experience, though it declined to elaborate.) Taboola, which claims it provides 360 billion recommendations a month, has about 100 account managers who approve new ads, as well as 10 employees dedicated to “keeping content clean,” Mr. Singolda said.
Financial details for the companies are not public, though notable deals shed some light on the industry’s size. Taboola signed a three-year deal with Gannett last year that Mr. Singolda estimated could bring inasmuch as $55 million for the publisher. Time Inc., which owns People, Fortune and other magazines, said in 2014 that its three-year partnership with Outbrain would generate more than $100 million in revenue. Outbrain says it accounts for up to 30 percent of revenue for some publishers.
“We have been consistently pleased with Outbrain as a third-party provider of content recommendations for our site visitors,” Jill Davison, a spokeswoman for Time, said in an email.
Sometimes, the links from these ads can lead to questionable websites, run by unknown entities. Sometimes the information they present is false.
A sample of six Outbrain recommendations on The New Yorker’s website on Oct. 5 showed the confusion readers may face when looking at content ads; several were legitimate, but one led to a spamlike “clickbait” site and another led to a fake health news site created by a marketing company.
Two led to editorial stories from AARP, which promotes its website through Outbrain and embeds the widgets on its own site.
“We no longer need to go out and create relationships with each individual publisher,” said Nataki Edwards, AARP’s senior vice president for digital marketing. But she acknowledged that quality control was an issue.
Asked about the widget and about specific ads, Nicholas Thompson, the editor of NewYorker.com, said, “Outbrain only appears on our humor pages. That’s a deliberate choice.” He added that the arrangement was part of a deal between The New Yorker’s parent company, Condé Nast, and Outbrain. Within a week of the interview, The New Yorker had removed the ads from its site, though it declined to comment on its decision.
For Slate, it was worth it to stop supporting the ads, Mr. Hernandez said. The publisher’s top priority is figuring out how to turn the casual visitor into a regular reader who stops by the site eight to 24 times a week, he said.
