Negotiators from more than 170 countries celebrated in Rwanda on Saturday after reaching a legally binding accord to cut the worldwide use of a powerful planet-warming chemical used in air-conditioners.
KIGALI, Rwanda — Negotiators from more than 170 countries on Saturday reached a legally binding accord to counter climate change by cutting the worldwide use of a powerful planet-warming chemical used in air-conditioners and refrigerators.
The talks in Kigali, the capital of Rwanda, did not draw the same spotlight as the climate change accord forged in Paris last year. But the outcome could have an equal or even greater impact on efforts to slow the heating of the planet.
While the Paris agreement included pledges by nearly every country to cut emissions of heat-trapping carbon dioxide from the fossil fuels that power vehicles, electric plants and factories, the new Kigali deal has a single target: chemical coolants called hydrofluorocarbons, or HFCs, used in air-conditioners and refrigerators.
HFCs are just a small percentage of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, but they function as a sort of supercharged greenhouse gas, with 1,000 times the heat-trapping potency of carbon dioxide.
The Kigali deal was seven years in the making, and is a compromise between rich nations and poorer, hotter ones, including some where rising incomes are just starting to bring air-conditioners within reach. Wealthier nations will freeze production of HFCs more quickly than poorer countries, though some nations, including those in Africa, elected to phase the chemicals out more rapidly than required, citing the grave threats they face from climate change.
While the Paris pledges are broad, they are also voluntary, often vague and dependent on the political will of future world leaders. In contrast, the Kigali deal includes specific targets and timetables to replace HFCs with more planet-friendly alternatives, trade sanctions to punish scofflaws, and an agreement by rich countries to help finance the transition of poor countries to the costlier replacement products.
So, narrow as it is, the new accord may be more likely to yield climate-shielding actions by industry and governments, negotiators say. And given the heat-trapping power of HFCs, scientists say the Kigali accord will stave off an increase of atmospheric temperatures of nearly one degree Fahrenheit.
That would be a major step toward averting an atmospheric temperature increase of 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit, the point at which many experts think the world will be locked into a future of rising sea levels, severe droughts and flooding, widespread food and water shortages, and more powerful hurricanes.
Over all, the deal is expected to lead to the reduction of the equivalent of 70 billion tons of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere — about two times the carbon pollution produced annually by the entire world.
The deal is an amendment to the Montreal Protocol, the landmark 1987 pact designed to close the hole in the ozone layer by banning ozone-depleting coolants called chlorofluorocarbons, or CFCs. That means the Kigali amendment maintains the legal force of a treaty, even if that treaty was ratified by the Senate during the Reagan administration.
Chemical companies responded to the 1987 agreement by developing HFCs, which do not harm the ozone layer but do trap heat in the atmosphere.
The Kigali deal came about in part because Mr. Obama, as he sought to build a legacy of tackling climate change, elevated the obscure effort to amend the Montreal Protocol to a top White House priority. The final agreement is also consistent with the president’s efforts to push his climate change agenda while using creative ways to bypass a hostile Congress.
Mr. Obama began paving the way to the HFC deal at a 2013 get-acquainted meeting with the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, at the Sunnylands golf estate in California. The two leaders agreed to make a deal to reduce the use of HFCs a priority, a major concession from China, the world’s largest HFC producer.
Since then, American and Chinese companies have increased production of HFC replacement chemicals, and major chemical makers in both countries stand to emerge as winners in the deal.
In an exclusive interview on his legacy, President Obama speaks to The Times’s Mark Landler and Coral Davenport on climate change while visiting Marine Corps Base Hawaii.
TIGHT ON OBAMA FOR: My top science advisor John Holdman, periodically will issue some chart or report or graph ah, in the morning meetings, and they’re terrifying. [B-ROLL SOUND UP WAVE CRASH AS PUNCTUATION] OVER SCENIC B-ROLL OF INTERVIEW LOCATION AND MOODY WEATHER SHOTS: Obama: And everybody starts off the day thinking about, okay ah, we—we’ve really gotta get on this, we’ve gotta pay attention to this. TITLE CARD OVER THE ABOVE SCENIC/MOODY SHOTS WIDE OF PATTER TIGHT ON INTERVIEWER: Q: First of all Mr. President, thank you very much for talking to us and doing such a lovely spot. Ah, we’re told you’ve thought a lot about how and why civilizations collapse. And we wanted to ask you, do you believe the threat from climate change is dire enough that it could precipitate the collapse of our civilization? A: Well, I don’t know 00:02:00 That I can you know, look into a crystal ball and know exactly how this plays out. [...] what we do know is that historically, when you see severe environmental strains of one sort or another on cultures, on civilizations, on nations, that the by-products of that are unpredictable and can be very dangerous. 00:02:30 What we know is that if the current projections, the current trend lines on a warming planet continue, it is certainly going to be enormously disruptive worldwide. And just imagine for example, monsoon patterns shifting in south Asian, where you’ve got over a billion people. 00:03:00 If you have even a portion of those billion people displaced, ah, you now have the sorts of refugee crises and potential conflicts that we haven’t seen in our lifetimes. [...] Then you’re looking at a much more dangerous world and severe strains on nation states, on communities, on economies[...]. Q: I mean given the magnitude of that threat, why do you think it’s been so difficult for you to mobilize 00:04:02 Public opinion at home about the necessity of confronting this issue? A: Well the good news is, during the course of my presidency, I think we’ve solidified, ah, in popular opinion the fact that climate change is real, that it’s important, and we should do something about it. Ah, so the problem is not that people don’t believe in climate change, you know, there’s—there are pockets of resistance, ah, particularly in 00:04:30 Certain congressional caucuses. UP SOUND: - someon e in Congress poo-pooing Obama’s climate policies specifically.>>> But you talk to the average person, I think they understand at this point [...] that this is something serious and we gotta do something about it. Translating concern into action is the challenge. And part of what makes climate change difficult is that it ah, is not an instantaneous catastrophic event. It’s a slow-moving 00:05:00 Ah, issue that on a day to day basis people don’t experience and don’t see. [...] And so part of our goal throughout my presidency has been to raise awareness, but also then to 00:06:00 Create frameworks, structures, rules that allow us to take specific action in ways that create economic opportunity and improve people’s wellbeing as opposed to people feeling as if there are these enormous trade-offs that ah, necessarily make life a lot harder for them. <<Obama at ACESA announcement:>> So that we can say, at long last, that this was the moment that we decided to confront America’s energy challange and reclaim America’s future. IN 2009, PRESIDENT OBAMA INTRODUCED the American Clean Energy and Security Act, PROPOSING A “CAP AND TRADE” PLAN WHERE THE GOVERNMENT SETS AN ANNUAL CAP ON GREENHOUSE EMISSIONS, AND ALLOWS BUSINESSES TO TRADE PERMITS ALLOWING THEM TO EXCEED THE LIMITS. THE BILL NEVER PASSED. LATER THAT YEAR, PRESIDENT OBAMA ATTENDED A SUMMIT OF WORLD LEADERS IN COPENHAGEN TO DISCUSS CLIMATE SCIENCE. HIS SPEECH WAS WIDELY CRITICIZED AS A FAILURE TO EMBRACE BOLD MEASURES TO COMBAT CLIMATE CHANGE <<Obama at summit:>> I believe that we can act boldly, and decisively, in the face of this common threat. And that is why I have come here today. TALKS ENDED WITHOUT SIGNIFICANT CHANGES. Q3: Mr. President you tried but failed to take action in your first term. Ah, the cap and trade bill failed in the senate. Ah, the Copenhagen climate change talks ended in collapse. What lessons did you learn, ah, from those episodes? 00:07:30 [...] When cap and trade came up, I was certainly disappointed that ah, many Republicans who previously had said that they were concerned about this suddenly went the other way, as the politics of it shifted. [...] people felt if, you know, we’re hemorrhaging jobs, and the economy is contracting, is this the time for us to be able to move this issue forward aggressively. Ah, but what we did do is to use the model we had created with the auto industry to start thinking how do we engage industry and how do we engage states on a whole set of rules, ah, and steps that even though short of big 00:08:30 Comprehensive legislation can still get the job done. And I think one of the most important things that people should know is that here, in 2016, ah, we’ve actually achieved more carbon emissions than we would have, under the ah, under the cap and trade bill that was presented and went down in the house. So ah, it taught us that there’s just more than one way to skin a cat. 00:10:30 [...] And what I was able to get done in Copenhagen was to at least extract the basic principle that if we’re gonna solve this problem every country has to be involved, not just the wealthy countries, [...] 00:11:00 [...] That seems like a small thing but that was the mechanism whereby we were able in subsequent meetings to begin negotiations with China, ultimately leading to our joint announcement where China said it would set targets and restrain itself. THE NOVEMBER 2014, ANNOUNCEMENT THE PRESIDENT REFERS TO IS A SIGNIFICANT ONE, THE US STATED IT WOULD DOUBLE THE PACE OF YEARLY EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS. AND CHINA, FOR THE FIRST TIME, ANNOUNCED IT WOULD PEAK ITS OWN EMISSIONS. <OBAMA sound-up:>> I commend President Xi, his team and the Chinese government for the commitment they are making to slow, peak and then reverse the course of China’s carbon emissions. Q: I’ve been told that in the—the night before actually, the 2014 US China climate deal was announced that there were a couple of outstanding issues and that some of these were actually worked out between you and President Xi one on one. [...] I was wondering whether there’s anything you can share with us about what your insight was about why ah, the—you know, ah, party leadership in China would be willing to take such painful steps. 00:33:30 [...] Ah, I had been in contact with President Xi prior 00:34:00 To my arrival. Ah and given him a sense of, if you are prepared to do this, here is what we’re gonna be doing, and for us to be able to make a joint announcement, I think would signal the capacity of ah, the US and China to lead the world on an issue of critical importance to everybody. Ah, one of the reasons I think that China was prepared to go further than it 00:34:30 Had been prepared to go previously, is that their overriding concern tends to be political stability. Interestingly, one of their greatest political vulnerabilities is the environment. People who go to Beijing, ah, know that ah, it can be hard to breathe. [...] And so they—the Chinese party leadership recognized that they had to rethink how they approach ah, environmental issues. Ah, and find ways to make that compatible with the growth rates that they need to keep up with their population. And I think we saw that as an opener ah, for us to be able to say 00:35:30 Ah, not only can you address what is increasingly important ah, domestic issue, and that’s air quality. You can also work with us to create a multi-lateral framework you know, that shows China’s emerging leadership on a world stage. // UNABLE TO FIND COMMON GROUND WITH REPUBLICANS, PRESIDENT OBAMA ELECTED TO TAKE UNCONVENTIONAL - SOME REPUBLICANS WOULD SAY UNCONSTITUTIONAL - STEPS. HIS CLEAN POWER PLAN IS AN EXPANSION OF THE REGULATORY OVERSIGHT OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY. <<aug 3 2015, east room of wh, obama announces clean power plan>> OBAMA: I am convinced that no challenge poses a greater threat to our future and future generations than a changing climate. And that’s what brings us here today. Q3: 00:22:33 [...] You’ve gotten a lot of blow-back for this. What are your misgivings about it, and how much do you worry that these will be these creative interpretation of the law will be legally durable? 00:23:30 [...] Well, // if Donald Trump is elected for example, you have a pretty big shift now with the EPA operates and that’s true generally. //There is no doubt that ah, when you have a legislative ratification of a policy, that it is permanent, ah, it is less subject to ah, reversal. But keep in mind that what happens, when we come up with smart policies and regulations that prove to work, 00:24:00 Ah, you start getting buy-in from utilities, and you start getting buy-in from states, and you start getting buy-in from those who’ve invested, ah, private capital in this existing system. It becomes stickier. It’s harder then to reverse because you know, the country’s gone down a different path. 00:24:32 [...] So all these ah, individual ah, and collective steps that have been taken, they lock in, they embed us moving ah, in a certain direction. And for somebody then to come in and say well we’re gonna tear this out 00:26:00 Root and branch, ah, it’s not just a matter now of reversing what I’ve done, it’s a matter of reversing what a whole lot of people are—are seeing works. Q3: Well you talked about all this buy-in from utilities, states, industry. But one of the things that is necessary for the clean power plan to be implemented is for it to stand up to 00:27:03 Legal challenge. Ah, the supreme court has put a halt on implementing it right now. And one of the most prominent critics of the legal structure of the clean power plan is your own mentor at Harvard Law School, Larry Tribe. He has said that your use of the clean air act to put forth the clean power plan is a vast legal overreach, he has compared it—direct quote—to burning the constitution. What is your 00:27:30 Reaction to Professor Tribe’s legal criticism of—of your plan? 00:28:00 I can say that legally, he’s wrong. And ah, I think most legal commentators also think he’s wrong. I think he’s in the minority in the view that he’s taken. But ultimately what really counts is what the DC circuit ah, and ah, if it gets there, the supreme court thinks about it. And I’m very confident that the clean power plan will be upheld. Q3: If it is upheld, there will be some stark economic tradeoffs if it’s implemented. If it stands up to legal challenges, essentially the clean power plan will eventually end demand for coal power. What do you owe the workers and the people in coal communities who will be hurt, who will lose their jobs, who will lose their livelihoods as a result of this? A: Well I think we as a country owe everybody opportunity. And if they’re in a sector that because of the necessities of doing something about climate change are gonna be adversely impacted, then we need to be there for them. // So what we owe ah, the remaining people who are making a living ah, mining coal, is to be honest with them, and to say that, look, the economy is shifting, how we use energy is shifting, that’s gonna be true here but it’s also gonna be true internationally. And how can we take your ah, skills and talents and work ethic that you’ve shown in this coal mine and use it to build some wind turbines, or use it to install ah, solar panels, or help us to rebuild a smart grid that would make our power distribution a lot more efficient. // I think there are a lot of folks in West Virginia and Kentucky, probably southern Illinois who do think that the reason they’re having a tough time is because ah, Obama and the EPA. And now of course Hillary Clinton, ah, you know, we’re all trying to destroy them. Ah, but what I want to do, and I think we should all want to do, is to have an honest conversation about how do we make sure that ah, these communities thrive with the energies—ah—industries of the 21st century, not of the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
The Kigali amendment adds momentum to a series of new global climate change agreements. The Paris agreement entered into legal force this month, and governments from 190 countries adopted a deal to curb planet-warming emissions from the aviation industry.
In each case, the new climate deals have been criticized by scientists for being too weak, and together they do not add up to the solution to global warming. But each accord will make significant inroads on different parts of the problem.
Negotiators in Kigali conceded that the final deal was much less stringent than some had originally hoped. The United States and other rich countries had pushed a plan that would freeze the use of the heat-trapping chemicals by 2021, reducing them to about 15 percent of 2012 HFC levels by 2046. That plan would have eliminated the equivalent of about 90 billion tons of carbon dioxide pollution from the atmosphere by 2050.
Negotiators from India and some of the world’s other hottest and poorest countries pushed back hard at that proposal. In India, millions of people are on the verge of being able to afford air-conditioners cooled by HFCs.
The final deal will divide the world economy into three tracks. The richest countries, including the United States and those in the European Union, will freeze the production and consumption of HFCs by 2018, reducing them to about 15 percent of 2012 levels by 2036.
Much of the rest of the world, including China, Brazil and all of Africa, will freeze HFC use by 2024, reducing it to 20 percent of 2021 levels by 2045.
A small group of the world’s hottest countries — India, Pakistan, Iran, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait — will have the most lenient schedule, freezing HFC use by 2028 and reducing it to about 15 percent of 2025 levels by 2047.
After arriving in Kigali on Wednesday, the Environmental Protection Agency administrator, Gina McCarthy, and her counterparts spent hours locked in meetings, working on Excel spreadsheets to try to find a compromise. But no one could agree on the numbers. In contrast to many other environmental negotiations, it was possible for negotiators to calculate the exact effects of their proposals in real time, down to numbers of tons of planet-warming pollution avoided.
Mr. Kerry arrived on Thursday, and his talks with officials from India, Pakistan and China went late and grew contentious.
After details were hashed out Friday night, the deal was gaveled in at 7 a.m., and the exhausted but exultant negotiators gathered for an impromptu Champagne breakfast.
Environmental advocates and countries that had pushed for a more stringent deal still called the Kigali amendment a significant step forward.
Negotiators noted that many of the hottest, poorest countries, including the entire African bloc, had decided not to join India on the least ambitious timetable, but rather signed on to the midlevel one. While most Africans lack air-conditioning, African negotiators said rapidly battling climate change was a higher priority.
Rwanda, which has worked to emerge from the shadows of its 1994 genocide, hopes to become known as well for the forging of a major climate deal. Negotiators met in the sparkling new Kigali Convention Center, and the night the deal was completed, it was illuminated in green.