Real Estate|Renovating a Bathroom? Experts Share Their Secrets.
Renovating a Bathroom? Experts Share Their Secrets.
New bathrooms don’t come cheap.
The average cost of a midrange bathroom renovation — replacing all the fixtures, the tile, the vanity and the toilet — is now almost $19,000, according to Remodeling magazine, which tracks the cost of home improvement projects annually. And that’s the nationwide average. If you live in New York City, count on spending closer to $25,000.
If you’re planning a high-end remodel that involves moving fixtures and installing amenities like heated floors, it will cost you more than $60,000 on average — and in New York City, upward of $72,000.
Still, there are ways to keep costs down. Interior designers and building professionals offered some tips on how to save money without sacrificing style.
LIMIT THE USE OF TILE Because tile can be expensive — and labor even more so — Pamela Dailey, an interior designer in Beacon, N.Y., sometimes uses it only in the shower, where she lays a simple subway tile in a staggered pattern up to the ceiling.
LOOK FOR LEFTOVERS Don’t pay for an entire slab of granite when all you need is a small piece to cover the top of a vanity. Stone fabricators like SMC Stone in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, and BCG Marble and Granite Fabricators in Hackensack, N.J., often sell remnants.
HIT THE FLEA MARKET Ms. Giesen recently found a small iron table for $125 this way, and plans to use it as a sink console. “The style is unique and special,” she said. “And perfect for a bath, without breaking the bank.” Just be sure to measure your flea market finds before buying, to ensure they’re the right height, width and depth for your bathroom.
CONSIDER THE COST OF LABOR “Most people think about saving on material,” said Raf Howery, the chief executive of the home-remodeling site Kukun, but they forget that labor can account for as much as 40 percent of the overall budget. Keeping the bathroom layout the same, so you don’t have to move the plumbing, and “choosing products that do not require a huge amount of installation labor,” Mr. Howery said, are some of the best ways to keep costs down.
Cindy Albert, a designer at New Life Bath & Kitchen in Santa Maria, Calif., offered an example: Instead of spending $1,400 on tile for a recent bathroom renovation, she spent $2,000 on wall panels from Kohler’s Choreograph line. The panels cost more, she explained, but because they took less time to install, her client saved about $2,500 on labor.
When it comes to finishes, standard polished chrome is typically less expensive than other options. Kohler’s Bancroft valve trim and handle in polished chrome, for example, sells for $244. The same model in brushed nickel costs $355.
