Two operatives who were working with the Democratic National Committee to help elect Hillary Clinton are no longer working in that role after an undercover video appeared to show them plotting to incite violence at Donald J. Trump’s rallies.
The creatively edited video (which contains profane language) was the work of James O’Keefe’s Project Veritas Action, a right-wing organization that sends researchers around the country to spy on the inner workings of Democratic campaigns. The tape showed Robert Creamer, of Democracy Partners, and Scott Foval, formerly of People for the American Way and Americans United for Change, appearing to talk about plans to plant people outside of Trump rallies and instigate fights.
“It doesn’t matter what the friggin’ legal and ethics people say, we need to win this,” Mr. Foval said in one clip of the video that describes how to get Mr. Trump’s supporters to start punching the people that they plant in line at his rallies.
Violence at Mr. Trump’s rallies was widespread over the summer, as Mr. Trump was widely blamed for riling up his fans with bombastic language. At one point, he promised to pay the legal fees of supporters who roughed up protesters.
The Democratic National Committee said in a statement that it contracted Mr. Creamer in June 2016 to do counterprogramming in cities where the Trump campaign was holding events. While the committee said it opposed the incitement of violence of any kind, it was also investigating any potential illegal activity by Mr. O’Keefe.
Mr. Creamer, who was portrayed by the narrator in the video as the “diabolical” mastermind of a team of Democratic consultants, said that Mr. Foval was no longer working with him and that he was stepping away from the campaign to avoid being a distraction.
Mr. Foval could not be reached for comment.
The Clinton campaign denounced the tactics discussed in the video while expressing doubts about the measures employed by Mr. O’Keefe.
Mr. O’Keefe’s organization put campaigns on notice last year that his investigators, who he considers to be journalists, would be aggressively working to infiltrate their operations this election cycle.
While Mr. O’Keefe has been a thorn in the side of campaigns over the years, he has also had legal problems of his own.
In 2010, Mr. O’Keefe pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges and was fined for posing as a repairman to gain access to the office of former Senator Mary Landrieu of Louisiana. Three years ago, Mr. O’Keefe paid $100,000 to settle a lawsuit filed by a former Acorn member after he posed as a pimp during an investigation of the activist group.
In his latest video, Mr. O’Keefe said that he planned to release more damaging evidence of wrongdoing before the election.