Stephen F. Bollenbach, an executive in the hotel industry whose financial skills were credited with sparing Donald J. Trump from having to file for personal bankruptcy, died on Oct. 8 in Manhattan. He was 74.
His wife, Kimberly, said he died after a long illness. He lived primarily in East Hampton, N.Y., and also had homes in New York and Paris.
Mr. Bollenbach was chief executive of the Hilton Hotels Corporation from 1996 until 2007, when he retired. He presided over the acquisition of the Bally Entertainment Corporation, giving the company a presence in Atlantic City, as well as the reunification of Hilton’s American and international properties and the expansion of its franchise business.
The Hilton Hotels company was sold in 2007 to the Blackstone Group, a private-equity powerhouse, for $26 billion.
Mr. Bollenbach took the helm at Hilton after overseeing the finances of several other companies, including the Trump Organization. It appointed Mr. Bollenbach its first chief financial officer in 1990, and he quickly moved to change how Mr. Trump financed his empire of buildings, Atlantic City casinos, hotels and an airline, which was crumbling at the time.
Those measures, which included debt-for-equity swaps and the sale or planned bankruptcy of some of the Trump Organization’s flagging assets, were credited at that time with helping Mr. Trump avoid personal bankruptcy.
Mr. Bollenbach was long praised for his financial skills. As chief financial officer of Walt Disney in 1995, he persuaded its executives that the company could afford to take on the debt necessary to acquire Capital Cities/ABC. The acquisition was among the biggest media deals ever at the time.
When he became chief executive of Hilton the following year, he was the first person outside of the Hilton family to hold that position.
Stephen Frasier Bollenbach was born on July 14, 1942, in Los Angeles. His father, Walter P. Bollenbach, worked at the Carnation Milk Company; his mother, the former Betty Mason, was a homemaker.
Mr. Bollenbach graduated from the University of California, Los Angeles, and received a master’s in business administration from California State University, Northridge.
Not long afterward, he came to the attention of Daniel K. Ludwig, once one of the world’s richest men and entrepreneur with interests in shipbuilding, banks and hotels. Mr. Bollenbach worked for Mr. Ludwig for many years, helping to oversee some of his hotel properties.
Mr. Bollenbach joined Marriott in 1982 and became the company’s treasurer. Four years later, he left to become chief financial officer at Holiday Corporation, the operator of Holiday Inn motels. During his time there, Mr. Bollenbach prevented Mr. Trump from taking over the chain through a leveraged buyout.
Mr. Bollenbach served as a director of several companies, including Time Warner, Macy’s and Mondelez International.
In addition to his wife, Mr. Bollenbach is survived by two sons, Christopher and Keat, and two grandchildren. An earlier marriage ended in divorce.