354 pages. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. $26.
A riches-to-rags story, an immigrant story and a quixotic road trip are bundled into Jade Chang’s sharply funny first novel. Charles Wang, a self-made millionaire, loses his Bel-Air estate and everything else in the 2008 economic collapse. Until then, Charles, a cosmetics mogul, was accustomed to getting his way — whether cheating in business or on his second wife: “Money made everything easy to indulge.” Now, unable to pay his children’s tuitions, he pulls his teenage daughter, Grace, out of private school, and his son, Andrew, from college. Then he demands that the family join him on what proves to be a hellish cross-country journey in an old powder-blue Mercedes station wagon. They’ll seek refuge at the Catskills farmhouse of his elder daughter, Saina, a Conceptual artist with plenty of her own problems. Charles is already planning his grand comeback scheme, reclaiming valuable ancestral land in China. He’s disillusioned and angry, dismissing America as “a great deceptor,” because “all it could do was destroy — fortunes, families, lives.” This novel is overstuffed with subplots and detours, but Charles — with an ego larger than his homeland and a relentless determination to “wrestle America to the ground and take her milk money” — makes the ride worthwhile, as does the author’s savage takedown of the American dream.
290 pages. Harper. $25.99.
At a research station on earth’s remotest continent, Roisin and François find love. Both are haunted by trauma. She is an Irish astronomer studying comets in Antarctica, having fled a messy, intense (and sexual) relationship with her cousin Liam: “This is what she needs. Somewhere wild and inhospitable and brutal where she can try to understand what has happened.” François, a French chef working at the base, has reluctantly abandoned his troubled mother, Severine, who raised him alone in Bayeux and never left. As a child, François used to stargaze and watch comets with Severine as she told stories of magic and ghosts. He never understood his mother’s refusal to travel, but more inexplicable was her habit of talking with a rotating cast of family ghosts — quarreling with them, confiding in them, consoling them. What was a necessary attachment for Severine became a shameful secret for her son. “Do you think it’s strange to love something you don’t understand?” François asks Roisin as he’s falling for her. It’s one of the great questions of this exquisitely layered, thrilling novel, which leaps across centuries and continents to delve into the role of destiny and the elusiveness of perception and memory. These characters are as awe-struck by the intimate moments of everyday life (“the taste of his skin where she once licked fresh water from the crease inside his elbow”) as they are by the vast night sky. A less gifted writer might have made this material too whimsical or sentimental. Ms. Sedgwick wisely takes a laconic approach to the supernatural and a romantic approach to the scientific.
126 pages. New York Review Books. $14.
The avant-garde writer Ge Fei (the pen name of Liu Yong) is one of China’s most celebrated authors, yet until now his fiction had never been translated into English. In this enigmatic 2012 novel, the middle-aged Mr. Cui lives in Beijing with his sister and her husband, who want him out. He has nowhere to go. His wife divorced him, promptly married her boss and became pregnant. He has one friend, whom he has known since childhood, but their interactions tend to leave him humiliated. He spends his days in solitude, building and installing custom amplifiers for a rarefied, dwindling group of hi-fi enthusiasts. “It’s probably the most insignificant industry in China today,” he says. An obsessive oddball, he occupies “the same rung of the social ladder as beggars.” Yet he’s also a snob who despises his clients’ middlebrow musical tastes and mocks their banal and pretentious conversations: “He liked to use the phrase ‘in point of fact’ a lot,” Cui says of one client. “I couldn’t say why.” Cui is indifferent to love, family and ambition, but his grim life becomes decidedly more intriguing when, through bizarre circumstances, he encounters a woman whose alienation matches his own.
278 pages. Riverhead Books. $26.
Suicide, abortion, grief, religion, female friendship and first love are bold themes to tackle in a debut novel, but 26-year-old Brit Bennett seems admirably repelled by caution. In a Southern California town, the Upper Room Chapel is the center of a close-knit African-American community. Nadia Turner, a high school senior, is the congregation’s first member to earn a university scholarship, and she’s headed to Michigan in the fall. But she’s grief-struck, recovering from the death of her mother, who shot herself in the head, and dealing with a genial but distant father. Nadia has also lost her virginity to Luke Sheppard, the pastor’s son, and decided to have an abortion: “She couldn’t let this baby nail her life in place when she’d just been given a chance to escape.” (The devastating scene in which she undergoes the procedure occurs in the first chapter.) Nadia finds the aftermath lonely: “She’d had a mother and now she didn’t, and she’d been pregnant but now she wasn’t.” Her promising future (she hopes to become a civil rights lawyer) might be in jeopardy, as well as her close friendship with Aubrey Evans, another motherless girl and, unlike Nadia, a devout Christian. Luke’s future may be threatened, too.  Told partly in first-person plural by a group of judgmental busybodies known as the Mothers (“church folk can gossip”), the story follows the ways in which these three teenagers are drawn together and wrenched apart. Ms. Bennett allows her characters to follow their worst impulses, and she handles provocative issues with intelligence, empathy and dark humor. Her risk-taking pays off.