A Florida man convicted of shooting at George Zimmerman’s car last year was sentenced on Monday to 20 years in prison, ending a trial that again put Mr. Zimmerman, who was cleared in the 2012 killing of the unarmed black teenager Trayvon Martin, back in the spotlight.
A jury last month found the man, Matthew Apperson, guilty of attempted second-degree murder and two other charges after he fired into Mr. Zimmerman’s car on May 11, 2015, in Lake Mary, Fla., a small town near Orlando, according to a charging document filed by state attorneys in Seminole County.
The 20-year sentence handed down by Circuit Judge Debra S. Nelson was the mandated minimum, said Lynne Bumpus-Hooper, a spokeswoman for the state attorney’s office in Seminole County. Mr. Apperson received 15 years for each of the two other charges — shooting into an occupied vehicle and aggravated assault with a firearm — but they will run concurrently, she added.
A lawyer for Mr. Apperson, Michael LaFay, called the sentence “harsh.” Mr. LaFay had asked the court to release Mr. Apperson pending his appeal, but the judge denied the motion for public-safety reasons, Ms. Bumpus-Hooper said.
“He fired on another vehicle as both vehicles were driving down a busy four-lane highway during a lunch hour in the middle of a workday,” Ms. Bumpus-Hooper said.
Mr. Apperson, a 37-year-old paralegal, and Mr. Zimmerman, the former neighborhood watch volunteer who fatally shot Mr. Martin, 17, in 2012, had had several run-ins before the shooting, Ms. Bumpus-Hooper said.
In the confrontation that took place about 12:45 p.m. on May 11, 2015, the two men were driving on Lake Mary Boulevard near Mr. Apperson’s office at the same time by coincidence, Mr. LaFay said on Monday.
Mr. Apperson testified that Mr. Zimmerman had threatened him in the past, Mr. LaFay said, and that day, the two men exchanged angry words. The lawyer said that Mr. Zimmerman told Mr. Apperson he was going to kill him, and Mr. Apperson testified he had reached for his pistol.
Mr. Apperson told the court that when he looked over and saw Mr. Zimmerman “point a gun at him,” Mr. Apperson fired a shot from his .357 Magnum, his lawyer said.
But Stewart Stone, the prosecuting assistant state attorney, said that Mr. Apperson’s self-defense claim was not believable because Mr. Zimmerman had rolled-up tinted windows that were almost impossible to see through.
Mr. Apperson called 911, Mr. LaFay said, and he was questioned at the Lake Mary Police Station and released without charges. Mr. Zimmerman was treated for injuries from flying glass.
The trial was the latest episode to thrust Mr. Zimmerman back into the news after he was acquitted of second-degree murder for shooting Mr. Martin in Sanford, Fla. That shooting took center stage in some of the testimony in Mr. Apperson’s trial, according to local news reports.
“I am entitled to go into prior acts of violence that Mr. Zimmerman committed, so I questioned him somewhat about Mr. Martin’s death,” Mr. LaFay said.
In May, Mr. Zimmerman was widely condemned for trying to auction the firearm he used to fatally shoot Mr. Martin. Saboteurs foiled his attempts by submitting bogus bids online.
Mr. Zimmerman had also been accused of assaulting his girlfriend twice, in January 2015 and November 2013, but those charges were dropped after the woman recanted.