Jennifer Diaz first stepped onto the stage of the Metropolitan Opera House at 11, as an extra in “I Pagliacci” and “La Bohème.” For the next three years, it became her second home, as she regularly visited her father, who is still the Met’s night crew manager after more than three decades.
At 19, she began working there as a stagehand, typically the only female member in a 28-person crew.
She works in a short-sleeve shirt, shorts and sturdy sneakers, a delicate silver necklace barely visible. Married to a fellow Local 1 stagehand, she sports a tattooed wedding ring in place of a traditional metal band, the palm-side of her ring finger worn clean from years of ungloved manual labor.
Standing on the shallow stage of the Kerr, she kept a close eye on the crew of stagehands, all of them men. As heavy objects thumped and banged, it was her job to keep everyone safe — while not alienating those who work for her.
Her new job title is somewhat misleading, as she no longer wields a hammer or saw; her role is now more administrative and managerial. “I point and do payroll,” she joked.
Still, even as an industry veteran, she said she was “totally surprised” when asked to compete with 12 others in applying for the job, and “terrified” of a formal interview.
Ms. Diaz brought specific technical skills to the position, having worked with a similar rigging system at the Cort.
She now acts as the intermediary between her employers and the mostly male stagehands she hires.
Local 1, with only 189 female members, is widely considered the most prestigious local in the country and, industry veterans agree, one of the most difficult to join.
There are three ways in: earning $35,000 a year for three consecutive years in a qualifying union job; unionizing your own workplace; or taking a skills assessment test to qualify for an apprentice position lasting two to three years. The work, while not always steady, can be lucrative, paying up to $80,000 a year, plus benefits.
Ms. Diaz’s tight-knit network is typical of the union, where many members are married to one another or related by blood.
“It makes a huge difference having family in the business,” said Kristina Miller, a veteran stagehand and Local 1 member who has known Ms. Diaz for more than a decade. When stagehands are being hired, a familiar last name makes a big difference.
Besides her father, John Diaz, Ms. Diaz’s older brother, Michael Diaz, is also in the business, as head carpenter of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.
Keeping a cool head is essential, fellow stagehands agree. Ms. Miller said that being “stubborn” and “pigheaded” has helped her thrive in workplaces where foul language is standard.
Acquiring the technical and mathematical knowledge for Ms. Diaz’s current job required years of hard physical labor and demands a sensitive managerial style and the ability to juggle the sometimes competing needs — for speed and safety — of her employers and her hired hands.
Stagehands and flymen wrestle enormous pieces of metal and steel, with each show’s costly, carefully designed sets usually shipping in from studios in Connecticut and upstate New York.
Nine of Broadway’s theaters, those built between 1903 and 1927, are “hemp houses,” using manila ropes to set the stage. A hemp fly system is the simplest type, and stage rigging techniques draw largely from ship rigging. Backstage in a hemp house sounds like a ship; the stage is referred to as a deck, and words used include batten, belay, block, bo’sun, hitch and lanyard.
“My first accident was when a house ran over my foot,” she said. The house, a life-size prop for “Madama Butterfly” at the Met Opera, left a huge contusion. “I was out for the rest of the season,” she recalled.
In her downtime, she listens to music (the Cure is a favorite), but she’s had little of that. Having worked two jobs last year, she admitted that she gained weight from a lack of sleep and exercise.
And what of the romance of the theater, the hush of anticipation as the lights dim, the orchestra begins to play and the curtain rises?
