The N.A.A.C.P., the nation’s oldest civil rights organization, has struggled in recent years to win over younger African-Americans, who often see the group as out of touch. The N.A.A.C.P.’s board will reinforce that impression if it ratifies an ill-advised resolution — scheduled for a vote this weekend — that calls for a moratorium on expansion of public charter schools, which receive public money but are subject to fewer state regulations than traditional public schools.
This truth has been underscored in several studies by Stanford University’s Center for Research on Education Outcomes. Last year, for example, the center found that students enrolled in charter schools in 41 of the nation’s urban regions learned significantly more than their traditional public school counterparts.
According to the study, charter school students received the equivalent of 40 days of additional learning a year in math and 28 additional days of learning a year in reading. Moreover, educational gains for charter school students turned out to be significantly larger for black, Hispanic, low-income and special education students in both math and reading.
This performance advantage has been well documented in New York City and has been found to be particularly striking for charters in the San Francisco Bay Area, Boston, Washington, D.C., Memphis and Newark. Such academic improvements have stimulated heavy demand for more charters among low-income black and Latino families that are often trapped in failing districts.
The Stanford study notes, however, that poorly run charters can be disastrous. In some areas, the study notes, not a single charter school outperforms the traditional school alternative — and in some places, more than half are significantly worse. The city of Detroit, where more than half of all students attend charter schools, has recently become an example of such a failure.
Where charter schools excel, however, demand for admission is high. In New York City, for example, charter schools enroll about 107,000 students, roughly 10 percent of the city’s total enrollment. But more than 44,000 students who sought admission for the current school year were turned away. In Harlem and the South Bronx, there are now four applicants for every charter school seat.
Given the demand for good charters, a moratorium would clearly be a bad idea. But the N.A.A.C.P. has raised legitimate concerns that lawmakers and education officials need to take seriously. It notes, for example, that minority students are more likely to be suspended from charter schools than their white peers.
That is, of course, outrageous, but it is an endemic problem to the public school system as a whole and not limited to charters. The Obama administration has recently put schools on notice that discriminatory disciplinary policies violate federal civil rights law.
The N.A.A.C.P. resolution is less credible when it says that charter schools have contributed to “increased segregation.” Yes, many in urban centers have predominantly black or Latino student enrollment, but it’s nonsensical to fault a charter school for serving a minority student body in an overwhelmingly minority area.
