In the midst of a national crisis of police violence, Baltimore’s state’s attorney gambled that prosecuting six officers for the death of Freddie Gray would help heal her city. She lost much more than just the case.
A little before 7 the other night, the prosecutor Marilyn Mosby stopped by my house in Baltimore for dinner. She was coming straight from work in one of her customary gray pantsuits, and because I was already nursing a beer, she took off her jacket with a sigh and poured herself a glass of white wine. Then we stepped onto the back deck to throw a few burgers on the grill. This being a September evening, you might imagine the yard in raking light and breezy autumnal aspect, but it was actually pretty swampy, the oppressive tonnage of summer humidity not yet given way to season’s end, so as soon as the burgers looked about done, we ferried them inside and settled at the island in my kitchen to eat. After a few minutes, Mosby’s husband, Nick, who sits on the City Council, knocked on my front door, let himself in and wandered through the house to join us. He took a seat two chairs down from Marilyn, leaving an empty one between them.
“Hey, Marilyn,” he said quietly.
“I was waiting for you at home,” he said.
“Which number?” he asked.
“Your cellphone!” she said.
I relate this bit of conversation not because it offers a perfect window on the Mosbys and their marriage, but just the opposite: because it’s important to understand from the outset that what you are about to read is a narrow but intimate view. A couple in the midst of a public ordeal is not excused from life’s usual bothers, and what is striking when you find yourself in proximity to a crisis isn’t always the soaring arc of the fall but the way it touches against, grazes and refracts all the familiar daily torments on the way down.
In case your memory is a little foggy, the Mosbys have emerged as one of the most prominent political couples in Baltimore over the last 18 months of upheaval. Nick represents the City Council district where a 25-year-old resident, Freddie Gray, was arrested in April 2015 and where protests over his death turned to incendiary violence. Marilyn is the state’s attorney who, in the midst of that unrest, took to the steps of the War Memorial downtown, facing City Hall, to announce that she was filing criminal charges against six police officers over Gray’s death.
“I have heard your calls for ‘no justice, no peace!’ ” she boomed before a bank of television cameras in a clip that would echo across the country, would calm the simmering tenor of the city and would, at least temporarily, elevate Mosby to the role of proxy for a nation reeling with outrage and disbelief over the failure of other prosecutors in other cities to indict other police officers for the killings of other black men, including Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo., and Eric Garner on Staten Island. In the days after her announcement, Mosby would be thrust into a woozy limelight: called onstage at a Prince benefit concert and photographed by Annie Leibovitz for Vogue.
Missing in all the hype and fizzle has been just about any public comment from the Mosbys, and particularly from Marilyn, who spent nine months under a gag order imposed by the criminal courts. At her news conference in July to announce the dismissal of charges, she seemed to offer a glimpse into her mood and thinking when she denounced the city’s criminal-­justice system as hopelessly broken. “Without real, substantive reforms,” she said, “we could try this case 100 times, and cases just like it, and still wind up with the same result.” Afterward, Mosby declined to take questions, and she has mostly avoided interviews since, citing the defamation lawsuits against her.
Baltimore is a peculiar place, with its own categories of privilege. The northern sector is an enclave of white wealth that would be familiar to any New Englander, with historic stone churches and elite preparatory schools cultivating vaunted lacrosse programs, but the city is predominantly black, with mostly black political leaders, and if you’re a kid like me, who came up through the public schools downtown and spent several years writing news and opinion pieces for a prominent black paper, you can gain a certain alternate privilege and entree with the city’s other power base, which we might call the black establishment. It is possible to find yourself, as I did one night this spring, sitting alone with the mayor in the back of a bar to chat over a few drinks, or leaving for vacation this month with a longtime member of the City Council. So when a curious figure like Mosby emerges, even if she’s bound to silence, you’re only a phone call away from a personal introduction.
Throughout all this, I was also recording conversations with a variety of other people in Baltimore, some fiercely opposed to the Mosbys, others ardent fans. At a certain point in the middle of September, after maybe three weeks of hosting gatherings, it began to feel as if my living room had become an old-­fashioned salon, in which the story of the Baltimore uprising was being endlessly retold in Rashomon variation.
Like one night in mid-­September, a cop with two decades of service on the police force swung by around 9 p.m. and spent the next hour and a half venting about Mosby’s intractable incompetence. In case you are picturing some old white dude with a revanchist hankering for the good old days of zero tolerance, I want you to know that this cop is a woman of color with staunchly liberal views, who firmly supports mandatory police cameras and readily acknowledges, for example, that under the mayoralty of Martin O’Malley in the early 2000s, the Baltimore police behaved like a goon squad, rounding up black people in mass arrests without a scintilla of probable cause. “O’Malley had us clearing corners and violating the constitutional rights of everybody,” she said.
Even so, she regarded Mosby as a singular catastrophe for the city. One thing that most people outside Baltimore don’t realize is the degree to which Mosby’s election in 2014 came as a surprise. When she started her campaign to become the city’s top prosecutor a year before, she was a 33-year-old corporate lawyer working for an insurance firm. Although she had spent a few years in the prosecutor’s office from 2005 to 2011, she caught little notice on the job. “I was like, ‘Who is that?’ ” the officer at my house recalled thinking when Mosby announced her campaign. “And I knew pretty much every state’s attorney at the district level, and every state’s attorney at the Circuit Court level, and most of the judges.” In conversation with half a dozen prosecutors who worked with Mosby, no one could remember any of the cases she handled before her election.
People have all different ways of explaining Mosby’s victory, but most agree that it came down to a combination of the political connections that she and Nick developed through his seat on the City Council; a vigorous yearlong campaign of knocking on doors across the city; the failure of the incumbent state’s attorney, Gregg Bernstein, to take her seriously until the final weeks of their race; and the underlying electoral math of a hyper­segregated city.
The night before the Mosbys came over for dinner, I invited a city councilman named Carl Stokes for drinks. Stokes is an old friend of mine, for whatever that disclosure is worth, and is a 66-year-old black man who has been involved in local politics since approximately forever. Over the 20 years I’ve known him, I would say he has become increasingly allergic to euphemism. During the uprising last year, for example, he caused a stir on CNN when he denounced the anchor for using the term “thug” with a flurry of unvarnished indignation that I can tell you is precisely what I love about Carl. Stokes admires Mosby, but over dinner he laid out a pretty simple theory to explain city elections. “It’s black and white,” he said with a laugh. “This is Baltimore! The only time the issues matter is when two candidates of the same race are competing.” Anyone from Baltimore can think of contrary examples to what Stokes was saying, but anyone honest would have to admit that the basic gist is right.
Whether you agree that losing nearly a third of her staff is a sign of a vigorous shake-up in a calcifying agency or believe instead that it’s a tragic evisceration of a vital public office depends on your own inclinations. Suffice it to say that from the perspective of a cop, the replacement of so many veteran prosecutors with new attorneys has been frustrating. “They have seriously depleted the top end,” a police lieutenant with three decades of experience told me, “and the result is that nobody knows what they’re doing.” Add to that the festering resentment over Mosby’s decision to prosecute officers for the death of Gray, and it’s fair to say that the partnership between the police and prosecutors in Baltimore is broken.
“It’s a fractured relationship,” the cop at my house the other night said with a shrug. “It’s absolutely been fractured, and I won’t say it can’t be repaired, but I think it’s going to be a very, very long time.” As she was preparing to leave, I asked this officer if she was willing to admit that the conflict with Mosby, and the mutual mistrust, has led police officers to pull back from their essential duties. One of the most discouraging statistics in Baltimore has been a 63 percent increase in homicides last year. As I asked about this, I watched the cop’s face twist into a frown, which at first I mistook for a sign that she was offended by the question. Then she nodded.
Mosby’s childhood home in Dorchester is a gray, prefabricated duplex surrounded by a thin strip of weedy grass. In a neighborhood of large historic homes with broad eaves and wraparound porches, it stands out for being almost perfectly devoid of architectural interest. What the home lacks in grace, however, it recovers in proximity: It is just around the corner from the sprawling manse where Mosby’s grandparents lived.
As I stood with Mosby outside her former home on Labor Day weekend, I was struck by how different she appeared from her professional persona. It wasn’t just that she had swapped out her workaday suits for a faded purple T-shirt and jean shorts with Converse high-tops. There was also an unguarded ease about her that suggested a person in every way content to be home. When I arrived, she was settled in front of the television with her grandmother while Nick relaxed upstairs. Now, as she stood on the sidewalk around the corner, she seemed to brace herself for the inevitable rush of memory; we were on the spot where, as a young teenager, she watched her cousin die.
Mosby and I had spoken about Diron Spence before. Growing up on either side of their duplex, just three years apart in age, with the shared experience of attending mostly white schools through Boston’s Metco desegregation program, Mosby and her cousin became extraordinarily close. “He was like my brother,” she said.
The crowd that gathered around Mosby’s family in those days consisted mainly of cops. Mosby comes from a police family in a way that few Americans can understand. Her grandfather was a founding member of the first black police officers’ association in Massachusetts and made the home both a gathering place for cops and a refuge for troubled kids. Although Mosby’s mother and uncle shared the duplex around the corner, Mosby spent much of her childhood with her grandparents. Her mother gave birth at 17 and struggled with substance abuse, often leaving Mosby in the care of her grandmother, Marilyn Thompson.
As a teenager, Mosby plunged into political action. She became active in the student government and the school newspaper; she worked with a group called Weatoc, which raised awareness about issues of race and gender; she joined an organization known as Project Hip-Hop, which fosters appreciation of the civil rights movement — she walked the bridge in Selma, Ala., and visited the grave of James Chaney in Meridian, Miss. In 1998, she enrolled at the historically black Tuskegee University, where she met Nick. Their first evening together, they stayed up until all hours dissecting politics. He was determined to return to Baltimore and enter local politics.
As she spoke, it occurred to me that from a certain vantage, Mosby seemed almost perfectly groomed for the moment in which she burst into national attention. If you were trying to engineer a figure with the right background and life experience, the instinct and inclination to do what prosecutors for Ferguson and Staten Island did not, you would imagine a young black prosecutor, acutely aware of racial injustice and systemic oppression, who had organized herself since childhood to confront bigotry through political action, and yet someone who came from generations of police, who could not be accused of hating cops or coddling criminals, whose commitment to hard-­nosed prosecution was inspired by her own formative experience of violent crime.
Mosby and I left her grandmother in the kitchen and settled to chat in the dim light of the dining room. She seemed almost to exhale the accumulated strain of the last year and a half as she began to describe in detail the moment when she lost faith in the police investigation of Gray’s death, when she realized that she didn’t trust the internal review to uncover the truth and felt compelled to turn the glaring light of the prosecutor’s office onto the family of blue that she’d known all her life.
It was April 13, 2015, when Mosby first spoke with Baltimore police officers about Gray’s injuries. He had been arrested a day earlier, at the corner of Mount and Presbury Streets in a tough West Baltimore neighborhood known as Sandtown-­Winchester. Two of his neighbors used cellphones to record the scene as a pair of police officers on bicycles held him down, then dragged him to a van with his legs dangling beneath him. Gray could be heard on the video screaming in apparent pain. By the end of the day, he lay in the hospital, in a coma, with three fractured vertebrae, a crushed larynx and his spinal cord nearly severed, while the videos of his arrest began to circulate on social media.
Investigators for the state’s attorney do not have police powers. They can knock on doors, interview witnesses and request public documents, but in order to file a search warrant, they need police support. Mosby said that on a series of requests, she could not get the Baltimore police to comply. “We couldn’t trust that they were going to follow through with everything that we needed,” she said. One of her requests was to execute a search warrant on the personal cellphones of the officers involved. Mosby told me that she knew the officers exchanged several text messages while Gray was in the van, and she believed that the content of those messages would be important to determine what happened.
Meanwhile, if you lived in Baltimore, you could feel the temperature of the street rising. On April 19, one week after Gray’s arrest, the police announced that he had died. Outrage in the city began to swell, and protests filled downtown. On Saturday, April 25, demonstrators clashed with overzealous officers in riot gear outside the baseball stadium, and on April 27, officials responded to a false report of incipient violence by shutting down lines of transportation near a local mall, which only fanned the outrage further: Fights broke out, cars and buildings were torched and 130 police officers suffered injuries.
In private, Batts and Rawlings-­Blake are equally critical of Mosby — and sometimes each other. Rawlings-­Blake fired Batts as commissioner in July 2015. When I contacted the mayor about Mosby’s comments, she chose not to respond on the record, but Batts vehemently denied putting out misinformation. He said he thought it was important to report progress in the investigation as it happened, even if some details were likely to prove wrong. “Cases change as you get more information,” he said. “But you’ve got to tell people something, and you’ve got to tell them as much as you can to be transparent.” He said that although the preliminary police investigation was ending, he expected Mosby’s investigation to continue beyond May 1.
Just then, Nick wandered down the staircase in an old Orioles T-shirt.
“When you asked them to stop having the press conferences?” he asked.
Nick shot a worried glance at my tape recorder. “Yeah, I don’t remember,” he said.
A silence descended in the room, and after a while Nick continued to the kitchen. Marilyn and I spoke for a few minutes longer, then she walked me to the door. We stood on the porch in darkness, and I asked if she felt any regret about the impact of her public profile on her private life.
“At least you’re aware of that,” I said.
Mosby swallowed hard and looked away, and I walked down the street to my car. As I pulled away, she was still standing alone on the porch in darkness.
A favorite parlor game in Baltimore these days, best undertaken with bourbon, is to enumerate the various errors and blunders in the Freddie Gray trials. The most common mistake you hear attributed to Mosby is that she overcharged in the indictments, trying to establish such a profound degree of blame that it was impossible to prove. This is an accusation you hear everywhere around town, but it strikes me as the least compelling, because it overlooks the reality that prosecutors often overcharge as a matter of process, and that it’s standard procedure in a criminal case to begin with the most extreme indictment that can be squeezed under the rubric of probable cause. As the case proceeds and the standard of proof rises, the arc of a case is often a matter of prosecutors tailoring those early claims down.
To my mind, the more troubling aspect of the trials is the litany of small, strange choices that aggregated until you had to wonder what prosecutors were thinking. For example, in Maryland, a criminal defendant has the right to decide whether he wants to face a judge or a jury. When a police officer is charged with a criminal offense, she enjoys the same basic rights. Pretty much anyone in Baltimore can tell you that a cop will get more sympathy from the average judge than the average jury, so it was no surprise when most of the officers asked for a bench trial. Except that it did appear to bother Mosby, who has insisted that the officers shouldn’t be allowed to make that choice. Mosby told me she believes that the right to a trial by jury is so basic to the American system that the defense and the prosecution should have to agree before it can be waived. That’s how the system works in federal court and some other states. If the Freddie Gray case had taken place in Atlanta, for example, a prosecutor could have forced the police officers to face a jury. As it happened, the trials took place in Baltimore.
On the other hand, the level of intransigence that Mosby says she encountered from the Police Department is troubling. Especially if the officers planted an informant in the van to suggest that Gray injured himself, as Mosby suspected, and if investigators failed to execute a search warrant for the text messages. Allen, by the way, has retracted his original statements about Gray banging his head, and he denies being an informant. Mosby so distrusted the process, from top to bottom, that she did not inform the mayor of her decision to press charges until a few minutes before she announced it to the world. “I called her five minutes before, and I said, ‘I’m giving you a heads-up,’ ” she said.
What has emerged, then, is a pair of irreconcilable narratives about the death of Gray — but a trial, by nature, tends to emphasize one. The prosecution crafts a detailed story about what may have happened, leaving the defense to respond in ­pieces along the way. But there is another complex narrative for the defense, another timeline to explain Gray’s death, which is endorsed by just about every cop in the city and many of the prosecutors who have left Mosby’s office. I find that narrative underwhelming for several reasons, one of which is that I believe the medical examiner’s conclusion that Gray’s injuries suggest homicide. It’s nevertheless useful to consider the alternate story, so I’ll try to present it as nearly as I can.
Imagine the scene for a moment. Here is Freddie Gray. He’s standing on the corner in a pair of bluejeans and a light jacket over a black Lacoste T-shirt. Let’s say he’s holding a few pills of dope, or let’s just say he’s selling them, when a pair of cops roll up on bicycles and Gray takes off.
Maybe the van driver has his own agenda, or maybe Gray is simply in the back of a wagon bouncing through the cratered streets of West Baltimore. Either way, by the time he comes out, he’s in critical condition. We know from the autopsy that the way he was dragging his legs wasn’t substantiated by any known injury. Cops will tell you that after faking a medical calamity, Gray gave himself a real one inside the wagon.
Mosby likes to say that even without convictions, the trials have done more good than she could have hoped. The Police Department has installed cameras inside vans and adopted new requirements for the use of force and the provision of medical care. Two weeks after Mosby dropped the remaining charges, the Justice Department released a blistering review of the discriminatory practices of the Baltimore police; under federal scrutiny, the department is likely to implement a raft of reforms. But the most important impact of the trials may be in the way future investigations of the police unfold. This month, Mosby plans to introduce, with a consortium of other prosecutors from around the country, a set of five recommendations that would give prosecutors more independence and authority to investigate the police.
Still, in the case of Freddie Gray, the uncomfortable truth remains that if, like Mosby, you believe that a man was killed by police negligence, you must also accept that the officers accused of killing him went free. The question that lingers around Mosby, then, is really one of shading: whether the failure to convict was a result of her own mistakes or of the larger forces arrayed against her. Whether, that is, the fatal error was personal or systemic, whether it was pride or destiny that stopped her, whether the tragedy is Shakespearean or Greek.
Marilyn told me that she and Nick had never talked openly about the distance, but as dinner wound down in my kitchen, it came up.
Nick turned to Marilyn. “Our strength has always been working together,” he said.
“Chasm,” Nick said.
“A chasm between us,” she said.
Marilyn looked surprised. “Like you mean the damage has been done?” she asked.
“It’s just like, that’s what the relationship is now,” he said.
There was a long silence, and I realized that when you looked at the fallout from Gray’s death — the devastation to his family, the eruption of the city, the polarizing trials and dismissed charges, the rift between cops and prosecutors and the surging violence — the scars were everywhere in this city, but it sometimes seemed as if the only public figure who had really suffered for his death, who put her career and private life on the line, whether right or wrong, the elected official who paid the highest price was the one who set out to make sure someone did.