Targeting people with individualized TV commercials using cable or satellite boxes has been promoted as the future of television for at least a decade. But the business, known as addressable TV advertising, has remained on the fringes, usually limited to two minutes of local commercial time an hour on cable shows.
Now, AT&T and Time Warner are pointing to targeted advertising as a major benefit of their proposed $85 billion merger. Jeffrey L. Bewkes, the chief executive of Time Warner, and Randall L. Stephenson, AT&T’s chief executive, highlighted the vast trove of consumer data their combined companies would have in a call with investors on Monday, and its usefulness for both marketers and consumers.
Viewers, with new subscription options, could enjoy fewer interruptions and see ads for “the products you’re interested in, not the ones you don’t need to see,” Mr. Bewkes said. National advertisers would presumably pay more to reach them and have an alternative to spending on Google and Facebook.
Targeted advertising has become commonplace on streaming services like Hulu or platforms like YouTube, where, for example, women in their 20s may see ads for birth control, pregnancy tests or certain movie trailers. Advertisers hope things could potentially move even beyond that on TV, with people seeing ads based on, for instance, their location or individual interests, much like what happens on the internet. Still, skepticism over whether the AT&T-Time Warner merger will normalize the practice for traditional TV is rife within the ad industry.
Tailored advertising is a generally accepted part of the internet experience — consumers see it daily on Facebook or through banner ads, where it has become common for a specific shirt or bag placed in an online shopping cart to haunt a person for weeks, even after it has been purchased. But traditional TV has largely continued to advertise in broad swaths, showing ads to demographics like 18- to 49-year-old men.
Rishad Tobaccowala, chief strategist for the Publicis Groupe, questioned whether new targeting capabilities could improve the health of the TV ad business over all, pointing to this season’s reduction in commercials on “Saturday Night Live” and the drop in ratings for National Football League games.
“The reality of it is, we’re moving into a world where consumers are turning against advertising,” Mr. Tobaccowala said.
Stephen B. Burke, chief executive of NBCUniversal, speaking on Comcast’s earnings call on Wednesday, said that the TV group has been working to developing advanced advertising products but that the process was difficult.
Others see great potential for advertising in the merger, which would marry AT&T’s more than 100 million subscribers across its wireless, broadband and DirecTV properties, with Time Warner’s offerings, which include CNN, TBS, Cartoon Network, the website Bleacher Report, HBO and Warner Bros. Pictures. On Tuesday at WSJD, a technology conference organized by The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Stephenson said that, starting next month, the company would offer a 100-channel internet-based premium television service that would cost $35 a month and allow people to watch video on their mobile phones and other devices.
Rob Norman, chief digital officer of WPP’s GroupM, a major media investment group, said the success of targeted advertising would hinge on cost. He offered the example of a home improvement business advertising grass seed in places like Arizona and Montana, which have significantly different climates. That advertising could be further tailored for whether viewers lived in a condominium versus a suburban home with a lawn, he said.
The biggest change is that television “has evolved to being more fluid and digital-like,” as it appears on devices like phones and tablets and streams through accessories like Roku and Apple TV, Mr. Hanlon said.
Dave Morgan, the founder and chief executive of Simulmedia, which works with advertisers on targeted TV ads, said a combined AT&T and Time Warner could narrow the average price gap between cable ads and more expensive digital video ads by establishing a uniquely “high degree of coordination” between a distributor, programmer and sales systems for digital and traditional video.
“I don’t think it’s going to be a magic silver bullet, but I do think a combination like this is going to accelerate better, more data-driven TV ads,” Mr. Morgan said. Outside of targeting, he said, that could also mean frequency capping, so that people do not see the same ads over and over again, better retargeting and improved measurement.
AT&T AdWorks, the company’s advertising division, said it did not use its mobile location and other mobile data for products out of that unit. The company declined to say whether that would change.
