For positive proof that in certain realms of theater, we have moved firmly beyond political correctness, see “Vietgone,” a raucous comedy by Qui Nguyen that strafes just about every subject it tackles and every character it presents. Sure, sometimes it wobbles uncertainly between satire and sentiment, but Mr. Nguyen’s fresh and impish voice rarely lets up as he thumbs his nose at our expectations.
This voice, the playwright reminds us, is more or less the opposite of the Asian one of stereotype, as in: “Herro! Prease to meeting you! I so Asian!” The Americans in the play, he adds, will speak like this: “Yee-haw! Get ’er done! Cheeseburger, waffle fries, cholesterol!” They do indeed.
Mr. Nguyen nails, rather smartly, the dissonance of immigration, which runs both ways — the Americans and the Vietnamese in the play are almost always misunderstanding one another — as well as the hegemony of the majority over the minority, as both are represented in the dominant culture.
Yo, as Tong might say, that sounds fancy! More plainly put: In life, it’s the minorities who are subjected to stereotyping; Mr. Nguyen gleefully reverses that here.
Mr. Nguyen, a co-founder of the downtown theater troupe Vampire Cowboys, is clearly a playwright with an inventive mind, and while “Vietgone” has many pleasures — including jazzy comic performances from an excellent cast, several in multiple roles, under May Adrales’s direction — it suffers from a lack of discipline. Scenes drag on longer than they need to — reams of dialogue could be cut with no loss — so that its strengths are sometimes blurred.
Jennifer Ikeda and Paco Tolson in a scene from Qui Nguyen’s show.
Quang, meanwhile, a pilot fighting for the South, is arguing with his best friend, Nhan (Jon Hoche), about whether they should hire hookers, until Quang’s wife, Thu (Samantha Quan), shows up. He’s miffed that she has not brought their two children, since he hasn’t seen them in months. But both Quang and his family, and Tong and Giai, are separated when Saigon falls.
But can we make a new life now that our old lives are done?
Her mother, Huong (Ms. Quan), is none too impressed, either. “I thought everything would be super-nice here in America,” she complains, noting the spare barracks they live in. “That’s sorta what they advertise,” she cracks.
“Vietgone” contains a sprinkling of such preachiness. It also tends to sprawl, with the chronology becoming confusing. But the vibrancy of the performances, and the stylish production — the set by Tim Mackabee pops with color and life —generally keep the more obvious or repetitive passages from becoming draggy.
Ms. Ikeda’s aggressive Tong is a particular pleasure, bluntly propositioning Quang soon after they meet. Mr. Lee brings biting force to Quang’s angry raps about his desire to return home. Other cast members play multiple roles persuasively, with Ms. Quan having fun with Huong, cranky but not above making her own lascivious moves on Quang (before he’s met her daughter).
Broadly speaking, “Vietgone” examines the consequences of the choices the characters made or the fates that were forced upon them. But even these sobering issues are mostly treated in Mr. Nguyen’s elbow-in-the-ribs style. (I wasn’t surprised to read in his bio that he currently writes for Marvel Studios.) There’s no rule, of course, that serious subjects cannot be approached in a subversively comic manner, but with the harsh experience of refugees a topic of obvious momentousness today, the flippant tone of “Vietgone” does sometimes pall.
Still, proving he is not straitjacketed into his style, Mr. Nguyen also includes darker moments, as in a nightmare sequence when Tong envisions the carnage left behind in Vietnam. And the play ends with an immensely moving scene between the playwright character and his father.
Lifting his foot from the pedal of irreverence, Mr. Nguyen depicts them as they try to reconcile the perceptions of the war that divided families and generations, both in America and in Vietnam. The laughter subsides; the play’s flaws recede; and we are left with a resonantly ambiguous picture of the manner in which wars, and the tides of refugees they often result in, have an indelible impact on individual lives.