It’s never easy to be a diva, but the Metropolitan Opera’s production of Janacek’s “Jenufa,” a stirring revival of which opened on Friday, comes with a special challenge: A singer has to hold her own against the rock.
The massive rock, that is, that looms over this staging’s second act — the physical manifestation of the blockages between the tortured characters in Janacek’s Moravian village, of their secrets and lies.
And the woman who has to do the most concerted battle for dominance with the stone? The Kostelnicka, the village’s self-appointed moral guardian, whose decision to kill her stepdaughter’s out-of-wedlock child to save the family from disgrace sets in motion a frenzy of guilt — and, eventually, one of the most moving scenes of forgiveness in all opera.
Once you learn that the Kostelnicka is being sung at the Met by the galvanic Finnish soprano Karita Mattila, her victory over the rock — indeed, the near-impossibility of looking at anything onstage except her — is unsurprising. Ms. Mattila, 56, has spent a career being the vibrating, riveting center of most any opera in which she’s cast, her gales of sound particularly well suited to hysteria.
The soprano performs an aria from Act II of Janacek’s opera, at the Met through Nov. 17.
Appearing at the Met after a four-year absence, her strategy here is not to beat the boulder, but to become it. The weight on the Kostelnicka’s shoulders — the threat to her reputation, which prompts her horrifying crime, followed by the shame of the aftermath — permeates Ms. Mattila’s posture, her back stonily rigid except when it collapses, more and more as the performance progresses, under her emotional burden.
I assure you it’s a compliment when I say that her voice, too, evokes the rock: dragged down, parched. If rasping could somehow be evoked musically, and beautifully, Ms. Mattila has done it.
At the end of the second act, the terrified Kostelnicka imagines freezing winds whipping through her house, but by that point, icy blasts have been emanating from Ms. Mattila’s throat all evening. Olivier Tambosi’s production, with sets by Frank Philipp Schlössmann, smartly pares down this visceral work — as close as opera gets to Arthur Miller — to its starkest natural elements, and Ms. Mattila, too, is a bare, implacable force of nature.
A decade ago at the Met, she sang the title role in “Jenufa,” long a specialty of hers, opposite the great Anja Silja as the Kostelnicka: a devastating, unforgettable performance. While Ms. Mattila’s Kostelnicka (a part she first took on earlier this year) is coruscating, she does not have quite a worthy partner in this revival.
As Jenufa, Oksana Dyka’s high notes soared out on Friday, but elsewhere her voice could grow acidic, and her presence was awkward, radiating neither sunniness nor desperation. As Steva, who impregnates Jenufa, Joseph Kaiser sang with hearty authority; Daniel Brenna had punchy power as his hapless half brother Laca, who ends up with her.
David Robertson led a sleekly heated performance of Janacek’s surging score, capped by its glowing sequence of truth and reconciliation. Hanna Schwarz, a mezzo-soprano legend, summoned penetrating sound and a weighty presence in the small part of Grandmother Burya. But the rock of this performance was Ms. Mattila.