Crosswords & Games|Would You Bet Against Your Candidate?
Would You Bet Against Your Candidate?
Would you ever bet against your favorite sports team? Or your preferred presidential candidate? This kind of emotional hedge makes sense: if your side loses, your disappointment will be partly offset by your financial gain. But would you actually place this bet?
In this week’s challenge, suggested by Carey Morewedge of Boston University, we take this on as a thought experiment with a very real upcoming presidential election.
As of today, The Times’s presidential poll forecast gives Hillary Clinton roughly a 90 percent chance of winning, and Donald J. Trump a 10 percent chance.
Let’s say you are offered two options: You can receive $10 if Mrs. Clinton wins, or $90 if Mr. Trump wins. Which option would you choose — the one that paid out if your candidate won, or the won that paid if your candidate lost? And why would you make this choice?
 Why or why not?
That concludes our challenges for the week. For more about the logic of emotional hedging, check out Carey’s “Why You Should Bet Against Your Candidate” (related academic paper here).
“My office mate (Todd Rogers) and I bet on the 2004 election. I bet $50 against John Kerry, despite being a strong supporter of him. Todd told me I was a terrible human being for betting against John Kerry (but accepted my bet anyway). Afterward, I became curious why Todd — who is familiar with the logic suggesting that we should bet our candidates to lose — felt I was so awful. Then I met up with Rick [Larrick] and Simone [Tang] at a conference, and discovered that they too had been working on the same problem for some time.
Check back on Friday for a recap of the week’s discussion by Carey More wedge.
To all who enjoy puzzles, math and magic: The Celebration of Mind, an international event inspired by the recreational mathematician Martin Gardner, will be taking place around the world over the next several weeks.
After Mr. Gardner’s death in 2010, his friends and readers began the tradition of hosting events on or around his birthday, Oct. 21. Since then there have been hundreds of Celebrations from Helsinki to Antarctica, Bombay to Silicon Valley, sharing in Mr. Gardner’s many interests, including math puzzles, logic puzzles, hexaflexagons and Möbius strips, magic and card tricks, and visual paradoxes.
Join an event near you (check out the event map for locations) or set up your own (puzzle and game ideas here). For more information, visit the Celebration of Mind website.