1. “Stop whining.” Those were President Obama’s words for Donald Trump as he called on the Republican candidate to stop trying to “discredit the elections” before any votes were even cast, as Mr. Trump has done in recent days.
Mr. Obama met with Prime Minister Matteo Renzi of Italy, above, at the White House.
Our model gives Hillary Clinton a 92 percent chance to win. Our election podcast, The Run-Up, considers how much of the election is still uncertain.
The candidates meet in Las Vegas on Wednesday night for their last debate, which will include questions on immigration and the Supreme Court.
2. In Iraq, President Obama’s doctrine of aiding other countries militarily rather than leading every fight is facing its greatest test yet.
The campaign to retake Mosul from the Islamic State will help define the president’s efforts to take the U.S. off the front lines of the counterterrorism war.
Our reporting team sent this account of how Kurdish forces advanced toward ISIS-held villages by moonlight.
3. Ecuador announced that it had cut off Julian Assange’s access to the internet in his exile in the country’s embassy in London, making it clear that it feared the country was being sucked into an effort to “interfere in electoral processes” in the United States by the activities of the Wikleaks founder.
4. What does Bob Dylan think about winning the Nobel Prize in Literature? The Swedish Academy doesn’t know. It hasn’t spoken with him.
Mr. Dylan has played two concerts since the announcement, but hasn’t made any comment about the prize or said whether he’ll attend the ceremony in Stockholm in December.
5. A Wall street trader who earned millions making bets in commodities markets says a 68-year-old art professor swindled him out of more than half a million dollars.
Andrew Hall had been using his fortune to start a small art museum. Among the works he bought were 24 paintings by Leon Golub, an American postwar painter of expressionistic, heroic-scale figures. Except then, he said, he realized they weren’t.
Above, “Two Heads,” which sold at auction for $31,250 as a Leon Golub work.
6. Pearl Jam and Tupac Shakur, seen above about two years before he was shot and killed, are among 19 nominees for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Inductees will be announced in December, and the ceremony will be held in April, with excerpts broadcast on HBO.
7. David Letterman seems to be enjoying his retirement.
After 33 years in the public eye, he has spent the last 18 months reacquainting himself with normal life — shopping at Target, hanging out with his son — and traveling for a documentary on climate change.
His voluminous beard, he says, serves as a reminder that he’s entered a new phase.
8. The Los Angeles Dodgers defeated the Chicago Cubs, 6-0, in Game 3 of their National League Championship Series in California. The Dodgers lead in the series, 2-1.
Above, Yasmani Grandal is cheered as he passes by the Cubs starting pitcher, Jake Arrieta, after hitting a two-run homer in the fourth inning.
The Toronto Blue Jays beat the Cleveland Indians, 5-1, in Game 4 of the American League Championship Series in Canada. The Indians lead the series, 3-1.
9. Skeletons from ancient settlements in the Near East are providing a glimpse of one of the most important transitions in human history: the agricultural revolution.
Scientists using new methods of DNA analysis found that people from Ireland to India trace some of their ancestry to the first farmers.
10. Google’s first smartphone, the Pixel, arrives in stores Thursday, in good time for the holiday season — and the fallout from the Samsung Galaxy Note 7 debacle.
Our tech critic says it’s relatively mediocre, but at least it won’t burst into flames.
11. Finally, it’s a golden age for baking in Britain.
“The Great British Bake Off,” a wildly popular weekly reality show, has fundamentally changed the country’s kitchens.
More people are baking at home and pursuing careers as professional pastry chefs, and the multicultural roster of contestants has put forward a contemporary, inclusive vision of Britishness.
If you want to get in on the craze, here’s a recipe and video on how to make a classic tea cake.
