SÃO PAULO, Brazil — Federal prosecutors filed new corruption charges on Monday against Brazil’s former president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, raising pressure on him and his family over dealings in Angola, the oil-rich country where Brazilian companies have aggressively raised their profile over the last decade.
The charges are the latest blow to Mr. da Silva, 70, who has been one of Latin America’s most influential politicians. In the scandal around the national oil company, Petrobras, he is already facing two separate trials on obstruction charges and charges that he illegally benefited from ties to O.A.S., a Brazilian construction company.
Opening a new legal front against Mr. da Silva, who was president from 2003 to 2010, prosecutors said that he helped the Brazilian engineering giant Odebrecht obtain lucrative contracts in Angola that benefited Taiguara Rodrigues, the nephew of Mr. da Silva’s first wife.
In addition to the charges related to Mr. da Silva’s time as president, prosecutors said that he continued seeking advantages for Odebrecht in the form of coveted financing from Brazil’s national development bank for projects in Angola, a former Portuguese colony controlled by José Eduardo dos Santos, one of Africa’s longest-ruling leaders.
In return, the prosecutors said that Odebrecht paid large sums to Mr. da Silva for speeches in recent years while also financially helping the former president’s brother, José Ferreira da Silva, in the form of paying for his private health insurance and gasoline.
While a judge still needs to accept the charges for Mr. da Silva to go on trial in this case, the move by prosecutors adds to his mounting troubles and those of his leftist Workers’ Party. Voters across Brazil turned against the party in municipal elections this month.
Despite such reversals, Mr. da Silva, who is universally known as Lula, still ranks among the leading contenders ahead of the presidential election in 2018. Many voters remember him fondly for expanding programs that lifted millions into the middle class, before the impeachment and ouster this year of his successor, Dilma Rousseff.
Mr. da Silva’s lawyers argued on Monday, as the former leader himself repeatedly has done in recent months, that prosecutors were politically biased. Mr. da Silva has also insisted that he did nothing illegal as president or after he left office.
“Prosecutors want Lula out of the next election,” Cristiano Zanin Martins, a lawyer for Mr. da Silva, said at a news conference.
Mr. da Silva is not the only politician on edge over ties to Odebrecht. Brazilian news organizations are reporting that executives from the construction giant are in talks to forge a leniency deal in which they would divulge bribes and kickbacks for dozens of political leaders from across the ideological spectrum.
Marcelo Odebrecht, the company’s former chief executive and one of Brazil’s richest men, is already serving a 19-year sentence for his conviction on corruption and money laundering charges. Prosecutors charged him again on Monday in the Angola case, claiming he oversaw illegal payments for Mr. da Silva and his two family members.