Unless, of course, that man is Donald Trump.
Out of the nine presidential campaigns I’ve covered, I’ve never seen anything as absurd as the motley crew of Trump advisers agonizing over how to delicately, in soothing tones, tiptoe up to the proudly uninformed megalomaniac and broach the topic of more rigorous debate prep. Or, even more hilariously, trick him into practicing for the second contest so he doesn’t repeat his oblivious shame spiral.
In a country roiling with fears about terrorism, race relations and economic inequality, Trump managed to get fixated on the fact that a former Miss Universe gained a few pounds — and to gnaw on that issue for a week after leaving Hofstra, while mainlining bacon cheeseburgers. And this weekend, Trump was ensnared in another sensational story about the lascivious way he talks about women.
The denizens of Trumpworld — and furious and flummoxed Republicans — are dealing with a highchair king who gets huffy when he sees his advisers and allies acknowledging the obvious on TV: that he struggled in the first debate and that he should cease the self-immolating, misogynistic 3 a.m. tweets.
In Trump’s alternate universe, he is always the winner. If he’s not, the system is rigged, the mike is faulty, the media is biased. Narcissists can see themselves only in a fun-house mirror, either larger or smaller than they really are at any given moment, so it is impossible for others to convey a true picture to them.
Members of his team still couldn’t get Trump to do a full-on mock debate, so they lured him up to Sandown, N.H., for a town hall with a two-minute countdown clock that could get him used to the format.
But Trump pulled a Brechtian move, breaking the fourth wall and informing the audience — on two different occasions — that no matter what his staff members had in mind, he did not consider it a rehearsal.
Even with softballs from a friendly audience, like, “What is one of your earliest memories as a child?,” Trump got distracted by bright, shiny media objects.
He trashed CNBC’s John Harwood and CNN’s John King for suggesting that he was upset that Mike Pence got better debate reviews by acting like a normal Republican and gliding over some of Trump’s wackadoodle stances. This, even though you know the trending words “Mike Pence 2020” must drive Trump mad.
We will soon see if Mogul, as he has been dubbed by the Secret Service, will once more take the shiny snares thrown out by Hillary and her crack team of psychologists.
Trump will brook no intense training and mock debates. But, as The Times’s Jonathan Martin and Alexander Burns report, Trump did allow Chris Christie — who prosecuted Marco Rubio so harshly in a debate that Rubio went into a robotic “Westworld”-style malfunction — to try to toughen his thin skin by tossing out some antagonistic questions.
It seems wildly self-destructive not to prepare for debates that will shape not only his future, and the future of his brand, but also the future of his alleged party.
Yet for the A.D.D. Trump, it seems to be part of the thrill to wing it. His preferred mode when I have interviewed him over the years is the lightning round, where he swiftly offers short opinions on a range of subjects. That format doesn’t work so well in a presidential race.
Given that Trump has dubbed so many women dogs, there’s poetic justice in comparing him to one.
On Friday afternoon, The Washington Post’s David Fahrenthold, who has been tormenting Trump on ethical issues with Trump’s foundation, tormented the candidate on another vulnerable area: his history of crude remarks about women.
But when he got hit by The Washington Post’s story, he couldn’t help himself. He went straight to Bill Clinton and women.
Throw a tennis ball, the black Lab goes after it. But it’s not fair to compare Trump to a dog. Dogs are awesome.