342 pp. Flatiron Books. $25.99.
I took “The Guineveres” on vacation, and a friend asked what I was reading. I said it was a novel about four girls, all named Guinevere, each abandoned at the same convent by their parents. She said, “O.K., I’m in.” I’m not very good at choosing beach reads — put on the spot, I once recommended an 800-page novel, and that’s too heavy to hold over your face as you lie in the sun. “The Guineveres,” Sarah Domet’s deft and lovely debut, is the perfect weight, in all ways. It’s suitable for a vacation, and you can describe it in one inviting line, but then it keeps unfolding and deepening, taking unexpected turns.
The novel opens with an attempt by the teenage Guineveres to break out of the convent of the Sisters of the Supreme Adoration. They build a hollow parade float to escape in, a two-fingered victory sign made of chicken wire and colored tissue paper, “one finger away from the other universal symbol we wished to offer the convent upon our departure.” The nuns declare the float to be a hand of benediction, the first hint that the girls’ bid for self-determination might fail.
Their plot foiled, the girls are sentenced to work in the convent’s sick ward, where they encounter five comatose, unidentified soldiers, “whose wounds were so deep you could smell it on them, even outside in the courtyard, a dusty metallic scent that made us take such short breaths we felt woozy.” The men have been injured in “the War,” and their dog tags are missing. One wakes, and remembers his name. His tearful family arrive, and another, older girl leaves to be his nurse. The Guineveres, who had been revolted by the men’s injuries, recognize a new chance to break free. If they can identify their charges, or wake them up, the families will be summoned and the girls can go home with them to tend their sons.
Vere, the first Guinevere to arrive at the convent, is the primary narrator, and the most taken with tales of martyrdom and extreme faith. Ginny, frail, with wild red hair, “liked to think of herself as an artist — not so much a person who created art as a person who was misunderstood. When she felt things, she felt them deeply.” Smoky-voiced Win is the strongest physically, and the least sentimental about her soldier. Gwen is the beauty and knows it, rubbing beets on her lips to redden them, flirting with the hapless resident priest. Their “revival stories,” as they call the circumstances that led their parents to give them up, “those moments when our eyes really opened to the truth,” are told in their own voices. Together they create a substitute family, and each has a different response to their plight.
Intercut with their collective story are Vere’s retellings of the lives of the saints. These chapters emerge as examples, often gory, of women rejecting the meager possibilities offered to them — forced marriage, circumscribed existence — in a desperate search for something more exalted, a greater purpose.
Viewed from within the convent walls, the outer world seems hazy in its details. The War is “a continent away,” and the girls want to escape to “the city.” As in Vere’s versions of the martyrdom of the saints, the world outside exists mostly as an abstraction, even when the girls’ escape plans begin to work. But inside the walls, a vivid, pungent, complex universe hums. And for Vere, the inner life of the passions is where the extraordinary and miraculous events occur.