OTTAWA — The head of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police struggled to keep his composure as he publicly apologized Thursday to hundreds of women who were bullied, sexually harassed or discriminated against as officers or employees of the force.
Commissioner Bob Paulson’s remarks were part of a settlement of two class-action lawsuits that will also include more than 100 million Canadian dollars in compensation to the women.
The settlement, which is subject to court approval, covers claims going back to 1974, when women were first allowed to become officers in the national police force.
Commissioner Paulson’s tenure has been clouded as a growing number of women have described mistreatment. Some said male officers had not responded to their calls for backup. Several said they had received suggestive communications or found sex toys on their desks. At least one senior officer was accused of exposing himself to a female colleague when they were traveling in a police cruiser.
Many of the women abandoned their police careers. Several of those who remained said they had been harmed psychologically.
Linda Gillis Davidson, one of the lead plaintiffs, once worked in the group that protects the prime minister. She said she had repeatedly received unwanted sexual advances and been harassed during her 27 years on duty.
“I love my flag, I love my country and I loved my job — I left way too early,” Ms. Davidson said on Thursday before thanking Commissioner Paulson. “It takes a great person to acknowledge something wrong,” she told him.
Some of the allegations are relatively recent, leaving open the question of how Commissioner Paulson will prevent future misconduct.
Last year, legislation gave him additional powers to fire officers involved in sexual misconduct, and a new process for harassment complaints was introduced.
But the number of complaints suggests that the force, which is still run somewhat on paramilitary lines, must resolve pervasive problems in its internal culture.
Michel Bastarache, a retired Supreme Court of Canada justice, will oversee an independent process to settle the claims.