Vertamae Smart-Grosvenor’s Onion PieCredit...Davide Luciano for The New York Times. Food stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Alex Brannian.
She would go on to travel the world with bags of dried black-eyed peas in her suitcase, but when Vertamae Smart-Grosvenor was 19, living in a hotel on the Left Bank, she wasn’t yet in the habit. She hadn’t imagined that in Paris she’d have trouble finding something as vital as black-eyed peas.
But she did. And because Smart-Grosvenor wasn’t just a brilliant cook but also a writer, she knew how to turn an unsuccessful trip to the grocery store into a tale about identity and blackness, about superstition and appetite, about who she was and who she was becoming (a woman who packed her own dang black-eyed peas).
The answer was yes, always yes. Smart-Grosvenor thought of cooking as creative work, right up there with making music and art. In Paris, starting in the late 1950s, she made what she liked, which was home cooking from her actual home as well as all over the world — smothered rabbit and cornmeal mush, salade niçoise and feijoada. She cooked for James Baldwin, David Bowie, Nina Simone, Miles Davis. When she published her first cookbook, “Vibration Cooking, or the Travel Notes of a Geechee Girl,” in 1970, Smart-Grosvenor was 33.
I didn’t know food writing could sound like that, is what I thought, over and over, the first time I read it. It was a cookbook, sure, but all the way through, Smart-Grosvenor shifted from memoir to recipe, often without breaking the flow of a sentence. She embroidered her stories with politics, sarcasm, romance and family mythology, defining the food-memoir genre as we now know it.
Paris was still a kind of magic because Smart-Grosvenor loved the theater, and she had been mesmerized by the work of Josephine Baker, but her andouillette story (and her black-eyed peas story; she found them eventually) was about how Europe, and whiteness, simply wasn’t the most important frame of reference, culinary or otherwise. In her own stories, she was right at the center, where she belonged.
Smart-Grosvenor had two children and married twice. In 1977, when Ebony magazine asked why she hadn’t married again, she said, “I want to be excellent in everything I do.” She did a lot: acted in films, sang backup for Sun Ra, reported for NPR. She landed on the cover of Jet magazine. She wrote poetry and hosted an award-winning cooking show on PBS.
Vertamae Smart-Grosvenor died last month, at 79. That day, all I wanted was to hear her voice. In my kitchen, I leaned a speaker in an open cupboard and listened to some old NPR segments of hers while I did dishes and poked around for ingredients. Her voice came in so clear, reporting from Daufuskie Island, or talking with Alice Walker in her home. She explained her method for making a collard-green sandwich with prosciutto, thinly sliced onion and tomato, which sounded perfect, but I didn’t have any tomatoes.
She said to let the onions become translucent, which was pretty straightforward: I was careful not to let them brown. But I wondered if by a “hot oven” she meant 350 or 400 degrees. And should the pastry be blind-baked? I muddled my way through and ended up with a plain, beautiful pie that tasted even better the next day, chilled, when the custard turned creamy and dense and the onions mellowed.
