Updated from the print version to include news of an audio tape of Donald Trump.
DONALD TRUMP is a succulent target for an investigative reporter. He never lived like a man who planned to seek public office. He has a boundless disregard for the ramrod discipline that makes other candidates hard to pierce. And his life has endless facets — women, casinos, bankruptcies, universities, charities, even a “birther” movement.
The question for journalists at The New York Times and elsewhere wasn’t whether to start digging but where to begin — and when. Using a SWAT team of investigative reporters, The Times this year has gone after both Trump and his emissaries, including a piece in August that helped force out the Trump campaign manager, Paul Manafort, over lobbying work he’d done in Ukraine.
Most of the paper’s investigative resources, however, were trained on Trump the businessman, since he was pressing the case that his acumen in this realm made him the superior choice for the presidency.
A Trump administration promises a radical upheaval unlike anything this country has seen. And investigating the character and deeds of the man who would lead it should be a mandate of any great news institution. For The Times, there’s another reason accountability coverage matters: the postelection narrative on its performance will surely include a chapter on whether The Times took seriously the challenge that Trump posed.
At this point, few could seriously question whether the paper has applied enough investigative muscle to Hillary Clinton, to her emails, especially, and to her foundation. If anything, the question from readers seems always to be whether it did too much.
But how tough, thorough and rigorous has The Times been in investigating Trump? And has it been competitive against its peers?
If you look at every ambitious piece the paper’s done this year, as I have, it deserves high marks. I applaud the editors’ strategic decision to concentrate mostly on Trump’s business pedigree, a focus that laid bare his debt-soaked empire and his sometimes exploitive business practices. The Times wasn’t alone in investigating this subject, but it consistently delivered polished investigations that broke new ground.
That was all to the good — and voters who read even half of what The Times produced will go to the polls with a keen sense of Trump’s performance in the C-suite.
So where did The Times fall short? After an extensive look at its work and that of its competitors, I’d say on two fronts. Judging by its big enterprise work, it didn’t take Trump seriously enough when he was breaking from the Republican pack last year. And The Times let down its readers by not paying enough attention to an important line of investigative work being done by its chief competitor to the south, The Washington Post.
Retracing the arc of Trump’s rise demonstrates the first point. By early summer of last year, the real estate kingpin was surging in the polls, and by midsummer he had shot past Jeb Bush, the presumed standard-bearer, and most of his other rivals. Come fall, it was increasingly clear that, contrary to predictions, Trump wasn’t going to flame out. The others were.
But Times readers hoping for some accountability journalism on Trump back then may have felt unsatisfied. The Times started delivering a gold rush of investigative work beginning in January of this year and continuing through to last weekend’s blockbuster on Trump’s tax returns. But its offerings last fall — in the months leading up to the first primary voting — were relatively few. Mark Leibovich produced a colorful piece on Trump for the magazine and Jason Horowitz wrote a well-turned biographical piece last fall on the cloistered Queens neighborhood where Trump grew up. But both were features more than they were pieces holding Trump to account.
Meanwhile, many other news organizations were beginning to dig in. Politico had an early piece on Trump that examined his tactical approach to fighting town officials in Palm Beach, with themes of bullying that still echo today. The New Yorker’s Evan Osnos produced a penetrating look at the swelling political movement elevating Trump to dominance. And The Post, already in full investigative mode last fall, unloaded a series of pieces: on Trump University (The Times did its version in May); on Trump’s relationships with women (The Times did a far more-in depth piece in March) and on Trump’s casinos (The Times wrote on the subject last June.) Full disclosure: I spent most of my career at The Post.
This who-got-there-first rehash isn’t just about journalistic pride. It matters because voters in early primary states were preparing to hit the polls in February. Voters everywhere else were solidifying their views of a man they knew mostly from reality TV, and first impressions count. Yet Times investigative reporters were still at the gates while some competitors were out on the track.
Here’s where I come down. Through the breadth, depth and consistency of its work, The Times has produced an important investigative dossier on Trump that should stand up well to history. There have been weak spots, and competitors with their own powerful portfolio. But with just four weeks to go before Election Day, readers surely can’t blame The Times for failing to deliver the information they need. The rest is up to them.