CHICAGO — Baseball is the sport where it is all supposed to even out, where those blistering liners and broken-bat bloopers balance out in the ledger of the long run.
Perhaps this explains how the Chicago Cubs, on a 108-year run of hard luck and heartbreak, have beaten the San Francisco Giants in the first two games of their National League division series — through a proper accounting of things.
How else to explain the Cubs’ good fortune on Friday night when Javier Baez’s fly ball fought through the teeth of a wind to land in the basket that sits atop the ivy-covered outfield walls at Wrigley Field, depriving Angel Pagan from catching the home run that won the opener?
Or how else to elucidate the Cubs’ 5-2 victory on Saturday, the difference delivered not by the arms of their pitchers Kyle Hendricks and Travis Wood, but by their bats?
Hendricks produced a two-run single that built the lead, and Wood, who was in the game only because Hendricks was knocked out by a Pagan line drive, delivered the crowning blow — a home run deep into the left-field bleachers.
Those hits proved to be enough as five Cubs relievers held the Giants to just two hits over the final five and one-third innings, with closer Aroldis Chapman finishing them off in the ninth inning and sending the series to San Francisco with the Cubs needing just one victory to advance.
If there is some comfort for the Giants as they return home facing elimination, it is that they have Madison Bumgarner, their indomitable playoff ace, ready to go on Monday night. They also have a history to lean on, having won nine consecutive elimination games dating to 2012.
This series has turned on the smallest margins. Earlier in the day, Pagan considered how Baez’s home run, the difference in Friday’s 1-0 game, landed in the basket that was put in place years ago to catch cups of beer that would otherwise fall — accidentally or not — onto opposing outfielders.
On Saturday, even the Cubs’ misfortune did not result in a turn of their luck. When Hendricks, whose 2.13 E.R.A. was the best in the majors, was caught flush in the right forearm by Pagan’s line drive with two out in the fourth, it inflicted little damage. Though Hendricks was forced from the game, X-rays proved negative and revealed only a bruise.
Wood, the longest-tenured Cub, was summoned from the bullpen and struck out Conor Gillaspie to keep the Cubs lead at 4-2. He then grabbed a helmet, put on his batting glove and ripped the first pitch he saw from reliever George Kontos into the bleachers. As with Baez the night before, Wood was rewarded with a curtain call.
It continued a season of the absurd for Wood, who earlier this year made a game-saving catch while crashing into the ivy in left field. Saturday’s home run was the 10th of his career, and he was also credited with the victory.
There was no such hubris from Hendricks, the baby-faced Ivy League pitcher who was considered the worst hitter on his high school team and has improved only marginally since. He has 14 hits in three seasons in the majors.
But no matter: When Hendricks arrived at the plate in the second inning with the bases loaded, none out and the Cubs ahead by 1-0, he looped the first pitch into center field for a two-run single. The second run was made possible by an aggressive read from Baez, who correctly figured that the ball would drop in front of center fielder Denard Span.
While Hendricks’s departure was painful, Giants starter Jeff Samardjiza was knocked out in more conventional fashion. The number of hits Samardjiza allowed — six — was the same as the number of outs he recorded, and he was lifted for a pinch-hitter after two innings.
Samardzija was drafted by the Cubs and played a role in their rebuilding when he was sent to Oakland two years ago in a deal that brought back Addison Russell, who emerged as the Cubs’ All-Star shortstop this season. Samardzija’s familiarity with pitching at Wrigley Field was a factor in Manager Bruce Bochy’s choosing him to start Saturday over the left-hander Matt Moore, who will pitch in Game 4 if there is one.
Samardzija was asked Friday if there was anything he had gleaned from pitching seven seasons at Wrigley Field.
Insider knowledge, however, has not helped Samardzija, who has a 9.75 E.R.A. in three starts as a visitor at Wrigley Field.
Perhaps a return home to their own raucous fans will inspire the Giants to be a little sharper, to swing the bats better and to make the plays that the Cubs have mostly made in the first two games of the series. At the moment, the Giants can only hope that this series lasts long enough for those things to even out.