I sang in my college’s church choir every Sunday despite the occasional hangover. All that echo! The resounding nave wrung my heart out harder and better than any of the desiccated marijuana, clumsily mixed drinks or inept gropings of the nights before. We were Mormons and Baptists, Protestants who knew the Anglican hymns, Catholics who could translate the Latin, closeted baritones who were planning careers in music or the church or both.
As a young pianist I had been taught meticulously to disturb the silence of a well-insulated concert hall. Though I loved music, I didn’t have the temperament for performing. Even while banging out one of my favorite pieces, I shrank from the instrument. I heard the music as belonging to the instrument, not to me.
But in a choir, I can make sound, focus the mind, enjoy myself and forget myself, all at once. There is an old choristers’ adage that goes, “When the music is marked forte, sing so you can hear yourself; when it’s marked piano, sing so you can hear the others.” After enough practice, you can learn to feel the vibration in your skull and tell by the sensation whether your pitch is right, your timbre true. It is a kind of listening without hearing. Perhaps this combination of experiences is as common as what psychologists call flow, a state of complete absorption in an activity.
A choral group may possess unity, but that unity depends on the behaviors of its individuals. Church-basement practice rooms get hot and damp and full of exhalations. Heavy breathing inevitably skews sexual, and it was sexually interesting to sing in a collegiate church choir. There were some true believers there and some young, lost people who had been imperfectly absorbed into faiths that their former lives demanded of them. Their desires joined mine. Imagine a web of gazes all around the room: the baritones looking at the basses, the second sopranos all looking at, singing to, training their longing on the same lethally hot countertenor. Doubtless some of them were thinking of God.
I see the beauty in the sheet music and hear it in the recordings, but when I try to remember what it was like to sing my favorite pieces by Tallis, Byrd and Bach, I can’t; I was singing, not remembering. Twice, as an experiment, before important performances, one in Amsterdam and the other in New York, I concentrated on a single phrase in a piece, trained myself to pay attention in that moment and thus to remember something of the actual physical experience. I can still recall those two phrases, but it took great effort to lay down those mental records. It’s more pleasurable to sing without remembering, or to forget at the rate that I sing.
And anyone can forget like this: I have done it at Lincoln Center and Carnegie Hall, but I’ve been doing it since elementary school, when the performances involved holding up little cardboard signs. I don’t remember any other performance, out of decades of performances, because I had no self-consciousness during them. I’m not talking about shyness or self-doubt or any of those other near-synonyms of the word; I mean that I forgot myself. I forgot that I had a self. Accountability is a standard of adulthood; we drag our lives behind us; consequences accumulate. You said this, you did that. If you’re lucky, you develop a means of regular and temporary escape from perpetual self-awareness; if you’re very lucky, your escape hatch isn’t a habit that will eventually kill you.
 With a choir, you can take a breath and escape physically and metaphysically, occupying and occupied by the music. When you return to the rest of life, all that remains is an echo of overtone, a brief silence and then the applause. You’re back, and it’s as if you’ve skipped forward an hour in time, if it weren’t for the residue, that telltale joy, and the sense that some part of your life has been gladly surrendered. You know you were there, even if you weren’t completely, exactly there at all.
Singing with a choir is precisely the opposite of what I do in the rest of my life, which is to sign my name to things and speak to people who hold me responsible for what I say. I am obliged to affix my name to everything I do. Later, if I want to remove it, I cannot. But no one, not even the conductor, can sign their name alone to a choir. Thank heaven, thank heavenly song.