That bad and beautiful Susan Traherne is back in town, glowering and glamorous and hellbent on kicking the stuffing out of what ever’s left of the British Empire. Somehow, though, she seems more fragile than she did when New Yorkers first met her 34 years ago, and far less dangerous. Like many mavericks who once shocked the world, she has aged into a bit of a bore.
Reincarnated with equal parts limp hysteria and fashion-plate elegance by Rachel Weisz, Susan is the radioactively unhappy center of David Hare’s “Plenty,” which has been revived by David Leveaux at the Public Theater, where it was first seen in 1982. At that time, Susan was portrayed by Kate Nelligan, who had originated the part in London, and her arrival was heralded as the second coming of Hedda Gabler.
Like Ibsen’s doomed Hedda, Susan was perceived as a figure of fascinating and fatal perversity, a woman of wildly heroic longings amid oppressive and insular small-mindedness. Mr. Hare, one of the British theater’s most fervent chroniclers of his country’s moral failings, made his agent of destruction a former teenage courier for the French Resistance, unleashed in all her angry disillusionment onto the increasingly affluent and ideal-stripped England of the post-World War II era.
Nearly everyone who saw Ms. Nelligan’s blazing performance left the theater dazzled into near blindness. “Only a fool would hold his breath waiting to see a better performance this season,” Frank Rich wrote in The New York Times, hailing the play for its “explosive theatrical vision” and “tour de force” dialogue.
I would have to say that in the moments in which they appeared, I agreed with both these reviews. But on the basis of Mr. Leveaux’s curiously pallid production, which had its official (and delayed) opening on Sunday night, and Ms. Weisz’s performance, it is Mr. Canby’s verdict that stands. This “Plenty” feels as artificial and remote as a Mayfair melodrama from the 1920s.
Much of this has to do, surprisingly, with Ms. Weisz, an Oscar-winning actress who made her Broadway debut in Mike Nichols’s production of Harold Pinter’s “Betrayal” in 2013 and won an Olivier Award as Blanche DuBois in London. Her Susan is an arresting presence for sure, a vision both trenchant (those cheekbones!) and blurry (those soft-focused eyes!).
But when we first see her in half-light standing over the bloodied body of a naked man, she registers not as the femme fatale in the picture but the damsel in distress. She is reedlike, wavering and tremulous — a waif forever on the verge of a nervous breakdown — and she mostly inspires our protective instincts. Who could possibly be afraid of Susan Traherne?
This impression persists throughout the play, which presents Susan’s story as a chronology-fracturing portrait of a shattered world. Whether she’s a 17-year-old waiting for a parachute supply drop in the fields of occupied France; a diplomat’s wife wreaking savage havoc on a dinner party during the Suez Canal Crisis; or a young advertising whiz slumming it with a Cockney stud, our Susan is less fire-breathing dragon than skittish whippet.
Though she is known to raise her voice in furious and obscene invective and even brandish a gun (a souvenir of her freedom-fighting days), she never really registers as a serious threat. Nor does she break our hearts when her thoughts turn mistily to her young days of derring-do and her eyes glaze as she reminisces about falling parachutes and gallant young Britons.
Ms. Weisz seems as stranded in her role as the uncompromising Susan does in lucre-loving London. “What you are saying is nobody may speak, nobody may question,” she hisses at an opaquely polite bureaucrat. Yet such accusations feel limp, and your tendency isn’t to applaud Susan’s fiery (if misplaced) courage but to look away tactfully.
Mike Britton’s set, in which claustrophobia-inducing gray walls hint at eternal captivity, makes deft use of a revolving stage to usher us through the disjointed chapters of Susan’s life. Cast against type as Raymond Brock, the midlevel diplomat who loves and marries Susan, Corey Stoll provides some affecting flashes of self-awareness, although Brock’s adoration of his abusive wife never makes sense except as a form of masochism.
The dutiful if largely uninspired cast also includes Ken Barnett as a fellow Resistance veteran, LeRoy McClain as Susan’s disastrous Cockney fling, Emily Bergl as a bohemian pal and, most notably, Byron Jennings as Brock’s boss, who is less of a bureaucratic fool than he initially appears.
The performances by Mr. Jennings and Mr. Stoll embody what’s best in Mr. Hare’s play, the ways in which seeming archetypes surprise by not hewing to type. “Plenty” is by no means all black and white in its judgments.
Yet the grayness that envelops this production is less one of moral ambiguity than of hazy dramatic uncertainty. Standing out in crisp and vivid relief are the unfailingly soignée costumes that Jess Goldstein has devised for Susan.
Even at her most addled, Susan can be relied on to show up looking fabulous in what appear to be the latest, smartest little numbers from Dior or Chanel. Such stylishness offers the reassurance that though a woman and her world may be falling apart, chicness always soldiers on.