This week I’m devoting myself to “Rectify” and continuing my quest to find the perfect show to balance it out. “Rectify” is thoughtful, and sometimes crushing, and it lingers. Chasing it with photos from this Canadian guinea pig rescue has been helpful.
Have an amazing week, friends.
This one’s for you, “Westworld” fans. (What are you calling yourselves? Westies?) Monday’s sort of dead broadcast-wise this week, but if you’re craving more “Does that robot have feelings? Like, real feelings?” stories, try the British import “Humans,” which aired on AMC last year.
Based on a Swedish series, “Humans” is set in the very near future, where humanoid “synths” are now providing unskilled labor (at least in Britain). One such synth is, of course, developing sentience. There’s a “Black Mirror” feel to the show — in a good way, not a hectoring way — and some well-articulated domestic drama. A second season airs in Britain next week and should make its way to the United States in 2017. In the meantime, these eight episodes should provide ample intrigue and allure.
Matt LeBlanc stars as a dad who has to actually be a parent when his wife goes back to work. It’s so hard for him. Because he is a man. Men can’t make snacks! Dads can’t be present in their children’s lives! How will he, a man, ever be able to pick children up from school? That’s women’s work!
This biodoc, which came out in theaters this summer, is a solid overview of Lear’s influence and impact, though it drifts more into hagiography than genuine exploration. Ironically, the doc seems to gloss over the thornier aspects of its story, particularly the conflict between Lear and the stars of “Good Times,” especially John Amos and Esther Rolle, who objected to what they saw as racist caricatures.
It’s the Chicago Cubs at the Cleveland Indians, a phrase I never thought I’d live to type. The last time the Cubs won a World Series was 1908; the last time Cleveland won was 1948. History! Expect to hear the phrase “bigger than baseball” bandied about an awful lot.
This is the fourth and final season premiere, and as much as I’d love to welcome more folks into the “Rectify” fold as quickly as possible, you absolutely need to start at the beginning. Which you can! It’s on Netflix. And there are only 22 episodes in the previous three seasons.
The show centers on Daniel (Aden Young), who has just been released from prison on the basis of new DNA evidence, having spent nearly 20 years on death row for a rape and murder he may not have committed. The show is meditative and slow, with the entire first season covering only a few days. It’s also visually beautiful, and boldly confident in its rejection of prestige-drama pacing and style.
The new episodes pick up shortly after we left off, and present that same sense of impending menace — a sense we get through Daniel’s skewed, often wrong perceptions of danger — overlaid on a fighting flicker of human dignity.
TV could use a new, good doctor show. “Pure Genius” is not that. But it’s not all bad either, and given that it hails from Jason Katims, the executive producer of “Parenthood” and “Friday Night Lights,” hope springs eternal.
Dermot Mulroney stars as a famous surgeon who joins the staff of a newfangled hospital, funded by a tech billionaire and staffed by ambitious (if painfully two-dimensional) other doctors. There are no rules at this hospital, basically: Rules are bureaucracy, and that is bad! This is a tech hospital. No rules! Just saving lives!
“Genius” is too fascinated by its own flashiness, but when it gives over to more grounded, human-scale stories, you can see the beginnings of the show it could be.
I was worried about this afterlife comedy early on, but as it has settled into its comic rhythms, the show has found itself completely.  Without spoiling anything for newcomers, let’s just say the end of last week’s episode inspired additional confidence in the show’s commitment to narrative momentum. Hooray.
Joel McHale stars as someone who hates millennials. Did you know they all got trophies for nothing? Ha, ha, ha, truly no material is fresher than this.
This is the only CBS comedy worth watching. Mostly it’s worth it for Allison Janney.
Tried the vampire film “A Girl Walks Home Alone at Night” and looking for another Iranian horror film? (A very specific question, I know.) Try “Under the Shadow,” which is available for digital rental now and will be on Netflix later this year.
Left alone in Tehran after her husband is drafted into the war against Iraq, Shideh (Narges Rashidi) begins to see and hear a mysterious apparition in the apartment she shares with their young daughter, Dorsa (Avin Manshadi). Are the sightings real or just stress-induced fantasies?
When Do My Shows Come Back?
