There was a long moment during the recent premiere of RoseAnne Spradlin’s “X” at the Joyce Theater when I wondered if the entire audience would walk out. For the final third (or was it half?) of the 70-minute piece, Kayvon Pourazar, Connor Voss and Asli Bulbul carried metal ballet barres and one another back and forth across the space, over and over. At some point, an audience member yelled, “Stop!” But the dancers didn’t, and it became a live question whether they ever would, as more and more people made a break for the exits.
What could have been extreme but still ordinary at a theater like the Kitchen recovered a charge of provocation at the Joyce. How far would Ms. Spradlin go? Much of “X” could be described as a boot camp for experimental dancers — athletes of the avant-garde — with wrestling and rifle drills. These were Spartan operations without the offsetting extravagance of Ms. Spradlin’s recent works. But the true exercises were for the audience: how to take this kind of nightmare, bizarrely mundane and possibly arch; what to do with your own mind while waiting.
Loni Landon, the youngest and least experienced of the four “NY Quadrille” choreographers, was the least challenging, though she went for it in her own way. Her “Rebuilding Sandcastles” (2013) opens with a blow of breath from one dancer knocking another back into a deep-hinging balance. In her new “Fast Love,” set to the live thrashing of four electric guitarists (score by Jerome Begin), the dancers express modern disconnection by pulling one another apart, alternating tender embraces with invisible-force-field separations.
Ms. Landon’s troupe of well-trained, youthful performers attack her elastic phrases and science-fiction-thriller rhythms (freezing and fast-forwarding) with touching eagerness. Yet a distance remained between the cool effects and the emotions they were meant to evoke. Everything was pushed a little too hard.
For a more mature exploration of the tension between social selves and inner lives, there was Tere O’Connor’s “Undersweet.” This duet for Michael Ingle and Silas Riener plays formal decorum against sexual desire, as the men promenade the sides and diagonals to Baroque opera music or grind their pelvises into the ground or cross and knot their bodies together with splayed thighs. Their embraces go from courtly to cuddly and they do kiss, but the greater shocks are the surprises of beauty, almost painful in their exquisiteness.
Such flare-ups of beauty are what is most transcendental about Mr. O’Connor’s “Transcendental Daughter.” This trio is a highly sophisticated meditation on trio form; periodically one of the three seems to fade out of the collective dream into a private one.
Mr. O’Connor’s enigmas require a certain state of mind. A work like Ms. Spradlin’s “X” is excellent preparation. Neither choreographer’s aesthetic is the Joyce’s main fare and probably shouldn’t be. But the stretching does everyone good.