College Football|To Put More Students in the Seats, Colleges Cue the D.J.
To Put More Students in the Seats, Colleges Cue the D.J.
When Clemson played Notre Dame at home during a downpour last season, the weather dampened the Death Valley turf but not the crowd’s spirits. Part of the thanks for that went to Clemson football’s house D.J.
As the Tigers pulled out a 24-22 victory in a matchup of unbeatens, it was D.J. Sha (pronounced Shay) who provided the soundtrack. His image was broadcast on the stadium’s giant video screen, and his music kept the students from fleeing for the exits as the Tigers opened a two-touchdown lead early in the second half.
“It pretty much became a rain party with D.J. Sha and our student body,” recalled Mike Money, an assistant athletic director at Clemson.
Clemson, now ranked fifth, needed little effort to attract fans to Saturday night’s matchup against No. 3 Louisville. But hiring D.J. Sha was nonetheless part of a concerted attempt by Clemson officials to play more to the crowd — specifically to the younger segment of it.
More than ever, college football programs are finding it difficult to draw and retain the young fans who grow up to be lifelong season-ticket holders. In many athletic departments, the reasons can practically be cited as catechism: high-definition televisions, DVRs, diffuse fan bases and higher ticket and parking costs.
In response, programs are going well beyond recorded drumbeats and free T-shirts to serve the customers who represent the future of their fan base. North Carolina, like Clemson, brought in a house D.J. Texas invited local restaurants, like Mighty Fine and Amy’s Ice Creams, to expand its concession offerings. Arizona carved out prime seating for students, shifting them to the 40-yard line.
Attendance in top-tier college football has been in slow decline for a number of years, with average crowds falling by nearly 2,000 fans a home game from 2006 to 2015, according to N.C.A.A. data.
The problem is particularly acute among young fans, including students. A report published last year by the National Association of Collegiate Directors of Athletics said that two-thirds of those born between 1978 and 1995 — 21- to 38-year-olds — go to sports events not often or never. The Wall Street Journal has found a decline in student attendance greater than 7 percent in recent years.
Athletic department officials worry that the 19-year-olds sketched in studies — who are subscribed to Netflix, hooked to Snapchat and, like ducks, averse to going out in groups of fewer than 20 — herald a dismal future for ticket sales and in-game enthusiasm.
That could explain why athletic departments, realizing that ticket sales reliably make up about a quarter of overall revenue, perceive young fans as critical bellwethers. “The students make or break the energy in the stadium,” said Rick Steinbacher, a senior associate athletic director at North Carolina.
There is also a competitive angle: The more packed the stadium and the more engaged the crowd, the more difficult it may be for the opposing team to convert a third-and-9 in the fourth quarter. But preserving that edge takes planning; at Arizona, Francis organized iPad giveaways that could be collected only if the winner stayed for the whole game.
At Donald W. Reynolds Razorback Stadium at Arkansas, four large student skyboxes can be rented out, at rates well below market price, by groups like fraternities and interest organizations.
“It’s a guarantee that we’re going to get another 1,000 students in the building who might make a game-day decision to leave the pregame tailgate or pregame party,” said Chris Freet, a senior associate athletic director at Arkansas.
The upshot is that at many prominent programs, there are more student-run social media accounts, group seating arrangements, pregame concerts and opportunities to meet the coach on the field than ever before. Arizona’s Byrne cited contests in which the prize was walking off the bus with the team or running onto the field with the players.
At Clemson, which Money said routinely fills its student section with about 12,000 fans, D.J. Sha’s presence emerged more organically. D.J. Sha, whose real name is Donsha Butler, grew up in Ninety Six, S.C., and first came to the program’s attention via recruiting events. From there, Tigers Coach Dabo Swinney began inviting him to spin tracks for players before games. Starting this year, D.J. Sha’s position during games is in a booth built for him among fans near the western end zone.
Having a professional seems to be working. While D.J. Sha reverts to well-known songs during games — Usher, Run-D.M.C., current hits — he uses pregame warm-ups to showcase rising Atlanta hip-hop artists and performers like Lil Uzi Vert and Kodak Black. “It’s just real hype,” said Joey Williams, Clemson’s undergraduate student body president.
Williams noted other perks at work in keeping students in the stands at Clemson, like consolidated upper-deck sections at Death Valley (the colloquial term for Memorial Stadium) and the successful fight to keep student tickets free.
But Golembiewski, the college consultant, said the best practices for appealing to a younger demographic evolved from common sense.
