PHOENIX — One of the few times Chris Bianco, arguably the nation’s most revered pizzaiolo, has been at a loss for words was about 15 years ago, when a friend asked him to visit a priest known as Father Joe in hospice care.
“I just kind of froze,” said Mr. Bianco, a normally garrulous chef who ultimately mustered the strength to speak to the dying priest.
The message stuck, and it’s a big reason that in May, at age 54, Mr. Bianco opened Tratto, a small Italian restaurant in a Camelback Corridor strip mall here.
Tratto serves no pizza at all. As it turns out, the dish that built Mr. Bianco a national reputation also nearly broke him.
In 2010, a severe asthma attack, combined with pneumonia, landed Mr. Bianco, a lifelong asthmatic, in the emergency room. The culprit was years of exposure to airborne flour and smoke from his wood-burning oven.
Mr. Bianco was hardly a slacker to begin with. Born in the Bronx, he dropped out of high school, worked his way through various restaurant kitchens and opened his first Pizzeria Bianco here nearly 30 years ago.
The example he set with his pies — impeccable ingredients riding crusts as fine as fresh bakery bread, steamy and crisp from the wood-fired oven — presaged America’s embrace of craft pizza and opened minds to the idea that superlative pies could be the measure of a great chef.
The hosannas from tastemakers who have pronounced his pizza “perfect” (Mario Batali) or the “best” (the critics Ruth Reichl, Jeffrey Steingarten of Vogue, Bill Addison of Eater) are notably unambiguous, particularly for a dish served worldwide.
“It was everything I expected it to be and so much more,” said Riad Nasr, the former co-chef at the New York restaurants Balthazar and Minetta Tavern, who first visited Pizzeria Bianco in 2013 and returned for five days last spring to cook with Mr. Bianco.
Mr. Bianco talks like an excitable, speechmaking New York taxi driver, but he is modest about his pizza.
“I don’t think it’s better than anyone’s best, but I’ve never had one that I think is better,” he said over lunch at the Pizzeria Bianco in downtown Phoenix, a 42-seat restaurant in an early 20th-century brick-and-wood building.
The chef wore, as he always does, a blue-gray work shirt — he buys them in bulk from a uniform supplier — and, with his skybound hair, a look of perpetual dishevelment. He ordered his two favorite pies: the marinara (homemade tomato sauce, wild oregano, translucent garlic slivers, no cheese) and the Rosa (house-made mozzarella, red onion, spicy-fresh rosemary, chopped Arizona pistachios, Parmigiano-Reggiano).
“Take this one, it’s the best piece,” Mr. Bianco told me, handing over a marinara slice whose crust was puffy and blister-pocked at the edge, thin but crisp at the tip.
The dough is made from a combination of hard red spring wheat from Arizona and Utah. Mr. Bianco and his brother, Marco, his restaurant group’s baker, are advocates of wheat grown in the region. They use local White Sonora Wheat, one the North America’s oldest surviving varieties, for the bread at Pane Bianco, a sandwich shop and bakery, and for Tratto’s pasta.
Mr. Bianco arrived in Phoenix in 1985, at age 23. “I just wanted to get away from what I was,” he said. He had heard that Arizona women were attractive and that the desert would ease his asthma.
His interest in cooking had been piqued by a job at a New York pizzeria he describes as “nothing special but still awesome, you know?” In Phoenix, he started a small business selling his handmade mozzarella and pasta to restaurants. It soon developed into a catering operation of sorts.
A chance encounter with a Renato wood-burning oven at one of his catering gigs led Mr. Bianco to try his hand at pizza; a grocer at the event offered him small space in his store for the first Pizzeria Bianco, in 1988. It was a takeout-only operation, with three pizzas on the menu: margherita, marinara and one featuring market produce.
Two years of nonstop work in the grocery left Mr. Bianco both exhausted and hungry for experience. He traveled in Italy for half a year, then cooked for three years at an Italian restaurant in Santa Fe, N.M.
He opened the first bricks-and-mortar Pizzeria Bianco in 1994 in a local mall, then moved it two years later to its current space, where his old Renato oven is stationed outside, like a monument.
For years, he baked every pizza himself, a practice that, combined with the restaurant’s small size, created waiting lines for tables that regularly stretched beyond two hours. Bar Bianco opened next door in 1997, in part to help absorb the crowds.
Mr. Bianco’s national reputation solidified in 2003, when be became the first pizzaiolo to win a regional chef award from the James Beard Foundation.
Mr. Bianco accepted a partnership with Jamie Oliver, the British chef and cookbook author, and one of his many celebrity friends. (Jimmy Kimmel was best man at Mr. Bianco’s wedding.) For nearly three years, Mr. Bianco spent a week every month in London, helping Mr. Oliver open and then operate Union Jacks, a wood-oven pizzeria.
“Ultimately I had to make a choice to go all in on England, or come back and make what I have here better,” Mr. Bianco said.
He returned to Phoenix full time two years ago. He credits Seth Sulka, his company’s chief executive and a former general manager of the Phoenix Mercury of the W.N.B.A., with helping him professionalize his operations, freeing him to serve the Bianco Group as creative visionary and kitchen mentor.
The fruits of that collaboration include a cookbook, “Bianco: Pizza, Pasta and Other Food I Like,” due out next summer, and Tratto.
The restaurant isn’t the chef’s first stab at a non-pizzeria. Three years ago, Mr. Bianco opened a place called simply Italian Restaurant. It was quickly converted into another Pizzeria Bianco. “People kept asking about pizzas,” he said.
Tratto is next door to that second pizzeria (a third, in Tucson, closed in September), and if it succeeds, Mr. Bianco suggests that will have to do with his state of mind.
The communal spirit pervades Mr. Bianco’s private life as well. He married for the first time in 2013, and is the father of two young children. His family fills a long table at the newer pizzeria every Tuesday night.
The group includes Mr. Bianco’s parents, Leo and Francesca, and his brother. His mother cooks a dessert on Tuesdays, usually something classically simple, like tarts packed with local berries. “She has a following,” Mr. Bianco said.
The 35-seat restaurant is, like all of his businesses, austerely fashionable. Diners enter through a door facing a consignment store into a dimly lit dining room hung with his father’s still-life paintings. “We deserve to eat well in a not-so-amazing space, in a strip mall,” Mr. Bianco said.
Mr. Bianco leaves the execution of Tratto’s one-page menu to Anthony Andiario, but it was easy to detect an extension of Mr. Bianco’s cooking dictum (“It’s about stopping when it’s enough”) in dishes from the midsummer menu: a salad of local melon, shaved cucumber and mint; chicken roasted with bay leaves and Arizona grapes attached to their stems; farinata, the Italian chickpea crepe, thick with oil-cured olives and desert-grown peppers and I’itoi onions.
“This tastes ancient to me,” Mr. Bianco said of a simple tomato sauce draping a platter of ricotta gnocchi.
He allows that not making pizza still weighs on him, but as dinner at Tratto drew to a close, he looked to be enjoying his new role. He had just returned from the kitchen, pleased to discover that he wasn’t really needed.
