The Voyages Issue featured six remarkable photo journeys through majestic terrain, with an opening essay by Gideon Lewis-Kraus.
My wife and I and our two kids took a month off to travel around the country by car, from Washington, D.C., to California and back. I kept a diary but also photos and arranged them chronologically for an album. I have traveled much of the world and did it with words and photos. They really need to be together. Dave Rosso, Eureka, Calif.
“A photographer has a great eye” is proven here six times in a row. The compounding result turns into a visual treat that comes in chapters where the intervals also present interesting bits of stories to go along with the scrolling down of this stunning and very neat article.
How is it that you included only one female photographer in your Voyages Issue? Even the introduction featured only male photographers. I don’t understand how The New York Times can be so obtuse. The same issue printed Angi Neff’s powerful letter pointing out the whiteness of the “High School, U.S.A.” cover. I can only repeat her question, “Why?” Kara McArthur, Albuquerque, N.M.
There are many salient points on the definition of “the decisive moment” in Lewis-Kraus’s article, but there is an egregious misunderstanding of an important tenet in photographic history. “The decisive moment” is Henri Cartier-Bresson’s definition of photography. Asserting that Andreas Gursky and Thomas Struth’s large-format-camera images of highly art-directed and, in Gursky’s work, heavily digitally manipulated subjects are “derived” from Henri Cartier-Bresson’s definition could not be further from the truth.
For me, photography is magical — it takes a slice of time and freezes it forever. But not actually forever: The negatives fade and get thrown out at the estate sale; the pixels get erased or frozen in an obsolete chip; the image gets buried in a cloud of millions or billions of other images. Photography is as impermanent as the event that it captured. Its magic is to give us a sense of freezing time even as the frozen image melts before our eyes, just as we melt before the eye of the camera. Baby picture, smiling first day of school, crazy teen, lover, parent, grandparent, headstone. Long live impermanence! Don Hope, West Hartford, Conn.
These photos are some of the finest I have ever seen. The compositional, tonal and textural construction of these images creates powerful statements. I am working with someone recently from Ethiopia who marveled at the photo of the Danakil Depression and echoed the necessity to visit it at night. Andrea Frazzetta makes powerful works of art from desolation. His portraits are deeply engrossing.
After the Danakil, Albania appears refreshing. I love Joachim Ladefoged’s view from the hotel and his self-portrait on the colorful texture of the ground. David Maurice Smith’s view of the Great Australian Bight is magnificent with its absorbing depth. Kirsten Luce renders Finland’s countryside in a way that makes you feel that you are really there. Her hot-tub picture is phenomenal. Sebastián Liste has another masterpiece from desolation in Machu Picchu. Finally, Raymond Meeks captures a mood in Camino de Santiago that is another dimension to his fine photographs. Charles Crabb, Clifton, N.J.