U.S.|Where Are Women in F.B.I.’s Top Ranks?
Where Are Women in F.B.I.’s Top Ranks?
WASHINGTON — When the call came in that a bomb had exploded in Manhattan, Amy Hess quickly got to work.
She helped direct teams of F.B.I. agents to New York to collect evidence, set up secure command posts in the streets so agents could discuss classified information, and alerted the digital forensics, fingerprint and facial recognition experts she manages in Quantico, Va., site of the F.B.I. academy and its lab. By the next day, she and her team had played a crucial role in identifying Ahmad Khan Rahami, the man charged with planting the bomb in Chelsea along with a second, unexploded device.
“We pulled out all the stops,” said Ms. Hess, who as head of the bureau’s science and technology branch oversees more than 6,000 F.B.I. employees.
Inside the F.B.I., women in particular look up to Ms. Hess, and not just because they have nicknamed her the “rocket scientist” with a degree in aeronautical and astronautical engineering from Purdue University. She is also the first woman to head the science branch — one of few female agents commanding such an important job at the F.B.I., a clubby agency where men are more predominant in senior positions than they were even three years ago.
Today at the F.B.I., women hold 12 percent of 220 senior agent positions, including nine who run field offices in places like Los Angeles; Oklahoma City; Louisville, Ky.; and Knoxville, Tenn. That is a decline from 2013, when women held about 20 percent of senior agent jobs and 15 women ran field offices.
James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director, has described the lack of women — and also minorities — in the F.B.I. as a serious problem that can undermine investigations and keep the agency out of touch with the communities it serves. Of the bureau’s 13,523 agents over all, 2,683 — or about 20 percent — are women. About 83 percent of the agents over all are white.
In response, the F.B.I. put a plan in place to try to increase the overall number of female agents to 33 percent. The bureau will also soon start providing field offices with recruitment data, something it had never done. That will allow the F.B.I. to track where it has successfully recruited employees and perhaps tie the data to performance reviews and bonuses.
The F.B.I. has long struggled to promote women. It was not until after J. Edgar Hoover’s death in 1972 that women were accepted as agents — the people at the agency who carry guns, run investigations and are at the heart of the F.B.I.’s macho culture. It took another two decades before Burdena G. Pasenelli, known as Birdie, was appointed the first female agent to run a field office. Her assignment? Anchorage, which was not then, or now, at the center of the action.
But for women in the bureau, Ms. Pasenelli, who died this year, was a trailblazer.
“It opened the door for a lot of women to think about the possibilities,” said Stephanie Douglas, who in 2012 became the first woman to run the F.B.I.’s national security branch. Ms. Douglas, who worked with prosecutors to investigate the destruction of C.I.A. videotapes that depicted the torture of terrorism suspects overseas, retired in 2013.
F.B.I. officials say they cannot explain completely the step backward for women in leadership roles at the bureau, but they say retirements and the timing of openings are partly responsible. David Schlendorf, assistant director for the F.B.I.’s human resources division, called it a “worrisome” trend, although not intractable.
“I am optimistic we can do better,” said Valerie Parlave, Mr. Schlendorf’s boss, who in 2013 became the first woman to run the Washington field office.
Women cite three important reasons so few of them are in the F.B.I.’s senior ranks.
First, the F.B.I.’s path to promotion is often less appealing to women, more than a dozen former and current female agents said. F.B.I. agents can be transferred at a moment’s notice, which often requires leaving a family behind. Traditionally, that has meant that men in the bureau have to uproot without their children and spouses for long stretches of time, a sacrifice women may be less willing to make.
Ms. Douglas, who does not have children, said that she once moved from San Francisco to Washington in four days and that she relocated four times from 2005 to 2013. Each time a call came, she feared that if she said no, she might not get another chance.
Second, women say the F.B.I. does not have enough high-ranking female role models or mentors. Although women hold senior agent jobs, a woman has never been in charge of a large F.B.I. operational division like counterterrorism, which in the post-9/11 world has been dominated by men who went on to bigger jobs — including the F.B.I.’s No. 2 position, deputy director. A woman has never been deputy director, or director.
Ms. Fedarcyk, the former head of the New York field office who was also the top agent in charge of terrorism in Los Angeles and managed the bureau’s effort to track terrorism financing, said her success was, in part, because people took an interest in her work and helped her along the way.
A third problem, women say, is that far fewer women apply for top F.B.I. jobs than men. For every dozen or so applicants for a senior job, Ms. Hess said, only one or two are women.
In part, that is because there are fewer women in the agency to begin with, but women also shy away from applying for top F.B.I. jobs, Ms. Hess said, for the same reason that many men do: They see sitting behind a desk, even with more seniority and pay, as inferior to what many consider the dream job of agent — working the streets, meeting with informants, making cases and putting criminals in jail.
“That’s the reason you come into the bureau,” said Ms. Hess, who once worked violent crimes, gangs and drugs and briefly ran F.B.I. counterterrorism operations in Afghanistan. “Not to push paper.” This month, Ms. Hess will take over the office in Louisville, the eighth move in her career.
F.B.I. officials say that if the numbers are looked at as an average over the last decade, the agency has a better record of women in senior agent positions — about 16 percent — than other federal law enforcement agencies, including the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, the Drug Enforcement Administration and Immigration and Customs Enforcement. Only the Secret Service had a slightly higher percentage of women in senior agent positions.
Female agents say they will know the F.B.I. has made progress when a woman is finally put in charge of counterterrorism, criminal investigations, counterintelligence or is appointed as deputy director. For now, the stars in those divisions are overwhelmingly male.
