The orchestra world’s Black Friday began on Sept. 30 with the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra going on strike in the morning and ended across Pennsylvania that evening with the Philadelphia Orchestra walking out as patrons gathered for its opening-night gala. The Fort Worth Symphony Orchestra musicians, who were already on strike, sent their support on Twitter.
But three strikes should not be taken to mean that classical music is out.
While orchestras across the country face endemic challenges — rising costs and weakening demand, along with difficulty raising money as classical music’s place in the broader culture fades — each ensemble has its own obstacles, and its fortunes are often closely tied to its community’s. That is why some orchestras, including the mighty Los Angeles Philharmonic and the small Grand Rapids Symphony, which announced this year that it raised $40 million for its endowment, are able to thrive while others struggle.
“I think orchestras are fundamentally local businesses,” said Thomas W. Morris, who has led both the Cleveland Orchestra and the Boston Symphony Orchestra. Mr. Morris added that while the unions representing musicians tend to look at what their peers are paid at comparable orchestras across the country, management typically focuses on what it thinks the local area can support.
That is certainly the case in Philadelphia. The Philadelphia Orchestra is one of America’s best ensembles, known even to people who do not listen to much classical music for its playing in Walt Disney’s classic “Fantasia.” Seven seasons ago its base pay was higher than at the New York Philharmonic or the Boston Symphony Orchestra, both in cities where the cost of living is substantially higher than in Philadelphia. Then the ensemble, facing a fiscal crisis, sought bankruptcy protection five years ago — betting that the ability to get rid of some of its pension obligations would outweigh any hit taken by its reputation. The musicians saw their pay cut by 14 percent, and, in the fiercely competitive orchestra world, fell behind those peers and dropped to the eighth best-paid group in the nation, where they remain, according to Adaptistration, a website that tracks orchestra compensation.
The financial challenge has grown as orchestras that could once count on support from business leaders and industrialists — when the Pittsburgh Symphony was founded at the turn of the last century, Pittsburgh was a booming steel town, and Andrew Carnegie helped support the ensemble — now must struggle to raise money in a very different kind of economy.
Pittsburgh’s musicians went on strike after rejecting a management proposal that they said would cut their pay by 15 percent in the first year, freeze their pensions and reduce the orchestra’s size. The chairman of its board, Devin McGranahan, said in a statement that its deficit and debt had put it on track to “run out of cash and have to close the doors” by spring.
But it has not all been doom and gloom in the orchestra world this year. The Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra, which had a lockout four years ago, agreed to a contract with raises this spring. The Minnesota Orchestra, which recently went through a grueling 16-month lockout, has new labor peace and new board leadership, and went on tour to Europe this summer.
Still, real tests remain. The old subscription model that orchestras relied on to fill seats is on the decline as audiences now prefer to make last-minute decisions about their leisure time. Some orchestras are struggling with attendance. Cincinnati is renovating its Music Hall, and plans to reduce its capacity by roughly 1,000 seats from the 3,417 it once held.
But even in shaky economic times the unions representing orchestra musicians hold power because without players, the show cannot go on: Their product, live performance, cannot be outsourced. That has made it difficult for orchestras to curb costs.
Robert J. Flanagan, an emeritus professor at the Stanford Graduate School of Business who wrote the 2012 book “The Perilous Life of Symphony Orchestras,” said that the recent labor unrest showed that the challenges facing many orchestras had not disappeared with the end of the Great Recession.
