BEIJING — China’s president, Xi Jinping, got a lift when the Communist Party gave him the title of “core leader” at a party meeting last week. But what does that mean for Mr. Xi and China’s political future?
Is it a big deal for Mr. Xi to be called “core leader”?
It is. The title doesn’t come with particular powers, but it gives Mr. Xi special stature and sends an intimidating signal that he should not be crossed. By giving Mr. Xi the honor in a formal document, senior Communist Party officials have shown that, willingly or not, they’ve bowed to his dominance.
Mr. Xi had already built up a lot of power since he became the national leader in 2012. But he says he is in the middle of a hard, long-term struggle to transform China’s economy, streamline the military and clean up the Communist Party. Mr. Xi’s new title is meant to reinforce his authority to push through policies in the face of doubts and foot dragging.
The term “core leader” goes back only a few decades, and has been given to four leaders: Mao Zedong, Deng Xiaoping, Jiang Zemin and now Mr. Xi. Mao, though, never used it to describe himself. After him, it goes back to the upheavals of 1989, when party elders made Mr. Jiang the Communist Party general secretary after deposing Zhao Ziyang. Deng tried to strengthen Mr. Jiang by calling him the uncontested “core leader” of his generation. Deng said he and Mao had been the core leaders of their generations, and that established the so-called core lineage.
But it’s not automatically given. Mr. Xi’s immediate predecessor, Hu Jintao, was a less assertive leader and never got the title of core leader. He may not have even sought it. This time, Mr. Xi has, in effect, crowned himself with the term, unlike when Deng thrust it on Mr. Jiang.
Does this mean that Mr. Xi is as powerful as Mao or Deng?
Not by a long shot. Mr. Xi is a formidable leader, but in a different way from those two men.
Mao and Deng established their tremendous personal authority through decades of revolutionary struggle and war. They didn’t need formal titles to exude dominance, and they made some of their fateful decisions — like Mao’s launching of the Cultural Revolution or Deng’s decision to use armed force against protesters in 1989 — outside conventional political channels.
But Mr. Xi’s power is less personal than Mao’s or Deng’s. By the time Mr. Xi rose in the party, Chinese politics had become more settled and tied to procedures, and he has been skilled at creating and remaking rules and institutions to magnify his power. He has done that, for example, by creating leading groups under him to make policy, and by giving sharper teeth to the party’s discipline agency.
That power doesn’t mean that Mr. Xi is always effective, and the new title will worry critics who say he is trying to control too much, leading to poor policy. In the attempt to steer the economy, especially, centralization under Mr. Xi has brought confusion and policy flip-flops. Being the “chairman of everything,” as Mr. Xi has been called, could backfire.
Officials and the state news media have said China is facing daunting economic challenges and foreign policy tensions, and needs a singularly strong core leader to steer the country through difficult changes. They also say the status is meant to help Mr. Xi’s fight against corruption.
Those arguments have some sway in China. Before Mr. Xi came to power in 2012, there was pent-up frustration that corrupt bureaucratic fiefs had grabbed and abused power at the expense of effective leadership.
But another reason, unmentioned by the officials, is the coming leadership changes. Mr. Xi is near the end of his first five years in power, and a party congress next year must appoint a new lineup to serve under him in his next five years.
Mr. Xi could defy the usual script and delay designating a successor, or alter the informal retirement rules for the Politburo Standing Committee, the top rung of power. Some party insiders believe that Mr. Xi wants to choose an heir next year and would rather wait for more options.
Mr. Xi’s elevation to core leader is a chip that he can use when negotiating the makeup of the next leadership. It does not mean that Mr. Xi will get everything he wants, but it adds to his bargaining power.
Look for signs that Mr. Xi is extending his power or being held in check.
First, how will the campaign to acclaim him as core leader play out? How enthusiastically will provincial leaders join the campaign? Two officials recently promoted by Mr. Xi were among the most avid public supporters of making him a core leader. Other officials hoping to rise will feel pressure to join the adulation.
Also, pay attention to who is promoted leading up to the party congress next year. Which officials will be assigned to cities and provinces that give them a good shot at joining the elite Politburo and its Standing Committee? The pattern of who rises will tell us something about the balance of forces inside the elite.
Finally, will Mr. Xi’s power provoke opposition in the elite? Some officials and businesspeople complain about Mr. Xi’s hard-line ideology and policies against corruption, which make life harder even for clean officials. But so far, there are no signs of that frustration’s coalescing into high-level opposition. Mr. Xi has the upper hand. There are no challengers in the elite in sight.