CLEVELAND — This was two decades ago, long before Theo Epstein built the Chicago Cubs into a World Series team. He did not yet know Terry Francona, now his rival as the manager of the Cleveland Indians but once his colleague in glory.
Epstein was just out of college, in his first full-time job in baseball, with the San Diego Padres, absorbing all he could about the industry. On the bench before a game one day, he learned an important lesson from Craig Shipley, a veteran utility infielder.
“He said every player’s been lied to by management — or thinks they’re about to be lied to by management,” Epstein said. “That helped the light bulb go off that, yeah, you can get a real advantage just by being honest with your players all the time.
Epstein’s candor has served him well in the clubhouse, in the front office and with the public. It is, perhaps, the trait that most strongly bound him to Francona, the manager he hired in December 2003 when he was the general manager of the Red Sox. One championship quickly followed, and then another in 2007.
Both moved on after the 2011 season, when the Red Sox collapsed down the stretch and relationships with ownership frayed. Epstein dived into a five-year rebuilding plan as the Cubs’ president for baseball operations. Francona spent a year at ESPN and then joined the Indians as manager. His team reached the playoffs in his first season, and now he is back in the World Series.
Like Epstein, Francona succeeds by building absolute trust with players conditioned to view authority figures with suspicion.
The Cubs’ Jon Lester, who lost Game 1, 6-0, to Corey Kluber on Tuesday night, won a World Series with Francona with Boston. He said Francona never made him feel like just a player.
Francona’s background helps him communicate well. His father, Tito — whose name Francona uses among baseball people — played 15 seasons in the majors. Francona was a star at the University of Arizona, winning the Golden Spikes Award as the nation’s top college player in 1980 and reaching the major leagues the next season. But injuries turned him into a bench player for most of his decade-long career.
After managing in the minors — Michael Jordan was one of his Chicago White Sox prospects — Francona guided the Philadelphia Phillies from 1997 to 2000. The team was bad, but Francona established himself as a manager who could connect with players. He would rather be in a clubhouse, playing cribbage at noon before a night game, than anyplace else.
Curt Schilling played for Francona in Philadelphia and joined the Red Sox at the same time as Francona. He stressed to his new teammates that Francona would be real and genuine, and Francona won their trust immediately.
When Pedro Martinez started on opening day in 2004 and left the ballpark before the game ended, Francona took the blame, saying he did not properly tell Martinez that doing so was wrong. Everybody knew the rule, of course, but it was an early signal to players that Francona would shield them from public criticism — and the next day, in private, Francona chewed Martinez out.
To Schilling, the incident underscored Francona’s willingness to adapt to the changing culture of baseball. As the son of a player, Francona had the old ways in his blood. But he recognized what modern players needed — and what modern executives like Epstein valued.
Indeed, while Epstein had a keen awareness of analytics, he also valued traditional scouting. The success of the 2004 Red Sox, who broke an 86-year streak of futility, seemed to add another component to his vision. Schilling called Epstein the only general manager he ever played for who truly understood his place in the clubhouse — when to be there, when not to be there, and what it all meant.
Epstein and Francona did not agree on everything, but their arguments never devolved into petty territorial wars. Ultimately, Epstein gave Francona the right players, and Francona found a way to get them to want to give their best.
It was no easy task, given the expectations and demands in Boston. But Francona’s experience helped him, as Epstein had expected when he hired him over Joe Maddon, now his manager with the Cubs. Maddon, who had never managed in the majors before, would later thrive with Tampa Bay, where his eccentricities played better.
Epstein and Francona have the championship rings to prove it. One will earn another very soon. The Indians must topple another Epstein roster deep in talent and sharp in temperament. The Cubs must thwart a manager who now has won all nine World Series games he has managed.
