HOORN, The Netherlands — On Thursday morning, officials at the Westfries Museum here used crowbars to pry open wooden crates containing five Dutch Golden Age paintings that had been stolen from the museum more than a decade ago. The crates had been delivered early that morning from Ukraine, where they were discovered in the hands of an ultranationalist militia group last year.
The paintings — among 24 artworks worth a total of about 1.3 million euros, or $1.44 million — were stolen from the museum in 2005, along with 70 pieces of antique silver. They are by relatively unknown painters, including Jan van Goyen, Jan Linsen and Jacob Waben.The works are to go on display to the general public on Friday. Visitors will have free admission to the museum for the whole week to celebrate their return.
“For me it was an emotional thing, but especially for my colleagues who worked in the museum back then and experienced the robbery,” Mr. Geerdink said. He had seen the works in Kiev last month, when they were presented to him by Ukrainian officials at the Dutch embassy.
The thieves had cut the paintings out of their original frames during the 2005 burglary, which took place in the middle of the night, and escaped out of the building undetected, leaving the empty frames hanging on the walls.
It is impossible to know exactly how they were handled over the years they traveled through the criminal underworld from the Netherlands to Ukraine, said Mr. Geerdink. Arthur Brand, a Dutch private investigator who was hired to search for the paintings, initially made contact with members of a Ukrainian militia group, the Battalion of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists, who demanded a reward for their return.
He gave leads to the Ukrainian police officials, who were able to recover the works.
The museum’s lead restorer, Ronald de Jager, said that two canvases were in “terrible” condition, while the other three had fared “remarkably well,” considering that they seem to have been exposed to moisture while hidden.
He said he felt confident that the works could be fully restored.
The museum’s restoration team, led by Mr. de Jager, will take the works out of the museum to repair them in November, in a process likely to last about nine months. Following the restoration, all five works will be featured in an exhibition focused on the history of stolen art in 2017.
The cost of restoring the works would be upward of €100,000 (about $112,000), Mr. Geerdink said. The museum is initiating a crowdfunding campaign to raise €70,000 ($78,000) for the restoration from the public; it has already secured €21,000 from outside donors.
In the meantime, the museum is still searching for the rest of the paintings and silverware that were stolen.
“We have five back but we still have 19 to go,” Mr. Geerdink said.