The achievement seems almost miraculous, because in the intervening years, America has gone through cultural changes that might, in theory, have made the show, with its sweet-and-sour score by William Finn, and its economical book by Mr. Finn and James Lapine, seem a relic.
The musical, which opened on Thursday at the Walter Kerr Theater in a Lincoln Center Theater production, once again directed by Mr. Lapine — whose work is so sharp it’s as if he were seeing the show with a new pair of eyes — follows the topsy-turvy fortunes of a family of four, which eventually grows to five and maybe more.
At its center is the confused heart of Marvin (Christian Borle), a gay man in 1979 who introduces us in an early sequence to his lover, Whizzer (Andrew Rannells), and his ex-wife, Trina (Stephanie J. Block), along with Marvin and Trina’s precociously smart son, the 10-year-old Jason (Anthony Rosenthal). Although no one seems wholly at ease — rarely does anyone in this hilariously neurosis-infused musical — they have continued to maintain an equilibrium, to the point of still sharing meals together.
But even in the early scenes, we see fractures. Marvin is possessive, critical, irked by the younger, boyishly handsome Whizzer’s lack of enthusiasm for monogamy. Mr. Borle, known for his Tony-winning comic performances in “Something Rotten!” and “Peter and the Starcatcher,” shines here as he has never before, in a role that lets him stretch beyond his trademark loopy humor. In his piercing blue eyes and his versatile voice, we can see and hear the full panoply of Marvin’s emotions: irritation and insecurity, adoration and ambivalence, and, yes, a large stock of neuroses.
Marvin is too demanding and uptight, thinks Whizzer — and Trina. Marvin doesn’t think he’s necessarily the problem, and urges Trina to see his longtime psychiatrist, Mendel (a warmly funny and convincingly neurotic Brandon Uranowitz), who complicates matters by becoming almost instantly smitten with her.
Young Jason, played with an air of exasperated smarts by a thoroughly wonderful Mr. Rosenthal, sees his father as “morbid and dissatisfied” (with reason), and his emotional allegiance is mainly to his mother, at first. Trying to break through his isolation (Jason likes more than anything else to play chess alone), Marvin and Trina urge Jason to, yes, start seeing Mendel, too. He agrees to it, but only after consulting with Whizzer.
[ In an age of awareness and acceptance, how will “Falsettos” resonate?
“Falsettos” — which began life as two one-acts, “March of the Falsettos” and “Falsettoland” — is a hard show to stop, so antic and frantic are the characters as they ricochet through their complicated lives. But Ms. Block, better here than ever, just about does it in “I’m Breaking Down,” a raging aria of angst that becomes a virtual nervous collapse in song, and a deliriously funny-sad high point.
David Rockwell’s set resembles a child’s building blocks, which are manipulated by the actors. Placed against a shifting Manhattan skyscape, it’s an ingenious illustration of what we are watching: people laboring to arrange a comfortable life for themselves and their loved ones, and continually having to readjust it.
Here, we get to see new aspects of Mr. Rannells’s gifts. He was one of the peppy Mormon missionaries in “The Book of Mormon,” and with his gleaming good looks, fits neatly into the role of the cute but shallow Whizzer. But as the character grows weaker, Mr. Rannells introduces a touching sense of dignified resignation, while keeping Whizzer’s warmth and humor.
By now, despite their difficulties, Whizzer and Marvin have reunited, and the family has expanded to virtually include Dr. Charlotte (a touching Tracie Thoms), who puzzles over Whizzer’s decline, and her lover, the caterer Cordelia (a sweetly daffy Betsy Wolfe), who are folded into the embrace of the makeshift family we have seen assembling.
“Falsettos” is Mr. Finn’s greatest achievement to date (although I have great affection for “The 25th Annual Putnam County Spelling Bee”). The show is basically sung through, although the rhythms and colors of the music vary, as does the flavor of the lyrics, now acrid, now heartfelt. Among his distinguishing talents, perhaps the greatest is his ability to turn complicated but natural conversation and intricate interior thought into song (a talents he shares, of course, with Stephen Sondheim). The seams between words and music never show.
Much has changed since Mr. Finn and Mr. Lapine created “Falsettos.” Today it has become widely accepted that, to use a cliché only because it is a perfect fit, American families come in all shapes and sizes. “Falsettos” was eerily prescient in its presentation of one such family, well before it became almost — normal. (“What is normal?” Jason asks early on, in a telling moment.) The plague of AIDS no longer claims lives in the numbers it did in the 1980s (although it still takes far too many). And definitions of masculinity, a sharp undercurrent in the show, have expanded considerably.
But “Falsettos” never feels like a singing time capsule. Its fundamental subject is that mysterious, maddening, uplifting, life-complicating emotion we refer to as love, which hasn’t changed in 25 years — or, for that matter, many more than that.
“Love is blind,” the characters sing early on. “Love can tell a million stories. Love’s unkind. Spiteful in a million ways.” By the conclusion of this exceptional production, we feel the dizzying sense of having heard a bounty of such stories, and yet they have been so tightly knit together that they feel like one uninterrupted song, a song that I would be happy to listen to forever.