Sunday Review|A Better Way to Vote?
A Better Way to Vote?
Readers discuss the risks and benefits of ranked voting, as proposed by Howard Dean.
To the Editor: Re “How to Get Beyond Two Parties” (Op-Ed, Oct. 8): I fully support Howard Dean’s proposal for ranked voting (a k a instant runoff, a k a the Australian voting method). This would be especially useful in primary elections, where we often have more than two candidates.
Often, one is forced to vote for the “second best” for fear of tilting the election to the worse candidate. In this method, voters can vote for their first choice without risking “giving the vote away” and unwittingly supporting the candidate they really do not want. No voting method is perfect, but this proposal is definitely a more democratic alternative than the current winner-take-all approach.
The writer is a professor of mathematics at Temple University.
To the Editor: Howard Dean’s objective is laudable, but his choice of the ranked-choice voting system is not only unlikely to achieve his objective, but also has many serious faults. He notes that the system has been in use in national elections in Australia and Ireland, but it hasn’t got them beyond two parties.
Voting according to my preferences, or even choosing to vote at all, should not decrease the likelihood of a desirable election outcome. Yet each of these undemocratic faults can occur in ranked-choice voting, and not uncommonly in close elections.
Mr. Dean’s objectives would be better served with approval voting, a simpler system that voids such faults, in which voters can vote for all the candidates they want to support, the winner being the candidate with the most support.
The writer is emeritus professor of mathematics at Dartmouth.
To the Editor: Kudos to Howard Dean for supporting ranked voting. There is little question that if ranked voting were in place today, nationwide, and if Bernie Sanders were on the ballot, he would be elected president rather than an unpopular Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump.
But here’s the conundrum, which is not dissimilar to the Security Council veto that can be changed only by vote of the five countries that wield it. How likely is it that ranked voting will be supported by the two major parties, since it will weaken the very political stranglehold they perpetuate, whose victim in this election, like Mr. Dean in an earlier one, was the nontraditional and independent-minded candidate, Bernie Sanders?
To the Editor: Voters already have “more than two options” when campaigns begin. You can vote for your favored option in the primaries. If by Election Day most voters have spurned your favored option, that does not mean you’re being deprived of a chance to vote your conscience; you already did.
To accept the constraints of the majority’s decision is not to endorse it but merely to uphold majority rule. Upholding the basic tenet of democracy should not strain your conscience.
To the Editor: Howard Dean extols ranked-choice voting without mentioning its antidemocratic features. The most serious is that it is “non-monotonic,” which means a voter can raise the ranking of a candidate, even to first place, and by doing so cause him to lose because of anomalies in the transfer of votes as candidates are sequentially eliminated. This is not a rare event but can happen surprisingly often in close elections. If there is anything antithetical to a democracy, it’s that giving more support to a candidate should hurt rather than help.
Mr. Dean mistakenly thinks that ranked-choice voting supports the principle of majority rule. But this is not true, even when the sequential elimination of weaker candidates whittles the number down to two. The reason is that voters who supported weaker candidates can have all their preferred candidates eliminated, so in the end these voters are not counted in the contest between the final two.
These and related problems cropped up in the 2009 mayoral race in Burlington, Vt., which had adopted ranked-choice voting. Burlington voters voted to repeal it, as have voters in other cities that had similar unfortunate experiences. Moreover, countries like Australia that have long used ranked-choice voting have remained essentially two-party systems.
It makes no sense to adopt a fundamentally flawed voting system when there are simpler alternatives, like approval voting, that do not suffer from such failures and would facilitate the entry of new candidates and parties.
The writer is a professor of politics at New York University.
To the Editor: Howard Dean’s suggestion that the United States should adopt ranked-choice voting is long overdue. Australia, whose electoral system I have studied extensively, has used ranked choice for almost a hundred years.
Beyond giving voters the ability to take a chance on a third party, ranked choice would immediately defuse the toxic polarization of our national political scene by psychologically reframing how we see the choices we face. Replacing our red-versus-blue Armageddon with something more nuanced would make us a less angry country almost overnight.
Ranked choice would also make voting more complicated; this could overwhelm some voters and depress turnout. Australia deals with this problem effectively by combining mandatory voting with some ingenious procedures that simplify the decision process while preserving an enviable level of freedom of choice. We would do well to learn from Australia’s example.
The writer is a professor of economics at CUNY.
To the Editor: Why does Howard Dean promote a new system of voting — ranked choice — when a system has long existed that gives third parties a real voice in government?
A proportional representation system, used throughout much of the world, allows third parties representation equal to the percentage of the popular vote they obtain.
If, say, Socialists get 10 percent, they get 10 percent of the legislative seats. Then the minority party can, as needed, forge coalitions with dominant parties, force change and be heard.
What Mr. Dean proposes is the illusion of choice, a Burger King menu of candidates that, by a process of elimination, ends up with the winner-take-all results we have now. Such a system guarantees the marginalization of third parties regardless of their merit.
