His Majesty’s protuberant eyes were fixed cruelly on his New York subjects. His voluptuous lips were set in steely resolve. Towering on a marble base above the Bowling Green, the gilded equestrian statue of King George III evoked a Roman emperor. With right arm upraised over the heads of the rabble, his message to a colony in revolutionary turmoil was plain enough: Don’t even think about it.
On July 9, 1776, however, after hearing the newly adopted Declaration of Independence publicly proclaimed, 40 American soldiers and sailors under the command of Capt. Oliver Brown stole down to the Bowling Green in Lower Manhattan under cover of night. They lashed ropes around the statue, pulled until their ropes broke and then pulled again. At last, the symbol of a detested monarchy lay in pieces on the ground. Pieces of precious lead.
“His statue here has been pulled down to make musket ball of, so that his troops will probably have melted Majesty fired at them,” Ebenezer Hazard, the New York postmaster, wrote to Gen. Horatio Gates.
Reduced to 42,088 musket balls, a pedestal and a few barely recognizable scraps, the statue all but disappeared. For 240 years, Americans have had to rely on their imaginations alone to conjure the hated icon.
Now, inside the workshop of StudioEIS on the Brooklyn waterfront, King George III has taken full form again, life size and in three dimensions.
It is now possible, for the first time since the 18th century, to experience viscerally the shiver of pride — and anxious awe — that must have greeted the original statue when it arrived from London in 1770.
“The statue is getting a bit of a second life,” said Ivan Schwartz, a co-founder of the studio with his brother Elliot.
This statue is not destined to be turned into ammunition. Instead, it will serve as the centerpiece of a historical tableau at the Museum of the American Revolution, now under construction in Philadelphia, which is to open next April.
Visitors will find the eight-foot-tall statue atop an eight-foot-tall marble pedestal. The figure of a sailor will stand alongside the king, seemingly ready to throw a rope down to the crowd. Viewers will be invited to consider whether they would have joined in, especially knowing that British soldiers were massed nearby on Staten Island.
“It immediately makes you see the Revolution as revolutionary,” Philip C. Mead, the museum’s chief historian and curator, said last week. The New-York Historical Society will lend the museum two of the six fragments of the original statue that are in its collection.
Instead, the Revolution was “populist and violent,” said R. Scott Stephenson, the vice president for collections, exhibitions and programming.
New Yorkers are lucky enough to have evidence of revolutionary fervor in their midst. Besides pulling down the statue of George III, patriots also knocked the ornamental finials from the posts of a wrought-iron fence that still encircles the Bowling Green.
Other remnants of that fateful moment may have come to light at the Monmouth Battlefield State Park in New Jersey. Daniel M. Sivilich, the author of “Musket Ball and Small Shot Identification: A Guide,” said that nine musket balls found there seem to bear the same chemical signature — of lead, tin, copper and antimony — as samples taken from the statue fragments.
But no one has seen King George III in one piece since 1776.
This posed an unusual challenge for StudioEIS, based at the Industry City complex in the Sunset Park neighborhood of Brooklyn, which prides itself on historical accuracy. Its sculptures, figures and likenesses are in historical, military, sports and science museums, including the Smithsonian Institution; and at historical sites and estates.
Ivan Schwartz said the most important clue for the reconstruction project came from a detailed account written in 1920 by Alexander J. Wall of the historical society.
Mr. Wall identified an equestrian statue of Marcus Aurelius as the source for the sculptor of King George III, Joseph Wilton. That provided the basis for a three-dimensional computer model created by Michael Ferrari-Fontana, working with Mr. Schwartz.
The historical society furnished a tracing of the pedestal, enabling the modelers to extrapolate the statue’s overall dimensions. “It’s our responsibility to try to fill in the blanks so we can present to the public a semblance of what the statue looked like,” said Margaret K. Hofer, the vice president and museum director of the society.
Though the statue’s head was lopped off and mutilated by the revolutionists, it was known to have borne a striking likeness to George III. That gave StudioEIS the confidence to model a new face based on portraits of the king. Dr. Stephenson said another useful source was Wilton’s 1765 bust of King George III, at the McCord Museum in Montreal.
At Digital Atelier, the computer files were used to mill the larger features of the statue out of a dense, rigid urethane foam that feels much like wood to the touch. Detailed elements, like the king’s head and the rosettes of the bridle, were made with a three-dimensional printer.
Once fully assembled, the pieces were painted gold. The total cost for the finished piece, including the sailor standing alongside the king, was $90,000. The statue is to be shipped to Philadelphia early next year.
