Minneapolis — “Diary of a Wimpy Kid: The Musical” is a hit at the Children’s Theater Company here. Reviews were strong and tickets are scarce, even with a week’s worth of added performances. As the production sprints toward closing night next month, a question hangs over the boisterous proceedings: What’s next?
There’s ample speculation that the show, based on Jeff Kinney’s wildly popular, illustration-dotted novels for young people, is eventually heading east, to a Broadway ever hungry for family-friendly fare. “Matilda the Musical” is closing on Jan. 1. And while “School of Rock the Musical” is a Tony-nominated hit, “Tuck Everlasting,’’ like “Wimpy Kid” an adaptation of a children’s book, turned out to be short-lived.
As directed by Rachel Rockwell, “Wimpy Kid” is faithful to the books on which it’s based: The set is dominated by a gigantic sheet of notebook paper, which forms the backdrop and spills over into the orchestra pit.
Most of the scenic elements are built or projected in the black-and-white, rudimentary two-dimensional style that is the visual signature of Mr. Kinney’s books. The music, by Michael Mahler and Alan Schmuckler, is a pastiche of styles, from hip-hop and Motown to techno-pop and old-style Broadway balladry.
In an unusual move, the creative and production teams will return to the Twin Cities before the June 12 closing to test some tweaks to the show with the current ensemble. Those changes won’t be incorporated into the Minneapolis production, but could find their way into the show’s next, to-be-determined incarnation.
Still, no plans for a New York transfer have been announced, and the commercial producers, who put money into the Children’s Theater production, have not yet reached out to Broadway theater owners.
The seed of the musical was planted three years ago, when Mr. McCollum and Fox announced a partnership to develop for the stage promising titles from the studio’s 4,500-film catalog.
Children’s Theater Company, which won a Tony Award as the nation’s outstanding regional theater in 2003, had been mulling a stage version of “Wimpy Kid” for this, its 50th anniversary season. The nonprofit theater’s producer, Jennifer Collins Ritter — who had worked with both Mr. McCollum and Mr. Hurwitz in New York — reached out to the new commercial partnership.
Mr. McCollum’s Broadway credits include “Something Rotten!” and “In the Heights.” But he also ran the nonprofit Ordway Center for the Performing Arts across the Mississippi River in St. Paul during the late 1990s, making him familiar with the work of Children’s Theater. He and Mr. Hurwitz, a founder of the New York Musical Theater Festival, have had a close hand in shaping the show.
Consider: Four days before the cast assembled for the first rehearsal in Minneapolis, “Wimpy Kid” still did not have a working script.
Ms. Rockwell gathered Mr. Hurwitz and Mr. Kinney into a church conference room in Chicago, where she is based. With the composing team and Kevin Del Aguila, who wrote the book, they pounded out a rehearsal draft over the course of a day, then headed north to begin rehearsals.
“Diary of a Wimpy Kid,” which Mr. McCollum somewhat grandiosely describes as “a classic hero’s journey with an unreliable narrator,” centers on Greg Heffley, an ordinary kid trying to navigate the perils of middle school.
He’s hardly a wholly sympathetic character: Though Greg suffers the neglect at home typical of a middle child (sandwiched between the headbanger Rodrick and the spoiled toddler Manny), he thinks nothing of denigrating, ignoring or even injuring his profoundly dorky best friend, Rowley.
Greg’s adventures fill 10 books that have sold more than 164 million copies, and three feature films (with a fourth in development). The musical borrows much of its material and structure from the first novel, which chronicles Greg’s determined but hapless efforts to climb his school’s popularity ladder.
But Mr. Kinney said the relationship between Greg and Rowley in the stage play actually gave him insights into his characters.
“Wimpy Kid” is not the company’s first venture into commercial theater. In 2002, Children’s Theater hosted a production of “A Year With Frog and Toad,” which has enjoyed a successful life around the country despite fizzling on Broadway. That project came to the theater prepackaged, with a finished draft, a completed creative team and a New York cast.
With “Wimpy Kid,” the Minneapolis theater was more fully engaged in the process, helping select the cast and creative team. Enhancement money allowed the theater to expand its budget beyond the $750,000 to $1 million it typically spends on musicals.
Both the nonprofit theater and the commercial producers had to make compromises. Mr. McCollum and Mr. Hurwitz, for instance, are accustomed to a dozen or more preview performances to fine-tune a new work before the critics show up. Children’s Theater’s schedule allows for three previews.
The theater is also committed to using its own company and local actors. Though Twin Cities performers filled out most of the 20-plus-member “Wimpy Kid” cast, Ms. Rockwell chose the Chicago-area actor Ricky Falbo as Greg and David Rosenthal (who appeared in the Broadway production of “Matilda”) as Rowley.
Life for “Wimpy Kid” beyond Minneapolis would be healthy for the Children’s Theater, said Peter Brosius, its artistic director. But it would also advance the cause of multigenerational theaters like his own.
Mr. Kinney, who will see the publication of “Double Down,” the 11th book in the series, this November, is pleased with how his characters have evolved for the stage. Given the various incarnations of the characters that now live off the page, many creative hands have shaped Greg, Rowley and company, he acknowledges.
