It was the buzz at the door Brian Andrew Whiteley had been dreading for months.
On Monday afternoon, a pair of police officers in plain clothes and a Secret Service agent appeared at his Brooklyn apartment. Mr. Whiteley, an artist, was nervous but not exactly surprised.
On March 27, Easter Sunday, he had secretly dropped off his latest project in Central Park: a gravestone bearing the name of Donald J. Trump. The epitaph read “Made America Hate Again.” The stone was quickly removed by the parks department and confiscated by the police.
Since then, mystery remained about the identity of the person responsible, although Mr. Whiteley, 33, had previously spoken to reporters anonymously, for fear of arrest. But after that Monday visit, his name surfaced in The New York Times. His cover blown, he came forward.
Mr. Whiteley is no stranger to discomfiting and absurd work; he has masqueraded as Bigfoot, staged a piece involving a naked man on a crucifix surrounded by balloons, and marched through Green-Wood Cemetery dressed as a clown. But this experience may have changed him.
Asked about the incident, a Secret Service spokesman said late Tuesday, “The Secret Service is aware of this matter and is conducting the appropriate follow-up investigation.” Mr. Whiteley was not charged with a crime. The Trump campaign has also not commented.
In a telephone conversation shortly after the gravestone’s discovery, Mr. Whiteley said he was “not calling for the death of Donald.” He continued, “I’m making an artistic statement,” suggesting that Mr. Trump should rethink his legacy.
This especially polarizing election cycle has needled activists and artists alike; Hillary Clinton, Bernie Sanders and Ted Cruz have all been turned into street art. But Mr. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, has provoked an exceptionally vigorous creative response, with sometimes profane imagery popping up around the world.
Still, Mr. Eccles, executive director of the Center for Curatorial Studies at Bard College, described the reaction by authorities to Mr. Whiteley’s project (which he called “a little silly”) as overblown.
“If the artist was investigated in a way to send a message to others, that would be chilling,” he said.
He added that at a time when much public art in New York is “essentially corporate in some form,” it was refreshing to see an unfiltered take. “Even if I’m not particularly engaged by the artwork, I applaud the effort of the artists,” he said.
Some artists are following Mr. Trump on the road. Last fall, David Gleeson and Mary Mihelic, who work as the t.Rutt collective, bought Mr. Trump’s old campaign bus and have been driving it around the country, stopping at rallies. They replaced his slogan “Make America Great Again” with “Make Fruit Punch Great Again” on their vehicle, and have encouraged people to pelt it with juice, in the hopes that it would help “process the emotion that was clearly getting ready to be stirred up in this campaign,” Mr. Gleeson said.
Both Trump fans and opponents have been angered — “They don’t understand why this bus is art,” Ms. Mihelic said — but the artists have also had positive conversations. “We’re very hopeful that art in this kind of absurd environment is useful,” Mr. Gleeson said.
Creating the gravestone was not the first time Mr. Whiteley had taken on Mr. Trump in his work. In February, he even dressed up as Mr. Trump and, in the WhiteBox gallery, staged a routine with another artist, Rebecca Goyette, dressed as Sarah Palin — a performance that his interrogators this week were aware of, he said.
They also asked him about what books he was reading, whether he owned a gun and whether he attended presidential rallies. “Luckily, I think I passed all the marks that they needed to see,” Mr. Whiteley said. “I did not fit the profile” of an assassin.
Mr. Whiteley said that, in using a gravestone, he wanted to send an unmissable message to Mr. Trump. “I thought the only thing that could affect someone who builds buildings and talks real loud and is the bully on the playground is to remind him of his own mortality,” he said.
After the police seized the gravestone, Mr. Whiteley said he contacted the fabricators, a family-owned memorial company in Brooklyn, to see if it would make “a second edition.” The company declined. Now he hopes to get the original back and exhibit it in New York or Washington.
At the moment, he said, it is not for sale.