Bartolo Colon might look physically out of place on a baseball field, but he rarely presents an uncomfortable image. During stoppages in play, Colon will casually toss the ball in the air and catch it basket-style in his mitt, like a Little Leaguer awaiting action to resume.
In two-plus seasons with the Mets, Colon, a rotund veteran with an unflappable demeanor on the mound and a batting helmet that sometimes spins off his head when he swings, has earned folk-hero status with an endearing approach to the game that occasionally defies logic. He was at the center of attention for several reasons in his start Wednesday, but by the end of the day, the overarching conclusion might have been that the magic in Colon’s memorable run with the Mets was wearing thin.
Colon walked five batters for the first time since April 26, 2005, when he pitched for the Los Angeles Angels, and threw a season-high 107 pitches in only four and two-thirds innings, hitting a batter and allowing three runs as the Mets lost to the Washington Nationals, 7-1.
The Mets’ six pitchers walked 11 batters.
It was Colon’s first game at Citi Field since he went deep in San Diego for his first major league home run at age 42, a feat that still boggles the mind.
On Tuesday, Colon demonstrated that his homer had not been a fluke. He walked out of the Mets’ clubhouse just before 4 p.m., tightening the straps on his blue and white batting gloves. 
David Wright, the Mets’ captain, has praised Colon’s hand-eye coordination and his ability to hit home runs in batting practice, and now Colon began to reveal signs of his hitting acumen. First, he showed bunt before pulling back the bat to swing away. 
While waiting his next turn, Colon walked to the side and spat his gum into the air, taking a cut, and whiffing. Suddenly, Wright’s proclamations of Colon’s hitting prowess again seemed farcical.
Colon then began his third round of swings, waving his bat back and forth in his stance, a less violent version of Gary Sheffield’s approach. But the balls did not crash into the seats the way they would when Sheffield, who hit 509 career home runs, took batting practice. Instead, Colon kept popping the ball straight up into the top of the cage.
At this point, the Mets’ position players slowly began to file out onto the field for pregame stretching, signaling that the pitchers’ batting practice was coming to a close. Fred Wilpon, the Mets’ principal owner, also made an appearance, walking toward the outfield.
With Wilpon and just about all of the Mets looking on, Colon entered the cage for his final swings. He began by taking pitches, which was puzzling; showing plate discipline in batting practice is as useful as stealing a base while trailing by 10 runs.
But maybe there was a method to Colon’s madness. On one of the last pitches thrown to him, he took a hearty cut, creating a booming snap off the bat. Some Mets players yelled, “Ohh,” and paused to gawk at the ball in flight.
The ball continued to carry, looking as if it might clear the fence. And in the end, it did, bouncing off Casey Stengel’s retired No. 37 above the left-field railing.
Colon cracked a small smile, as if he knew he had it in him all along.
Those good feelings may be tarnished after a report in The New York Post on Wednesday said that Colon had been taken to court by a woman who contended that she had two children, now school age, with him out of wedlock and that he had failed to pay child support.
Evan Schein, a lawyer representing the woman, and Robert H. Moses, a lawyer representing Colon, did not return requests for comment.
The news did not lead to any jeers when the starting lineup was announced Wednesday, and Colon received the warmest reception of any Mets player. Before the game, Collins was asked if he thought Colon might be distracted when he pitched Wednesday night.
That may no longer hold true. The loss to the Nationals was his third straight uninspiring start. Despite belting a 90-mile-an-hour pitch from San Diego’s James Shields, a former All-Star, over the left-field wall at Petco Park on May 7, Colon still yielded three runs in that game, and another five in his next outing, against the Los Angeles Dodgers.