In 2014, a developer sought approval for an odd alteration to a lot on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. Instead of a 30-foot-deep lot, abutting East 88th Street, the developer sliced off a narrow sliver only four feet wide.
The change, approved by New York City, became part of the official map of taxable lots that November. But the motivation behind it became clearer only in recent months.
That thin buffer between the building’s lot and the street allowed the developers, DDG Partners, to avoid an array of requirements for a structure’s shape and size when it touches the street — and ultimately, opponents of the project say, build a tower about 60 feet higher. The Upper East Side tower takes its address from 88th Street, but because of the tiny lot, the entrance is around the corner on Third Avenue.
With permits issued in March, the developers have wasted no time: Rebar jutted out in clusters above street level on a recent afternoon from the poured foundation of what is to be among the neighborhood’s tallest towers. Signs outside announce the multimillion-dollar condominiums now on the market. Height, one of the developers has said, is a major selling point.
But the fast-rising 521-foot tower, known as 180 East 88th Street and approved by the city’s Buildings Department, now faces a challenge from residents and elected officials arguing that the developers, who donated at least $19,900 to Mayor Bill de Blasio’s campaign and causes, used a novel tactic to circumvent zoning regulations and build taller than would ordinarily be allowed.
Their argument centers on the four-foot-wide lot along 88th Street.
The brewing fight over a soaring luxury tower in one of the city’s more rarefied neighborhoods highlights how a surge in residential development has rankled New Yorkers up and down the economic ladder.
And the presence of DDG Partners on the rolls of donors to the 2013 campaign of Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, and among the contributors last year to his political nonprofit, the Campaign for One New York, emphasizes the way in which donations appear to have become a cost of doing business in the city. Many of those who have given to the nonprofit, which advocated the mayor’s policies but is now defunct, are developers or others who do business with the city.
In March 2014, the department said the project could go forward with the adjacent lot along 88th Street. But at the time of that approval, the lot proposed by the developer was more than 30 feet deep — a size that could be developed into a separate building.
There has been no allegation of wrongdoing by the de Blasio administration in connection with the project or favorable treatment afforded to the developers.
Mr. Janes, who was hired by Carnegie Hill Neighbors to analyze the site, said the developers appeared to be seeking to avoid building a bigger base for the tower, which would be required if the lot touched 88th Street. And the square footage that would have had to go into that extra base could be used instead to add additional height to the 521-foot tower. If required to add to the base, he said, the tower might have to be shortened by about 60 feet, or roughly six floors in a typical building.
The pricing reflects Mr. McMillan’s philosophy: Apartment 42, a four-bedroom unit three stories from the top that takes up an entire floor, is listed at $15.5 million.
Though it would be taller than the surrounding apartment buildings, its 32 floors would be roughly equivalent in number to the broad but shorter brown-brick building facing it on Third Avenue.
“We do have tall buildings on Third Avenue, but none are this tall,” Mr. van der Valk said. His concern is not that the tower would gentrify the neighborhood, which includes a Whole Foods Market across the street. “It’s already gentrified,” he said. Rather, the issue is forcing developers to abide by zoning regulations. “We’re challenging an approval,” he added.
