The American economy is picking up speed after a slow start to the year, with resilient consumer spending and a buoyant housing market just about making up for a falloff in investment by cautious companies.
But the overall gains are still likely to fall short of what many experts — not to mention ordinary workers — would hope to see as the recovery nears the end of its seventh year.
These crosscurrents highlight the challenge facing policy makers at the Federal Reserve as they weigh whether to raise interest rates when they meet in mid-June, or wait until July or later in the year.
On Friday, the Commerce Department raised its estimate of the pace of growth in the first quarter of 2016 to 0.8 percent, a move driven mostly by better data on inventories and housing. Other areas of the economy, especially manufacturing and mining, still face significant headwinds.
One explanation for the hesitancy of businesses to spend is pressure on earnings after several years of expanding margins. The Commerce Department said corporate profits rose just 0.3 percent in the first quarter, after a 7.8 percent drop in the fourth quarter of 2015.
The government’s initial estimate of first-quarter economic activity, released in late April, showed an annual growth rate of 0.5 percent. The third and final estimate for growth will be released on June 28.
For the second quarter, which covers April, May and June, most experts forecast that the pace will pick up to about 2.5 percent.
Underscoring the consumer’s ability to shrug off the anxiety that has gripped some businesses, the University of Michigan said on Friday that its monthly survey of consumer confidence in May showed sentiment at its healthiest level since June 2015. Expectations for future growth improved among both high- and middle-income households, according to the University of Michigan researchers.
The reports on Friday also suggest that 2016’s economic trajectory will follow an arc that has bedeviled forecasters for years: a soft first quarter followed by a turnaround in the spring even though underlying conditions remain largely the same throughout the period.
“There is better momentum now, but it’s still a bit of a head fake,” said Diane Swonk, an independent economist based in Chicago.
“It could be everything from a change in the structure of the economy to mismeasurement,” Ms. Swonk said. Government agencies are working to improve their methods, she said, but budgets are tight in Washington and it has been difficult for federal statisticians to keep up with the broader shift from manufacturing to services as a growth engine in recent decades.
Although revisions and statistical quirks are nothing new for economists, Ms. Swonk explained that they appeared much larger these days because the overall level of economic growth was low to begin with. “You notice it much more when you’re skating so close to thin ice,” she said.
Just how thin that ice really is has prompted considerable debate within the Federal Reserve and on Wall Street as Fed officials ponder a possible interest rate increase when they meet in mid-June.
Until recently, most outside experts did not expect the Fed to lift its short-term rate lever until September at the earliest. But the official account of the central bank’s last meeting in April, released May 18, showed that policy makers were ready to tighten monetary policy in June if they thought the economy was indeed getting stronger.
Ian Shepherdson, the chief economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, said positive recent indicators like retail sales and buoyant home prices in April strengthened the hand of Fed hawks, although they could wait, because markets remained anxious before Britain’s June 23 referendum on whether to leave the European Union.
With the so-called Brexit vote looming, one alternate possibility would be for the Fed to hold off in June but telegraph that it plans to move at its July gathering, Mr. Shepherdson said.
Next week should provide greater clarity on the economy’s real momentum. On Tuesday, the Commerce Department will report on consumer income and spending in April, and Friday will bring the Labor Department report on May unemployment and hiring, a crucial metric for the Fed.
Buried in the details of the gross domestic product report on Friday were signs that inflation was picking up to more normal levels after years of dormancy, Mr. Harris said. In particular, he said, the so-called core measure of consumer prices rose at an annual rate of 2.1 percent in the first quarter, just above the Fed’s 2 percent target.
