The interest in consulteering — a word Mr. Peters said he thought up on his own — is one sign among many that traditional retirement no longer satisfies as many older people as it once did. A recent study from the Employee Benefit Research Institute found that fewer older Americans say they’re having a great time during retirement.
Based on a 15-year period of data from the University of Michigan’s Health and Retirement Study, the most comprehensive national survey of older Americans, the share of people reporting “very satisfying” retirements dropped significantly from just over 60 percent in 1998 to under 49 percent in 2012.
Staving off retirement blues takes preparation. The first step for Mr. Peters and his wife, Chris, a retired teacher, was to move closer to family. They relocated to Greenland, N.H., to live near their son and daughter-in-law and their two young granddaughters, ages 3 and 5.
It wasn’t a rash move. They rented for a year. “We wanted to get a lay of the land and not disrupt our son and his family’s life, and at the same time find a place we could afford,” Mr. Peters said.
To test the waters, he accepted weekend consulting assignments before retiring. “There was a demand, so now I pick and choose when I work — generally one job a month,” he said.
To further engage in their interest in theater, they usher at a local music hall and the Seacoast Repertory Theater, and sell concessions. “I make a lot of popcorn,” Mr. Peters said.
He also serves as a board member at a handful of small nonprofits.
The third leg of the stool is family and leisure. Dane and Chris Peters care for their granddaughters two days a week before and after school. This year, they have already traveled to San Miguel, Mexico, and have booked an Alaskan cruise and a biking and barge tour in France.
Similarly, Ann Seltz, 66, who lives in Rockville, Md., keeps a tight rein on her paid work in retirement, limiting it to an average of 25 hours a week, so she has time for her volunteer work and other activities.
A sizable 60 percent of retirees surveyed last year by the nonprofit Transamerica Center for Retirement Studies said they were pushed out of their jobs before age 65, largely for reasons out of their control, according to Catherine Collinson, president of T.C.R.S.
After bouncing around in a few short-term positions, Ms. Seltz decided to set up her own shingle, starting SeltzSolutions.com, a marketing-consulting practice. To land assignments, she tapped FlexProfessionals, an employment agency in Washington and Boston that matches experienced professionals with part-time employment. Her hourly rate was about a third of what it would have been for project management and marketing assignments at the top of her game, she figured.
Not all retirees are willing to work for less than they feel they’re worth. That is often a mistake. “They have unrealistic expectations for pay and responsibility, especially for part-time positions,” said Gwenn Rosener, co-founder of FlexProfessionals.
“This stems from justified pride in their expertise, but it significantly limits the landscape of positions that can meet those expectations,” she said. Moreover, many semi-retirees “have a sense that the world is their oyster and that the second act is about pursuing a dream, or trying something new,” she said.
