When Other Music, the scrappy East Village record store, opened in 1995, it existed in the shadow of Tower Records, which ran the entire city block across East Fourth Street. By 1998, Virgin Megastore was a short walk away in Union Square.
Yet Other Music, known for its dedication to underground and experimental artists, outlived both — Tower shut its 89 American stores in 2006, while Virgin closed in 2009. In the face of a shrinking music industry, the longevity of this small shop could be seen as a win for the niche, the curated, even the slightly snobby. But it couldn’t last.
The New York record shop Other Music will close its doors on June 25, after over two decades in business. We asked the co-owner Josh Madell about the records that represent the soul of his store.
Rent, on the other hand, has more than doubled from the $6,000 a month the store paid in 1995, while its annual share of the building’s property tax bill has also increased.
Then there are the dreary industry trends: In 2015, streaming nearly doubled from the previous year while CDs sales were down 82 percent from their peak in 2001. And despite the resurgence of vinyl, which now makes up about 60 percent of Other Music’s revenue, up from about 20 percent in its first 10 years, there’s no real salvation in sight.
A staff knowledgeable about esoteric genres — ambient music, free jazz, ’70s German psychedelic, ’60s French pop — served as spirit guides.
Along with its meticulous selection, Other Music made a name with its intimate connections to indie acts and labels. The store was early to champion local bands like the Yeah Yeah Yeahs, Interpol and Vampire Weekend, selling homemade releases and hosting in-store performances. Elliott Smith and Neutral Milk Hotel also played there over the years.
Now physical products are often “an afterthought,” he added, even for larger bands like Radiohead, whose new single and album were released first digitally, with vinyl and CDs coming weeks or months later. The annual Record Store Day, in which artists provide stores with exclusive releases, can help only so much.
“The energy of music obviously has moved out of a place like this,” said Mr. Madell, who admitted that CDs now look “like floppy disks” to him.
As Manhattan stores continue to close — notable survivors include Bleecker Street Records and Generation Records on Thompson Street, though both focus more on used titles — shops are opening in Brooklyn, though usually with more to offer.
Rough Trade NYC, a 15,000-square-foot spinoff of the London store that opened in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, in 2013, has a cafe and a performance space, among other flourishes.
