During the same week in November that an obscure New York City agency lifted a protective covenant on a nursing home on the Lower East Side — an alteration that is now the subject of at least three inquiries — a similar move was playing out in Harlem.
Few people knew that the agency, the Department of Citywide Administrative Services, had accepted $875,000 in exchange for lifting a deed restriction, in place since 1976, that required a corner lot at St. Nicholas Avenue and 152nd Street to be used only by nonprofit cultural organizations in the area.
Neighbors who learned about the change after the fact feared that the lot, owned by the Dance Theater of Harlem, would end up in the hands of developers. What they did not know, at that point, was that a developer who made a financial contribution to one of Mayor Bill de Blasio’s political causes was already in contract to buy the property. The developer, BRP Companies, closed on the sale last month for $3.1 million.
The process by which the deed restriction on the unremarkable but nonetheless valuable Harlem parcel was lifted in many ways mirrors the one involving the Lower East Side nursing home, known as Rivington House.
The decision to amend the nursing home deed, for $16 million, is being investigated by Eric T. Schneiderman, the New York State attorney general; the city’s comptroller, Scott M. Stringer; and the city’s Investigation Department.
The transactions in Harlem are facing new scrutiny. Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, has said he was unaware of the Rivington House deal and ordered a review of the process for removing such deed restrictions imposed by the city. The City Council is expected to hold a hearing on deed restrictions next month.
And Mr. Schneiderman’s office said on Friday that it was reviewing the circumstances surrounding the transactions in Harlem, including the lifting of the deed restriction, but had not opened a formal investigation.
As little public notice as there was for the contentious deal on the Lower East Side, which resulted in a developer of luxury condominiums buying the nursing home property in February for $116 million, the decision to remove all restrictions on the Harlem property got even less.
The local community board was not informed. Neither was the local councilman, Mark Levine, nor the Manhattan borough president, Gale A. Brewer. A notice of a public hearing appeared on a back page of the City Record for a single day in April 2015. No one showed up at the hearing to testify.
According to a person familiar with the matter, the city has been in talks with BRP Companies, which builds both market-rate and below-market-rate housing, about putting around two dozen affordable units on the Harlem parcel. It was not clear when those conversations took place or if they played a role in the decision to lift the deed restriction, said the person, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the active inquiries into deed changes.
A developer would need city approval, and would have to include affordable units in its plans, if it wanted to pursue a rezoning of the property to allow for the construction of a larger building than is currently allowed there.
BRP Companies went into contract to buy the lot in May 2015. Several months earlier, in October 2014, it contributed $10,000 through a company it controls to the Putnam County Democratic Committee, a donation that coincided with a push that year by Mr. de Blasio and his allies to use local county committees as vehicles for supporting Democrats in tight State Senate races. The Manhattan district attorney’s office and the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York are now investigating whether the tactic resulted in violations of election law.
Asked last month about the donation, Meredith Marshall, a founder of the firm, said that he could not recall who had asked him to contribute, though he said it was not someone from the de Blasio administration. Mr. Marshall has occasionally appeared in mayoral news releases, providing quotations supportive of housing initiatives.
No construction permits have yet been filed with the city for the lot. Mr. Marshall suggested last month that the absence of a state subsidy might prevent the company from building affordable housing in some cases. He did not respond to a request for comment for this article; emails and phone messages to BRP Companies were not returned.
At a Council budget hearing on Friday, Ms. Camillo said that the city had delayed acting on “about 13 or 14” pending requests to lift or modify deed restrictions while the agency conducts its review. She did not address specific questions about Rivington House or the Harlem lot.
City officials are also exploring whether the administrative services department had the authority to lift the restriction on the Harlem deed, which was imposed nearly 40 years ago by the Board of Estimate, which had many of the powers of today’s Council.
In most cases, if a land-use decision made by the Board of Estimate is to be changed, the revision must be approved by the city’s Planning Commission or, in some cases, by the Council itself.
Barry Weinberg, another member of the local community board, questioned how the decision on the deed had been arrived at.
“There’s huge concern and there’s massive frustration: Why was this deed restriction lifted?” Mr. Weinberg said.
Deed restrictions, on parcels of land formerly owned by the city, are rarely removed. There have been at least nine instances of such restrictions being modified or removed since Mr. de Blasio took office. In several cases, the city accepted no money for the change, choosing instead to impose new restrictions. The price fetched by the Harlem lot appears to be the second highest, after Rivington House.
The lot also benefited from special zoning. When the Council changed the zoning rules in 2012 for the neighborhood, a fast-gentrifying section of Harlem, the local councilman at the time obtained an exemption for the Dance Theater of Harlem that allowed for construction of greater height and density on the empty lot than in the surrounding area.
But even with the special zoning, the restriction on the deed — for “nonprofit use by a community-service-type organization offering cultural services to the community” — limited the value of the property.
It was not clear how long the Dance Theater of Harlem, which has struggled financially, had been in negotiations with the city to lift the restriction. The group’s executive director, Anna Glass, referred questions to the board chairman, Michael D. Armstrong, who did not respond to a request for comment.
