The young man taking orders behind the counter at Royal Rib House greeted John White, who was next in line for ribs, with a smile. Mr. White gave a wave. Behind him was a long queue snaking out of the store and down a sleepy block in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, on a warm spring evening. Judging from the handshakes and hugs given out, many customers were regulars, catching up with friends they see once or twice a week as they picked up their rotisserie-style barbecue and soul food from Royal Rib House. But often enough there were also those returning to the neighborhood from other parts of Brooklyn or farther afield. What united them was a deep love of fall-off-the-bone ribs.
Once inside the small waiting room, those in line became serious. Customers waited to place their order with one of the young men working behind the gate, a vestige of a time when running a restaurant in the neighborhood was a riskier proposition. Jason Barnett was busy packing orders and chopping meat with a loud thwack, pausing only to share a quick word with a customer who asked to pass along a hello to Mr. Barnett’s mother, Carole Grier, who does most of the cooking.
It was Ms. Grier’s father, Calvin Grier, who opened Royal Rib House more than 40 years ago, and everyone who works in the takeout is a relative or a neighbor — Mr. Barnett (with the cleaver) is his grandson, and Jonathan Mears, who has been taking orders for five years, is a family friend.
When Mr. Grier moved to New York City from the Carolinas with his young wife in the early 1960s, his daughter said, he worked as a taxi driver. On most shifts he would scope out locations for the restaurant he dreamed of opening. After a few brief attempts to break into the restaurant business, he found the storefront at 303 Halsey Street and opened a takeout restaurant offering Southern classics and specializing in the slow-baked ribs the place is known for.
Mr. White, 73, has been coming to Royal Rib House for as long as it has been in business, having spent his entire life in Bedford-Stuyvesant. As he waited for his order to be packed, he declared Royal Rib House a “cornerstone” of the neighborhood and added, “Besides the courtesy I receive every time I come, I’m here because the food is excellent.” He received his bulging bag from across the counter and went on his way.
Next was Jezra Kaye, 64, who used to live in the neighborhood. “Lots of what was great about Brooklyn when I moved here in 1981 is gone,” she said, “but just walking in this place is a comfort.” She said she makes the trip from her home across Brooklyn every few weeks.
With just a few straight-backed chairs inside the small brick-walled waiting area, Royal Rib House is only a temporary hangout. “People come from near and far for the nostalgia,” said S. Emmanuel, a street vendor who sells his wares nearby. He said he had watched many local stores and restaurants come and go during his lifetime, and he listed a few of the places that had recently changed: a family-run hardware store a block away yielding to luxury apartments, an adjacent pet supply store that used to be a restaurant owned by a relative of Mr. White’s.
