Diane Arbus was teetering on the edge of a breakdown. In 1956, she tearfully dissolved the decade-long fashion-photography enterprise that she had been conducting successfully but stressfully with her husband, Allan. Her misery was longstanding. Fashion photography is built on artifice. Diane needed, temperamentally and philosophically, to poke through pretensions and masks to expose the hidden truth.
In the early 1950s, she hit “a high note of hysteria,” as she put it, and “tried to wriggle out of a sitting” for Glamour, at a dinner party hosted by the Condé Nast art editor Tina Fredericks, who had been the Arbuses’ earliest champion in the magazine business. In a letter to her friend Alex Eliot, Diane castigated herself for being “a terrible coward, childish, hysteric, quitter,” someone who would inevitably “lie down and let everything walk over” her. The painter Alfred Leslie, at another dinner with the Arbuses, found himself squirming at Diane’s nonstop, searing self-disparagement.
Although Allan later said it was “terrifying” when Diane quit, he allowed that in some ways it was easier, because he no longer had to cope with “that load of Diane’s disapproval.” As for Diane, at 33, she was free to photograph whatever she chose. In many of her initial efforts, she posed family and close friends: She was learning her craft and enlisting collaborators who made her comfortable. At other times, she shot unpeopled places that, through her eyes, came alive: an empty snack bar, for example, in which two chairs seemed still engaged in the conversation of the couple who had vacated them. “She always responded to inanimate objects as if they were people,” her high school art teacher, Victor D’Amico, observed.
The novice photographer often took portraits of women her own age, toting packages or children. Married at 18 and now the mother of two young daughters, Diane recognized children for what they were: not the spun-sugar creations of adult fantasies, but suspicious, skeptical, forlorn, dreamy or furious creatures inhabiting their own sphere. In late 1956, she was feeling not only burdened but also fragile — so light and insubstantial that she could blow away. She photographed the tracery of dead leaves on autumnal trees, a flyaway newspaper tumbling down a dark street, a discarded Raggedy Ann doll on the ground.
From the very beginning of her career, she was taking photographs to obtain a vital proof — a corroboration of her own existence. The pattern was set early. When she was 15, she described to a friend how she would undress at night in her lit bathroom and watch an old man across the courtyard watch her (until his wife complained). She not only wanted to see, she needed to be seen. As a street photographer, she dressed at times in something attention-grabbing, like a fake leopard-skin coat. She didn’t blend into the background, she jumped out of it. And she fascinated her subjects. “People were interested in Diane, just as interested in her as she was in them,” John Szarkowski, a longtime director of photography at the Museum of Modern Art, once told me.
That immense seductiveness was essential, because she relied on others’ responses to feel alive. She puzzled her close friend Pati Hill by asking “what it was simply like to be happy, as if she, on the other hand, had not experienced this emotion and wished to,” Hill recalled to me in 2011. “As if it were cigarettes or a hay ride.” In later years, when Diane was seeing a psychotherapist, she complained how she had felt so little throughout her life. Childbirth and menstruation were the two experiences that gave her a twinge of joy, she confided, because they provided intense feeling and physical evidence of her being.
The dissolving of her self-image coincided with the disintegration of her marriage. The year after Diane stopped working in the studio, Allan, who had dreamed of becoming an actor, began taking an acting class. There he met and fell for an abundantly talented young woman, Zohra Lampert.
Sexual fidelity wasn’t stipulated in the Arbus marital compact. But in 1959, Ms. Lampert declared that she would end the affair if he continued to live with Diane. Allan — although he maintained an unusually close and caring relationship with Diane for the rest of her life — reluctantly moved out. The 18-year marriage was over.
Though it was painful, the marital breakup freed Diane to become an artist. Unlike Israel, who became her lover and pushed her to be more extreme, the cautious Allan had insulated her. “I always felt that it was our separation that made her a photographer,” he once told me. “She’d go to bars on the Bowery and to people’s houses. I would have been horrified if I’d been with her.” Early in her solo career, Diane arranged to visit the room of a 72-year-old merchant seaman she had spotted on the street wearing a woman’s fur coat and wheeling an old baby carriage. Before keeping the appointment, she gave her older daughter the address. “I really had the sense that he was one of those people, one of those Daily News people who like you read the next day murdered somebody,” she explained years later.
Diane had a talent for friendship, and she maintained long-term connections with all sorts of people — eccentrics in rooming houses, freaks in sideshows, socialites on Park Avenue. She needed those relationships. But she also relied on filmed verification of her impact on others. The reciprocal gaze that marks her early photographs would be furthered and intensified in the collaborative form of portraiture in her mature work, done with a medium-format camera. Szarkowski, for one, believed that the sharpness that larger film offered was in keeping with her aim to be both particular and mythic.
But even when her early 35-millimeter work is overexposed and blurry, the Arbus sensibility shines through. She said that she photographed what “gnawed” at her. The anxious middle-age women, larger-than-life matrons and exotic-looking circus performers that she was shooting in 35 millimeter in the ’50s would reappear in her medium-format work. So would the look of mutual recognition — right up until the last two years of her life, when she slipped into a lasting depression, and her subject matter and approach changed.
In her weakened state, she no longer engaged subjects who responded in the intense manner — angry, libidinal — that charged her classic photographs. Instead, she began photographing people who could not return her probing, empathetic gaze: the intellectually disabled, the blind, the oblivious passer-by. Where in the ’50s she had photographed the patrons and film images in movie houses, now she depicted empty theaters with blank screens.
Weeks before her suicide, she visited a friend, the artist Nancy Grossman, who was making rubbings of zippers and leather straps. Terribly distraught, Diane asked Nancy to make a rubbing of her hand. “No, I have to press down hard,” Nancy said. “It will hurt.” “I don’t mind,” Diane replied. And when she left, Diane seemed a little more cheerful. Nancy’s rubbing had done two things that photography no longer accomplished. It made her feel something. And it left behind a proof of her existence.