European modernism still has some great artists whose achievements are a bit fuzzy in the public mind, and one of them is Laszlo Moholy-Nagy. His name is barely known beyond the field of 20th-century art, where it is associated mostly with experimental photography and sometimes thought to be Russian.
Part of the fuzziness reflects the fact that this Hungarian visionary of multiple mediums — the first thoroughly interdisciplinary artist — was exceedingly prolific. Photographs of him show a man with wire-rim glasses and slicked-back hair whose face seems to jut into the future. His extraordinary foresight is confirmed by “Moholy-Nagy: Future Present,” a lavish groundbreaking retrospective opening Friday at the Guggenheim Museum.
The first large Moholy-Nagy exhibition in this country in over 50 years may also be, its organizers say, the largest anywhere. It packs around 300 works into Frank Lloyd Wright’s great spiral — perhaps a record itself. They represent some dozen mediums including painting and sculpture, film and projection, works on paper as well as graphic, set and exhibition design and several forms of photography.
The show provides a bracing picture of both the extent and the unity of Moholy-Nagy’s art as it moves up the ramp, superbly styled for the occasion by Kelly Cullinan, the museum’s senior exhibition designer. Her scheme separates Moholy-Nagy’s achievement into separate strands and then braids them together fluidly. The abstract paintings and sculptures dominate the museum’s signature bays; most films are displayed in small alcoves between the ramps. Moholy-Nagy’s extensive writings and graphic design are displayed on each level in vitrines, whose bright rectangular lids manage to evoke the colorful trapezoids in his paintings. And his complex involvement with photography is played out on free-standing partitions, enabling close study of the interplay of documentary, photomontage and camera-less photograms — a term he invented — sometimes made using his own sculpture. Certain forms and motifs reappear in different mediums, and the give and take between photography and painting is one of the show’s driving forces.
The Guggenheim spiral looks — as it sometimes can for other shows — as if it were built for this phenomenal exhibition. Indeed, Moholy-Nagy was one of several artists collected in depth by Hilla Rebay, the German-born artist, and Solomon R. Guggenheim, as the museum’s founders. The show represents the combined efforts of the Guggenheim, the Art Institute of Chicago and the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, and their respective curators, Karole P. B. Vail, Matthew S. Witkovsky and Carol S. Eliel.
Born in Hungary in 1895, Moholy-Nagy was inculcated with the modernist faith in a free art school in Budapest, which he attended after serving in the Austro-Hungarian army during World War I. By 1919 he was in Berlin, absorbing the heady vapors of Dada, Surrealism, Cubism and especially Russian Constructivism. He expanded its airborne geometries throughout his life, in two and three dimensions, adding brighter colors, and layers of transparencies that reflected his love of light.
Moholy-Nagy carried the Constructivist aesthetic into the postwar era — presaging kinetic art, early Minimalism, environmental art and even Conceptual Art. His best-known paintings are the so-called telephone paintings of 1923: works in baked enamel on copper that came in three sizes, had identical Constructivist motifs and, he said, were ordered over the phone from an enamel-sign maker. They hang in this show like the nuclear family of advanced abstraction.
From 1923 to 1928 Moholy-Nagy taught at the Bauhaus in nearby Dessau, fomenting its shift away from handmade toward industrial fabrication. “To be a user of machines is to be of the spirit of this century,” he wrote. With Walter Gropius, the school’s founder, he published a series of Bauhaus books for which he designed everything down to the typography. He also taught metalwork and the crucial preliminary course, or Vorkurs, which he later summarized in a book translated as “The New Vision” in 1932.
Upon leaving the Bauhaus, Moholy-Nagy became prominent designing avant-garde book covers, department store advertisements and opera and theater stage sets. He pursued similar work as the rise of Nazism forced him to Amsterdam, London and ultimately to the United States, in 1937. He died of leukemia, at 51, in 1946 in Chicago, where he founded an art school, now part of the Illinois Institute of Design, which did much to introduce the Bauhaus credo to American designers.
Moholy-Nagy believed fervently in new materials, techniques and technologies, and experimented with them on multiple fronts, from painting on clear plexiglass, aluminum and Formica to time-lapse photography. The Guggenheim show starts with a late sculpture, from 1946: a spiraling tangle of plexiglass and chromium rods — reminiscent of Frank Stella’s recent work — that dangles over the little fountain on the rotunda floor.
This delightful appetizer is followed immediately by the show’s tour de force: the radical, chic “Room of the Present” (1930), an unrealized participatory gallery commissioned by Alexander Dorner, the innovative director of a museum in Hanover, Germany, to culminate his reinstallation of its collection.
Based on drawings also on view, the 2009 recreation by Kai-Uwe Hemken and Jakob Gebert presents an amalgam of gleaming metals and wall-to-wall images, presaging today’s image deluge. The Wilhelm Wagenfeld table lamp that is part of the display was designed in Moholy-Nagy’s Bauhaus metal shop and is still in production.
The star here is Moholy-Nagy’s own “Light Prop for an Electric Stage,” a revolving mash-up of shiny chrome forms enhanced by tinted gels. It also appeared in his forays into abstract photography and film and evokes the 1960s light and shadow installations of Otto Piene.
The show ends with a ramp devoted to works made in the United States, including a slide projection whose jumpy color abstractions are time-lapse photographs of traffic in New York, a city he often visited.
Here Moholy-Nagy continues the innovations of his paintings and sculptures of the 1920s, using aluminum, plexiglass and paint in fresher, nearly contemporary ways. His American work has new robustness of material, scale and color, although the swarms of paint daubs here first appear in print, in a yellow poster for the London Underground from 1937.
Despite the love of machines, Moholy-Nagy’s work is unified by his hands-on feel for his many mediums, each of which he approached with a sense of precision, physicality and potential tailored to but also pushing at its inherent nature. In the first vitrine, five covers of Der Sturm — the German art magazine of Herwarth Walden — are based on linocuts so delicately textured they evoke woodblock, that most German print form. In the first plexiglass paintings on the show’s last ramp, he incises both sides with infinitesimal curling lines and tints them with contrasting colors to create a third.
From these he moved on to bolder works that accentuate the very flaws and fissures of thicker plexiglass that he heated in his oven and bent into flowing forms. With the help of his beloved light, some cast shadows on the walls on which they hang. The Bauhaus seer was clearly on the verge of a great last phase.