In an election year when Bill Clinton’s policies and personal indiscretions have faced intense scrutiny, Hillary Clinton is beginning to shape the role her husband would play in her administration, zeroing in on economic growth and job creation as crucial missions for the former president.
Mrs. Clinton told voters in Kentucky on Sunday that Mr. Clinton would be “in charge of revitalizing the economy, because, you know, he knows how to do it,” especially “in places like coal country and inner cities.” On a campaign swing this month before the West Virginia primary, she said her husband has “got to come out of retirement and be in charge” of creating jobs.
Aides said Mr. Clinton’s role would be narrowly defined to focus on hard-hit areas of the country, such as the Rust Belt, and they rejected any implication that Mrs. Clinton would outsource a central part of her administration to her spouse.
But even a passing promise that Mr. Clinton would be put in charge of a significant part of a president’s portfolio raised questions about how such an arrangement would work in a White House that has long relied on an appointed Treasury secretary and National Economic Council.
“There is a practical puzzle of how a role like this would jibe with the existing cabinet members whose job is to work on the economy,” said Austan D. Goolsbee, an economic adviser to President Obama and a professor at the University of Chicago.
The declaration about Mr. Clinton’s potential place in a Hillary Clinton administration comes as her campaign is preparing to battle the likely Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump, and widening its efforts to win the support of white working-class voters. Those voters hold generally favorable opinions of Mr. Clinton, but view her with more skepticism.
Mr. Clinton’s more emotive style appears to resonate with blue-collar voters in ways Mrs. Clinton’s has not. Some 55 percent of voters nationwide said they do not believe Mrs. Clinton “cares about people like me,” according to a Quinnipiac poll conducted in February.
And Mr. Clinton’s record — a balanced budget, the creation of 22.7 million jobs and 7.7 million people lifted out of poverty — is in many ways simpler for Mrs. Clinton to pitch than Mr. Obama’s economic record, when economic growth has disproportionately benefited the wealthiest Americans.
“Hillary Clinton’s statement that if elected president she’d put Bill Clinton ‘in charge of revitalizing the economy … because, you know, he knows how to do it’ suggests she’s no longer touting the successes of the Obama economy, or even linking herself to it,” said Robert B. Reich, a secretary of labor during the Clinton administration who endorsed Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont in the Democratic primary.
But for all the benefits of relying on Mr. Clinton, and touting the economic prosperity he oversaw, the strategy could open Mrs. Clinton up to further attacks by Mr. Trump, who has outspokenly criticized Mr. Clinton’s personal indiscretions.
Mr. Trump, who has campaigned as an economic populist, has also hit Mrs. Clinton over her husband’s trade policies, including the North American Free Trade Agreement, which Mr. Clinton signed into law in 1993 and which many voters believe hurt American workers.
Mrs. Clinton’s embrace of her husband’s economic legacy comes after she has spent much of the past year grappling with a challenge from Mr. Sanders and the liberal wing of the Democratic Party. With economic inequality emerging as a main concern among Democratic voters, she has sought to distance herself from the Wall Street deregulation and trade policies associated with the 1990s.
“To what extent does Bill Clinton’s mixed policy agenda map out to the current campaign? That’s the challenge,” said Jared Bernstein, a senior fellow at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities and a former economic adviser to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.
Mrs. Clinton often says she is not running for her husband’s third term, but she has also leaned heavily on his economic record.
Nick Merrill, a spokesman for Mrs. Clinton, said that the central focus of her campaign has been increasing wages and creating good jobs, and that she would not outsource that effort.
While Mrs. Clinton has devoted much of her time in the Democratic primary to speaking out against the impact caused by parts of the 1994 crime bill and a 1996 overhaul of the welfare system that cut federal assistance to the poor by nearly $55 billion over six years, she can now more safely embrace the Bill Clinton years, Democrats said.
Mrs. Clinton’s advisers said the upside of using Mr. Clinton, particularly in the general election, would far outweigh any potential personal baggage that he brings — and that Mr. Trump plans to exploit.
Polls show that voters have a better opinion of Mr. Clinton than either Mrs. Clinton or Mr. Trump, with 56 percent of registered voters viewing him positively, according to a CNN/ORC poll in February.
If Mrs. Clinton leans on her husband for economic advice, the former president may need to update his approach.
To address the growing income inequality and middle-class wages that have remained virtually stagnant for the past 15 years, Mrs. Clinton, in her current campaign, has put forth an economic agenda that is more populist and reliant on government than Mr. Clinton’s centrist approach of deficit reduction and welfare reform.
