On Monday night, Sarah Jessica Parker attended the Met Gala, celebrating the exhibition “Manus x Machina: Fashion in an Age of Technology,” wearing a suit by Monse. Here, she explains the decision behind the unusual choice — and, with the help of her stylist Erin Walsh, shows how it all came together behind the scenes.
The creative process of landing on an idea of what to wear to the Met Gala happened much later than usual this year because I’ve been so consumed with shooting and postproduction. My team takes the theme so seriously each year — and I don’t think we’d do it any other way. There’s my amazing tailor, Lars Nord, who has been building my Met outfits for like 100 years; Serge Normant, the genius behind my hair; my makeup artist Leslie Lopez; the manicurist Gina Eppolito; the magnificent Alyssa Arminio (C.O.O. of my brands SJP Collection and SJP Beauty); and my talented stylist, Erin Walsh, who has an eye for keeping everything cohesive.
Together we are always excited, challenged and befuddled by the themes — and it’s fun to see it all come together. There are always surprises that occur day-of; things we didn’t plan that reveal themselves to us and help move things in a new but exciting direction. Things always change last minute: Serge can do my hair and then decide 40 minutes before I walk out the door that he wants to change it all. It’s all part of a process.
We had approached Fernando Garcia and Laura Kim of Monse with a general direction of what I was looking for — but our actual idea arrived rather late in the game. This year’s theme, “Manus x Machina: Fashion in an Age of Technology,” is far more challenging than themes of years past, mostly in terms of how I wanted to express it as I understood it. It wasn’t as straightforward as past themes, like the era of punk in fashion or examining Chinese culture in fashion. What is technology? And what does it mean when applied to fashion? We didn’t want to simply apply lights and actual, physical technology on me. We didn’t want it to be about the electronic screen or something that could turn on and off. We wanted it to be about the technology of thought, of application, of fabrication. The technology of the hand and the machine.
So we decided that this year, maybe I wouldn’t wear a dress; we were interested in trousers. We had been in discussions and reviewing sketches and I just so happened to take my daughters to see the show “Hamilton.” I’ve seen it a few times now, so I can look at singular pieces of the show rather than focusing on the bigger story. I was looking at the costumes and, in particular, the men’s suiting of the period. All of a sudden, I was like: “Oh, that’s it.” It was such a specific time, and I was curious how we could use technology with that. What would the technology part of the idea be? Fernando introduced us to these embellishment artists in Brooklyn called Le Studio Anthost, who take the idea of old-fashioned couture embroidery and, with technology, apply it to fabrications using paint. It was the perfect marriage of technology and the hand of man. Together, we were able to really collaborate and meticulously look at the period and redefine what it was that we were trying to achieve.
That’s when all of the important details started taking shape: the hair, the idea of doing an open back in the jacket, having the pants fold in a different way, the pinstriped sleeves, the button detailing. The one feminine thing we wanted to use was a corset rather than create a proper men’s suit. Frankly, it wasn’t going to be very flattering for the occasion. It wasn’t going to be festive enough. It didn’t feel right. The corset has very feminine framework and detailing, but in terms of overall silhouette and idea, we kept it pretty true to masculine notes without it feeling forced.
We picked a very simple shoe silhouette from our collection, the Rampling, without yet knowing what color we were settling on for the suiting. We love this strong teal satin color, but it was a total leap of faith. There had been discussion of painting a stripe up the back, but when we discovered Le Studio Anthost, the idea of them applying their technology really completed the idea for us. Shoes of that period typically had buckles worn in the front — a detail we found inspiring and interesting. So I looked around in my closet and I found two brooches I’ve had for 15 or 20 years: The mismatch of them seemed perfect in scale and color on the front of the shoes.
I feel very fortunate to work with such a dedicated and loyal team for the Met Gala every year. We all function together like a single organism. It may just be me on the carpet, but there’s a whole system of people working together behind the scenes, like the gears of a machine.