The sale that Loic Gouzer, Christie’s deputy chairman of postwar and contemporary art, put together at 5 p.m. Sunday, the first of five successive spring evening auctions, at first seemed reckless, filling a catalog with challenging, even disturbing work. With a kneeling Hitler and a wooden grid of potatoes, it was a far cry from the auction staples that can be counted on to command high prices.
But the auction, called “Bound to Fail” (after a work by the artist Bruce Nauman) also was considered an important test of the market. Art experts said it dared true collectors to step up and prove that their tastes ran deeper than just the auction darlings.
The 39-lot sale at Christie’s, which had been estimated to raise at least $59.4 million, brought a total of $78.1 million including buyers’ premiums, with 31 percent of the lots selling above their high estimates and only one failing to sell at all (those potatoes, by Sigmar Polke).
Mr. Gouzer’s themed sale — his third in three years — was viewed as an important bellwether of what was likely to come in the crowded crop of auctions ahead; for the first time in recent memory, Christie’s and Sotheby’s will go head-to-head all in one week in New York.
In that sense, the market showed that it was still there, however muted it may have been by predictions of a softening, which has resulted in smaller sales this spring and markedly less inventory at all three of the major auction houses, Christie’s, Sotheby’s and Phillips.
At Phillips’s evening auction of 20th-century and contemporary art right afterward — where the actor Leonardo DiCaprio sat in a sky box — the 37-lot sale that was expected to raise at least $40.85 million ended up bringing $46.5 million with fees.
With major collectors holding onto their most prized pieces in wait-and-see mode, this season is devoid of the blockbuster items and record-setting prices that have made recent auctions the stuff of banner headlines. The highest estimate is $40 million — for a Jean-Michel Basquiat at Christie’s on Tuesday and a Cy Twombly at Sotheby’s on Wednesday.
With Mr. Gouzer’s sale, Christie’s seemed to say it was not going to try to go after the usual big-ticket bait — the Warhols, Bacons and Richters. Instead, it was going to shake out lower-priced pieces of excellence.
Are You Smarter Than a Billionaire?
Art auctions can be unpredictable. See how you match up in this interactive quiz.
The sale was well-timed because of Mr. Cattelan’s recent re-emergence from retirement, with a sculpture of a solid-gold toilet announced — but delayed — at the Guggenheim Museum.
After active bidding that included the French dealer Philippe Ségalot, it was sold for $17.2 million with fees. Marianne Hoet, a Christie’s specialist in Brussels, was the winning telephone bidder to an undisclosed buyer.
Jeff Koons’s floating basketball, estimated at $12 million and one of the pieces with a third-party guarantee, went for $15.3 million with fees.
Christie’s, which is privately owned by the French luxury goods magnate François-Henri Pinault, said bidding from international buyers was strong and that there were purchases by some museums, which may be announced in the next few days.
Immediately after the Christie’s event, Phillips held their second “20th Century & Contemporary” evening sale in New York. The format allowed the Russian-owned auction house to bolster its sales with higher-value works by modern masters, rather than just rely on the fashionable new art that had been its trademark.
This month, Phillips was dependent on presale guarantees to persuade collectors to sell desirable works. Sunday’s sale featured no fewer than 18 lots with third-party guarantees, plus two provided by the auction house itself.
The most valuable of the third-party bets was Brice Marden’s 1972-1974 black and gray striped abstract, “Star (for Patti Smith),” estimated at $5 million to $7 million. This minimalist “portrait” had never been offered at auction before. It sold for $5.9 million.
Mark Bradford’s monumental 2012 mixed-media canvas “Building ‘The Big White Whale’” was the standout contemporary work, enhanced by Mr. Bradford’s recent selection as the United States’ representative at next year’s Venice Biennale. Depicting an abstracted map of France made out of red string and paper, it sold for $3.5 million with fees against a low estimate of $3 million.
The appetite for the French artist Jean Dubuffet, fueled in part by Christie’s $24.8 million sale last May of a 1961 painting and a current show at Acquavella gallery, continued with a 1959 painting, “Barbe des rites,” depicting a hugely bearded male figure, attracted $3.1 million (more than double its low estimate).