You’re one of the loudest, most provocative voices at Breitbart News, and you’re currently on a speaking tour of college campuses, railing against “P.C. culture.” You once admitted in a profile that your public persona started out as a comedy character that you created because “I didn’t like me very much.” What didn’t you like about yourself? I’ve wrestled with being religious and being conservative and being gay, but the reason I felt like that is because of other gay people. The only real shaming I’ve ever experienced has been from other gay people when I reveal my politics or my religion.
Did they hurt your feelings? No. I don’t have feelings to hurt.
Do you like yourself now? I love myself. I am the best person I know.
You’ve called feminism a “cancer” and Malala Yousafzai “schoolmarmish.” Is there anything you wouldn’t say or wouldn’t mock? There’s nothing I wouldn’t mock. I wouldn’t say the N-word. It’s an ugly, hateful word.
Why is it any different from anything else? I defend people’s right to use offensive speech, I just don’t personally choose to use the N-word. But I think people who do use those words should not be subjected to censure. That’s already happening in the U.K. — the police are actively trying to regulate “offensive speech.” That is so Orwellian and terrifying and horrendous.
What would surprise people the most about you? People assume because I have a very thick skin that I don’t have feelings. I don’t, for the most part. But occasionally I’m capable of great acts of charity. I tend to do it quietly.
But you promote everything else about yourself. Why not your charitable giving? Well, if I’m going to promote a charity, I’ll promote mine.
You mean the white-privilege fund that you recently started? Yeah — the Yiannopoulos Privilege Grant. It’s both means and ability tested, so they have to show academic promise, but they also need to need the money, so it’s poor white men.
To make it even more subversive, shouldn’t you give it to rich white men? Yes, that would maybe be funnier, but it wouldn’t do any good in the world. The thing that really rubs people the wrong way is the sort of hypocrisy of the social-justice progressive left. They don’t actually like it when they see somebody doing real good in the world because it makes them feel bad about themselves ’cause all they do is sit on Twitter all day and call people misogynists. Like, 600 people say they’re going to come protest me on Facebook, and 20 show up. They are lazy, indolent blowhards on the Internet.
Or maybe they just realize they have better things to do. No, I think they are lazy and entitled, and they think that tweeting is the equivalent of real-world action.
You’re a Trump supporter, and you frequently refer to him as Daddy. I do because that’s what he is.
I assume that’s not in a purely father-figure sense. Are you sexually attracted to Donald Trump? Oh, yes. I call myself a Trump-sexual. I have a very antiwhite bedroom policy, but Trump is kind of like the exception to that rule.
You’ve defended his perceived missteps with the idea that he’s “destroying old notions of what’s acceptable and unacceptable.” But outside the G.O.P. primaries, he’s becoming more and more unpopular. What’s the overall benefit to him? Trump might become deeply unpopular in the way that I, with some people, am deeply unpopular, but that doesn’t mean that we don’t get things done. You can be unpopular and successful.
If you succeed at your goal and everyone is able to say whatever they want, what happens next? I might have to become a social-justice warrior ’cause I’ll be out of a job.