HOUSTON — Enjoy the low gasoline prices this Memorial Day weekend while they last.
Even with global oil prices grinding higher, American holiday travelers will see the cheapest prices at the pump in more than a decade for this holiday weekend, saving nearly 50 cents a gallon compared with last year.
But the bargain-basement prices are probably fleeting.
Declining oil supplies have led to a near doubling of crude prices since early February. On Thursday, the world’s benchmark prices breached $50 a barrel, and for the first time since last August prices for regular gasoline have risen above $2 a gallon in all 50 states.
The average gas station has raised its prices 17 cents a gallon over the last month — and 5 cents over the last week alone.
The sharp decline in oil and gasoline prices since late 2014 because of a persistent global petroleum glut has been partly reversed in recent weeks as wild fires curbed production in Canada and rebel attacks throttled Nigerian oil exports.
At the same time, oil companies are cutting back production in the United States and several other countries because of the recent collapse of oil prices — which still remain at levels that are roughly half what they were two years ago. And the low prices have raised demand for petroleum products in China, India and the United States.
Oil and gasoline prices are not poised to return to levels of the days when crude was worth well over $100 a barrel, which became the norm in recent years. That was before the drilling frenzy in shale fields across the United States slashed imports and flooded the global market, while demand slowed in Europe and many developing markets.
But the rig count in the United States is now down roughly 80 percent over the last two years, which means less exploration and production through the end of this year as output from older wells declines. Since service companies have slashed their payrolls, it will take as much as six months to rehire and organize new drilling crews to develop new wells, energy experts say.
Oil executives and other experts say that still hefty global inventories will keep prices from rising to extremes anytime soon, but that oil prices are likely to rise at least another 10 percent over the next year.
Further steady rises in price are expected through the end of the decade given the deep cuts in exploration investment across the global oil patch.
But drivers probably shouldn’t worry about such projections too much for the rest of the summer.
On Thursday, the average price for a gallon of regular gasoline nationally was $2.31, 43 cents below a year ago, according to the AAA motor club.
The Oil Price Information Service, which monitors fuel prices, expects that the average national price this summer will be $2.25 to $2.50 a gallon of regular, the cheapest summer driving since 2009. Refinery repairs have been particularly helpful in reducing prices in California.
AAA expects 34 million people to drive at least 50 miles this holiday weekend, the most since 2005. It is part of a broader trend of more road travel as the economy improves. Experts say the Memorial Day traffic is just the beginning of a summer of traffic jams at the nation’s beaches and mountain parks.
Economists have been generally disappointed that lower gasoline prices have not given the economy a bigger boost over the last year. They originally thought consumers would spend their extra dollars at the shopping mall, but instead many people have saved their extra cash, although others are buying bigger and less efficient vehicles.
Then there is the toll on jobs. The drop in exploration and production in states like Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana and North Dakota has led to layoffs totaling 120,000 workers in high-paying jobs. More than 70 companies in the United States and Canada have gone bankrupt, and experts say the industry will need at least a couple of years to recover.
In the next several weeks, the companies are obliged to cover quarterly interest payments on loans they took out when oil prices were over $100 a barrel, and several more may be unable to meet their obligations. Many banks have cut lines of credit, seeking to reduce their own vulnerability.
The depressed state of the industry has been a drag on the national economy — particularly for manufacturers who make the pipelines and drilling equipment — and that has only been partly counterbalanced by lower energy costs.
Still, the share prices for many oil companies, like Exxon Mobil, Chevron and Hess, have risen sharply with oil prices in recent months, reflecting rising confidence that energy prices will rise even more in 2017 and 2018.
In the meantime, economists say that they see a benefit for lower-income people, who spend the highest proportion of their salaries on energy and generally drive older, gas-guzzling vehicles. Some of the states with the lowest gasoline prices, like Mississippi, South Carolina and Arkansas, have a large number of lower-income workers, many of whom drive long distances to work.
And some sectors of the economy, including tourism, are also benefiting.
If nothing else, the rising price has raised morale in the American oil patch.
