MORNING AFTER I wake up 11-ish, hopefully before noon. It depends on the night before. I go out on Saturday nights, dinner, drinks, and if I’m feeling young, dancing. I make the energy to go out. 
TRACK WORK In the last couple of weeks, me and my brother Malcolm have started doing really slow versions of sprint workouts on this beautiful track across from Yankee Stadium. I jog down there and I meet him, and we do the old-dude-on-the-track sprints. Soccer gets walked probably before I go.
BRUNCHY TIME Since we have Sundays off for a limited amount of time, I’ve been all about brunch. This is like a really brunchy city so I try a new place every week. I went to a place on the Upper West Side, I had a great French toast and oysters; it was, like, nautical themed. I went with a friend from the show.
VINYL BABY I’ll visit a record store. I basically inherited my mom’s records, and my dad’s records too. And then I just kept adding to the collection. I partly buy vinyl more now because there’s a need for a collector to have something. Streaming is not satisfying. I feel like I didn’t do anything, other than supporting the artist. I have all of Kendrick Lamar on vinyl.
SURROUND SOUND I make music. I have a decent setup. I took out all of the clothes from one of the closets and put a microphone in there and put some soundproofing on the walls. It’s literally a regular closet, not a walk-in. I have the control room set up in the living room, and I wired everything through the wall. There’s a microphone and a monitor. I close the door, start the track, and just rap. If I’m really in the zone, I’ll put the headphones on and I’ll keep working until I fall asleep. Music is one of those things where it’ll take as much time as you give it.
MUSE I still write about Oakland. I’ve been thinking about that place a lot, particularly because it’s changing so fast. The gentrification there is just like on a whole new level. Both my parents got priced out; they live in Richmond now. It feels personal to me.
KEEP IT LOCAL Jalene will cook something or we’ll order. She cooks a lot of Trinidadian food, stewed chicken. We’ll get stuff at C-Town down the street, or once a week we’ll go to Trader Joe’s at 72nd.
ALWAYS WRITING I’m on the couch, with “SportsCenter” or music on, and when I have thoughts I write them down in Google Docs on my phone. I used to work in notebooks exclusively, but I lost so many of them. I don’t think that quickly. There’s no reason for somebody who’s good at writing rap to be good at freestyling. They’re different parts of your brain. You can develop both skills. I’m a much better writer.
BRITISH BEDTIME RITUAL I love detective shows. I’ve seen every episode of “Agatha Christie’s Poirot.” I never go to sleep before 3. Right before falling asleep I like to watch this old British court show, “Rumpole of the Bailey.” I find it comforting.