When Maddy and Hormuz Batliboi of Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, realized that they could not afford to move from their condo to a larger place in the borough, they turned their attention to the East End of Long Island.
After visiting friends with a second home on the vineyard-laden North Fork, the Batlibois — she is a lawyer, he’s an architect — started checking out the countryside, studded with quaint hamlets and framed by pristine beaches. The couple ended up keeping the condo and buying a larger house on the North Fork for weekends and parental visits.
Sheri Winter Clarry, an associate broker with the Corcoran Group Real Estate on the North Fork in Southold, also attributed the uptick in buyers from Brooklyn to the region’s “laid back, chilled vibe” and its growing status as a family-friendly second-home haven for foodies and oenophiles. “Brooklynites get the North Fork, period,” she said.
There are reasons other than the vibe, of course. The North Fork doesn’t have the South Fork’s Atlantic Ocean beaches, but buyers can find houses perched on bluffs overlooking Long Island Sound, facing farmland or creeks, or on Great Peconic Bay. Particularly desirable over the last few years are older houses — some renovated, some in need of fixing up — in Greenport, in walking distance of the harbor, shops and restaurants, real estate agents said. The average price for a house in Greenport in the first quarter of 2016 was $595,000, according to data from Brown Harris Stevens real estate.
In February 2015, the Batlibois paid $380,000 for a 1,400-square-foot 1960s ranch with three bedrooms, two baths and a basement on a third of an acre in Mattituck. Their sons, 7 and 4 years old, play in the backyard. A tiny community beach on Great Peconic Bay is a quick stroll away; a larger beach is within a five-minute drive.
The Batlibois coordinate visits every other weekend with Brooklyn friends who have vacation homes nearby. “They are people like us who can’t afford that much more in the city,” Ms. Batliboi said.
To focus their buying power on the North Fork, brokers said, some Brooklyn buyers opt to hold onto their digs there, continuing to rent a home or stay in a smaller co-op or condo.
The magnets that draw city dwellers include the area’s burgeoning farm-to-table movement, new craft breweries and distilleries, wineries, farm stands, antiques shops and seasonal agri-tainment activities like apple-, berry- and pumpkin-picking. Niche farms offer locally raised meat, goat cheese, organic greens and hops for making beer.
Last year, after a decade in Boerum Hill, Allison Katz, 49, moved lock, stock and barrel to the North Fork. As an owner of Goodfood, a takeout shop in Mattituck, Ms. Katz carries local eggs, honey and mixed greens as well as Brooklyn-roasted Gorilla Coffee. “I try to bring some stuff that is a little more urban,” Ms. Katz said.
Real estate prices that are “still within many buyers’ reach, less traffic and congestion than you would find in the Hamptons, and large open spaces filled with active and productive farmland all make Southold a compelling option,” he said.
The median sales price on the North Fork for the first quarter of 2016 was $550,000; it was $662,431 in Brooklyn. The Hamptons median price of $895,000 aligns more closely with Manhattan’s median of $1,137,500. Only 6.7 percent of sales on the North Fork topped $1 million in the first quarter, while on the South Fork, 77.3 percent of sales exceeded $1 million.
Waterfront homes on Long Island Sound or Peconic Bay run from $2 million to $10 million, Ms. Szynaka said. The middle of the market ranges from $750,000 to just under $2 million.
Summer rentals, often a precursor to buying, are also more down to earth on the North Fork than in the Hamptons. A house with a bay view and a pool in New Suffolk, another Southold hamlet, is for rent for $50,000 from Memorial Day to Labor Day, while a Cutchogue creek-front property with a dock is $35,000 for the season and a Sound-front house in Cutchogue with stairs to the beach is available for the month of August for $12,000, Ms. Collins said.
Shift your sights to the Hamptons and you can rent a pond-side house with a pool in Sagaponack for $85,000 for July, or a place on Mecox Bay in Bridgehampton for $395,000 from Memorial Day to Labor Day, said Gary DePersia, an associate broker with the Corcoran Group.
In search of a more family-friendly neighborhood, more peace and quiet and more space for their money, Gabe and Tori Phillips, both 32, moved from Manhattan’s Lower East Side to a three-bedroom rental apartment in Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, two and a half years ago.
But when it came to buying, last June, the Phillipses, with their infant son in tow, chose a 100-year-old cedar shake cottage with two bedrooms and two baths in New Suffolk, paying $650,000. “It seemed like a good idea to make the second home purchase on the North Fork instead of in the five boroughs, where your dollar doesn’t go as far,” said Mr. Phillips, the chief executive officer of GP Renewables & Trading, a small energy company.
The house has an open floor plan, a big wraparound porch, the original flooring and exposed beams, and views of Peconic Bay. The couple watch sailboat races off Nassau Point from a balcony off the upstairs landing and are two blocks from a Southold Town beach.
The couple fell in love with the North Fork, Mr. Phillips said, having frequented bed-and-breakfasts there for a few weekends every summer for the better part of a decade. “In Brooklyn we would have gotten a closet — a two-bedroom apartment in this neighborhood is over a million bucks,” he said, referring to Boerum Hill.
Three years ago, Ben Wartofsky, 48, and Kristina Ivy, 45, of Carroll Gardens, Brooklyn, bought a Dutch colonial in Southold for $365,000 and furnished it with vintage pieces from local shops.
Ms. Ivy, who owns Rica Bath and Body, a skin care company in Carroll Gardens, uses peppermint and lavender found on local farms in her products.
Last fall, after renting on Peconic Bay for half a dozen summers, Mark Timmins, 42, an architectural designer from Park Slope, paid under $500,000 for land a block from Long Island Sound in Southold. He and his wife, Nell Daniel, 45, an art and design teacher, are building a contemporary four-bedroom beach house there with sunset views over the Sound.
In April 2015, Sophie McNeill, a marketing director for Scholastic, and Daniel McNeill, a managing director of an investment bank, who live in a brownstone in Park Slope, paid about $765,000 for a two-story 2003 shingle house with three bedrooms, three baths and a wraparound porch on Nassau Point, a peninsula in Cutchogue that juts into Peconic Bay. It’s close to beaches well-suited for their daughters, who are 10, 7 and 2.
In 2014, Francisco Pineda, 38, of Williamsburg, Brooklyn, the program director for Columbia University’s master’s degree in construction administration, purchased and renovated an old house on the Sound in Southold to use as a second home. Having fallen in love with the “more languid way of life,” he then paid $2 million in 2015 for an 1880s Victorian on nearly five Sound-front acres in Orient that he hopes to finish fixing up this summer.
Though Mr. Pineda considered buying in the Hamptons, the traffic was “a turnoff,” he said. But heading east from Riverhead on the North Fork, he found uncongested roads, restaurants he described as “on a par with Manhattan” and swaths of open land protected by the Peconic Land Trust, a nonprofit group.
“More and more people are noticing that the North Fork has value,” Mr. Pineda said. He wonders whether a 2014 episode of the Brooklyn-based HBO series “Girls” set in Greenport might have tipped off the hipsters.
Victoria Eichinger, an art director, and Peter Baumann, a banker, both in their 50s, moved from TriBeCa to Brooklyn a year and a half ago but have had a home in Cutchogue for a dozen years, enjoying the quiet, family-oriented lifestyle.
