Once again, Simba ruled supreme: “The Lion King,” still mighty more than 18 years after it opened, grossed $102.7 million on Broadway last season, far outpacing any other show. The musical, which has multiple productions running simultaneously around the globe, has grossed more than $6.2 billion worldwide, and has been seen by 85 million people over its history, according to Disney; by contrast, 478,605 people have seen the Broadway production of “Hamilton” thus far.
“Hamilton” (featuring a onetime Simba, Christopher Jackson, in the role of George Washington) offered an enormous jolt of energy to the Broadway season. This hip-hop musical about America’s founding fathers has dominated the cultural conversation, raked in awards and been celebrated at the White House. Many Broadway leaders believe the show has helped the industry as a whole, bringing attention from corners of the culture that have long preferred to mock jazz hands and dream ballets.
Case in point: Jeremy St. Louis, a 44-year-old sports anchor for the station beIN in Miami, who had never been to Broadway before seeing “Hamilton” last week.
Among plays, “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time” was, by far, the highest grosser, pulling in $32.9 million. “Curious Incident,” which last year won the Tony Award for best new play, is a rarity for modern Broadway — a long-running play — and is planning to close Labor Day weekend after 823 performances.
Two poorly reviewed star vehicles were the next-highest-grossing plays: “China Doll,” with Al Pacino ($12.6 million), and “Misery,” with Bruce Willis ($12.5 million); plays without stars did much less well. Of the $1.373 billion grossed on Broadway last season, 13 percent went to plays.
Charlotte St. Martin, the president of the Broadway League, attributed the industry’s continued growth to tourism (about 67 percent of the Broadway audience comes from beyond New York City and its suburbs) and to the mix of offerings during a season of unusually diverse programming.
Tourism has grown in New York for six years in a row — this year there are expected to be 59.7 million visitors to the city, according to Fred Dixon, the president of NYC & Company, the city’s official tourism agency. Although Broadway’s growth rate this past season was lower than it had been the previous season, Ms. St. Martin said she was pleased.
Nonetheless, there are reasons for concern. For the first time since the Broadway League began releasing records, the average ticket price actually declined, albeit only slightly, to $103.11, from $104.18. That might be good news for consumers, many of whom complain about the high cost of tickets to shows at the 40 large theaters in and around Times Square that make up Broadway, but it is worrisome for producers, whose costs for mounting and marketing shows seem to grow ever larger.
There are other indicators that the industry’s success is enjoyed by a relative few. Including long-running hits, short-lived holdovers from the previous season, and new shows, there were 72 productions on Broadway last season — 41 musicals, 28 plays, two magic shows and one dance spectacle. About half of all the grosses were earned by just 10 of those productions. And, as is true every season, a vast majority of new productions flopped.
Broadway is bracing for a tough season ahead: The quadrennial confluence of the Summer Olympics and the presidential election is often bad news for theaters, because, hard as it is to believe, some people prioritize politics or sports over theatergoing.
Also, unlike this season, when the much-anticipated “Hamilton” seemed to be a guaranteed hit even before it opened, next season does not yet have anything quite so surefire.
A revival of “Hello, Dolly!”, starring Bette Midler and David Hyde Pierce, seems to be the most likely hit, but it isn’t opening until the final days of the new season; “The SpongeBob Musical” has the potential to be big, given the popularity of the animated series on which it is based, but that show still needs to prove itself to audiences in Chicago before booking a transfer.