Kimchi Fried RiceCredit...Davide Luciano for The New York Times. Food stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Gozde Eker.
I had a problem with kimchi fried rice: Its name says garlic and chile and sour, yeasty ferments that will lay waste to your taste buds, but the usual reality is chewy grains and a hum of warmth. It’s like sidling up to a fireplace when you feel like being a smokejumper. But Grace Lee, a music marketer by day and kimchi-maker by night and weekend, set me straight on kimchi fried rice. In her version, the fire and tang of kimchi are mellowed out with butter, and the rice is scented with sesame oil and topped with a soft-fried egg. “It just tastes happy,” she said, and I finally understood the dish. It’s not tame — it’s food designed for comforting, continual spoon-to-mouth consumption. For Koreans who grew up making and eating it, there is no confusion about what it is supposed to be.
“It’s everyday comfort food for us; it’s what you make for your kids when they come home from school,” Lee said. I saw how kimchi fried rice becomes a companion for life, a taste that does not change.
So it was somewhat odd when we got to the subject of the Spam that she diced into it. “I was at a restaurant, and they had a kimchi fried rice with brisket,” she said. “That was delicious. But that is not Spam. If you’re making this at home, you’re using Spam.” It’s been a while since I pulled the tab on a can of Spam myself, though it was easy to see its appeal in Lee’s rice — the salt, fat and bounce it adds to each bite. But Spam, whose name is rumored to be a mash-up of the words “spiced ham,” is a Minnesota native, and not, shall we say, the food of the ancients in Korea.
It isn’t hard to find these dishes in Koreatown restaurants, but it’s arguable that the cross-cultural spirit that invented cheese ramyun may not have traveled easily with the restaurateurs who’ve left Korea. Lee was born there but raised in Ohio, Minnesota, California, Georgia and Seoul, and makes it a point to try Korean restaurants wherever she is in the world. From Mexico City to Rome, the food has tasted just as it might in Korea.
Credit...Davide Luciano for The New York Times. Food stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Gozde Eker.
When Lee moved back to Korea for high school, she and her parents had spent 15 years in America. She wondered who she was supposed to be, living in a place where she finally looked like everyone else but felt like a foreigner. She remembers her parents’ struggling in their own way: The Seoul they returned to was not at all the Seoul they left. The streets were different, the slang was different, the culture was different. After a decade and a half of working to preserve their Koreanness in their home as they moved around the United States, spreading out newspaper on the floor to protect it from toppled piles of cabbage as they wore dishwashing gloves to mix tubs of kimchi, they finally relocated to Korea, only to find that the country had moved on without them.
