Central Park East I, a small public elementary school at Madison Avenue and 106th Street, opened in 1974 with a lofty goal: to offer children in East Harlem the kind of nurturing, arts-focused education more often provided in private schools. There was no fixed curriculum. Students learned math through cooking and carpentry, studied violin and went ice skating. The utopian vision was reflected in the school’s democratic style of governance.
The school earned a reputation as an exemplar of progressive public education. Its founder, Deborah Meier, became a leader in the small-schools movement, starting several others and winning a MacArthur award in 1987.
Today, in an era of data-driven assessments, Central Park East I remains an anomaly, proud of its spirit of total freedom. Teachers decide what to teach, and students are encouraged to pursue their own interests, whether that means writing short stories or building a zoo’s worth of animals out of papier-mâché.
But since Monika Garg took over as principal last summer, simmering tensions among parents and staff members have erupted in all-out war.
On one side are parents and at least half the teachers, who accuse the New York City Education Department of installing Ms. Garg in an attempt to make the school more traditional. These parents and teachers say that she is forcing teachers to adopt prepackaged curriculums, bringing in families with little stake in the school’s approach and retaliating against teachers who resist her policies by starting investigations focused on them. They held a rally outside department headquarters on Tuesday demanding that she be removed.
On the other side are parents who see Ms. Garg as trying to return the school to its mission of serving the children of East Harlem, something they say Central Park East I has lost by increasingly catering to middle-class families.
What is not in dispute is that, in recent years, the makeup of the school, which does not draw from a defined georgraphic zone, has changed significantly: In 2004-5, the student body was 92 percent black and Hispanic; 54 percent of the children qualified for free lunch. Today, it is 53 percent black and Hispanic, and 25 percent qualify for free lunch. In the early years, most students lived in District 4, where the school is. Now, 24 percent of the students come from District 4, and the largest share of students, 29 percent, come from District 3, on the Upper West Side.
The parents who oppose Ms. Garg say the changes are unfortunate but result from various factors: gentrification; a few well-connected Upper West Siders talking up the school; and the spread in East Harlem of charter schools, which appeal to many poor families because of their structured approach and high test scores.
But Ms. Watkins and other supporters believe the changes in the school’s makeup are a consequence of exclusionary admissions and enrollment practices, which they say Ms. Garg is moving to reverse.
Ms. Garg is not the first principal to face problems at Central Park East I, which has had five since 2003.
She was previously the assistant principal at the Pan American International High School in Queens, which serves recent immigrants. She said in an interview that there was “zero truth” to the claim that she had been directed to make the East Harlem school more traditional. Rather, she said, she had been drawn by its focus on social and emotional development.
Ms. Garg said, however, that she discovered significant problems once she arrived. She said she found that some students were leaving the school after the fifth grade without basic math and literacy skills. She said she had told the teachers that they needed either to adapt a curriculum from outside the school or to write their own, which should lay out the skills that students should learn in each grade.
“How do we as a school make sure all our students have equity?” Ms. Garg said in the interview, adding that it was not only an matter of students of different races, but also of students who learn differently.
Some parents said they found the articles offensive.
Teachers, meanwhile, said that Ms. Garg was using the Education Department’s investigation process to try to drive them out. Two, Yvonne Smith and Marilyn Martinez, said all 10 of the school’s veteran teachers were being investigated, including them.
The department would confirm only that two teachers had been investigated, on charges of using corporal punishment. In one case, a teacher was removed from the school and the investigation remained open. The second case was closed with a finding of poor judgment on the teacher’s part, the department said, but no action was taken.
A spokeswoman for the school system’s special commissioner of investigation said that there had also been a complaint made in January against a large number of the school’s teachers regarding the use of school funds, but that it had been closed with no further action.
Some of Ms. Garg’s supporters said she was dealing with problems that previous administrations had left to fester.
For many years, Central Park East I controlled its own enrollment, admitting students based on weekday parent tours and visits by prospective students, prioritizing children’s fit with the school’s model and parents’ commitment to its progressive approach.
In recent years the Education Department has taken over the admissions process, creating a lottery that gives priority to children who live in District 4.
But the school has continued to offer tours, given by parents or a parent coordinator. Tour leaders emphasize the school’s philosophy that children should progress at their own pace, and that students’ not reading or writing by the second or third grade is no cause for alarm.
Under the new system, students from other districts are generally not offered seats through the lottery unless their siblings attend the school. Other students are put on a waiting list, which is also supposed to offer District 4 children priority; the list, though, appears to have offered a back door to admission for children from other districts.
Last year, only 17 of the 30 children offered kindergarten seats through the lottery ended up at the school, leaving another 13 seats to be filled from the waiting list. There were 77 students from District 4 on the list, but in the end fewer than 10 students from District 4 enrolled in the class, while more than two-thirds of the seats went to children from other districts.
Ms. Garg’s opponents say that no one is kept out, but that the school is not for everyone, and that to thrive it needs families who value its approach.
Others, including Ms. Smith, the principal of Central Park East II, see discriminatory forces at work.
She and a mother at her school, who asked to be identified only by her given name, Diana, to protect her privacy, said Diana’s daughter was turned away from Central Park East I last spring, despite having won a spot in the lottery.
Diana said that on the last day of registration, she called the school and was told she needed to show up by the end of the school day with her daughter and the girl’s birth certificate — not a copy, but an original — that she would need to get from the health department in Lower Manhattan.
She said she eventually spoke to Ms. Uehling and told her that she could not get the document and her daughter in time. Ms. Uehling told her there was nothing she could do to help.
Diana went to the school to plead her case, but Ms. Uehling dismissed her, telling her if she could not meet the deadline, “my seat was given up,” Diana recalled.
Parents can register with a copy of a birth certificate, and schools have some flexibility in when they can allow parents to register.
“This is how you manipulate the system to lock people out,” Ms. Smith said. In the end, Central Park East II made room for the girl.
Ms. Uehling said she did not recall the episode. She said she did not believe an original birth certificate was needed to register.
This year, Ms. Garg said, to encourage all of the families who were offered kindergarten seats through the lottery to visit and to register she invited them to a Saturday reception. Of the 35 children, 33 enrolled.
Some parents viewed his remarks as racist, implying that he did not want the school to be overrun by black and Hispanic families. Mr. Rave said in an interview that he had been misunderstood. He said he believed that Ms. Garg was ending parent tours, which he said would lead to the enrolling of families who did not understand the school’s approach, and would then be dissatisfied and push for changes.
“We really want children who want this type of education — otherwise it doesn’t exist,” he said.
In an interview, Ms. Meier, the school’s founder, who is supporting the effort to remove Ms. Garg, said she should have taken a year to get to know the school better.
Andrew Padilla, 26, who grew up in East Harlem and graduated from Central Park East I in 2001, suggested that focusing on mistakes Ms. Garg may or may not have made missed the point. He said the school was isolated from the surrounding community.
