Daniel Aaron holding one of 155 volumes of the diary of Arthur Crew Inman, a failed poet and scion of Southern wealth, which he condensed to 1,661 pages.
Daniel Aaron, a literary critic and historian who helped preserve the nation’s cultural heritage as a co-founder of the nonprofit Library of America and who pioneered the multifaceted academic field of American studies, died on Saturday in Cambridge, Mass. He was 103.
The cause was complications of pneumonia, his daughter-in-law Anna Aaron said.
Professor Aaron suggested in his autobiography that his chosen profession was augured when he was only 3, with the sinking of the British ocean liner Lusitania by a German U-boat in 1915.
The victims included his mother’s mentor, Elbert Hubbard, a journalist who had founded the Roycroft artisan community in upstate New York in the late 19th century with his wife, Alice. Elbert Hubbard also wrote the best-selling inspirational essay “A Message to Garcia,” about the prelude to the Spanish-American War.
Hearing about the sinking while growing up “foreshadowed my introduction to American history,” Professor Aaron wrote in the memoir, “The Americanist” (2007). But his route to being granted one of the first doctoral degrees in American civilization by Harvard and becoming an English professor at Smith College and Harvard was, much like history itself, hardly preordained.
He entered the University of Michigan planning to study medicine, before switching to English. He then intended to pursue graduate studies at the University of London, until onerous conditions were attached to his enrollment there.
He wrote several major books himself. In “Men of Good Hope: A Story of American Progressives,” published in 1951, he sought to redeem progressivism from its disfavor during the McCarthy era, arguing that rebelling against injustice and inequality was ingrained in American middle-class tradition.
In 1985, Professor Aaron turned his attention to the sprawling journal of the reclusive, troubled Arthur Crew Inman, a failed poet and scion of Southern wealth who chronicled his life and observations in the North with startling detail and candor in 155 volumes of more than 15 million words. Holed up in a Boston apartment, he committed suicide in 1963. Critics called the journal a remarkable document of American social history.
“In Mr. Aaron’s adroitly edited version, Inman’s diary is a fascinating document, by turns bizarre and illuminating, poignant and obscene,” the psychologist Michael Vincent Miller wrote in The New York Times Book Review.
But another reviewer, John Gross, also writing in The Times, balked at the book’s length.
In addition to his own memoir, Professor Aaron wrote “Commonplace Book, 1934-2012,” a distillation of the diary and scrapbook he started as a teenager, published in 2015.
Daniel Baruch Aaron was born in Chicago on Aug. 4, 1912, to immigrants from Russia transplanted to the Midwest from New York. His father, Henry, was a lawyer who had multiple sclerosis. His mother was the former Rose Weinstein.
The family moved to Los Angeles when he was 5. Within five years both his parents were dead. He returned to Chicago, where he was raised by relatives.
He received a bachelor’s degree in English from Michigan in 1933 and entered Harvard at a time when the historian Samuel Eliot Morison still rode to campus on horseback. As a graduate student there, he graded what he called a “so-so” exam by a young John F. Kennedy and the English assignments of “an intense, hungry-looking” Norman Mailer.
His doctoral dissertation on the development of Cincinnati boldly challenged the renowned Frederick Jackson Turner’s “frontier thesis,” suggesting that the city had more in common with the development of the urban eastern United States than the Western hinterlands. The doctorate “signalized my merger with the U.S.A. and my dehyphenizaton,” Professor Aaron wrote.
Smith College hired him as a freshly minted Ph.D., and he taught there for 30 years. During wartime shortages of manpower, he worked on a farm and as a volunteer police officer. He also pitched for a softball team in Northampton, Mass.
He and his wife, the former Janet Summers, had three sons, Jonathan, James and Paul. They survive him, as do several grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
In 2010, he was awarded a National Humanities Medal as a scholar and as the founding president of the Library of America.
