Protesters gathered outside court in Baltimore on Monday to follow the verdict in the Freddie Gray trial.
BALTIMORE — The acquittal Monday of a police officer charged in the arrest of Freddie Gray, the black man who suffered a fatal spinal cord injury while in police custody last year, immediately renewed questions of whether any of the six police officers charged in the case would be convicted in connection with his death.
Officer Edward M. Nero’s acquittal on four charges for his role in the opening moments of Mr. Gray’s arrest was a second blow to the prosecution’s sweeping case, announced as Baltimore was still seething after the unrest following Mr. Gray’s death in April 2015. The first trial, against Officer William G. Porter, ended in a hung jury in December, touching off legal maneuvers that brought proceedings against the officers to a temporary halt.
But legal experts said Judge Barry G. Williams’s finding was a narrow one that does not forestall the possibility of convictions against other officers charged in the case. They said Judge Williams’s ruling turned not on a wholesale rejection of prosecutors’ broad legal theory, but rather on his determination that Officer Nero, 30, was a bit player in Mr. Gray’s arrest.
Judge Williams, who ruled on the case after the officer opted to forgo a jury trial, said in his verdict that there were other officers who played — or who could have reasonably been expected to play — a bigger role in the encounter. And while that is no guarantee that other officers will be found guilty, it is those officers who will stand trial in the coming months.
Judge Williams read his verdict matter-of-factly while Officer Nero stared straight ahead.
“There has been no information presented at this trial that the defendant intended for any crime to happen,” Judge Williams said.
At the conclusion of his 30-minute explanation, he added, “The verdict on each count is not guilty.” Officer Nero rose to his feet and wiped away tears as his supporters — including Officer Garrett E. Miller, who is also charged in the case — moved in to embrace him.
Prosecutors dropped all charges against three officers awaiting trial. Three other officers had already been acquitted.
“To see that officer walk away, and still no accountability, that hurts me the most,” said the Rev. Westley West, a frequent presence at demonstrations related to Mr. Gray’s death.
Mr. Gray’s death touched off rioting, looting and arson in this city, which has a long history of tension between residents and the police.
He had been walking through the Sandtown neighborhood in West Baltimore when he saw a group of officers and took off running. He was arrested and put into a transport van where, prosecutors and defense lawyers have said, his spinal cord was functionally severed; he died a week later.
Last May, the state’s top prosecutor, Marilyn J. Mosby, announced charges against six police officers.
For Officer Nero’s trial, Ms. Mosby’s team of prosecutors tried an unusual legal theory: that he and Officer Miller exceeded their authority by handcuffing, moving and searching Mr. Gray without first questioning and patting him down, as the law requires — essentially turning a lawful detention into an unlawful arrest. The prosecutors said that Officer Nero had committed misconduct by arresting Mr. Gray without probable cause, and that any physical contact they had made with him while doing so amounted to second-degree assault.
Normally defense lawyers, not prosecutors, make claims of illegal search and seizure in court. During closing arguments, Judge Williams himself questioned prosecutors aggressively on whether they were really asserting that every arrest made without probable cause could be a criminal act.
But he sidestepped those questions on Monday, focusing instead on the fact that no evidence showed Officer Nero had touched Mr. Gray during the critical opening moments of his arrest.
“When the detention morphed into an arrest, the defendant was not present,” Judge Williams said. He cited the testimony of the state’s witnesses: Officer Miller, who told the court that he had handcuffed Mr. Gray, and Brandon Ross, a friend of Mr. Gray’s who witnessed the arrest.
“Since the defendant’s contact with Mr. Gray came after Mr. Gray was detained by Miller, this court finds that the contact by the defendant was legally justified and not reckless,” the judge said.
Mr. Jaros, the law professor, said Judge Williams’s finding that the detention had turned into an arrest and his focusing on the actions of Officer Miller could foreshadow a tougher-than-expected case for Officer Miller’s defense team when he is tried this summer.
“That certainly seemed to suggest that the case against Officer Miller would actually be significantly stronger than the case against Officer Nero, and perhaps significantly stronger than we thought before the verdict came out,” Mr. Jaros said, although he cautioned that all of the trials will require separate findings of fact.
Judge Williams found that Officer Nero acted reasonably when he did not use a seatbelt on Mr. Gray in the police van, citing questions about his training and awareness of the rules. Again, he looked to other officers, saying Officer Nero could reasonably have assumed that Lt. Brian Rice, a superior officer who climbed into the van with Mr. Gray, or Officer Caesar R. Goodson Jr., the driver of the van, would have secured Mr. Gray if either believed that it was required or necessary.
A lawyer for Officer Nero, Marc Zayon, called for the charges against the remaining officers to be dropped.
“The state’s attorney for Baltimore City rushed to charge him, as well as the other five officers, completely disregarding the facts of the case and the applicable law,” Mr. Zayon said in a statement.
Despite the acquittal, Tessa Hill-Aston, the president of the Baltimore city branch of the N.A.A.C.P., said she remained hopeful that someone would eventually be held responsible for Mr. Gray’s death.
