On the outside, the house at 43 Suffolk Street in Sag Harbor, N.Y., was designed to blend in with nearby homes that were built in the 18th century. Inside, it is very much a 21st-century home. Its radiant heated bathroom floors, gas fireplaces and security system can be controlled with an iPhone, and a hydraulic lift transports a vehicle down to the home’s lower level, where, like a treasured sculpture, the car sits in a glass-enclosed showcase visible from a spacious lounge and a wine room.
The owners have listed the house for sale at $12 million.
“We were aiming at understated luxury,” said John McLaughlin, who owns the just-completed home with his wife, Joanne McLaughlin. Mr. McLaughlin, 60, is a retired executive vice president of Monster Worldwide, the parent company of the jobs site Monster.com, and his wife, 52, is a potter. They live on the same street as their newly built house, in a home dating to 1765.
The McLaughlins had initially planned to move into the new house, which has five bedrooms and five and a half baths over more than 7,000 square feet. It sits on a quiet street near the quaint shops of this historic East End village, once a whaling port. “I love old architecture, but I also like a house that breathes,” Mr. McLaughlin said.
But the couple never moved in, because circumstances changed in the two years since they purchased, for less than $2 million, the nearly half-acre property, which had a 1960s ranch-style house on it that they tore down. Both their children, Ben, 22, and Kylie, 19, went off to colleges in California — which the parents had not anticipated — and the house became “too big for just the two of us,” Ms. McLaughlin said. Also, she said, the children “wanted us to stay in the family home,” even though they would only be visiting.
The couple had already filled the new house with furniture and artwork from previous places they had lived, in Manhattan and in Auckland, New Zealand, during Mr. McLaughlin’s career at a head-hunting firm and then at Monster, where at one point he oversaw the Asia-Pacific region. The house is being sold unfurnished, though some furnishings may be negotiable.
Getting permission to build the house required six visits to the village’s Board of Historic Preservation and Architectural Review, Mr. McLaughlin said. Each time, he and his architect, Kirby Grimes, presented a slightly different plan. Mr. McLaughlin said he originally wanted to pattern the house after the nearby Custom House, an 18th-century building that is now a museum. Board members thought that proposal too large, and later made other suggestions. “Although the process was painful and very costly, the outcome was a better house,” he said.
Lighting, staircase railings and other details are all custom made. Dereyk Patterson, a woodworker from East Hampton, N.Y., created cabinets and the beams that wrap around a two-story stone fireplace. Window moldings echo the Egyptian Revival design of the local Old Whalers’ Church. The white oak floors were finished with a traditional soap and lye method, and walls are covered with three coats of plaster and two coats of wax. The backyard has a heated pool.
“We’re setting the bar for luxury in Sag Harbor,” said Mark J. Baron of Brown Harris Stevens of the Hamptons, who is the lead broker for the property.
