Video posted to social media and from the New York Fire Department shows a roaring blaze that burned down a historic Serbian Orthodox cathedral in Manhattan on Sunday and left six people with minor injuries.
A historic Serbian Orthodox church in Manhattan that plays an important role in New York’s Serbian community was gutted by flames on Sunday, just hours after parishioners had filled its pews for Easter services.
The New York Fire Department said it received the first report of the blaze at the Serbian Orthodox Cathedral of St. Sava, on West 25th Street between Fifth Avenue and Avenue of the Americas in the Flatiron district, shortly before 7 p.m. It grew to a four-alarm fire that took 168 department personnel to tame, fire officials said.
It was not clear if anyone was at the church when the fire started, officials said. The priest had left before the blaze began to go on a bicycle ride after an Easter luncheon that stretched into the late afternoon and capped several busy days of religious celebrations, officials said. A caretaker who arrived after the fire started was treated for smoke inhalation but was not hospitalized, they said.
Frank Gribbon, a department spokesman who was at the scene on Sunday night, said the blaze did not appear to be suspicious. He said the department would investigate the cause, but cautioned that the amount of damage could complicate that effort.
The blaze tore through the 19th-century building quickly, and within an hour onlookers were posting photos and videos on social media showing a column of smoke rising over Manhattan and the flames engulfing the church.

Herman Tulp, 60, a tourist from the Netherlands who came upon the burning church before the firefighters arrived, said he saw a man who was clearly distressed admonishing camera-wielding people in the gathering crowd.
Less than two hours before the department received word of the blaze, St. Sava staff members had posted pictures of the Easter services on the church’s official Facebook page. The photos showed priests and well-dressed parishioners smiling over baskets of colorfully dyed eggs.
On Sunday night, distraught parishioners gathered near the smoldering ruins of the church, where smoke and the acrid smell of ash hung for hours in the air. Dejan Dex Lipovic, 24, wept as he recalled attending the services just hours before.
Orthodox churches like St. Sava use the older Julian calendar, which is one reason why they often celebrate Easter later than Western churches, which use the Gregorian calendar, the standard in much of the world.
The church, which has served for decades as the backbone of New York’s Serbian Orthodox community, was previously known as Trinity Chapel, an Episcopal church that was sold to its current owners in 1943. Attempts to reach church officials on Sunday night were unsuccessful.
Jovana Djurdjevic, 22, another parishioner, said the church was a vital institution in the life of many Serbian-American New Yorkers.
