Lt. Nadiya V. Savchenko, a Ukrainian helicopter pilot, was freed in an exchange for two Russian prisoners.
MOSCOW — Russia and Ukraine swapped high-profile prisoners on Wednesday in a move that could help negotiators reach a settlement in the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
The exchange, like much of the diplomacy related to the two-year-old conflict, was carefully choreographed to underline Russia’s position that it had never taken part in the war, while also allowing prisoners of war on both sides to return home.
A Ukrainian helicopter pilot, Lt. Nadiya V. Savchenko, was released from custody in the southern Russian city of Rostov-on-Don and flown to Kiev, Ukraine, on the plane of Ukraine’s president, Petro O. Poroshenko.
The plane touched down to a raucous welcome from fans and reporters in Kiev, where Lieutenant Savchenko was rushed to a ceremony at which Mr. Poroshenko awarded her a medal for heroism, the Golden Star.
“This is just the beginning,” Mr. Poroshenko said.
“As we took back Nadiya, we’ll take back Donbas, we’ll take back Crimea,” he added, referring to a region in eastern Ukraine and the peninsula annexed by Russia in 2014.
Lieutenant Savchenko was swapped for two Russians captured in eastern Ukraine, who the Ukrainians say were soldiers serving in the Russian military intelligence service.
A Russian government airplane flew them from Kiev to Moscow, where their wives greeted them on the tarmac, avoiding the spectacle typical of prisoner-of-war exchanges of the captives walking past one another, suggesting an equivalency.
The trade touched on pivotal questions surrounding the unrest. Over the course of the conflict in Ukraine, Russia has denied sending soldiers or weapons across the border. Russian soldiers fighting in Ukraine in unmarked uniforms were said to have gone there on their vacations.
The Russian Ministry of Defense has refused to acknowledge any ties to the two men, Capt. Yevgeny Yerofeyev and Sgt. Aleksandr Aleksandrov. The Ukrainian authorities placed them in a glass cage during a trial in Kiev, as examples of “the little green men,” a reference to the thousands of soldiers without insignia on their uniforms in Crimea and eastern Ukraine. A Ukrainian court in April sentenced both of the men to 14 years in prison on terrorism-related charges.
Mr. Poroshenko pardoned the pair, saying it was necessary to gain the return of a Ukrainian soldier from captivity.
Lieutenant Savchenko, a minor celebrity even before the war as the first woman to become a combat pilot in Ukraine, had been serving as an infantry soldier with a volunteer unit in the Luhansk region of eastern Ukraine when she was captured by rebel fighters. The Russian authorities say she then escaped from her captors and slipped into Russia posing as a refugee; Lieutenant Savchenko said she was taken to Russia as a prisoner of war.
A Russian court convicted her of serving as an artillery spotter and directing fire at a rebel checkpoint where a Russian television journalist and a sound technician were killed. She was sentenced to 22 years in prison for murder. Lieutenant Savchenko vigorously denied the charges and, at one point, went on a hunger strike to protest the trial, which she dismissed as a farce.
President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia went on television with the widow and a sister of the slain Russian journalists to say they had asked him to pardon Lieutenant Savchenko as a humanitarian gesture.
“I want to thank you for this position, and express hope, that the decision — dictated most of all by humanism — will lead to an easing of the tensions” in Ukraine, Mr. Putin said. He made no mention of Captain Yerofeyev and Sergeant Aleksandrov. Mr. Putin’s spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, referred to the pair as “citizens,” and said Mr. Putin had no plans to meet them.
The speaker of Russia’s upper chamber of Parliament, Valentina Matviyenko, emphasized in a statement carried by the Russian Information Agency that the releases were “not a trade,” but rather carried out under a treaty allowing prisoners convicted abroad to serve their terms in their home countries.
During her incarceration in Russia, Lieutenant Savchenko was elected to the Ukrainian Parliament.
With her short-cropped hair and penchant for passionate, patriotic speeches and boasts of fearlessness, she is wildly popular in Ukraine.
Arriving in Kiev wearing jeans and a T-shirt, and inexplicably barefoot, Lieutenant Savchenko waded into a crowd of fans and reporters.
Lieutenant Savchenko had once served in a Ukrainian military unit aiding the United States operation in Iraq. Given that American tie, the Russian government had floated the idea of a trade of a convicted Russian arms smuggler, Viktor Bout, held at a federal maximum security prison in the United States, for Lieutenant Savchenko. But the American ambassador to Ukraine rejected that proposal.