Women don’t like Donald J. Trump. Or at least that’s what hacks in the news media like myself say, right? But don’t take it from me. Take it from female voters themselves. A CNN/ORC poll conducted in March found that 73 percent of women from both parties say they don’t like him, an increase from 59 percent in December. Among Republican women, this number is much lower but still significant: 39 percent said they had a negative view of him.
Then there is that other 25 percent.
In conversations, many women who support Mr. Trump expressed similar defenses of their preferred candidate. He’s not sexist, he’s just not politically correct. He’s not a career politician, so he doesn’t stick his finger in the wind before he says something. He believes in treating women as tough as he treats men. The news media has distorted his message with cherry-picked sound bites. If he were sexist, would he have promoted so many female executives, including his daughter, within his own company?
Aside from his female surrogates, the most visible group of women who support Donald Trump are using social media to spread the good news about him, especially on YouTube and Twitter. Lynette Hardaway and Rochelle Richardson, two sisters who live in North Carolina, have gained a degree of Internet fame with their pro-Trump YouTube videos. The sisters, who go by their childhood nicknames Diamond and Silk, say they switched their party registration from Democratic to Republican last year to vote for Mr. Trump in the March primary. They recently started a website called Women United 4 Trump, which aims to “bring many women of different ethnicities and demographics together” to support the Republican front-runner.
On Twitter, a group of male and female Trump supporters known as the #TrumpTrain emit a steady stream of pro-Trump tweets every day, often accompanied by the hashtag #MAGA — Make America Great Again — and sometimes a train emoji.
Linda Suhler, a retired molecular biologist who lives in Scottsdale, Ariz., is one of Mr. Trump’s female Internet superfans. She has four grandchildren and more than 219,000 Twitter followers. She said she started her path of becoming a conservative Twitter activist after President Obama was re-elected in 2012.
Like many of the female Trump supporters I spoke to, Ms. Suhler supported Senator Ted Cruz before switching allegiances. She says she has formed real-life friendships with fellow female Trump supporters she met online.
Amy Mek, who has more than 85,000 Twitter followers, is one of the women Ms. Suhler has gotten to know through their shared support of Mr. Trump.
According to Mr. Trump’s lawyer, Michael Cohen, Trump-owned businesses employ 57 percent men and 43 percent women over all. Mr. Cohen has maintained that the Trump Organization employs more women than men in executive positions, and that they “are compensated at equal and in many cases higher pay rates” than men. He has declined to provide evidence for these claims to news outlets.
Among the women who have worked for the Trump organization, most have positive things to say about their boss, while admitting some of his personal faults. Louise Sunshine, who worked for Mr. Trump’s real estate business, said he kept a “fat picture” of her in a drawer, as a “reminder that I wasn’t perfect,” but said she appreciated Mr. Trump’s tough management style. “He gave me the ropes, and I could either hang myself or prove myself,” she told The Washington Post.
More recently, a Trump organization employee named Lynne Patton posted a video to YouTube defending Mr. Trump and his family as “one of the most generous, compassionate, and philanthropic families I’ve ever had the privilege of knowing.” The video has more than 2.6 million views.
“As a black female executive at the Trump organization, I can no longer remain silent about the repeated and reprehensible attempts to align my boss and his family with racist, hate-mongering groups, campaigns and messaging,” Ms. Patton says in the video.
Mr. Trump has been criticized for telling a female contestant on his reality TV show, “The Apprentice,” “Must be a pretty picture, you dropping to your knees.” But the show’s most famous female contestant, Omarosa Manigault, is one of Mr. Trump’s biggest defenders. Ms. Manigault worked in the White House under President Bill Clinton before her stint on “The Apprentice.” She now works as vice chairwoman of the National Diversity Coalition for Trump.
Mr. Trump has won the grudging support of female Republican officeholders. Senators Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire and Susan Collins of Maine and Gov. Nikki Haley of South Carolina have all reluctantly said they would support Mr. Trump — though Ms. Ayotte’s office added that she wasn’t “endorsing” him.
We have yet to see how many #NeverTrump Republicans will become #EventuallyTrump in November, when faced with the choice of voting for him or Hillary Clinton. But Liz Mair, a Republican consultant who works for the anti-Trump “super PAC” Make America Awesome, said the reason women don’t like Mr. Trump has more to do with his personality than his policies — and that personality isn’t likely to change anytime soon.
“Donald Trump is basically the most high-profile example that I think we all have of the sort of overgrown frat boy who’s extremely egotistical and narcissistic and thinks he’s all that,” Ms. Mair said.
Some of his fans might like that, though. The Trump supporter Ms. Hughes put a softer spin on it. “He’s kind of seen like the bully to the bully,” she said.