The arrest on a New York City sidewalk was so startling to a bystander that he took a video of it. And when he posted the video online with the label “Police Brutality,” some viewers denounced the officers’ tactic as disturbing and inhumane.
“I’ve never in my entire life seen anything like this,” said the unidentified man videotaping the arrest near a subway stop at 14th Street and Seventh Avenue earlier this year.
But the scene was not that unusual, and coming amid national scrutiny of the authorities’ use of force and protests after episodes like the death of Eric Garner, who was put in a chokehold by an officer and died in police custody on Staten Island, there is no evidence that the officers involved in the arrest in Manhattan violated police policy.
For onlookers who had never witnessed a live man being strapped into what looked like a body bag, the sight was unsettling. But the bag in the video, stenciled with “NYPD” and “ESU,” is known as a mesh restraining device. The bags are used to restrain people judged to be emotionally disturbed.
A Police Department spokeswoman declined to comment on Ms. Rabinowitz’s letter. Ms. Rabinowitz later said in an email that she had since spoken to the police and that they had defended using the restraint.
“He was the victim of the assault, instead of the other way around,” Mr. Miller said.
In response to questions about the bags, the Police Department said it had used the restraints for 25 years. The department said only “highly trained members” of the Emergency Service Unit were authorized to use them. The person being restrained is assessed while being held and afterward, and is taken by an ambulance to a hospital for medical and psychological evaluation.
“There are no great options,” he said.
Over the years, the department has experimented with plastic shields, netting and Tasers to deal with emotionally disturbed people, Mr. Louden said. It re-evaluated its approaches starting in 1984, after an officer shot and killed Eleanor Bumpurs, an emotionally disturbed woman in the Bronx who was attacking another officer with a kitchen knife.
“If people in the mental health community find out that their fate is to be put in a body bag, they will fight even harder to not get into a body bag,” she said.