The first International Jazz Day concert took place four years ago at the United Nations in New York. This year, after stops in Istanbul, Paris and Osaka, it came here to the nation’s capital. But while the all-star concert on the White House lawn was a shining centerpiece, it was one of hundreds of Jazz Day events around the world.
Washington, a city with a deep jazz culture that still endures amid recent hardships, was the epicenter all day Saturday: a citywide swarm of performances, panels, workshops and film screenings, in spaces grand and unassuming. Below are some highlights.
Duke Ellington School of the Arts Jazz Band, DuPont Circle In an outdoor opening ceremony, the best moment belonged to this local high school band. When Herbie Hancock sat in on “Watermelon Man,” he shared the keyboard bench with a student, Sequoia Snyder, who watched his hands intently before playing her own, startlingly poised solo.
Dianne Reeves, Thrive DCFor her appearance at Thrive DC, a homeless services organization for women, Ms. Reeves was magnificent and on point. “I sing no victim’s song,” she boomed in “Endangered Species,” continuing: “I am a woman. I am an artist. And I know where my voice belongs.” She then prefaced a luxurious version of “Misty” with a childhood memory of jazzing up a Bach aria in her choir.
Dormeshia Sumbry-Edwards, Kennedy Center Ms. Sumbry-Edwards is a tap dancer with a gift both kinetic and musical, and on a version of “In a Sentimental Mood,” featuring the Thelonious Monk Institute of Jazz Performance Ensemble, she engaged in agile repartee with the pianist Carmen Staaf, both parties listening and responding deeply.
Donvonte McCoy, 18th Street Lounge I spent the final moments of International Jazz Day at a gig with no formal connection to the event. But Mr. McCoy, an assured young trumpeter, brought taut purpose to his playing, surmounting a shaky rhythm section. Some in the crowd were dancing, others were listening or talking, but the spirit was strong and right.