A nice big foyer separates the entryway from the sunken living room in Graham Parker’s Hudson Heights apartment.
It turns out there are all sorts of uses for that wide-open space. Mr. Parker, the general manager of the classical music public radio station WQXR, and his psychologist husband, Adam Benson, can expound on the topic with great verve and authority.
The foyer is used as an extension of the dining room on Thanksgiving, Jewish holidays and other occasions, and it’s the site of fiercely contested chess games between the couple’s adopted children, Max, 8, and Georgie, 6. It’s where Max demonstrates Brazilian martial arts moves like flips and cartwheels, and where the very flexible Georgie shows off her yoga poses. The foyer has also worked admirably as a stage for the children’s plays and musicales. That’s Max on drums and Georgie on keyboards.
It was Mr. Benson who introduced Mr. Parker to Hudson Heights or, as he refers to it, upstate New York City. “It’s quiet, it’s familial and neighborhood-y,” said Mr. Parker, who married his longtime partner in 2007. “I’ve worked in the nonprofit space my whole career, and it was nice to realize I could afford to buy an apartment up here.” Subsequently, the couple bought an apartment where they lived for a decade.
“But when we had kids, we needed more space,” said Mr. Parker, who had long had his eye on a particular Art Deco building near Fort Tryon Park.
The couple’s real estate broker, a close friend, knew they were looking for a three-bedroom apartment. When just such a unit came up in the long-coveted building, the men hustled.
“It was really funny — we had scheduled it way too tightly,” Mr. Parker said. “The seller’s Realtor was late, and we had to get our son to a music lesson, so we had about a minute and a half to look around. As we walked out, we said, ‘We’ll take it.’ ” They moved in four years ago.
The apartment’s light, scale and flow were prime attractions. The living room and bedrooms were spacious. As for the kitchen — well, perhaps the less said, the better. Let’s just say this: It hadn’t been updated since the 1940s, and paint chips had a tendency to fall into the pots and pans. “It was awful,” Mr. Parker said simply. The bathrooms would also have benefited from a contractor’s attention.
They finally settled on a gray a few shades warmer than pewter for the public areas. The gray theme is restated in the Italian glass backsplash and the under-counter drawers and cabinets in the recently renovated kitchen.
“When we redid the kitchen in our previous apartment, someone came in and said, ‘Oh, you can tell two guys live here. It’s very dark,’ ” Mr. Parker recalled. Soft white is the dominant color this time around.
“I’m very proud of the kitchen,” Mr. Parker said. “Adam and I love to cook and entertain, and we’re Sabbath observant, so we often have people here for Friday night dinner or Saturday lunch after synagogue.” Singing and whiskey-drinking are part of the program.
The post-synagogue crowd spills into the living room, whose look was shaped by Darci Hether, an interior designer. “She sat with us and heard what we wanted to do, and went shopping with us and helped us figure out what we needed to buy,” said Mr. Parker, who points with pride to the wheat-colored semicircular sofa he and Mr. Benson bought on their own.
“When we got it home, Adam said to me, ‘What have we done? It’s huge.’ But our decorator said: ‘Guys, you nailed it. We will work with this couch.’ And I have to say, it’s the most comfortable thing in the world. Everyone loves sitting on it.” Its very shape sends a message: Gather around.
As with the purchase of the sofa, the couple have boldly gone it alone in their selection of art. While doing some consulting at Interlochen Arts Academy in Michigan, Mr. Parker fell in love with a piece that was part of a show by staff members: nine large color-swirled tiles. It was the first art he had ever bought; it was the first work that Seth Kaiser, a ceramist and recent art school graduate, had ever sold. The couple’s subsequent acquisition of an armless pink chair was inspired by the tiles’ swooshes of cerise.
A large grid of metal strands by Alice Hope that was once on display in the lobby of the Greene Space for public performances at New York Public Radio, now hangs in the couple’s foyer. “It’s made of heavy chains, but it has this light, floaty quality that I think is amazing,” said Mr. Parker, who stepped in with his checkbook when the Greene Space lobby was redecorated and Ms. Hope’s installation became available.
That’s lucky; he doesn’t often have it. This is an apartment with an open-door policy. “We want our kids to know they should feel as comfortable as we do inviting their friends around.” This may explain why visitors are frequently suggesting to the couple that they do some rejiggering of the space to accommodate the scrum: Expand the kitchen to incorporate the dining room! Take a wall down and make the third bedroom part of the kitchen! Put a table in the foyer and have that be the dining room. No, no, no.
