These days he generally sits, very quietly. Joe Allen, owner of the 46th Street restaurant he uncharacteristically named for himself, is unfailingly polite, reluctantly conversational.
D D Allen, the interior designer and his not-exactly-estranged wife, said that whenever his friend Al Pacino walked into the restaurant, which was often, with the Actors Studio just blocks away, he’d nod at Joe, and Joe would nod at him. No talk. Just that.
“A lot of people considered Joe to be dismissive, but he just didn’t want to bother anyone,” she said.
The singer and dancer Chita Rivera, whom Mr. Allen was involved with in the 1970s, said of him: “I would look up from wherever I was playing and see him sitting alone at a table, watching me. That’s so romantic, made me feel so good.
His signature restaurants are Joe Allen and Orso, and once he had seven of them, in New York, Los Angeles, Toronto, London and Paris. When Joe Allen opened in Paris in 1972, The International Herald Tribune proclaimed, “American Hamburger Has Come to Paris,” and ran a photo of him and his Labrador retriever, Alice, on the Avenue des Champs-Élysées.
About the same time, French Vogue ran a three-page spread on the restaurant. Orso in Los Angeles remained fabulous through the 1990s, an essential luncheon spot for celebrities like Mel Brooks and Johnny Depp.
He was lured into a restaurant career by neither cuisine nor a love of the business. “It was the glamour, I guess that’s what you could call it,” he said.
He liked the idea, especially since it meant working nights. “You could do nothing during the day except lie in bed, and you’re not doing anything wrong,” Mr. Allen said.
For a few years, he ran a bar on the Upper East Side, then opened Joe Allen in 1965. His menu stressed familiarity, and his gastronomic ambition was to make sure that certain dishes were prepared well.
The restaurant has wide-ranging virtues, including a certain classiness that comes with white tablecloths and cloth napkins. Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton were regulars in the ’60s, and theater people still hang around, often using the tables as impromptu offices and holding informal meetings during slow hours.
Then there’s his gallery of Broadway fiascos. Mr. Allen has brought infamy to flops, lining the walls with framed posters of theatrical failures.
The first was “Kelly,” a 1965 musical inspired by a man who claimed to have jumped off the Brooklyn Bridge and survived. The show closed after opening night, a major disaster.
“I told him I’d kill him if I ever saw one of my posters on the wall,” Ms. Rivera said.
He has sold off or closed his out-of-town branches and is now the proprietor of three places, all on 46th Street: the original Joe Allen; Orso, serving Italian food; and Bar Centrale, an eccentric, dapper hideaway with a soundtrack that includes Jimmy Durante crooning “I’ll Be Seeing You.” The three are clustered in what he refers to as his “compound,” three adjoining brownstones that he owns. In the oldest of restaurant traditions, he lives above the store.
Restaurant Row, 46th Street between Eighth and Ninth Avenues, on the fringe of Broadway, is conspicuously garish, with low-priced pre-theater restaurants and hawkers stalking passers-by.
His little realm remains classic, permanent, serious: The Joe Allen exterior is devoid of ornamentation. Bar Centrale’s front door is nearly invisible and Orso’s facade is subdued, though oddly Japanese in appearance.
He is 83 now, hobbled by back problems and surgically repaired but-never-quite-the-same torn quadriceps tendons. It’s another reason he sits. “I’m feeling old, is what I’m feeling,” he said.
Once he ran up to 40 miles a week, mostly through Central Park. Ms. Allen said he was a great dancer, and in his day, a natty dresser who shopped at Savile Row.
Almost all lifestyle details come courtesy of her and other family members. The restaurant business has no lack of loquacious owners, eager to promote their food or themselves. He is not among them.
His success with women is not easily explained. On one of his first dates with Ms. Allen, he took her to his local gym, operated by Nicholas Kounovsky, who introduced European-style gymnastics to America.
Men have seen it, too, particularly the actor Ken Howard, a close friend who died in March. At the time Mr. Howard was president of SAG-Aftra, the screen actors’ union, which suggests that any comparison he made to a fabled movie star was done thoughtfully. “He really is ‘Casablanca,’” Mr. Howard said in an interview a few weeks before his death.
His sister concurs, and said she thinks his total absence resulted mainly from her father’s belief that his former wife and her new husband wanted a life without him.
Then, one day, Mr. Allen was contacted by his brother-in-law, who asked if he would like to be reacquainted with his son. He said yes.
They became friends, and eventually Mr. Lumia started working for his father, as did his sister. She became head chef at Orso in New York, and Mr. Lumia was the longtime manager of Orso in Los Angeles. But before that, the father-and-son relationship had to survive yet another misadventure.
Mr. Allen took a house in Amagansett, N.Y., one summer, and he found his son a job at a bar where Ms. Allen happened to be working as a waitress. She and the son started dating. They both moved in with Mr. Allen. Mr. Lumia left for school. His father started dating Ms. Allen.
“It took a lot of explaining, I’ll tell you that,” Mr. Allen said.
He had his loves — perhaps some of them women, although much of his passion appeared to be reserved for the champion New York Knicks of the early 1970s. He is decidedly sentimental when recalling Walt Frazier and Dave DeBusschere.
