There sure is. And this tale crosses it.
Q. Last year, I bought two round-trip tickets to Kenya from JustFly, an online service that finds inexpensive flights. A few days before my 5-year-old daughter and I were about to fly out in December, I learned that our return tickets had inexplicably been canceled. I spent the next two weeks in Nairobi frantically trying to rebook our tickets, spending hour upon hour on expensive international calls trying to get help from JustFly.
Agents there said I needed to contact United, the airline we were flying on. United agents said I needed to contact JustFly.
Round I went, day after day, racking up nearly $400 in phone bills. Instead of enjoying what was intended as a vacation to see family and attend my brother’s wedding, I was in a state of panic.
Finally, I was forced to buy two new tickets, for a total of $2,000, a week later than our originally scheduled return. I lost a week’s worth of pay — I’m a nurse — and my daughter missed a week’s worth of school, which drew a rebuke from her superintendent.
After many calls, United sent me a check for $750, the cost of our original homebound tickets, and JustFly sent me a check for $1,100. That doesn’t quite add up to $2,000, of course, and I don’t expect I’ll be made whole for this ordeal, which was emotional as well as financial. But at minimum, I’d like people to know what happened.
Carol Kamau Macungie, Pa.
Many customers offer a different, less flattering, description. The Better Business Bureau in Canada, where JustFly is based, posted an alert about the company, citing a pattern of complaints that include “failure to provide promised assistance or support for products or services.” Worse, the company failed to respond to the B.B.B. to address these issues. And to add a hint of mystery, a news report about the B.B.B. alert, published in a Canadian newspaper last year, said that efforts to contact the owners of JustFly had been unsuccessful. It was even unclear where the company was based.
This offered a brief and unpleasant glimpse into Ms. Kamau’s experience (seriously, two hours?). The Haggler declined the offer and enlisted the assistance of an ace researcher at The New York Times, Kitty Bennett, who quickly found United States business registrations for JustFly in various states, all of which listed the company’s address as Rocky Hill, Conn. According to the filing in Massachusetts, the president, treasurer and director of the company is Douglas Helal. According to Ms. Bennett, there is only one Douglas Helal in the United States.
Efforts to reach Mr. Helal, with messages left on a JustFly phone number with a Connecticut area code, and his email address at WFSB, a Rocky Hill television news station where he is listed as a digital sales manager, yielded nothing. Well, not quite nothing. (The station has no connection to JustFly.) Someone identified as Peter Ford, part of “JustFly Customer Care,” wrote to the Haggler and asked if he could help. (He had evidently received the Haggler’s email from Mr. Helal.) The Haggler forwarded Ms. Kamau’s letter. Mr. Ford then wrote to Ms. Kamau, asking for more details.
Then things got interesting. On Monday, a man named Nick Hart called the Haggler. He said that he was the chief financial officer of a company called Momentum Ventures, based in Montreal, which owns JustFly. It turns out that while Mr. Helal is, indeed, the president of JustFly, he is an employee, hired primarily to give Momentum an agent in the United States.
Under the “Our Strategy” section of Momentum’s self-congratulatory website it says, “We tackle every business decision with enthusiasm and we live the work that we do.” This enthusiasm does not seem to extend to customer service.
Mr. Hart put up a spirited, even defiant defense of JustFly. This included a request that the Haggler cease “harassing” Mr. Helal, which seems an unfair description of what was merely an effort to get a comment from someone who the Haggler assumed ran the company. On a more conciliatory note, Mr. Hart said that JustFly needed to hire more phone representatives because it was more popular than originally expected.
“We’re trying to ramp up the number of agents,” he said.
That is a fine start. As for how Ms. Kamau ended up with a canceled return flight from Kenya, Mr. Ford, the JustFly customer service agent, said in an email that was not JustFly’s fault. So whose fault was it? Swiss International Air Lines, he wrote, which handled a portion of that return flight.
The airline investigated the issue for a couple of days and on Thursday wrote to say “You’ve got to be kidding.” Actually, a public relations representative was more diplomatic. She just stated that the culprit was a travel agency, which, citing privacy issues, she would not name.
The Haggler could spend the next three months untangling precisely what went wrong with Ms. Kamau’s return ticket. But that would make him sad. Suffice it to say, JustFly asked Ms. Kamau to send receipts detailing her expenses during her extra week in Kenya, which she did. This included a $1,400 bill for housing and food, though not her lost wages or phone bills.
As of press time, Ms. Kamau had heard nothing from the company. The Haggler is left to assume that JustFly and Momentum believe that they live in a post-consequences corporate world, a realm where so many people jump on low fares and become new customers that an unflattering performance in this space doesn’t really matter.
An update next time. For now, bargain-hunting fliers, consider yourself warned.