582 pp. Melville House. $27.95.
Recently I was browsing in an esoteric bookshop in a small medieval town in England when I found, among witches’ almanacs, books on dog reincarnation and boxes of runes, a paperback called “The Secret History of the World.” This was the kind of book that had apparently inspired “The Da Vinci Code.” Secret societies, strange connections, gargoyles. I love all that stuff. Who doesn’t? So I almost bought it.
But I didn’t, because I had no need for it. At home I already had a 600-page book, two-thirds read, that had so far promised me insights into numerology, card counting, the chaos of war, the secrets of the city, alchemy, fake books, art history, the rule of three, the manufacture of mirrors and the workings of 16th-century magi. This was the only book I needed; the book I was raving about to my friends before I’d even finished it. The novel whose bookmark was simply a pencil, because of the volume of notes I was making in its ­margins.
I’m such a sucker for books like this — mystical literary fiction with a hard edge — that I had been planning my glowing review since around Page 150. How could I express that while this novel seems on the surface to be a bit like “Cloud Atlas” (multiple perspectives, Russian doll structure), it’s more heartfelt, deeper, less of a pastiche? I thought I might describe it as “Stone Junction” rewritten by David Foster Wallace or Thomas Pynchon with a big twist of William Gibson, Susanna Clarke and Italo Calvino. But I wasn’t sure that would cover it. Maybe I would begin by praising the genius of setting the novel in three different versions of Venice: the Venetian casino in Las Vegas (“a machine for forgetting”) in 2003; Venice Beach, Calif. (a lagoon “independent of geography”), in 1958; and Venice, Italy (a “turkeyleg island”), in 1592. Oh how I was loving this clever, well-written book that even seemed to promise to reveal how magic worked. Like, actual magic! This was going to be a huge best seller. This was “The Da Vinci Code” for intellectuals. “Foucault’s Pendulum” all over again. Then, eventually, after a month of scribbling in the margins, I finished it.
“The Mirror Thief” is, it turns out, essentially a book about hermeneutics and disappointment. It’s a book about reading, specifically depth reading, to a point of inexplicable transcendence. What does one find in the depths? Nothing? Everything? A bit of both? The book — in the end long, frustrating and slow — becomes a mirror, perhaps inscribed, as are several mirrors in this text, with the words “this is the face of god you see.” But what that actually means is anyone’s guess. Its main lesson, that “the reader, not the poet, is the alchemist,” is a hard one to apply. Ten, nine, eight pages from the end, one still hopes, but this book does not contain any of the answers offered by “The Secret History of the World.” It doesn’t even supply the answers to most of its own questions. This is not “The Da Vinci Code” for intellectuals. It’s more like “Howl” translated into Latin and then back again. Over 600 pages. It’s amazing.
All reviews of this novel are going to ruin the thrill of its structure, just as reviews of “Cloud Atlas” did. So here goes. We begin in Las Vegas with Curtis Stone, a former military policeman who has been hired by his old acquaintance Damon Blackburn to find Stanley Glass, a card counter who has recently hit Blackburn’s Atlantic City casino the Spectacular (a.k.a. the Point). Curtis finds not Stanley but a battered copy of the book that has inspired his life, a collection of dense and complex poems called “The Mirror Thief.” This book serves as a portal through which we enter the streets of Venice Beach in 1958 as Stanley, then a 16-year-old runaway, searches for Adrian Welles, the book’s author. Stanley has sensed magic in “The Mirror Thief” and wants to know how it works. But all Welles can do is open another portal, this time into the life of the book’s protagonist, the displaced Cypriot and possible double agent Vettor Crivano, as he moves around Venice in 1592 trying to bring to fruition a complex plot involving mirror-makers and alchemists.
The book then spirals through those three narrations to its conclusion, which has been sort of foreshadowed 500 pages earlier when Stanley “long ago stopped paying the story any mind. He’s come to regard it as a fillip at best, at worst as a device meant to conceal the book’s true purpose.” Do we find out how magic works? No. Or maybe yes. Did I mention that the mirror is “a machine for unseeing”? This book is a machine for unreading.
The 20th-century sections can be just as thrillingly obscure. A casino building looks like “an Anasazi cliffpalace reworked by Frank Lloyd Wright”; someone’s irises are “the color of Windex.” But there are plenty of more conventionally vivid descriptions as well. A house “sits on its wide sandy lot like a lunatic on a parkbench, tricked out in his best suit, with nowhere to go and nothing to do but fix passers-by with a silent crooked smile.” Or “The shoreline seems limp, collapsed, like an old helium balloon.” Elsewhere, pigeons coo under the eaves alongside the “downy puffs” their pale guano has glued to the sill. There is a lot of excrement in this book. Descriptions of voiding and the contents of chamber pots are presented alongside extravagant descriptions of meals, paintings, the layout of cities. It is as if nothing is left out. There is no change of pace. Everything is described in minute detail. Except the most important bits, which duck and feint into the margins.
How this book got published is a complete mystery to me. Not because it is not good enough, but rather because it is too good. I can’t imagine any mainstream publisher not asking the author to cut at least 200 pages, include more human relationships, use more cause-and-effect plotting, not require the reader to look everything up all the time (including the major locations, which are not named), deliver on at least 50 percent of its promises and not bury significant plot details in a language and register that you need a postgraduate education and research skills to understand. But then it would just be like every other book. And “The Mirror Thief,” audaciously well written, demanding, frustrating and oddly enlightening, is absolutely not that.