You get back to Eden by preserving what exists of the original, or by creating new versions of your own. Roberto Burle Marx, the great Brazilian landscape architect, did both. From the 1930s onward, mainly in South America, he designed some of the modern world’s most distinctive parks and gardens, from an immense, jazzy tattoo of a promenade on the Rio de Janeiro beachfront to rooftop plantings in a city carved overnight from jungle, Brasília. In the process, he became deeply invested, heart and mind, in saving the Amazonian paradise that surrounded him; fought to halt its devastation; and turned his home near Rio into a botanical rescue farm, a sanctuary for one of the world’s largest collections of tropical plants.
Despite this ecological pioneering, his name, though monumental in Brazil, is not widely known in New York. No surprise. There’s no park or garden by him here to experience firsthand. Landscape design, a fundamentally sensual genre, doesn’t translate easily into museums. For many people, the very connection between gardens and art may be a stretch. The last New York survey of his career was in 1991, at the Museum of Modern Art, and it seems not to have attracted wide notice. I hope “Roberto Burle Marx: Brazilian Modernist,” now at the Jewish Museum, will. It deserves to. It’s a lovely and eye-opening show.
Among other things, this show demonstrates that Burle Marx’s aesthetic contributions went beyond plantings. He created mural-size decorative wall coverings from ceramic tiles; wall reliefs carved in wood and stone; and immense wool tapestries, one of which takes up an entire wall in this exhibition’s main gallery. It also suggests that this artist, who died in 1994, has finally found his proper global context in an environmentally activist moment that he, long ago, helped create.
He was born in 1909 in São Paulo into a cosmopolitan family; his merchant father was a German-Jewish immigrant, his upper-class mother a Brazilian Roman Catholic. We see them in painted portraits by Burle Marx that could have been done at almost any time, anywhere, they are so traditionalist in style. And we see the artist in a 1929 self-portrait drawing, looking tense, tousle-haired and mildly Cubistic. He was 19 and had just spent a year in Berlin soaking up Picasso, German Expressionism and van Gogh’s electric landscapes, the influence of which he would carry back to South America.
In Berlin he also saw, as if for the first time, the native flora of his homeland, displayed as exotic imports in that city’s botanical museum. He already had some knowledge of European-style horticulture through his mother. But once back in Brazil, and studying painting at the National School of Fine Arts in Rio, he turned his attention to local plants. His interests in art and botany merged in 1932 when one of his teachers, Lúcio Costa, the modernist architect and future planner of Brasília, got him a gig designing a garden for a private home. Within two years, Burle Marx was director of parks and gardens in Recife, his mother’s home city. By 1938, he was taking on major private and public jobs, among them a reputation-making commission for the Ministry of Education and Health in Rio.
For him, painting and landscape design were inseparable, if not identical, art forms: He spoke of design as a way of painting with vegetation, but acknowledged its distinguishing dimensions, which encompassed touch, sound, fragrance and change with the passage of time. In this show you see him developing his thinking about this. A 1935 pencil study for a Recife garden is an academically correct perspectival view of leafy trees lined up along a large pool, with nothing particularly Brazilian in sight except a distant stand of palm trees. Three years later, in a large, light-touch Matisse-like ink drawing, we’re in a lush grove of monster philodendron leaves with a bevy of tiny female nudes. Then, with his plans for the Ministry of Education and Health roof garden, comes the revolution.
The building was designed by Costa, assisted by the young Oscar Niemeyer, and with no less an eminence than Le Corbusier on tap for advice. Burle Marx rose brilliantly to the stellar occasion, producing a garden of entirely indigenous vegetation set in beds bulging with biomorphic curves. The high-color gouache study for his plan, if you didn’t know its function, could pass purely as an abstract painting in the manner of Jean Arp or Miró.
Many other, and more elaborate, studies followed over the years. Several were collaborations with Niemeyer. Some, like a garden plan for the Ministry of the Army in Brasília, and another for the Banco Safra in São Paulo, were meticulously color-coded: The finished gardens reproduced, in plots of vegetation and crushed stone, or painted pavement, the precise colors, as well as shapes, in the studies.
“This landscape? It doesn’t exist. What exists/ is vacant space, to be planted/with landscape retrospectively.” So wrote the Brazilian laureate Carlos Drummond de Andrade in his 1970s poem “How to Make a Landscape.” Andrade, Burle Marx’s almost exact contemporary was, knowingly or not, describing the artist’s nature-inventing work.
One of Burle Marx’s most celebrated projects is the two-and-a-half-mile thoroughfare, Avenida Atlântica, which he designed in 1970 for the Copacabana shoreline in Rio. An unfurling crazy-quilt of rolling, twisting abstract patterning picked out in white, black and brick-brown paving stones, it isn’t his most original concept. The idea is based on Portuguese models. But it is the one that perhaps most fully achieves his long-stated goals of visually activating public space and of giving pleasure, indiscriminately, to the maximum number of people. You don’t walk the promenade, you dance it; its visual rhythms have a samba beat.
You can see that pleasure in action in a short film in this show by the French-born artist Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster. Shot from high above on New Year’s Eve 2000, the wavelike pavement patterns appear to toss and sway the Copacabana crowds like a seething tide. Ms. Gonzalez-Foerster, who splits her time between homes in Rio and Paris, is one of a handful of contemporary artists chosen by the show’s curators — Jens Hoffmann, Claudia J. Nahson and Rebecca Shaykin, all of the Jewish Museum — for doing work influenced by, or complementary to, Burle Marx’s. Some of the matches are obvious: Juan Araujo, from Venezuela, paints images of Burle Marx designs; Luisa Lambri, from Italy, photographs them. Glazed earthenware tiles by the American artist Nick Mauss have a painterly touch similar to those by Burle Marx on view. Mostly, though, the presence of the newer work — particularly a cascading samba-inspired installation by Beatriz Milhazes in the lobby — seems calculated to give the show a sensation of color and texture that architectural exhibitions often lack.
But with his protean, cross-disciplinary energy, Burle Marx needed no warming up or filling out. When he wasn’t making things (sculptures, jewelry, theater costumes, hand-painted tablecloths), he was collecting them: A small selection from his significant holdings in Brazilian folk art, much of it Roman Catholic in theme, is in the show. In a six-decade career, he designed some 2,000 gardens, assisted in later years by his longtime associate Haruyoshi Ono. Many of those plans, though arduously pursued, were never realized.
In 1993, the German government asked Burle Marx to design a public space in a unified Berlin. As if in memory of his father, the location he chose was a neglected plaza that had once been at the center of an Eastern European Jewish community. In the end, the proposal he submitted was turned down, but the idea of homage to his heritage was clearly fixed his mind. He was working on garden plans for both the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and for a new synagogue in São Paulo at the time of his death.
Ultimately, the garden he may have cared about most was his own, a landscape accumulated, rather than specially composed, at his home on an old plantation outside of Rio. Donated by the artist to the Brazilian government and now known as Sítio Roberto Burle Marx, the garden here blends elements from past projects: reflecting pools, fountains, clumps of jungle, thickets of shrubbery harboring wildlife and multicolor patchworks of ornamental grasses.
