At the Chanel boutique in Bushwick, Brooklyn, black-and-white tweed skirts hang near gold lamé gowns. Classic black-toed beige pumps are on display on a glass platform lit from below. A quilted leather handbag with a gleaming gold clasp is also on view, perfectly paired with a rabbit fur coat.
Alas, this shop is not open to the public. That’s because it’s just two feet long by two feet tall, and it’s inside the apartment of a man named Phillip Nuveen.
Mr. Nuveen, 27, is a designer who works almost exclusively in miniature, often making minute versions of the most sought after luxury goods. Each item is made by hand or with the help of a 3D printer. He has designed little Hermès bags, Eames chairs and Louis Vuitton steamer trunks that Barbie most likely would be only too happy to have Ken carry for her.
“I love fashion and style, so my miniature world has become a very chic one,” he said.
Kate Ünver’s aesthetic is far darker than Mr. Nuveen’s. But it’s just as tiny. Ms. Ünver, 29, is a collector of tiny objects that may decorate a dollhouse, or at least the spooky place next door. She is the proud custodian of a 2-inch bull skull, an itty-bitty motorcycle and a freckle-size pair of antique scissors that actually work. “I’ve seen mini pistols that fire,” said Ms. Ünver, the founder of Dailymini, a website devoted to all things diminutive. Eensy switchblades that actually pop out. Nearly microscopic marbles. An electric chair that fits in the palm of your hand. Like so many “miniacs,” as some of the collectors and artisans call themselves, she came to the modern mini movement by way of a childhood love of dollhouses.
Apparently, it really is a small world, and it’s getting progressively smaller, thanks to young artists working in 1:12 scale, which is the traditional ratio for miniatures, dollhouses and dioramas. Instead of dreamy young schoolgirls adorning pint-size Victorian mansions, today’s miniaturists are creating perfect parallel universes in the vein of the Thorne Miniature Rooms on permanent exhibit at the Art Institute of Chicago.
Some may think artisans focused on minis reflect an older demographic. “For a very long time, miniaturists have had this very ‘Grandpa in the basement working on model railroad’ vibe to it, or ‘Grandma with her dollhouse,’” said Thomas Doyle, 39, an artist who works exclusively with contemporary miniatures.
It’s no coincidence that the mini movement is having a moment during a time of political uncertainty and international turmoil. While many of the artists are attracted to the creative process, “there’s also a level of control that’s appealing,” said Nicole Cooley, who teaches creative writing at Queens College, City University of New York. Ms. Cooley is writing a book on mini-ism and has 25 dollhouses in her Glen Ridge, N.J., home.
A miniature universe can also provide a psychological respite. A year and a half ago, Ali Alamedy and his family were driven out of Iraq by the Islamic State. Mr. Alamedy, 33, has been making miniature worlds since he first bought a computer at 16. With the help of 3D software, a piece of balsa wood and a hobby knife, he constructed his first miniature farm scene. “I weathered it with coffee, and there I discovered my love to rust and age wood and urban scenes,” said Mr. Alamedy, who lives a few hours outside of Istanbul.
For Mr. Nuveen, the Chanel-boutique creator, a foray into the world of miniatures grew out of necessity; he had no other way to show off his talents. In college, he studied graphic design, but he dreamed of being an architect. He wanted potential clients to see his work, but he couldn’t reach them in his Bushwick flat, on the fifth floor of a walk-up.
