It used to be that if you wanted to practice fire arts in the city, you had to do it in secret. But all that changed late last year, when the Fire Department granted a special permit for the first time to the Floasis, where anyone with an appetite for heat can spin fire.
On the front door of a tan brick building on 1342A DeKalb Avenue in Bushwick, Brooklyn, a poster advertises “fire dance.” Inside, several Japanese screens enclose a sewing studio where Tara McManus, one of the owners of the Floasis, designs her line of flame-resistant clothing, which is also on sale there.
Props for fire arts are displayed on a far wall — hoops, staves, fans and a whip that could be lit on fire. Several cats roam the space. In the backyard, reached through a door with a stern sign warning of fuel and fire, there is a large black silicone rubber mat designated for fire-spinning practice. A yellow metal cabinet with three types of petroleum sits a safe distance away, and next to that, an essential tool — a fire extinguisher.
Ms. McManus helped found the Floasis as an artist collective in 2011 after quitting her job as a costume designer. Already a skilled fire spinner (she learned her craft from classes held in the shadows on rooftops), she needed a space for her new clothing company, 3rd Earth Fireproof. She began hosting fire-spinning get-togethers, or “spin jams,” and she taught off-the-books classes at what became a hub for all things fire arts.
Nowadays, you find a mix of pros, hobbyists and newcomers. “Every week, there’s somebody who spins fire for the first time here,” she said.
There are regular classes taught by an array of teachers, both outdoors and in the basement dance studio (no fire), covering all manner of props, fire eating and breathing, conditioning, and fire safety.
On a recent evening at a fire-eating class, Ms. McManus was demonstrating a technique called “candling” to several students.  When she removed it, a candle-like flame was coming out of her mouth. Then the students tried.
“That was a candle!” said Neal Sherman, who succeeded after several tries. “I saw it!” A 69-year-old retired science teacher who lives in Kew Gardens, Queens, Mr. Sherman started going a few months ago out of curiosity, he said, and gets a thrill from the momentary brush with danger.
Another evening, after a rehearsal for a coming show, Alexandra Furillo was in the backyard spinning fire, tracing circular and crisscrossing streaks of light with two torches that whooshed loudly as they cut through the air.
Ms. Furillo, a 27-year-old manicurist who lives nearby in Bedford-Stuyvesant, discovered the Floasis three years ago. A baton twirler who had always wanted to twirl fire and who had recently moved to New York City from Pennsylvania, she was broke and felt adrift. Going to the Floasis changed everything, she said.
And after learning fire-eating from Ms. McManus, who pushed her to perform to get over her stage fright, Ms. Furillo landed a gig as a resident fire-eater at the Coney Island Circus Sideshow, under the stage name Nola Star. She is still a regular at the weekly spin jams.
