One of the great privileges of steady theatergoing is that you get to keep falling in love again. You’ll cautiously revisit a show you once lost your heart to, thinking it can’t possibly be as intoxicating as it was the first time around, especially if there have been cast changes.
But then you discover that lightning really can strike twice — or thrice, or more — in the same place. And you wake up the next day, happy and lightheaded, thinking you just might rejoin the ticket queue that afternoon.
Such was my illuminating experience recently on two successive nights, with established revivals of musicals that have introduced new actresses in pivotal roles. In the Tony-winning Lincoln Center Theater production of “The King and I,” Marin Mazzie has taken over the pronominal role of the “I,” Mrs. Anna Leonowens (with a new King in Daniel Dae Kim), while Heather Headley is now inhabiting the sinuous skin of the honky-tonk diva Shug Avery in “The Color Purple,” a Tony front-runner this year.
Both women have the unenviable task of replacing shimmering stars of box office weight. Ms. Mazzie succeeds Kelli O’Hara, whose Anna won her the Tony last year; Ms. Headley has taken the place of Jennifer Hudson, an Oscar-winning pop singer and a household name.
But these additions turn out to be unconditionally at home on stages you might expect to be haunted, “Rebecca”-like, by the glamorous ghosts of their predecessors. You could even say that Ms. Mazzie and Ms. Headley own the joints, at least when they’re required to.
For while these savvy veterans bring a new feistiness to their parts, they never make the mistake of turning expertly tuned ensemble pieces into lopsided displays of star power. Each fits right into the family, like an ideal second spouse who manages to charm everyone by being herself while respecting the delicate balance of a harmonious clan.
Ms. Headley seduced and abandoned Broadway 16 years ago in the title role of the Walt Disney musical “Aida,” for which she received the Tony. She recently resurfaced in London in the musical adaptation of the film “The Bodyguard,” but sightings of her on New York stages have been disappointingly rare.
So there’s an added shiver of anticipation when the characters in John Doyle’s ravishingly reconceived production of “The Color Purple” (adapted from Alice Walker’s novel and first seen in more leaden form on Broadway in 2005) start singing that women better lock up their menfolk because Shug Avery’s back in town. Though Shug’s role is secondary to that of the repressed Celie (still played by the incomparable Cynthia Erivo), she gets one hell of an entrance buildup.
There was, to be honest, a slight letdown when Ms. Hudson showed up after all that feverish expectation. Ms. Hudson’s Shug exuded the weary, slightly resentful passivity of a sex object who knew she didn’t have to work hard to reel in the suckers; it was only when she sang that she came fully alive. On its own terms, the performance worked; but while it was often affecting, it was seldom exciting.
Ms. Headley crackles with electricity from the get-go. So what if Shug’s circuits have temporarily blown when she makes her long-awaited entrance, slumped against the form of her once and future lover, Celie’s husband, Mister (Isaiah Johnson)? In this incarnation, she’s a born jazz baby who might have emerged from the womb in slinky sequins and marcelled hair and who can clearly turn on the juice whenever it’s required.
“Push the Button,” the honky-tonk number in which Shug demonstrates the art of pleasing a partner in bed, is now the raging showstopper it should be. Yet Ms. Headley’s Shug is also fiercely vulnerable, on prickly guard against those who might discover her soft spots.
When she finds herself unexpectedly falling for the plain and work-worn Celie, her long body morphs from sharp angles into melting curves. And her resplendent voice matches her mercurial character’s every emotional shift. As important, it also blends beautifully with Ms. Erivo’s, and their climactic first-act duet becomes a tender, erotic intermingling of kindred spirits.
Ms. Mazzie faces a perhaps more formidable challenge in taking on the schoolmistress duties of Mrs. Anna, the British tutor to the children of the King of Siam. In Bartlett Sher’s rejuvenating revival of a Rodgers and Hammerstein war horse, Ms. O’Hara endowed her part with an exquisite emotional delicacy and fluency.
I didn’t expect anyone to match her subtlety, and Ms. Mazzie wisely doesn’t try. A Broadway leading lady known for powerhouse performances in “Ragtime” and “Kiss Me, Kate,” she brings a touch of brass to a character Ms. O’Hara forged in silver filigree. Ms. Mazzie is a more obviously formidable Anna, a doughty Victorian widow used to holding her own in exotic and adverse environments.
That means you don’t necessarily buy Anna’s trepidation in her opening number, “I Whistle a Happy Tune.” But then Ms. Mazzie begins her second solo, “Hello, Young Lovers,” with a husky quietness, and you hear the fragile heart beating beneath the stalwartly corseted form. From that moment, the audience is hers.
Ms. Mazzie and Mr. Kim possess astute comic timing, and they make beautiful, jangling comic music together. Ms. Mazzie may ultimately be a shade less touching than Ms. O’Hara was, but she’s funnier. Her performance suggests what Gertrude Lawrence, the skilled British comedian who created the role of Anna in 1951, might have been like in the part.
That doesn’t mean that “The King and I” has taken a step back into the past. Like Mr. Doyle with “The Color Purple,” Mr. Sher has created a show that’s a living, mutating organism; these productions are both confident and fluid enough to accommodate new individual elements that might alter their chemistry but don’t warp their essential shape.