Warm Kale, Coconut and Tomato SaladCredit...Davide Luciano for The New York Times. Food stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Gozde Eker.
It looked like the makings of dinner at a yoga retreat. There was a sheet pan filled with cherry tomatoes, glistening with olive oil, dusted in lime zest, showered in salt and pepper. Beside it, another pan: a soy-drizzled mound of ripped kale and dried shaved coconut. There were the ingredients for a dressing as well: miso paste from Japan; tahini from the Levant; local honey; a knob of ginger; a bright red pepper. All of this was very beautiful. But I didn’t see how it was going to come together.
These are good questions, in their way. Of course the first is what the entrepreneurial class calls table stakes; your cooking had better taste good. And the third is perhaps more a symptom of a world obsessed with photographic documentation than one concerned with deliciousness. But Jones’s second question is vitally important, particularly in salads, where the layering of textures is what differentiates the great from the merely good. You want crisp and yielding, slick and crunchy and soft, all at once.
The combination — the layering up, in Jones’s phrase – is sublime. You could certainly toss everything together, but I think the dish works better as a kind of tableau: the greens assembled across the bottom of a bowl or platter, with the tomatoes dotted across them along with the strips of shaved coconut, and the whole thing dressed simply, without tossing, the miso-tahini mixture added as you might apply pieces of mozzarella to a pizza. People will mix everything together on their own, on their own plates, as they eat.
Regardless, and pleasantly, there is no need to rush the preparation. You can assemble the recipe serially, slowly. The greens and the tomatoes come out of the oven hot. They can be served merely warm, and indeed should be. “I know that food cooked with calmness and a little grace,” Jones told The Guardian a few weeks ago, “tastes, to me, a little better than when I’m running around doing 10 million different things.” Which is true as north, though generally hard to achieve. Here is a chance now. Take it.
