LONDON — The new mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, said on Wednesday that his election in the face of a divisive campaign highlighting his religion is a lesson to Donald J. Trump that Islam is perfectly compatible with Western values.
In a briefing at City Hall and then an interview with The New York Times, Mr. Khan, a member of the Labour Party, said that his Conservative opponent, Zac Goldsmith, “chose a Donald Trump approach and their campaign sought to sow divisions.” But London, he said, “chose unity over division, and a rejection of the politics of fear,” something that he suggested should encourage Hillary Clinton, the probable Democratic candidate for president.
Mr. Khan, a practicing Muslim whose parents came to Britain from Pakistan, said that he understood that he would be seen as a role model, but did not want or seek to be a spokesman for Muslims or Islam.
He said he intended to represent all groups in London, symbolized by his swearing-in ceremony Saturday in the city’s Southwark Cathedral and his visit the next day to a Holocaust memorial ceremony, and his criticism of the Labour Party leader, Jeremy Corbyn, for doing too little to speak out against anti-Semitism in the far left of the party.
While he experienced prejudice and racial abuse while growing up, he said, his daughters, 16 and 14, have not. Yet it would be much more difficult now in today’s far wealthier London for his parents’ generation to replicate their success, he said.
His parents were able to live in public housing and put money aside to purchase a home, while the children went to state schools and universities.
But with London’s real estate and rental prices among the highest in Europe, working people are increasingly being priced out of the city, he said, so creating cheaper housing and supporting affordable mass transit are among his highest priorities.
It is also vital for London that Britons vote on June 23 to remain in the European Union, he said, given the many thousands of jobs dependent on financial services. His position on the vote stands in sharp contrast to that of his predecessor, Boris Johnson, a Conservative who is a leader of the campaign to leave the union.
Mr. Khan and Mr. Trump have exchanged messages through the media, with Mr. Khan criticizing Mr. Trump’s declaration that he would stop foreign Muslims from entering the United States. Mr. Trump responded by saying that there were always exceptions and that he hoped Mr. Khan would succeed. Mr. Khan responded that he had no desire to be an exception.
“Something is going wrong,” he said. “We have got a problem with people who are born and raised in Western cities, Western countries, but who are radicalized and turned into violent extremists.” More attention should be paid to giving people a “sense of belonging,” promoting role models and constructing programs, for example, to de-radicalize people in prison.
