Men’s Style|Age 31 and Up, With Roommates. You Got a Problem With That?
Age 31 and Up, With Roommates. You Got a Problem With That?
On a warm spring evening, James Lee sat drinking a gin and tonic on the balcony of the apartment he shares with two roommates in Crown Heights, Brooklyn. He had the night off from his job as a server at a Manhattan restaurant, and he was talking about the high cost of living in New York and what it’s like to have roommates at his age (33).
The two had not had a meal together for a while because Mr. Lee works nights and spends much of his free time with his girlfriend, Rachael Field, a vocational counselor in Brooklyn Criminal Court. Ms. Field happens to be Mr. Rosenthal’s best friend from childhood. In recent months, Mr. Lee had been pressing Ms. Field about moving in together.
A bit later, while waiting for dinner to arrive, Mr. Rosenthal, a 34-year-old clinical coordinator at a homeless shelter, pointed out his contributions to the living space: the art on the walls, the tomato plants on the balcony, the compost heap.
Mr. Rosenthal is not alone in hanging on to a living arrangement more typical for people in their 20s. Data on the living arrangements of Americans from the ages of 18 to 44 suggests that nonfamily households have become more common in recent years, and a United States Census Bureau study, taking a broader view, also reported an increase, to 6.1 percent from 1.7 percent, from 1970 to 2012.
For all that, Eric Klinenberg, a sociology professor at New York University, noted that, for men, living with nonfamily members was not unusual long ago.
To be part of any household — whether with a partner or spouse, other family members, or roommates — means giving up the freedoms that go with the living-alone life.
But it can also ward off loneliness. And the almost constant presence of others is something that Sam Jackson, 35, likes about having roommates. Growing up in Houston, he was part of a family with 10 children, and he never had the chance to feel alone. Nor did he want to.
 “But there’s something comforting about knowing that there’s someone possibly in the living room.
He was seated on a couch that has seen better days. On the walls of the apartment in Bushwick, Brooklyn, that he shares with two other men were mirrored advertisements for beer brands. A row of dusty basketballs occupied a nearby shelf. “When this place cleans up, it’s a looker,” Mr. Jackson said.
Some people may say he is living out a prolonged adolescence.
Jeremy Owens, too, likes having other people around, even at 41. He rents out a room of the apartment he owns in the Bronx, a place he once shared with his wife, to the 24-year-old sister of a previous roommate.
After his divorce, Mr. Owens, who teaches middle school math, lived in this apartment with two other men. He took the living room for himself and put up bookshelves as a divider. His current roommate is about to move out, which has left him at something of a real estate crossroads.
Mr. Owens recalled that when his marriage ended, he found himself out of step with men his age.
Jon Derengowski, 31, a television script coordinator, found himself in a similar situation after a breakup. Now he lives in a rent-stabilized apartment in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, where he has lived with nine different people since 2008. But one of those people was his longtime boyfriend. When the relationship ended, after a year and a half, he had to replace his partner with a stranger who could help with the rent.
Even though he gets along with his roommates, Mr. Derengowski said he does not necessarily want to see someone sitting on the couch when he gets home from work.
 At the moment, he shares an apartment in Astoria, Queens, with two women in their 20s. But having recently come into some family money, he is about to move out on his own.
He added that he feels as if he has lived in what he called a “subset” of adulthood. He pays his bills and college loans on time, he owns a car and he isn’t having ramen for dinner. But, as a bartender, he is often out long after midnight.
“It’s certainly not a lifestyle I want to be in another 10 years,” Mr. Tobal said. “I don’t want to be that guy, the guy who’s 45, 50 years old, who’s trying to pick up girls every night. I hope to God that’s not the path the Lord has set me on.” Having his own place, he said, feels like moving forward.
Not long after my first interviews with Mr. Lee and Mr. Rosenthal at the apartment they shared in Crown Heights, their living arrangement was about to change. Mr. Lee and his girlfriend, Ms. Field, had decided to move in together.
To be precise, Ms. Field is the one who made the final decision. Like Mr. Lee, she was living with two roommates. But when faced with renewing her lease, she decided to act on the thing he had been asking her about for a long time. She called him and simply told him it was time.
Because of their work schedules, it turned out that she was the one to tell her longtime friend (and Mr. Lee’s roommate) Mr. Rosenthal. The first conversation did not go well, Ms. Field said, but she understood. After all, Mr. Rosenthal was losing not only a solid roommate, but also a friend.
Making it trickier for Mr. Rosenthal was the fact that Mr. Lee would be building a new life with his best friend from childhood. And now he will have to start the search for a new roommate.
