“Ego,” first released last year and also a song from the EP, best illustrates her youthful commitment to nonconformity: “They want me to be this picture-perfect girl/In a little picture-perfect world/But I cuss when I talk, and I lean when I walk.” And she does, punctuating her songs and speech with swagger and a few well-placed curses — and then a few more for good measure. When Ms. Bourelly catches herself spouting anodyne industry platitudes, she interrupts with the opposite: a string of playful, self-mocking obscenities.
Ms. Bourelly, who is of Haitian and Moroccan descent, grew up bouncing between Berlin, where her guitarist father, Jean-Paul Bourelly, lived while not on tour, and the Washington area, where she stayed with an aunt and uncle. High school was a constant struggle, and college never an option, she said, having decided her life’s purpose by puberty.
At 19, she moved to Los Angeles to work with a producer she met on Facebook. There, she quickly found a manager whose connections — along with her strong demos — put her into a room with Kanye West and Rihanna.
The release of “Bitch Better Have My Money” in March 2015 got Ms. Bourelly’s name circulating. But first there was the sketch for “Higher,” a title now tattooed in casual script in the middle of Ms. Bourelly’s right forearm. “That song changed my life,” she said.
Still, having made it first as a songwriter in the shadows was “bittersweet,” Ms. Bourelly explained. “It was awesome because I was writing for one of the biggest artists in the world after four months in L.A.” However, “it’s hard to give your songs away,” she added.
In what might be Rihanna’s finest vocal performance to date, she stretches on “Higher” to find the plaintive voice cracks that are Ms. Bourelly’s specialty. The opportunity gave this young songwriter a chance to make her mark on a major album, and provided her with a front-row seat to the necessary operation of a superstar, with cameras constantly watching and ceaseless scrutiny. “I needed to learn how that worked behind the scenes in order to understand how to be an artist,” Ms. Bourelly said.
For now, she exists in a strange limbo, having met her heroes, scored hit songs and performed on “The Tonight Show,” but not yet having broken out on her own.
Ms. Bourelly plans to release a second EP this summer — “The generic answer is that they’re two different chapters to my life, but the truth is, I just have too many songs,” she said — followed by an album later this year or early in 2017.
She has already written more than 300 songs, but insists it’s the creation, not the career strategizing, that drives her.
