LOS ANGELES — The homeless population in Los Angeles County jumped 5.7 percent last year, with a sharp increase in tents and homeless encampments offering daily evidence of the problem sweeping this region, county officials said Wednesday.
Yet the findings, based on a three-night block-by-block census of homeless people living on the street, also described reason for optimism: a 30 percent drop in the number of homeless veterans and an 18 percent decrease in homeless families.
Officials said that these reductions were a result of spending on housing vouchers for veterans and increasing temporary shelters for homeless families, and that the success showed that there were ways to achieve even broader cuts in the homeless population.
Jerry Jones, the director of policy at the Inner City Law Center here, and a longtime advocate for homeless people, said the figures confirmed the importance of spending on housing.
Still, this was the second year that the count tracked a jump in homelessness in Los Angeles. From January 2013 to January 2015, the homeless population increased 12 percent, though that report covered two years.
Officials said the increase reflected, in part, a more aggressive effort to count younger homeless people, a more daunting target because unlike older homeless people, they did not tend to be concentrated in one place like Skid Row. They said that accounted for some but not all of the increase.
“The youth count definitely had an impact,” Mr. Lynn said.
The overall homeless population increased from 44,359 in January 2015 to 46,874 in the count in January 2016 in all of Los Angeles County. There was a 20 percent increase in tents, encampments and vehicles there, not counting the cities of Glendale, Long Beach and Pasadena.
The number of homeless veterans in the county dropped from 4,362 in the 2015 count to 3,071 this year; the number of homeless families slipped from 8,103 to 6,611 this year.
Los Angeles has the second-worst homeless problem in the nation, after New York City, but because of the warmer climate, there are more unsheltered homeless here.
The findings come as the Los Angeles City Council and the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors have moved to increase spending on housing for the homeless. The county has proposed a $98 million spending increase, while the city has proposed spending an additional $138 million. It is not clear where the money would come from, and officials estimated it would cost more than $1 billion to find housing for everyone living on the streets.
