Suzanne Corkin, whose painstaking work with a famous amnesiac known as H.M. helped clarify the biology of memory and its disorders, died on Tuesday in Danvers, Mass. She was 79.
Her daughter, Jocelyn Corkin, said the cause was liver cancer.
Dr. Corkin met the man who would become a lifelong subject and collaborator in the early 1960s, when she was a graduate student in Montreal at the McGill University laboratory of the neuroscientist Brenda Milner.
Thus began a decades-long collaboration between Dr. Corkin and Mr. Molaison that would extend the work of Dr. Milner, focus intense interest on the hippocampus, and make H.M. the most famous patient in the history of modern brain science.
Suzanne Janet Hammond was born in Hartford on May 18, 1937, the only child of Lester Hammond, who worked in engine parts sales, and the former Mabelle Dowling, who worked for the local Department of Motor Vehicles. She grew up in West Hartford — “just down the street,” as she said many years later, from Dr. William Beecher Scoville, the brain surgeon who operated on Mr. Molaison in 1953.
It was the era of the lobotomy, and Dr. Scoville was one of a number of swashbuckling surgeons doing experimental surgeries — they would be unethical today — for a variety of mental problems, including schizophrenia and severe depression, with often disastrous consequences. Mr. Molaison was that rarest of cases: Notwithstanding the seizures, he was mentally healthy and lucid, both before and after the surgery, making him an ideal experimental subject.
Dr. Corkin, after graduating from Smith College with a degree in psychology, knew exactly where she wanted to go: to Dr. Milner’s laboratory at McGill. She focused on studying how the brain represents touch, an area of research many students found too laborious to take on.
In her later work with Mr. Molaison at M.I.T., Dr. Corkin became equal parts experimentalist, protector and advocate. She closely guarded access to Mr. Molaison, especially after his parents died and he moved in with a family friend and later to a nursing home.
Dr. Corkin lived in Charlestown, Mass. In addition to her daughter, she is survived by two sons, Damon and J. Zachary, and seven grandchildren. Her marriage to Charles Corkin ended in divorce.
Dr. Corkin published more than 100 research papers, touching on topics as varied as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease and psychosurgery. She also wrote or co-wrote 10 books.
After Mr. Molaison died, Dr. Corkin arranged to have his brain removed, preserved, exhaustively imaged and finally sent for dissection and electronic mapping. It became a kind of monument as well as a historical artifact and resource for further study.
