In the past quarter-century or so, there have been too many Jane Austen movies and too few Whit Stillman movies. I refrained from starting that sentence with “It is a truth universally acknowledged,” because it isn’t, and also because that would have been too obvious a way of calling attention to the Austen glut and its attendant clichés. I’m happy to report, in any case, that the release of “Love & Friendship” mitigates both the shortage and the surfeit. It’s the Whit Stillman movie that some of us have been waiting a long time for, and also a Jane Austen movie that goes some way toward correcting the record of dull and dutiful cinematic Janeism.
Based on an early, little-known epistolary novella called “Lady Susan,” “Love & Friendship” is a reminder that Austen was not only a brilliant architect of screen-friendly plots but also a very funny writer. Mr. Stillman’s script accordingly abounds in rapid-fire sallies of verbal wit that require and reward maximum alertness. There is plenty of low comedy as well, a bracing silliness that places Austen in the line of British humor that extends through P. G. Wodehouse to Monty Python. The lavish costumes and lovely real estate — requirements of the genre — are offset by a fizzy, giddy mood of spirited preposterousness.
The best (and the rest) of movies made from Jane Austen’s novels. Let the whispers of dissent begin.
A narrative of duplicity, desire and fortune-hunting zips along, propelled by Lady Susan Vernon, a charmer and schemer played with verve and precision by Kate Beckinsale. A less than grief-stricken widow, Susan has the kind of amoral poise that might make her a suitable alpha on “Real Housewives of the Home Counties” circa 1800. Her smile is as radiant as her motives are murky, and she leaves a trail of wreckage and confusion in her wake.
When she is not keeping illicit company with the handsome, silent and emphatically married Lord Manwaring (Lochlann O’Mearain), the nearly penniless Susan is looking for a pair of husbands, one for herself and one for her daughter, Frederica (Morfydd Clark). Frederica has caught the eye of Sir James Martin (Tom Bennett), described in an onscreen note (and later aloud) as “a bit of a rattle,” which is Regency slang for blithering idiot. Visiting the estate of her sister- and brother-in-law, (Emma Greenwell and Justin Edwards), Susan meets a dreamboat named Reginald (Xavier Samuel), who is both her perfect match and a wildly inappropriate choice.
As it must in any decent Austen adaptation, the story more or less takes care of itself, as the action shuttles between London and various country houses. Callers are received, letters are opened, gossip is breathlessly exchanged and long walks are taken on beautifully manicured lawns. Reputations are at stake, along with innocent hearts and large sums of money. It all ends up pretty much as expected and yet also manages to take you by surprise.
The real interest lies in the interplay of the characters, and in the shadings Ms. Beckinsale gives to Susan, who is at once heroine and villainess. She is surrounded by a gallery of amusing and intriguing types. Husbands are variously imperious (Stephen Fry) and obliging (Mr. Edwards), while other women are accomplices (Chloë Sevigny, speaking glorious American), patsies or victims (Jenn Murray) in Susan’s intricate long con.
Mr. Stillman, who started out (with “Metropolitan” in 1990) as an anatomist of the manners and mores of the young American “urban haute bourgeoisie” and returned to filmmaking with the campus comedy “Damsels in Distress” (2012), is perfectly at home in Austen’s world. He approaches his literary source not with the usual reverence but with an appreciation for its freewheeling sense of fun. At times, most often when Mr. Bennett is onscreen, “Love & Friendship” is howlingly funny, and as a whole it feels less like a romance than like a caper, an unabashedly contrived and effortlessly inventive heist movie with a pretty good payoff.
“Love & Friendship” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). Hints of scandal. Running time: 1 hour 32 minutes.