In the American cinephile circles of the 1960s, each new film from the French director Jean-Luc Godard was an event. Vital film critics like Manny Farber, Andrew Sarris and Pauline Kael and public intellectuals like Susan Sontag weighed in, creating a near-constant colloquy on how this director was reinventing cinema. The buzz and argument were equally fevered in Paris, Mr. Godard’s home at the time.
But Anna Karina, the Danish-born model turned actress who during this period was Mr. Godard’s muse, leading lady and wife — one of the screen’s great beauties and an enduring symbol of the French New Wave — doesn’t recollect the hype or intellectual foment. Reminiscing about working with Mr. Godard, she largely remembers freedom and fun.
Ms. Karina, who lives in France, is making a rare visit to the United States, where, in Los Angeles and New York, she is presenting several Godard films at various theaters. On Friday, she will appear at Film Forum in Manhattan for a newly restored version of Mr. Godard’s wry, eccentric quasi-caper “Band of Outsiders” (1964).
She met Mr. Godard when she was still in her teens. He was preparing his debut feature, “Breathless,” and wanted to cast her in a bit role; she balked at its nudity requirement. They began a romance, acted opposite each other in an Eric Rohmer short and married in 1961.
Ms. Karina, 10 years younger than Mr. Godard, cheerfully allowed that their relationship had more than a touch of “Pygmalion” to it, and she spoke admiringly of him as a teacher, recalling his erudition with some awe. Their films together can be read as a multivolume work about their relationship.
In “Le Petit Soldat,” their first film together (although its release was held up for several years by French censors), she was the young revolutionary as object of desire. In “A Woman Is a Woman” (1961) she was a stripper flirting with domesticity. In “Vivre Sa Vie,” Ms. Karina played a desultory beauty who drifts into streetwalking on the way to cinematic sainthood.
“Band of Outsiders” saw her as naïve, coquettish but clever, with a streak of mischief. In “Alphaville,” she was a robotic woman of the bleak future, introduced to love via poetry by the tough guy Eddie Constantine. For their final collaborations, Mr. Godard made his soon-to-be-ex-wife a femme fatale. (They divorced in 1965.) In “Pierrot Le Fou,” she seduces and double-crosses Jean-Paul Belmondo, and in “Made in U.S.A.” she gender-reverses the trench-coated noir antihero, leaving a trail of corpses.
Ms. Karina said the turmoil did not bleed into their working relationship until very late. But when she recalled Mr. Godard’s presenting her with a difficult monologue on the set of “Made in U.S.A.” and insisting on shooting it right away, her incredulity and indignation made it sound as if she was upset about something that had happened just yesterday. “He was making a fool of me, and he did it on purpose,” she bristled.
She is currently working on a memoir about her early years and putting together a stage musical for which she has written songs.
