In their new documentary, “Unlocking the Cage,” D. A. Pennebaker and Chris Hegedus bring their relaxed, acute observational style of filmmaking to bear on a thorny tangle of legal and philosophical questions. Part courtroom drama, part rumination on what separates human beings from other animals, the film is above all a sympathetic portrait of an advocate.
That is not quite the same as a work of advocacy, though it is hard to watch “Unlocking the Cage” without being somewhat swayed by the arguments — or at least impressed by the sincerity — of Steven Wise, a leading animal-rights lawyer. The subject of a cover article in The New York Times Magazine (its author, Charles Siebert, occasionally appears on camera), Mr. Wise has argued that animals should have the legal status of persons. What this means is not that they should be classified as human, but rather that their rights should be acknowledged and protected under the law.
Mr. Pennebaker and Ms. Hegedus — who have, together and separately, made some of the most memorable documentaries of the past half-century — are inexhaustibly curious about people. They are driven to explore, on a case-by-case basis, what ticks us off and makes us tick, and they have ranged far and wide across the contemporary landscape, from battles over feminism in the 1970s to the 1992 presidential campaign to the cutthroat world of French pastry chefs.
This time, their cameras follow Mr. Wise and his colleagues for several years as they build a case that they hope will establish a new precedent. The legal team zeros in first on highly intelligent species like whales, elephants and apes, and then set out to find a venue, settling on New York, where several chimpanzees live in small rural zoos, run-down amusement parks and university research laboratories. The chimps aren’t treated with intentional cruelty. The owners Mr. Wise encounters as he and his team conduct undercover investigations think they’re taking good care of their simian wards. But it’s clear that standards are changing, and that Mr. Wise and the people who will become defendants in his lawsuits are operating under very different assumptions about what animals are and how they should be treated.
“This is the end of the beginning,” Mr. Wise remarks near the end of the movie, citing Winston Churchill, and “Unlocking the Cage” is energized by the sense of recording an early chapter in a long history. Some of Mr. Wise’s positions may seem radically counterintuitive. How can a being without human language or human culture have standing to seek redress from human institutions? But it is also possible that practices and attitudes now widely taken as natural will look arbitrary and cruel to future generations, and that the future will arrive sooner than many of us expect. It wouldn’t be the first time.
“Unlocking the Cage” is not rated. Running time: 1 hour 31 minutes.