Waiting in line to enter a theater has something in common with waiting in line at a border. In the first case, if you have a ticket, you can be reasonably certain you’re going to get through, but in both cases the waiting is infused with anticipation: excitement and nervousness about what may happen on the other side.
At the La MaMa Moves! Dance Festival this weekend, the line in front of the Ellen Stewart Theater on Friday led into the premiere of “After the Feast,” by the Tiffany Mills Company, and the line in front of the Downstairs Theater on Saturday led into “Supper, People on the Move,” by Cardell Dance Theater. Despite their titles, the two works didn’t have food in common so much as walls.
It was “Supper” that prompted thoughts of borders. The piece is about emigration and requires audience members to pass through a convincingly nervous-making simulation of border control. Inside are long folding tables, which soon become the site of a Last Supper, arranged like Leonardo da Vinci’s, the kind of farewell dinner that precedes leaving one’s homeland.
The tables are key. On four legs or tilted, they serve as platforms for the dancers, who scramble up their sides or run along their edges. The tables represent walls, as at borders, and the dancers slip through the gaps between them, gaps that sometimes slam shut.
Directed and choreographed by Silvana Cardell, who herself emigrated to Philadelphia from Buenos Aires more than a decade ago, “Supper” is a collection of imagistic sketches. It’s most effective when it’s moving fast, conveying the terror and difficulty of many emigrant experiences. When the work slows down, it goes slack, revealing a single-layered and static quality to the choreography, as in a procession of people balancing motley possessions. There is a lot of slow-motion acrobatics, impressive but not very expressive. The ideas don’t go anywhere.
Much more compelling are the emigrant stories shared in an accompanying exhibit of photographs and text, organized by Jennifer Baker. The closest that “Supper” gets to the simple eloquence of these stories is at its end, when spectators join performers in a meal and share their own tales.
In “After the Feast,” there is one important wall, at the rear of the stage, and the dancers, like the work itself, keep running into it. Over a long hour, they huddle up against it in various tableaus. They touch it as if wanting to get past it, but they never do.
The atmosphere is post-apocalyptic or medieval. The costumes — jerkins, leather straps, cowls — suggest “Games of Thrones” on a low budget. There are hints of some kind of drama: warmongering, mass death, the emergence of a cult or community. It’s a world of scarcity, all right, yet what’s truly meager, and often maudlin, is the movement vocabulary, which buckles without building. Eventually it all ends, and everyone is free to leave.