She made the remarks as she continues to face a determined challenge on the left from Mr. Sanders, forcing her to essentially fight a two-front war as she seeks to turn her attention to Donald J. Trump and the general election. While Mr. Sanders trails by a substantial number of delegates, his effect continues to be felt in the race as he pressures Mrs. Clinton to adopt more progressive positions.
But it is a new idea in Mrs. Clinton’s presidential campaign. She has called for a range of health policy overhauls to preserve and expand the Affordable Care Act. She has proposed expanding financial protections for people with high health care costs and expanding subsidies to help middle-income people buy their own insurance. She also has proposed a package of policies to lower the price of prescription drugs.
But more recently, she has moved further. In February, she began discussing the possibility of a “public option,” a government-run insurance plan available to people shopping on the existing marketplaces. That idea was considered when the Affordable Care Act was being debated in Congress, but it was ultimately removed from the law.
Mrs. Clinton’s latest suggestion regarding Medicare, first reported by Bloomberg News, takes another step by proposing that Americans still in their prime working years be given the opportunity to obtain the same government insurance that is provided on a universal basis to their older peers.
Before the Affordable Care Act, people older than 55 tended to have difficulty buying their own insurance, because insurance companies saw them as bigger risks. Since the health law passed, insurance plans have been banned from discriminating against people based on health history, but they can charge premiums that are three times as much as younger adults are charged.
Moving more older adults into the Medicare program could have the effect of lowering insurance costs for younger people, as Mrs. Clinton suggested. But the exact dynamics would depend on how the program was structured.
Mrs. Clinton did not say, for example, whether lower-income Americans choosing Medicare would receive help paying their premiums, as they do when they buy private plans on the new marketplaces in the Affordable Care Act. Without such subsidies, Medicare might be an affordable option only for wealthy or very sick customers. In 2008, the Congressional Budget Office estimated that a Medicare buy-in program for 62- to 64-year-olds would cost about $7,600 a person.
Medicare tends to cover a wider range of doctors and services than commercial plans, but it also has more holes — it has no limit on how much patients can be asked to spend out of their own pockets, for example. That means conventional Medicare would have different benefits and financial protections than private plans that are available to the 50-to-65 population.
Taking a more progressive stance on health care could serve Mrs. Clinton in a general election matchup against Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee. He has offered a range of views on the subject. While he says that he wants to repeal the Affordable Care Act, he also has called for a system that would ensure that all Americans have health coverage.
Mr. Sanders is pressing on in his campaign and hopes to influence the party’s platform at the July convention even if, as expected, he does not become the nominee. He has already pulled Mrs. Clinton to take more progressive stances on several issues, including supporting a higher minimum wage and opposing the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal and the Keystone XL pipeline.
Although Mr. Sanders viewed Mrs. Clinton’s latest health care proposal as progress, he said on Tuesday that it was not sufficient.
