The legal battle over which bathrooms transgender people can use in North Carolina turns on a deceptively simple question: Can a law, written in the heat of the civil rights movement generations ago, apply to people the drafters never intended to cover?
The word sex made it into the bill at the last minute, almost accidentally. It was inserted only after the drafting and congressional hearings, when the bill went to the House floor. Representative Howard W. Smith, a Virginia Democrat who opposed the bill, introduced an amendment adding sex discrimination, prompting laughter from his colleagues, who mockingly offered other suggested additions.
Despite speculation that Mr. Smith meant to weaken support for the bill — he said his concern for women was sincere — his amendment passed, and so did the act. The rights of transgender people never came up.
This is the history that Gov. Pat McCrory of North Carolina turned to when he sued the Justice Department on Monday, arguing that sex means biological sex, and nothing more. “The Obama administration is bypassing Congress by attempting to rewrite the law,” he said.
But the Justice Department said the word also covers gender identity, not just anatomy, and filed its own lawsuit charging that a North Carolina law allowing people to use only those public bathrooms and locker rooms that correspond to their biological sex violates both the 1964 law and a 1972 federal law barring sex discrimination in education. In explaining her case, Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch also harked back to the civil rights struggle.
Courts have often expanded the interpretation of laws in ways that the authors never imagined, to answer questions that earlier generations never thought to ask. For example, the Supreme Court’s ruling last year legalizing same-sex marriage was based on the 14th Amendment to the Constitution, adopted to protect black people after the Civil War.
That kind of thing infuriates conservative “strict constructionists.” But as a practical matter, courts are often less interested in asking whether the meaning of a law can be stretched, than in asking how far.
Advocates for transgender rights say the Justice Department’s case is less of a stretch than some others they have supported.
Conservatives say the Obama administration and federal agencies have overreached their legitimate power — unilaterally changing the clear meaning of the word sex, and the scope of the law. If the law needs changing, they say, it is up Congress to do so.
But in fact, many court rulings and federal government actions have led to this point.
The 1964 law’s ban on sex discrimination was applied narrowly at first, but the Supreme Court broadened it in a series of rulings saying that sex discrimination includes sexual harassment, that the law protects men as well as women, and that discrimination against a person for not adhering to sex stereotypes in appearance is sex discrimination.
The Supreme Court has not addressed whether the same language protects transgender rights, but several lower courts have. In 2004, the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit found that it does, and some other courts have since agreed. But in 2007, the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit made the opposite finding.
In 2011, the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit ruled that discriminating against a transgender person was sex discrimination — not based on the civil rights statute, but based on the 14th Amendment. And last month, relying on a 1972 law, Title IX, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit ruled that a high school must allow a transgender student who was born anatomically female to use the boys’ bathroom.
A hate crimes statute passed in 2009 became the first federal law to explicitly protect transgender people. A 2013 renewal of the Violence Against Women Act was the second. In 2012, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ruled, as the Sixth Circuit did, that discrimination against transgender people violated the Civil Rights Act’s ban on sex discrimination, a decision hailed by advocates as the executive branch’s first unequivocal statement to that effect.
In extending civil rights protections in a new way, the government does not speak softly, and it does carry a big stick — the threat of taking away federal funding if an institution does not comply. With that possibility hanging over them, most entities quickly give in to government demands, as colleges and universities have in recent years when the Department of Education accused them of mishandling sexual assault complaints.
“You usually don’t see the showdown,” Mr. Sears said. But in an election year, such showdowns can become a strategy, a way of trying to mobilize voters.