Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Tuesday that he supported collective bargaining rights for the 60,000 New York farmworkers and that the state was renouncing a loophole in federal labor laws that had left farmworkers unprotected and marginalized for more than seven decades.
Mr. Cuomo’s statement came just hours after the New York Civil Liberties Union filed a complaint in State Supreme Court in Albany saying that preventing farmworkers from organizing was a violation of the State Constitution. The state and the governor were named as the defendants.
In a statement, Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, said his administration would not fight the lawsuit.
Donna Lieberman, the executive director of the civil liberties organization, said it was now looking forward to achieving a court-ordered settlement to establish protections allowing farmworkers to organize.
The right of workers to organize is enshrined in a federal law passed in 1935 known as the National Labor Relations Act.
As part of a compromise to get the legislation and other key parts of the New Deal approved by Congress, President Franklin D. Roosevelt made a number of concessions. Specifically, he needed the support of a bloc of politicians from the South, where the economy was largely driven by agriculture — and where the work force was disproportionately black. An exemption carved into the labor act put its protections beyond the reach of farmworkers. To this day, farmworkers are not accorded the same federal protections as other workers.
In 1938, New York amended its own Constitution to expand the rights of workers to bargain collectively.
The New York Farm Bureau, an industry advocacy group, said it was reviewing the lawsuit and could not comment on it specifically, but said there were reasons farmworkers should not be allowed to bargain collectively.
The fight to expand worker protections to farmworkers in New York stretches back decades. Former Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, the current governor’s father, even formed a task force to study the issue and found that farmworkers were largely left to fend for themselves.
The civil liberties group argues that many of those conditions still apply.
With $6.36 billion in sales in 2014, New York is one of nation’s leaders in a variety of dairy and farm products. Yet the farming industry’s workers are among the lowest paid in the state. The average yearly wages for farmworkers in 2015 was $28,430, according to data from the State Labor Department, about one-third less than the overall state average of $41,650.
Farmworkers tend to be less likely to challenge unfair conditions, according to their advocates, because many do not speak English and fear deportation. A study by the Community and Regional Development Institute at Cornell University estimates that roughly 75 percent of farmworkers in New York are undocumented.
The lawsuit was filed on behalf of Crispin Hernandez, who until last year worked 12-hour days, six days a week, as a milker on Marks Farms, near Lowville, in the Adirondacks. Marks is one of the largest dairy producers in the state, with nearly 5,000 cows and 55 workers.
In a statement, the owners of Marks Farms said that the complaint was inaccurate and that they would be working to set the record straight.
What Mr. Hernandez wanted, according to the complaint, was a forum to discuss issues as basic as having to pay out of pocket for full-sleeve gloves to protect against chemicals.
Last summer, he and other workers met with advocates for farmworkers in a trailer on the farm during nonworking hours. The police were summoned by the managers of the farm, in a clear attempt to intimidate the workers, the complaint says.
On Aug. 24, Mr. Hernandez was again spotted speaking with a labor rights activist during nonworking hours.
Eight days later, he was fired and given four days to move out of his home.