When two Syrian immigrant brothers refused to shake their female teacher’s hand this year, it ignited national outrage in Switzerland.
This week, the authorities in the northern canton of Basel-Landschaft ruled that the students, who studied at a public school in the small town of Therwil, could not refuse to shake their teacher’s hand on religious grounds. They said that parents whose children refused to obey the longstanding tradition could be fined up to 5,000 Swiss francs, about $5,050.
Shaking a teacher’s hand before and after class is part of Switzerland’s social fabric, and is considered an important sign of politeness and respect.
The boys’ school had initially decided to grant the brothers an exemption from the custom after the boys, ages 14 and 16, the sons of an imam from Syria, had argued that Islam did not permit physical contact with a person of the opposite sex, with the exception of immediate family members. Seeking a compromise, the school decided that the boys would not have to shake male teachers’ hands either.
But when the compromise became public last month, it provoked an uproar from educators and politicians across the ideological spectrum. Justice Minister Simonetta Sommaruga, a social democrat, argued that shaking hands with a teacher was an important part of Swiss culture.
Beat Zemp, the president of the Swiss teachers’ union, also spoke out against the decision, saying that the rules should apply to all students and that it sent the wrong message, since the boys would need to shake hands with colleagues, both male and female, as their lives progressed.
After the backlash, the school decided to refer the issue to the regional authorities.
On Wednesday, the cantonal board for education, culture and sport in Basel-Landschaft said that the integration of foreigners and the fostering of gender equality were in the public interest and that this consideration trumped the private interests of the two students (their names have not been made public).
“In addition, shaking hands was an important social gesture for one’s future career,” it added.
The decision by the Swiss school board comes as Europe is grappling with how to integrate more than a million migrants, many of whom have been arriving from conservative Muslim countries. It also comes amid a simmering culture war in Europe over immigration.
In October elections, the right-wing Swiss People’s Party won the most votes, in part by railing against immigrants and what party leaders called their threat to the Swiss way of life.
In 2009, a majority of Swiss voted in a referendum to ban the construction of minarets, the prayer towers of mosques, after the Swiss People’s Party warned of the “creeping Islamization” of Switzerland. The vote underlined widespread unease about Islam and undermined the country’s reputation for religious tolerance.
In Germany, where nearly one million migrants arrived last year, including many from Middle Eastern countries buffeted by war, the government proposed an integration law this week that aims to give migrants a path to full employment, but will require them to learn German and accept local laws and customs.
In Denmark, pork meatballs and other pork dishes became the latest weapons in the battle playing out in Europe over identity and integration after the central Danish town of Randers voted in January to require public day care centers and kindergartens to include the meat on their lunch menus.
In abidingly secular France, the country’s minister for families, children and women’s rights, Laurence Rossignol, recently set off a loud debate when she equated women who wanted to wear Muslim headscarves to “American Negroes” who had supported slavery.
The ruling in Switzerland has proved polarizing among leaders of the country’s 350,000 Muslims. After the controversy first erupted, the Federation of Islamic Organizations in Switzerland said that the shaking of a woman’s hand by a man was theologically permissible.
But the Islamic Central Council of Switzerland rejected the educational body’s ruling altogether, and said in a statement that the Swiss regional authorities had “grossly” overstepped their mandate.
It argued that, rather than contributing to the integration of Muslims, the ruling would foster feelings of alienation among Swiss Muslims. It said that policing physical contact between individuals was a form of totalitarianism, and vowed to take legal action if the ruling was enforced.
Mr. Gunes said the citizenship application by the teenagers’ family had been suspended by the authorities, at least for now.
The brothers were not available Wednesday for comment. But in an April interview with Die Welt, the German newspaper, the younger of the brothers said the two were merely following the teachings of the Prophet Muhammad, whom he called their “idol.” Lamenting all the fuss, he stressed that their actions were not hurting anyone.
The brothers, he noted, were trying to protect the dignity of women with their refusal to shake a woman’s hand.