WASHINGTON — In an extraordinary rebuke of his party’s presumed nominee, Speaker Paul D. Ryan, the nation’s highest-ranking elected Republican, said Thursday that he was “not ready” to endorse Donald J. Trump for president.
Mr. Ryan’s announcement represented a split among Republicans not seen in at least a half century, and it came only two days after Mr. Trump said he would unify the party after essentially clinching the nomination with his victory in the Indiana primary.
As the chairman of the Republican National Convention, Mr. Ryan has repeatedly said he would support his party’s nominee as Republicans tried to regain the White House and solidify control of Congress.
But the combination of Mr. Trump’s at times outrageous remarks — insulting women, Hispanics and Muslims — and his broad rejection of many core Republican policies proved too toxic a brew for Mr. Ryan as he defended his majority in the House, the reputation of his party and his own viability.
A look at how the Republican speaker of the House and the party's nominee for president differ on issues including immigration, entitlements, and trade.
Mr. Ryan’s ambivalence toward Mr. Trump adds another layer of division in a party torn by the billionaire developer’s ascent, placing him at odds with his fellow Wisconsinite, Reince Priebus, the party chairman, who pronounced Mr. Trump the presumptive nominee and said Republicans should fall in line. Mr. Priebus was not aware Mr. Ryan was going to make the statement, his spokesman, Sean Spicer, told CNN.
Although Mr. Ryan said he had expected the race to run at least a few more weeks, he had spent the last day honing his position, aides said, even as others, like Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, voiced unequivocal if not effusive support for Mr. Trump. While Mr. Ryan’s defiance put him in line with a number of other prominent Republicans, Mr. Trump has defied convention throughout the campaign, so the long-term effect was at best uncertain.
A party nominee has never failed to gain the support of a House speaker or majority leader from his party in modern times. In 1896, Speaker Thomas Brackett Reed ran against William McKinley and made it be known he would not serve as vice president, but ended up backing the nominee.
In 1964, Senator Barry Goldwater had to wait a bit uncomfortably for the endorsement of Senator Everett Dirksen of Illinois, but Mr. Dirksen gave it and thus ended the stop-Goldwater movement.
While Mr. Ryan’s remarks caught Republicans off guard, it also gave them essentially a permission slip to go their own way on Mr. Trump’s candidacy. Had Mr. Ryan issued a forceful endorsement, it would have put pressure on fellow House Republicans to follow his lead, a step many have been unwilling to take.
Mr. Trump, who once said Mr. Ryan would “pay a big price” if he did not support him, knows that the speaker and other opponents did not have great sway over primary voters. But Mr. Ryan, who has helped raise hundreds of thousands of dollars for Republicans, may well be a more notable voice in a general election.
Outside of Mr. Trump’s remarks about Muslims, Hispanic immigrants, women and other groups — which Mr. Ryan has at times gone out of his way to denounce — his policy positions on many major issues, notably trade and entitlements, stand in stark contrast with Mr. Ryan’s.
Mr. Ryan has been signaling a willingness to carve out some terrain to differentiate himself by insisting that House Republicans write their own policy agenda this year, and he has left bread crumbs of ambivalence for months by giving speeches that at times criticized Mr. Trump’s views.
He also criticized Mr. Trump for declining to distance himself from the former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke. “If a person wants to be the nominee of the Republican Party, there can be no evasion and no games,” Mr. Ryan told reporters in early March.
Mr. Trump is expected to be a drag on some Republican candidates running for the House and Senate this November, given his intense unpopularity with key voting groups, including women, Hispanics and voters with college degrees.
Even before Mr. Ryan spoke out, Mr. Trump was confronting the prospect of crippling defections within the Republican elite. Both George Bush and George W. Bush, the only two living former Republican presidents, announced on Wednesday that they would not back his candidacy.
Mike Shields, president of the American Action Network, a conservative outside spending group, said Mr. Ryan had effectively cleared the way for others in the party to decide for themselves how to handle Mr. Trump. Mr. Shields said that with Mr. Ryan as an example, many candidates could cleave to a message and an issue agenda distinct from Mr. Trump’s.
In exit polls, big chunks of the Republican electorate said they remained deeply wary of Mr. Trump. In Indiana, the state where he effectively locked up the Republican nomination, about a quarter of Republican voters said they would be scared to see him as the president.
