Illustrated. 396 pp. Bloomsbury Press. $32.
A “people’s history” suggests an alternative to an official history. But there is no official account of the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution. After Mao died, the Chinese people cut a tacit deal with the Communist Party: Raise our living standards and we will allow you to stay in power; we will not ask questions about the nightmare we endured.
Frank Dikotter’s gripping, horrific and at times sensationalistic “The Cultural Revolution: A People’s History, 1962-1976,” the third volume of his work on the Mao years, challenges the Chinese people to address those missing years. Drawn from hundreds of English-language and Chinese eyewitness accounts, newly available archival records, online Cultural Revolution documentary projects and foreign and Chinese scholarship, the book paints such a damning portrait of Mao and Communist Party governance that if it were widely circulated in China, it could undermine the legitimacy of the current regime.
Dikotter, a professor of humanities at the University of Hong Kong, divides the period into four phases. The first is the 1962-66 lead-up to the Cultural Revolution, when Mao contemplated his return to the political stage. Relaxed policies under the leadership of President Liu Shaoqi had helped the country partially recover from a famine that had killed tens of millions. Mao, fearing the return of revisionism and sidelined by his own party, signaled his reassertion of control with the famous July 1966 swim in the Yangtze River.
What Dikotter calls the “Red Years” from 1966 to 1968 saw the worst of the urban violence. Student Red Guards were organized to defend Mao against his enemies. They attacked their teachers (humiliations, beatings, torture and suicides are described in wrenching detail) and raided homes in search of bourgeois “articles of worship, luxury items, reactionary literature, foreign books, concealed weapons, hidden gold, foreign currency, signs of a decadent lifestyle, portraits of Chiang Kai-shek.” Then new factions targeted elite party members, along with intellectuals, artists and writers, miscellaneous class enemies and victims of earlier campaigns, until competing groups were fighting one another in the streets. So many campaigns, work team investigations and political reversals characterized the early Cultural Revolution that even the activists were confused. They had no way to know why a signal for radical behavior one day would be rescinded the next. Ordinary people were paying for political struggle at the elite level, often with their lives, but they were also responsible for the petty vendettas they carried out when given the chance.
Mao eventually brought in the military to quell factional violence, but China descended further into civil war as the army, too, sought revenge. The country became a dictatorship under the command of Mao’s chosen successor Marshal Lin Biao, who installed revolutionary party committees to direct institutions throughout the country. Another wave of purges and counterpurges ensued. Armed battles, most famously in Wuhan, strengthened the left-wing Cultural Revolution Group associated with Mao’s wife, Jiang Qing. The army had split against itself.
During what Dikotter calls “The Black Years” from 1968 to 1971, the Cultural Revolution moved to the countryside, as former Red Guards were rusticated by the millions to “learn from” the peasants and prepare for war with the Soviet Union along the border. Dikotter describes the experience as an unremittingly terrible time of suffering, hunger, rape and abuse. Yet the rustification movement has produced hundreds of Chinese-language memoirs, many of which testify that for some young people, the time in the country­side was more nuanced or even bittersweet than he indicates. The rusticated youth, arguably, helped China to break with its Maoist past, for they later became known as the “awakened generation” and the “thoughtful generation” as they gradually inherited the leadership of the country. Their experiences in the countryside gave them the chance to re-evaluate the very premises of the revolution.
During this period, a campaign brought rural self-reliance to cult level, as local officials throughout the country were organized to visit Shanxi Province to study an arduously hewed terrace system claimed to free the community from the need for government help. Meanwhile, heavy industries and their workers were relocated inland to shelter them from an expected Soviet attack, a program Dikotter describes as an economic disaster. By then, many officials were in May Seventh Cadre Schools, compounds in remote areas where they were made to self-criticize while conducting hard labor. Compared with the violent purges and near civil war of the first few years of the Cultural Revolution, the dispersals and forcible relocations of these years make less painful, if equally dramatic reading. The period ended when Marshal Lin Biao, the man most responsible for the Mao cult, died on Sept. 13, 1971, in a plane crash in Mongolia. He is alleged to have tried to flee China after conspiring to assassinate Mao.
Some may disagree with Dikotter’s argument that Maoism died out primarily through widespread passive resistance and noncompliance; there were important policy experiments in decollectivization underway at the time, and the eventual dissolution of the people’s communes came as a carefully considered decision by policy elites who prevailed after Mao died. The persecution and experience in rural exile of top leaders like Deng ­Xiaoping convinced them that Mao-style socialism was a failure and the free market needed to flourish.
At times Dikotter’s account focuses on the sensational rather than the nuanced. Some discussion of just how reliable his disparate sources are would have been welcome. Cultural Revolution memoirs may emerge from understandable pain and the desire for revenge, the hope to prevent the recurrence of horrors, the desire to tell the world and to inform future generations. They are by their nature subjective and selective. Yet attributions in the text are sparse, forcing the diligent reader to flip to endnotes, which sometimes cite questionable sources. Moreover, it is difficult to evaluate the significance of the statistics about casualties.
That said, this book is a significant event in our understanding of modern China. For Dikotter, the Cultural Revolution represented Mao’s attempt to put himself at the center of global Communism. It was also the cynical expression of “an old man settling personal scores at the end of his life.” In his efforts to purge the party’s highest echelons, Mao unleashed the people of China against one another, inviting them to settle ­grievances and carry out vendettas, with the result that the roles of victim and victimizer became entwined. This, perhaps, is the best explanation for why so many Chinese people have chosen to be complicit in the party’s historical amnesia. Dikotter’s dramatic account chronicles not only the Chinese people’s bad behavior and suffering during the Cultural Revolution but also their disparate and creative responses to the upheavals and violence. Beaten down and often near starvation, people at the grass roots played a significant role in ending one of history’s worst convulsions.