The act of voting can be shamefully difficult in this country amid the crazy quilt of often-dysfunctional systems employed by the states and thousands of localities. The discouraging fact is, citizens in 17 states will find new voting restrictions in place this year — obstacles that include stringent photo ID requirements, limits on early voting and unjust hurdles in the registration process.
That is all the more reason to celebrate the positive, pro-voter measures quietly enacted in some states, most notably an electronic system of registering voters automatically when they visit motor vehicle departments. In the past 14 months, four states — Oregon, California, West Virginia and Vermont — have voted to put this innovative system in place, while 28 other states and the District of Columbia have been considering the idea, according to the Brennan Center for Justice.
The best selling point for this breakthrough comes from Oregon, the pioneer in motor-voter registration, where the number of new voters has surged. This year, an average of 15,375 voters a month have joined the rolls after being automatically added, with the option to decline, at the motor vehicle office. Under the old system, in which people had to initiate the process, the monthly average was 3,955 in 2014 and 4,163 in 2012.
Any politician worth his oath of office should be embracing this system, with its promise of a healthy increase in voter participation. But Republican strategists continue their push to suppress voting (knowing that bigger voter turnouts tend to favor the Democrats), citing the repeatedly disproved claim of widespread voter fraud.
Officials in Vermont estimate that their new system could add as many as 50,000 voters in the next four years. California officials, not sure whether their system will be working in time for this year’s election, estimate that there are 6.6 million eligible voters now unregistered, with many due for license renewals.
The general trend in state legislatures has been toward bills that would expand voting access, rather than curtail it, according to a Brennan Center analysis. That’s a positive sign for the future, but not for this year’s tooth-and-claw campaign, in which voter suppression is a reality that mars the very idea of democracy.