New York|$1 Billion Went to Buffalo. Cuomo Donors Benefited.
$1 Billion Went to Buffalo. Cuomo Donors Benefited.
ALBANY — It was to be the salvation of Buffalo, a billion-dollar godsend from the administration of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo that promised to revitalize the depleted city with bold investments there and across western New York.
But the so-called Buffalo Billion is in danger of becoming an albatross for many involved. Federal investigators are examining how money and contracts were distributed. Delays have bruised several projects, and one of the state’s key corporate partners — SolarCity, a power company backed by Elon Musk that intends to open a huge solar-panel factory on the Buffalo River — has watched its stock price plunge over the past year.
In the latest indication of the Buffalo Billion’s woes, state officials unexpectedly postponed approving an infusion of nearly $500 million for the SolarCity project last week, as legislators in Albany hinted they would exercise more oversight of the governor’s banner economic initiative.
Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, has repeatedly praised the Buffalo Billion’s successes, citing new jobs, new buildings and a new optimism in the city. But federal investigators’ interest seems to lie less with whether the people of Buffalo will ultimately benefit than with those who already have: a tangle of well-connected players — including developers and frequent donors to the governor — who have feasted on Buffalo Billion money.
The federal inquiry, led by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, has now metastasized across the state and reached all the way to the governor’s office. But its first stirrings became apparent in Buffalo last year, when prosecutors subpoenaed state institutions responsible for SolarCity and two other components of the Buffalo Billion program, seeking information about how government-funded projects were awarded and what role state officials played in selecting the winners.
A small group of densely interwoven figures linked to multiple projects and state entities has conceived, built and promoted most of the central Buffalo Billion initiatives, leading to accusations by some government watchdogs of conflicts of interest and questionable uses of state subsidies.
By last month, when investigators subpoenaed Mr. Cuomo’s office, the federal inquiry appeared to be focusing on the links between state officials and the sprawling investment New York has made, not only in Buffalo, but also in Syracuse and other struggling upstate cities.
While no one has been charged, the governor’s office has opened its own investigation into what it has called suspicions of “improper lobbying and undisclosed conflicts of interest” that may have defrauded the state. The administration has also taken the unusual step of requiring that all decisions regarding the projects be reviewed by Bart M. Schwartz, the lawyer leading the governor’s investigation.
The Cuomo administration strongly defends the project, noting drops in unemployment and rises in spending as signs of Buffalo’s turnaround. And at a news conference on Tuesday, the governor called the Buffalo Billion a “tremendous success,” adding that the encroaching investigation did not “go to the essence” of the program.
LPCiminelli is a prominent builder in the city whose chief executive, Louis P. Ciminelli, has generously supported Mr. Cuomo: Mr. Ciminelli and his associates and relatives have given nearly $150,000 to his campaigns over the years.
In November 2013, Mr. Ciminelli and his wife, Ann Louise, hosted a fund-raiser for Mr. Cuomo in Buffalo, three weeks before submitting a proposal to build parts of the Buffalo Billion. The couple gave $29,200 to the governor in January 2014, shortly before LPCiminelli was selected as one of the winning developers.
In the latter half of 2014, Mr. Cuomo tripled down on SolarCity, raising the state’s commitment to $750 million, from $225 million, even as he hopped across western New York, collecting campaign donations from at least two developers connected to Buffalo Billion projects, in the run-up to his successful bid for a second term.
LPCiminelli, which has received a federal subpoena in the case, says it is not a target of the investigation.
Federal investigators are looking into the activities of one person tied to LPCiminelli: Todd R. Howe, a well-connected lobbyist who once worked for Mr. Cuomo and his father, and whose links to several companies that have received state projects are under scrutiny.
Until he was recently fired, Mr. Howe worked for Whiteman Osterman & Hanna, a prominent Albany law firm; among its clients was the State University of New York Polytechnic Institute, which, as a linchpin of the Cuomo administration’s efforts to stimulate economic growth upstate, has received and helped distribute hundreds of millions of dollars in state funds.
Whiteman Osterman & Hanna has also represented separate interests that sought Buffalo Billion money.
A spokesman for the firm acknowledged in a statement that it had represented both LPCiminelli and the Fort Schuyler Management Corporation, the SUNY Polytechnic subsidiary that awarded LPCiminelli the contract to develop the site where SolarCity is being built. But the spokesman said the firm “at no time represented both” companies in the same matter.
Mr. Ciminelli’s brother, Paul Ciminelli, who leads a separate real estate development firm, has also capitalized on the Buffalo Billion gold rush.
Ciminelli Real Estate Corporation, headed by Paul Ciminelli, has benefited from the Buffalo Billion through two major enterprises, a medical innovation center and an information technology project.
And in 2013, when Ciminelli Real Estate lost one of the largest tenants in its Key Center building in Buffalo — the tenant was granted millions of dollars in tax breaks to move to a new building two blocks away — Mr. Ciminelli did not have to wait long to recoup the loss. Mr. Cuomo announced in June 2014 that the state would bring IBM to Key Center.
About $25 million in state money would go to redeveloping part of the building to suit IBM’s needs, a project for which the state hired McGuire Development Company, another Buffalo developer. Two months after Mr. Cuomo’s office announced McGuire’s selection, it donated $25,000 to the governor’s re-election campaign, with $10,000 more coming later in the year.
Neither the Ciminelli Real Estate Corporation nor a spokeswoman for McGuire responded to a request for comment.
The Buffalo Billion includes more than a dozen other regional projects, a potpourri of state-backed ventures such as an information technology hub, a pharmaceutical research center, a pediatric hospital, a visual effects center, various residential redevelopments and even a candy store renovation.
Those that benefited include not just the Ciminelli family companies but also McGuire Development (which was hired for a $55 million information technology hub) and Uniland Development Company (which is developing a $150 million water park resort in Niagara Falls). Like the Ciminelli companies and McGuire, Uniland also backed Mr. Cuomo: Uniland and its executives donated at least $36,000 to the governor’s campaigns. A spokeswoman for Uniland declined to comment on the investigation.
Other companies involved in building the Buffalo Billion have financially supported Mr. Cuomo as well. A small chunk of Buffalo Billion funds designated for revitalizing neighborhoods and improving transit in the city went to about two dozen companies and local groups, a few of which also donated to the governor.
His office said the formal awarding of the SolarCity contract was made by Fort Schuyler on behalf of the state. It has also said that donations, no matter how substantial, do not influence official actions.
The fear of being tainted by the ever-widening investigation has become so pervasive that the operators of Maid of the Mist, the Niagara Falls tour boat, issued a statement this month affirming that the Cuomo administration had not pressured them to hire LPCiminelli.
Howard Zemsky, the chief executive of Empire State Development, the state’s economic development agency, argued that while Mr. Bharara’s inquiry may have cast a temporary shadow over the Buffalo Billion, the program’s long-term legacy would be positive.
The growing concerns about the Buffalo Billion have reached the capital, where the Public Authorities Control Board delayed a May 18 meeting at which it was set to approve $485 million in new funds for SolarCity.
The postponement came just days after Buffalo news media reported that SolarCity would create only 500 manufacturing jobs — not almost 1,500, as originally projected. But in a statement, the company said it would create other jobs in their place.
Jerry Gretzinger, a spokesman for SUNY Poly, said SolarCity had actually increased the total number of jobs it had promised throughout the state — 5,000 in 10 years — though automation at the Buffalo factory meant that fewer jobs would be in manufacturing and more would be in research, sales and management.
SolarCity also said that federal agents had been in contact and that it was cooperating with the investigation.
For his part, Mr. Cuomo, who attributed the delay in the meeting of the authorities board to a scheduling issue, said last week that he wanted people to “have total confidence and trust in the integrity of this government” and welcomed the scrutiny by federal agents.
“If there’s a question about Buffalo Billion, fine, any way we can help the U.S. attorney in his investigation and we’ll do our own independent inquiry,” he said.
The control board is now scheduled to take up the SolarCity money on Wednesday. But there remains the question of whether Mr. Cuomo’s approach to revitalizing the upstate economy is a good return on a sizable taxpayer investment.
John Kaehny, the executive director of Reinvent Albany, a government watchdog group, said it remained to be seen whether the Buffalo Billion was a good use of state funds.
