Gov. Pat McCrory said he was challenging the department’s “blatant overreach” in concluding that the state’s law limiting bathroom access for transgender people violated the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
RALEIGH, N.C. — The nation’s clash over the rights of transgender people escalated sharply on Monday as Gov. Pat McCrory of North Carolina and the Justice Department sued each other, testing the boundaries of federal civil rights laws in a dispute over public restroom access.
Days after the Justice Department demanded that North Carolina back away from a new state law restricting access to restrooms, locker rooms and changing rooms, Mr. McCrory, in a lawsuit filed in Federal District Court here, accused the department of “a baseless and blatant overreach” stemming from a “radical reinterpretation” of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The state General Assembly’s Republican leaders filed a similar suit against the Justice Department.
Hours later, Attorney General Loretta Lynch said no clarification was needed, and she asserted that federal civil rights laws barring discrimination on the basis of sex prohibit laws like the one in North Carolina.
Straying from her usual understated, lawyerly tone, Ms. Lynch, a North Carolina native, grew impassioned as she likened the fight to earlier battles over Jim Crow laws and laws against same-sex marriage.
Even before the Justice Department challenged the law in court, the federal government had been examining how it could pressure North Carolina. Last month, federal agencies acknowledged that they were studying whether the law affected North Carolina’s eligibility for aid from Washington that helps pay for schools, highways and housing.
Mr. McCrory’s suit was assigned to Judge Terrence W. Boyle, an appointee of President George W. Bush and a former aide to Jesse Helms, the longtime conservative Republican senator from North Carolina. The Federal District Court for the Middle District of North Carolina, where the Justice Department filed its case, did not immediately assign a judge to handle the proceedings there.
A lawsuit filed by North Carolina against the Justice Department, which said last week that the state had violated the Civil Rights Act of 1964 when it passed a law prohibiting people from using public restrooms that do not correspond with the gender listed on their birth certificates.
Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, on Monday described the North Carolina law as “meanspirited,” and said it would harm the state’s economy.
But the economic arguments are familiar ones in North Carolina, and they have failed to prevent both sides from moving the clash into the courts. The litigation will test the expansive view the Obama administration has taken of civil rights law, arguing that it bars discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity, even if the wording of the law does not address those issues explicitly.
The North Carolina measure, which Mr. McCrory signed into law on March 23, was approved by the Republican-controlled General Assembly during a one-day special session. Commonly referred to as House Bill 2, the law was prompted by the City of Charlotte’s adoption of an ordinance barring discrimination against gay or transgender people, and specifically allowing people to use bathrooms and locker rooms that conform to their gender identity.
The litigation placed new attention on the dispute between Charlotte, a relatively liberal city where Mr. McCrory was mayor for 14 years, and conservative Republicans, often from rural areas, who dominate the legislature. It further presses the governor, who ran for office as a moderate, into an unexpected role, as a conservative warrior on social issues, months before voters decide if he deserves a second term.
Mr. McCrory and other Republicans said the law’s bathroom access provision was a bulwark against sexual assault, as Mr. Cruz suggested. But critics, many of whom have demanded a full repeal, said that transgender people had been using the bathroom of their choice for years without others noticing, and that it had not been a problem. In fact, the risk of assault, they said, would be to a person who appears to be a woman and identifies as a woman and is forced to use the men’s room.
In a letter to Mr. McCrory last week, Vanita Gupta, the Justice Department’s top civil rights official, said the North Carolina statute violated Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, which prohibits sex discrimination. In the Justice Department suit, which named the University of North Carolina as a defendant, the federal government also alleged violation of Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972.
After her letter, there were signals that Republicans here, influenced by the prospect of losing federal funds and facing an economic backlash, were considering softening the law and its effects.
But on Monday, it became clear that the prospects for a quick reconciliation had vanished.