BIRZEIT, West Bank — When the $24 million Palestinian Museum celebrates its opening on Wednesday, it will have almost everything: a stunning, contemporary new building; soaring ambitions as a space to celebrate and redefine Palestinian art, history and culture; an outdoor amphitheater; a terraced garden.
One thing the museum will not have is exhibitions.
In the West Bank, where Palestinians have for years struggled to build political and civic institutions while resisting Israel’s occupation of the territory, the fate of the exhibition may say as much about the realities of Palestinian society as any art collection could. Since the signing of the Oslo peace accords with Israel in the mid-1990s, Palestinian cultural and social initiatives have often failed to gain traction and find consistent leadership.
Mustafa Bargouthi, head of the Palestinian Medical Relief Society, a nonprofit organization, said that the list of institutions struggling under occupation and other difficulties is lengthy. Among the groups that have suffered, Mr. Bargouthi said, are the Palestine National Orchestra, the Popular Art Center in Ramallah, dance groups across the West Bank, and road, agricultural and medical projects.
Many Palestinian activists see the aging Mr. Abbas, 81, and his administration as increasingly feckless in their attempts to build an effective government, but a new generation has not risen to replace them. The museum is backed by a private organization, Taawon — Arabic for “cooperation” — and is not affiliated with any political entity.
“Never Part,” developed over several years by the ousted director, Jack Persekian, was to feature artistic interpretations of things like keys and photographs that Palestinians around the world have kept from the homes they fled or were forced from in what is now Israel.
Mr. Persekian, who runs an art gallery called the Al Mamal Foundation for Contemporary Art in Jerusalem, said he had agreed to leave after the museum’s senior management unceremoniously told him that it no longer favored the project, but he said he did not know why.
Mr. Qattan, the museum chairman, said that his team had decided that Mr. Persekian had not sufficiently built expertise among staff members during his tenure of three and a half years, and that outside artists had criticized his conception of the exhibition.
“We didn’t feel that what was delivered was up to scratch,” Mr. Qattan said.
Although there are a number of what Mr. Bahour called “niche museums” in the West Bank and Gaza, the Palestinian Museum would be the largest institution of its kind.
The building, designed by Heneghan Peng, an architectural firm in Dublin, will host the high-profile opening ceremony a few days after the 68th anniversary of what Palestinians call the Nakba, or catastrophe — essentially, Israel’s founding and the conflict that followed, which displaced hundreds of thousands of Palestinians.
The spokeswoman said the ceremony was only to celebrate the completion of the building. She said it would be open to the public, free of charge, starting June 1, though it is unclear what will be inside to look at.
The museum announced in a news release this month that it had named a new director, Mahmoud Hawari, whom it called “the lead curator at the British Museum”and a specialist in early Islamic art, architecture and archaeology, among other topics.
A spokeswoman for the British Museum would not confirm that Mr. Hawari held the position of lead curator there, saying only that “he was a visiting academic at the British Museum.” A spokeswoman for Taawon said on Monday morning that the information in the release was based on a curriculum vitae that Mr. Hawari had provided.
The museum also announced that on May 25, it will open a “satellite exhibition” in Beirut, Lebanon, called “At the Seams: A Political History of Palestinian Embroidery.” Mr. Qattan said the Beirut show would be the first of many such exhibitions outside the West Bank, which is difficult for many people to visit because it requires travel through Israel or border crossings it controls.
Tafeeda Jarbawi, the director of Taawon — formerly called the Welfare Association — said erecting the museum was a critical achievement itself. She added that the understated lines of the structure, rising atop a terraced garden with carefully selected trees and other plants, expressed just what the organizers had hoped for.
Mr. Qattan said future exhibitions might explore the cultural meaning of martyrdom, the debate over which people inhabited the area first — and whether that question makes historical sense — as well as the more recent departures of religious and ethnic minorities.
For “Never Part,” Mr. Persekian said he had collected images of countless artifacts from Palestinians around the world, conducted Skype interviews to document the stories behind those artifacts and planned to include physical objects as well. The objects would have been collected locally — across the West Bank for exhibitions in the museum here in Birzeit, a university town next to Ramallah, and in cities around the world for versions presented there.
Mr. Persekian said he had intended to make all this material available to artists whose work involves archival material and research, and the artists could have interpreted the objects as they saw fit. For those in charge of the museum’s finances, he said, that may have caused unease.
“Maybe they didn’t want to take a risk with something that is so unpredictable and so uncontrollable,” he said.
As for the parting in November, Mr. Persekian sought the high road, saying, “They are the owners,” and conceding that — as with any art project — no one could have said how it would have turned out, particularly because he was not sure what the precise reasons were.
