The research was funded by a small, privately owned biotechnology company in Cambridge, Mass., Living Proof, and the product is being developed by another small, privately owned Cambridge company, Olivo Laboratories, which owns the patents. All of the authors on the new paper have an equity interest in Living Proof and so, indirectly, in Olivo.
The report published on Monday describes pilot studies, the first test of the product. The researchers say they are not sure yet when they will have enough data to submit to the Food and Drug Administration for marketing approval — they will know more later this year.
Dr. Murad Alam, a professor of dermatology at Northwestern University, who also was not associated with the study, was impressed, too, but he cautioned that it was still early.
The idea for second skin originated more than a decade ago when Dr. R. Rox Anderson, a professor of dermatology at Harvard Medical School, was approached by Living Proof, which had been working on a polymer to be used as a hair product. Since dermatologists also know about hair, the company consulted him. Why, Dr. Anderson asked the company executives, couldn’t there be a polymer to put on skin?
What if there was a way to restore the elastic nature of skin?
The “skin” can last for more than a day.
One of the first applications, said Dr. Barbara A. Gilchrest, a dermatology professor who is part of the research team, was on undereye bags, a condition that plagues so many middle-aged and older people.
Those studies included tests on people with undereye bags and those with dry skin on their legs. In one study, participants put second skin on their forearms to see how quickly the skin returned to normal after it was pinched in a suction cup — a test of elasticity. In another study, people were randomly assigned to use second skin or a placebo under their eyes. Trained observers graded the subjects on the appearance of the undereye skin. The product’s durability was tested in volunteers who wore it while running in heat and working up a sweat, while swimming, and while going out in a rainstorm.
One of the important uses, the researchers said, is in treating eczema and the sort of dry skin that comes with aging, with dry itchy patches on the back and legs that keep people up at night, scratching.
The researchers emphasize that their tests of the product as a cosmetic treatment, where most subjects responded, are separate from their tests of it as a medical product, where they do not yet know the response rate.
A Harvard colleague, Dr. Mathew Avram, who was not associated with the company or its product, said he had tried second skin, putting it under his eyes.
“It does work,” he said.
