Illustrated. 406 pp. Random House. $28.
Ever since she stepped down as secretary of state in 2013, Hillary Clinton has been positioning herself to the right of Barack Obama on foreign affairs. In her 2014 memoir, “Hard Choices,” Clinton recalled her foreign policy differences with the president, stating that she had opposed demanding an Israeli settlements freeze in 2009 and warned about Russian President Vladimir Putin’s malign intentions long before anyone else in the administration. Since then she has gone on to compare Putin’s annexation of Crimea to Hitler’s takeover of the Sudetenland in 1938 and to support a no-fly zone in northern Syria. “Look,” she told a group at the Council on Foreign Relations several days after the terrorist attacks in Paris in late 2015, “I have made clear that I have differences, as I think any two people do.” But would Clinton actually preside over a more robustly interventionist foreign policy than Obama? Or is she simply adopting hawkish plumage to woo swing voters and to deflect criticism from the right during the general election?
In “Alter Egos,” his lively and informative study of the relationship between Obama and Clinton, Mark Landler, who is a White House correspondent for The New York Times, comes down emphatically on the side of an interventionist Clinton. Landler expertly quarries her recently released emails from her secret web server, and he has conducted numerous interviews with Obama administration officials (though Clinton and Obama both declined to be interviewed for this book). He depicts Obama as an idealist who disdains the idea of American exceptionalism and Clinton as an inveterate liberal interventionist who firmly believes that the mandate of America extends, to borrow the language of George W. Bush, into “any dark corner of the world.” Nonetheless, he does not demonstrate that there has ever been a profound clash of foreign policy ­visions between them.
Unfortunately, Landler is not content with ably tracing these events. In his view, Obama and Clinton “are more than just two of the most riveting political figures of our time. They are protagonists in a great debate over American power — one that will decide not only who sits in the Oval Office but the direction she or he will take a nation that faces a new twilight struggle against the forces of disorder.” This is unpersuasive. Any disputes between Obama and Clinton over dealing with issues like Iran, Syria or China are about tactics, not substance. At bottom they are both liberal internationalists. Landler himself notes that in warning about the Islamic State, “as was often the case with Clinton and Obama, the differences were less about direction than degree. She wasn’t calling for ground troops in the Middle East, any more than he was.” What’s more, any conflicts between them pale into insignificance next to the battle over foreign policy in the Republican Party, which is pitting crusading neoconservatives against outright isolationists.
Landler says that Obama became skeptical about American intentions during his childhood years in Indonesia and that “his Kenyan roots added another layer to this carapace of suspicion.” Already as a freshman at Occidental College, Landler writes, Obama was focused on the limits of American power, observing in a political science paper, “the U.S. today has limited influence in the Middle East, and must be viewed as a participant, rather than a controller of the world system.” But was it necessary to have lived in Indonesia and have a Kenyan father to arrive at these sensible views? A number of American presidents, including Dwight D. Eisenhower, who grew up in Kansas, were apprehensive about becoming entangled in the Middle East.
Landler concludes that Obama and Clinton are “very different people with very different instincts about how to wield American power — like Truman and Acheson, the plain-spoken Missouri haberdasher and the aristocratic Connecticut Yankee, who together embodied the idealism and realism of America in the 20th century.” But this comparison is dubious. There were no great frictions between Truman and Acheson. Both tried to work with Stalin’s Soviet Union as late as 1946 before adopting a pragmatic containment policy toward it. Given Clinton’s own pragmatism, it would be surprising if once in office she tried to embark on a crusade for a new dawn of justice to replace the twilight struggle identified by Landler. Despite Landler’s contention that Clinton and Obama exemplify a grand debate, his book inadvertently suggests that the surprising thing isn’t that they had occasional disputes. It’s that they worked together as well as they did.