When Carolyn Burke landed a teaching job nearly three years ago at a charter school in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, she saw it as an opportunity to move back to her childhood neighborhood.
This was where Ms. Burke’s parents, immigrants from Barbados, introduced her to art at the Brooklyn Museum, blocks from the family’s basement apartment on Eastern Parkway near Franklin Avenue. Her father now had cancer, so moving back home took on a new urgency.
The neighborhood, once burdened by drugs, crime and racial strife, has changed in the decade since Ms. Burke left home. Nail salons, bodegas and 99-cent stores along Franklin Avenue have been joined by shops selling brick-oven pizza and craft beers. New rentals and condominiums have risen in place of dilapidated buildings, attracting young professionals and white couples pushing strollers. But it was not until she started apartment-hunting that Ms. Burke, who describes herself as Afro-Caribbean, realized that all the changes left little room for her.
Ms. Burke had been living in Harlem, paying $1,400 a month for a two-bedroom walk-up. In Crown Heights, a broker showed her a two-bedroom, for $3,500 a month, so small that it did not have a full-size oven. She applied unsuccessfully for other apartments.
Ms. Burke is among a generation of young New Yorkers who grew up in neighborhoods that have rapidly gentrified. When they were children, their corners of the city were dismissed by wealthier — and usually white — New Yorkers. But now that their neighborhoods are hot prospects, these young people are struggling to stay, and wondering what comes next.
In interviews with about a dozen young native New Yorkers, all from areas where real estate prices have soared and new residents have poured in, mixed emotions surfaced about the consequences of gentrification. Some of those interviewed were members of minority groups, some were white; all were between the ages of 23 and 34. For some, new restaurants, shops and services were welcome, especially if amenities had once been sparse, but to others, they seemed like a hostile takeover. Some said the old sense of community had disappeared in construction dust. None had been able to afford an apartment of their own in their childhood neighborhoods.
A few said that moving had offered them a chance to discover a new swath of the city. But others simply felt unmoored.
And, when residents displaced by gentrification move into neighborhoods they can afford, they are often considered gentrifiers, too.
Young people face a daunting path in the city. Although 18- to 29-year-olds are the most educated group of young workers in the city’s history, they earned about 20 percent less in real wages in 2014 than they would have in 2000, according to a report by the office of Scott M. Stringer, the city comptroller. The environment is particularly tough for young blacks, who faced an 11.4 percent unemployment rate in 2014, more than double the 5.2 percent experienced by young whites, according to the report.
At the same time, rents in predominantly black neighborhoods are rising at a faster clip than in wealthier areas, putting added pressure on young people whose parents may not be able to help their offspring pay the rent or guarantee a lease. While wealthier peers might be able to lean on their parents financially, young members of minority groups like Ms. Burke are more likely to need to help out their parents.
In Crown Heights, the average rent for a one-bedroom apartment jumped 47 percent between 2010 and 2015 to $1,877 a month, while the increase for Brooklyn overall was 29 percent, at $2,607 a month. And in Harlem, rents for one-bedrooms in non-doorman buildings rose 36 percent during the same period, to $2,149 a month, twice the 18 percent increase to $3,138 for Manhattan overall, according to an analysis of data provided by MNS, a real estate firm.
She eventually found a two-bedroom apartment in Bedford-Stuyvesant for less than $3,000 a month. Her place is 30 minutes away by bus and subway from her parents’ home in Crown Heights.
Lifelong residents, meanwhile, receive very different signals. Havanna Fisher was in elementary school in 1999 when Starbucks arrived on West 125th Street in Harlem. As other national chains moved in, Ms. Fisher attended community meetings with her mother, a carpenter.
Over the next decade, Ms. Fisher, who describes herself as black, watched as upscale restaurants and cafes joined mom-and-pop shops. Whole Foods Market, a potent symbol of gentrification, will soon open on West 125th Street. Abandoned brownstones have been restored, but in many cases, the new owners and tenants are white.
Between 2000 and 2014, the black population in Central Harlem fell to 55 percent from 77 percent, while the white population rose to 15 percent from 2 percent, a trend echoed in other gentrifying neighborhoods, including Bedford-Stuyvesant and Crown Heights, according to a report released on May 9 by the NYU Furman Center. The report found that the number of college graduates, young adults and families without children grew much faster in gentrifying neighborhoods than in other parts of the city.
No neighborhood, of course, is impervious to change. Young people who grew up in wealthier parts of the city have had to contend with prices that eclipse their junior salaries. They, too, find themselves living in cramped quarters in distant neighborhoods or sleeping in their childhood bedrooms well into their 20s.
But the transformations wrought by gentrification can reshape a community within a very few years, potentially erasing a neighborhood’s history and identity. Both those who leave and those who stay behind grapple with unrecognizable landscapes.
Two years ago, Mohamed Ghareb moved out of the building where he was raised on East Broadway on the Lower East Side. He found a room in a rundown house in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, adding an hour to his commute to SoHo, where he works in international digital marketing.
He never warmed to the neighborhood. “It definitely felt like it was its own community already and I wasn’t from there,” said Mr. Ghareb, 27, who describes himself as Tunisian and Egyptian. After four months, he moved back to East Broadway, where he shares a rent-regulated apartment with his grandmother; his parents also live in the building.
But the old neighborhood does not seem much like home, either. Many of the new stores and businesses that have moved in, Mr. Ghareb said, don’t appear to have the locals in mind. Last year, Ice & Vice, an ice cream shop, opened near Mr. Ghareb’s home. The shop, dedicated to handcrafted ice cream made from ingredients like beer, blue corn and “lobster” croutons, sells $12 pints.
Being priced out of the nest is not always a loss. Sometimes it means the start of a new chapter. Two years ago, Chyann Sapp, who describes herself as African-American, decided it was time to move out of her mother’s apartment on West 120th Street in Harlem.
Ms. Sapp, a playwright and a saleswoman for Citi Habitats real estate, didn’t necessarily mean to leave Harlem, but she found the rents to be “just insane,” she said. So she widened her search to include the Bronx, a borough she barely knew.
Since Ms. Sapp arrived, Blink Fitness opened on Macombs Road in Mount Eden, about a half-mile from her apartment. More people are moving to the area, many priced out of Harlem and starting another wave of migration — and displacement.
Two years ago, André Springer, an artist, was renting an apartment for around $900 a month on the top floor of his mother’s townhouse in Bedford-Stuyvesant. Then she decided to sell the building that she bought in 1996 for around $150,000.
Mr. Springer, 33, handled the sale for his mother, Jacqueline Spencer, 56, an immigrant from Barbados who works for the Department of Education. He listed the building on Decatur Street for $1.2 million, hoping to deliver her a comfortable retirement. The house ultimately sold early last year for $825,000, falling short of expectations, but Ms. Spencer was able to buy a house in Rosedale, Queens, with the proceeds. Mr. Springer now pays $700 a month for a bedroom in a two-bedroom apartment in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, receiving a discount for walking a dog.
