130 pp. A New Directions Book. $16.95.
This brilliantly described state is familiar to me, as is her experience of maternal sleeplessness and dim memory of Russian formalism. Galchen writes, “Another problem with being the mother of a baby is loneliness.” What friends we might have been, she and I, pushing our strollers around together. I fantasized that we might have breast-fed while watching the sexy anti­hero Louis C.K., recited the poetry of Sei Shonagun, talked about the new Jenny Offill novel that we couldn’t put down, sharing our well-worn copies of Jane Bowles. But probably we are both too guarded with our time; we would have seen each other at the park, and looked away.
There were times I laughed out loud reading Galchen’s accounts of encountering her nemesis in the elevator, who never failed to comment on the size of her baby. (In the middle of writing that sentence, my daughter told me that the streak of gray in my hair was silver like the moon, and that I should never change it, and then I checked her temperature.) “Little Labors” chronicles the state of continual interruption faced by the mother who writes, a state I understand perhaps too intimately. A writer friend told me never to quote children or taxi drivers. But I insist — as I think “Little Labors” does — that motherhood is an undiscovered country in the literary sense, one we must venture into lest our experience goes unrecorded, or recorded only by men.
Galchen gallantly traverses this country — particularly the nonlinguistic bond between baby and mother. She observes cannily that “among the mother writers of today probably two of the most distinguished are Karl Ove Knausgaard and, in his way, Louis C.K.” I have often thought (perhaps cynically) that male writers have more literary freedom to detail 21st-​­century parental domestic life, and only when a goodly number of men are stay-at-home parents will this country ever pass laws about universal pre-K. But I ­digress.
I adore Galchen’s quiet, and the bravery of this book’s fragments. You get the sly sense reading this book that you are not seeing the whole writer; there is a sleight of hand — something only partially revealed — so that the fragments glow more. Her kaleidoscopic subjects leap from the literary to the mundane and back again. In discussing the form of “The Pillow Book,” an 11th-century miscellany written by a Japanese lady of the court, Galchen writes that she associates the book with “the ‘small’ as opposed to the ‘minor.’ ” This is an important distinction, and, I think, a defense of her own form.
Detailing the few literary representations of babies available to us, from Judy Budnitz to Tolstoy, Galchen writes that “literature has more dogs than babies, and also more abortions.” I might add Chekhov, whose grating Natasha in “Three Sisters” can’t stop cooing in baby-talk to her infant Bobik, worrying about his catching a small cold. I recall that I felt differently about the character after I had children. Upon first reading “Three Sisters,” Natasha seemed an insensitive upstart, fixated on the temperature of her baby’s room over the comfort of her more refined sisters-in-law. After having three children, I thought: Of course she’s more concerned about whether her infant has caught the flu than about a fire that might consume the whole village.
It is this shrinkage of concerns that is worrisome to the mother who writes. How can one write with ethical breadth — with what Chekhov called “objectivity,” after his medical training — if one is mired in the subjective small concerns of motherhood? (Particularly white-lady motherhood in Manhattan, 2016, the setting of “Little Labors.”) The book seems to be making an argument for the bigness of motherhood’s labors, while defending the choice to approach the subject matter with the humility of a slim volume, in fragmented form. But what could be bigger than the project of motherhood itself?
Galchen writes of children: “Their arrival feels supernatural, they seem to come from another world, life near them takes on a certain unaccountable richness, and they are certain, eventually, to leave you.” Given the tenderness of that situation (life’s richness or design flaw), how can we as writers, and as people, not pay attention? I am happy that Galchen did, and I am confident that many mothers (and other sleepless readers) will pick up this book and feel that they have found an unexpectedly intimate friend.