SAN FRANCISCO — For decades, the computer industry has been guided by a faith that engineers would always find a way to make the components on computer chips smaller, faster and cheaper.
Nearly every big chip maker, including Intel, IBM and Samsung, belongs to the organization, though Intel says it is not participating in the last report.
To replace what the semiconductor industry has done for nearly 25 years, a professional organization called the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers announced on Wednesday that it will a create a new forecasting system, called the International Roadmap for Devices and Systems, that is intended to track a wider range of computer technologies.
One technology could be so-called quantum computing, a cutting-edge reimagining of how computers work that taps quantum physics — a branch of physics that explains how matter and energy interact. Another could be graphene, a form of carbon and an alternative to silicon that could produce smaller and faster transistors that use less power.
Predicting the end of Moore’s Law has for years been a parlor game in Silicon Valley, and not everyone in the industry believes that what it has come to represent is nearly over. Intel, the world’s largest chip maker, is a notable contrarian and predicts it has the means and know-how to push further into the atomic level.
In a statement on his company’s website last month, Brian Krzanich, Intel’s chief executive, played down concerns. “I have witnessed the advertised death of Moore’s Law no less than four times,” he wrote.
Intel, however, faces its own problems because of a long slump in PC sales and an inability to sell many chips to smartphone makers. Last month, the company announced plans to lay off 12,000 workers — roughly 11 percent of its work force — and take a $1.2 billion charge.
The industry saw signs that Moore’s Law was running out of steam as far back as 2005, when researchers began to worry that computer processors were becoming so hot that they would soon match the surface of the sun in heat output.
But the industry managed to fix the problem by worrying less about increasing speed and instead splitting tasks among many processors. In effect, it kept things cool by finding a way to share the load.
By walking away from a task they have managed for so long, the chip makers other than Intel — the Silicon Valley giant says it is no longer formally contributing to the forecasting process — are posing broader questions about their businesses.
“As you look at Intel saying the PC industry is slowing and seeing the first signs of slowing in mobile computing, people are starting to look for new places to put semiconductors,” said David Kanter, a semiconductor industry analyst at Real World Technologies in San Francisco.
In addition to the impending physical limits of transistors, other barriers are looming. For example, most of the semiconductor industry now insists that the per-transistor cost of computer chips has stopped falling. That had been one of the factors leading to rapid development of new computer technologies.
Many executives and analysts in the computer industry are skeptical about Intel’s ability to keep Moore’s Law going. They point out that if the chip maker were able to continue to reduce costs, it would have been able to make larger inroads into the mobile computing world of smartphones. As part of its recent cutbacks, the company killed its Atom microprocessors, which it had been unsuccessfully trying to sell to smartphone makers.
“If your whole business was about Moore’s Law, and it was ending, how would you react?” Dr. Conte wrote in an email message.