Ms. Broadwell was here in April for a 40th anniversary celebration for the academy’s first class of women, who enrolled two decades before she would graduate near the top of her class, with multiple varsity letters. It was also the first time she had been back to campus since 2012, when she achieved her own kind of unwanted fame.
The downfall was swift: Mr. Petraeus, now 63, resigned, apologized to the Senate Armed Services Committee, and later pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor charge of mishandling classified material related to eight personal notebooks he’d shared with Ms. Broadwell. For two months, he remained home in isolation — reading, communicating with friends and pedaling on his exercise bike. “One foot in front of the other, one day at a time,” Peter Mansoor, a military historian who was Mr. Petraeus’s right-hand man in Iraq, recalled Mr. Petraeus as saying. He was sentenced last April to two years’ probation and a $100,000 fine. Ms. Broadwell was never charged.
Ms. Broadwell has struggled to find her footing. For weeks, reporters camped outside her home in Charlotte, N.C., where she was trying to restore her marriage. Friends sent over groceries and hot meals for her family — her husband, Scott, and sons, 8 and 10 — and staged interference so Ms. Broadwell could cut across her neighbors’ lawns, climbing over fences, to escape for a morning run.
She lost her military security clearance; her promotion from major to lieutenant colonel was revoked when the news broke. The F.B.I. still has her computers — including her dissertation research — and she withdrew from her Ph.D. program. She said she was told in more than one job interview that, while she was qualified, hiring her would be a public-relations nightmare.
Four years on, her name still pops up in the news with regularity. She tracks these references with precision. Every time there is a new development — a legal update, Mr. Petraeus’s sentencing, the recently self-published memoir by the woman on the receiving end of her emails — she said she is reminded: that for him, the affair is a footnote to an otherwise celebrated career. But for her — not as decorated, not as public, but still accomplished in her own right — it has become a lasting stain.
That seems to be the question of the moment, in an age when one mistake can permanently cement your reputation. But the shame of the mistress is a particular category. Donna Rice, Monica Lewinsky, Rielle Hunter … the names have come to represent a kind of archetype.
Ms. Broadwell was not exactly an entirely private figure before, of course; it was just that what she was known for publicly was him.  Yes, she would challenge Jon Stewart to a push-up competition — to raise money for wounded veterans — and win. She could also run a six-minute mile. “My immediate reaction was, ‘Oh no, they’re going to destroy her,’” said Ms. Fulton, who did not know Ms. Broadwell at the time but reached out after the affair became public to offer her support.
And so the public inquisition into the “mistress” began, with everything from her fitness acumen — could she really run a six-minute mile? — to her body fat (13 percent) to her “usually tight shirts and pants” scrutinized. She was called, by a senior military source, “a shameless self-promoting prom queen” who “got her claws” into him. She was “curvaceous,” with “expressive green eyes.” One general described her as “seemingly immune to the notion of modesty,” referring to the attire she was said to have worn in Afghanistan.
Mr. Petraeus had many defenders — and a four-decade career of service to stand on. Ms. Broadwell did not. She said she never heard from her best friend — a crime agent with the F.B.I. She asked another friend, a woman she had mentored, if she’d be willing to speak up on her behalf, but this woman was applying for a job with the C.I.A. “It was too controversial to even touch; certainly if you were active duty you would pay a price,” Ms. Fulton said.
She is emotional when she speaks about the Charlotte community that embraced her family. But she’s torn: Should she try to reclaim her past — her dream of becoming a national security adviser — or should she pursue something entirely different? Should she fight to restore her military status, or simply move on?
“The truth is, the military is not a place where you can rehabilitate,” she said. “There’s a ‘Zero Defects’ policy — that’s military code. So the whole redemption thing? It’s not common.
She recently presented on the topic to a roomful of editors at The Huffington Post, as well as to a team at Yahoo and the United Nations. She is working with a professor at Harvard to try to come up with a system for tracking biased language, she said — from unnecessary words (“female fighter pilot”) to journalists primarily relying on male sources to the subtle ways language can affect the way an article is framed.
