Who says that Sleeping Beauty needs a prince?
Not the choreographer and director Katy Pyle. In her “Sleeping Beauty & the Beast” — a two-act labor of love that opened the La MaMa Moves! Festival on Friday — the young heroine falls in love with a masculine woman, a union organizer in a Gilded Age garment factory.
Revision is the mission of Ballez, Ms. Pyle’s company of lesbian, gay and transgender performers, who rewrite fairy-tale story ballets to include people who self-identify the same way. Its adaptation of “Sleeping Beauty” is conceived with impressive thoroughness and many delightfully apt, even brilliant choices.
By setting the 16th birthday of the heroine (Aurora) in a Lower East Side garment factory in 1893, close to the premiere date of the Tchaikovsky-scored Russian ballet, the Ballez production honors the original while slipping in some local labor history. And her 100-year slumber lands the story in the AIDS epidemic, movingly represented by a corps of Dying Swans in a lesbian nightclub, frighteningly vulnerable in nothing but white briefs, expiring one by one. Most important and affecting, this “Sleeping Beauty” preserves the core story of a girl’s sexual awakening, but colors it differently by splitting it across the confusions and anxieties of two very different eras.
The scale of the production is also exciting. The cast of two dozen is supported, during the first act, by 18 members of the Queer Urban Orchestra, playing Tchaikovsky right next to or under your seat. For the second act, everyone moves from the Ellen Stewart Theater at La MaMa into the Downstairs Theater in the basement, a shift of location that nicely physicalizes the leap in time and adds to the feeling of a big event.
It’s just the choreography and the dancing that are disappointingly thin. The technical skill of even the best of the dancers isn’t high, and the choreography (credited to Ms. Pyle, Jules Skloot and the company) never rises above adequate. (The orchestra, too, is lively but often sounds on the verge of falling apart.) The Ballez members, while bravely defying limitations imposed by society and much of the ballet world, seem trapped within the limitations of their training. Working with what they have, they work so hard that it is rare — as in an early, gender-role-swapping duet between Aurora and the Lilac Faerie — that they relax enough to let fun and tender emotion come through.
That’s especially unfortunate, because what “Sleeping Beauty & the Beast” most resembles is a Mickey-and-Judy-style backyard show put on by kids excluded from the playhouse. Rather than the substance, it’s the spirit that matters here — a mix of earnestness, fantasy, heart and justice that can resound as great even if the production isn’t very good.