Every 30 seconds for the last several months, the smoke detector in a neighbor’s apartment has been making the low-battery beep. You can hear it five floors down from his apartment. I hear it in my apartment day and night, disrupting my peace and quiet. I’ve repeatedly attempted to contact the neighbor, but never get a response. Building management said it would contact the super, but the super told me that unless a tenant requests it, he does not fix things inside apartments. What are my options?
This could explain the neighbor’s behavior, but it does not ease your discomfort. The city’s noise code prohibits people from making unreasonable noise or permitting such noise to continue. By ignoring the problem, you could argue that the landlord is potentially violating the noise code. You could ask the landlord to measure the noise, and if he refuses, you could hire someone yourself. But you would be paying a large sum for a test that would give you information, not a resolution.
The landlord is required to install and maintain smoke detectors, said James B. Fishman, a Manhattan lawyer who represents tenants. So you could try another approach, reminding your landlord that a beeping smoke detector violates city rules.
You could also try to contact the unresponsive neighbor again, leaving another letter and, perhaps, some batteries.
I live with my husband in the co-op apartment where he was raised. He and his mother are both named on the stock certificate and proprietary lease. When we married, my husband told me that he would add my name to the documents and remove hers. Three years later, his mother, who is not living there, is still not ready for this change. While I understand her hesitation to add me to the documents, my mother-in-law could at least remove her name. I spent $40,000 of my savings on renovations. If we sell, she will have to approve the sale and is entitled to 50 percent of the proceeds, even though the apartment is worth substantially more than the $5,000 she paid decades ago. My husband feels caught in the middle. How do I resolve this without causing friction?
Yours is not the first marriage to have money issues. In your case, your husband promised you something that was not his to give. His mother owns those shares and she can do with them as she pleases. Now that you’ve sunk your nest egg into her investment, the emotional stakes are high.
Consider your mother-in-law’s perspective (and her leverage). Half the apartment is hers, and she does not have to give it to you just because you live there. “You cannot compel your mother-in-law to make a gift of her 50 percent interest in the apartment,” said Peter Lese, a Manhattan trusts and estates lawyer.
Even if $5,000 seems like chump change by today’s standards, she is the one who made that initial investment and she is entitled to reap its rewards. Presumably, she did not compel you to invest your savings in her asset.
“The fact that the mother-in-law may have invested less money in the apartment — or that someone with no legal title to the apartment invested any money at all — is of no consequence,” said Eric D. Sherman, a Manhattan real estate lawyer.
To ease your financial anxieties, the three of you should try to come to an agreement about your remodeling costs. One solution: Your mother-in-law and your husband agree in writing to give you the first $40,000 from the eventual sale of the property and divide the rest between the two of them. If your mother-in-law balks, your husband could reimburse you out of his portion of the proceeds.
Your husband should also ask his mother about her will. Should she die before the apartment is sold, her shares and her interest in the proprietary lease would be disposed of according to the will, Mr. Sherman said. Theoretically, she could leave her shares to someone other than you or your husband, further complicating the situation. Whatever resolution you reach, there may be tax implications to consider if she gifts the shares to you or her son or leaves them to him in her will, Mr. Lese said.
Some of the doormen in my large rental building smoke outside while on duty, standing a few feet from the front entrance, under a “no smoking” sign. Entering and exiting through a cloud of smoke is unpleasant. My comings and goings “interrupt” their smoking — they have to put the cigarette down on a window ledge and walk to the door. How can I put an end to this?
As frustrated as you might be, avoid confronting the doormen yourself. Staff discipline is not your responsibility, and it might not solve the problem. Instead, you could end up in a confrontation with one or more of the doormen and the smoking would continue anyway, because you do not have the authority to stop it.
Write a letter to your landlord or managing agent whenever this behavior occurs. Keep a log of the dates and times of the incidents and the staff involved. Send management this information.
“This will establish a firm timeline of events and can be used by management when speaking with their staff,” said Mark B. Levine, a principal of the Excel Bradshaw Management Group.