“Knowing you have something good to read before bed,” Vladimir Nabokov wrote, “is among the most pleasurable of sensations.” It’s easy to feel similarly about summer. Knowing you’ve got a few fine books tucked away for beach or lawn is akin to bliss.
FROM THE BOOKSHELF “Absolutely Nothing to Get Alarmed About: The Complete Novels of Charles Wright.” The books in Wright’s New York City trilogy — “The Messenger,” “The Wig” and “Absolutely Nothing to Get Alarmed About” — were published from 1963 to 1973. They’re about a young, working-class black intellectual, and they are said to be (by a friend I trust) brutal, pessimistic and scaldingly funny. I’ve found a beat-up old copy online, and I can’t wait to read Wright for the first time.
FROM THE BOOKSHELF “Something Fresh” by P. G. Wodehouse. Whenever a friend is down in the dumps, I purchase a stack of Bertie and Jeeves novels and pop them in the mail, on the theory that there is no blight of the soul that can’t be healed by their company. Yet I have never read a single one of Wodehouse’s Blandings novels, which seems like both a literary sin and a crime against my own mood. So here’s to the first of the lot, which I’m guessing won’t just be something fresh, but something marvelous.
FROM THE BOOKSHELF “Jane Eyre” by Charlotte Brontë. There’s a blurry place in my memory where books I was never assigned overlap with books I was assigned but neglected to read. I’m already 200 pages in, so this is a seasonal aspiration very likely to be fulfilled. I might follow it up with Emily Brontë’s “Wuthering Heights.” Opinions seem to vary, and in interesting ways, about which book is superior. I’d like to join the jury.
FROM THE BOOKSHELF Carlo Rovelli’s “Seven Brief Lessons on Physics” (Riverhead Books). I’ve wanted to read Mr. Rovelli’s surprise best seller ever since a reviewer said his breezy “tone would give Brian Cox a run for his quarks.” In just 88 pages, he explores mind-bending topics in physics, like gravitational waves, the heat of black holes and quantum gravity. It sounds like the rare book about physics that can be ingested in a single sitting, which I hope to do sometime this summer.
FROM THE BOOKSHELF “In Search of Lost Time” by Marcel Proust. I’ve never read Proust. Now is the time. A few of us from various parts of the country (and Canada) have decided to read “In Search of Lost Time” together and record our spur-of-the-moment thoughts in a group Google document. We’ve just started. Our reactions are all over the place. So far so good.
