Scoop NYC, the boutique chain that billed itself as “the ultimate closet,” announced last week that it was closing its 15 remaining shops.
The store, whose original site on the corner of Broadway and Spring Street opened in 1996, was known as a pioneer for its merchandising, in which clothes were sorted by color and style rather than by brand.
Stefani Greenfield, who opened the store with her business partner Uzi Ben-Abraham, was an early champion of lines like Rag & Bone, Alice and Olivia, Tory Burch and Stella McCartney.
In 2004, The New York Observer called a “flirty top and stiletto heels” the “Scoop Girl silhouette.” It was a look unavoidable on the streets, on “Sex and the City” and in Lucky, the Condé Nast shopping magazine introduced in 2000.
Scoop was also at the forefront of a shift in shopping patterns in the city. Along with stores like Henri Bendel, Intermix, Big Drop and, on the West Coast, Kitson (which also closed this year), it moved away from head-to-toe designer looks toward more individual choices.
It was a certain early millennium moment in time. Online shopping was nascent, and the meatpacking district, where Scoop opened a Washington Street outpost in 2006, still sold meat. Nearby, the Soho House was a nexus for celebrities (and those who wanted to be close to them). Its members got a discount at Scoop.
Unlike Kitson, where paparazzi routinely snapped photos of the starlets of the moment — Britney Spears, Paris Hilton, Lindsay Lohan — as they shopped, Scoop observed privacy.
“Celebrities were treated normally,” said Lauren Rothberg, Scoop’s vice president for retail. “We all recognized them, but you were anonymous when you were there. Employees were not allowed to speak to the news media about them being there or what they purchased, and security would remove photographers.” Jennifer Lopez, Reese Witherspoon and Sofia Vergara all shopped there. Carolyn Bessette-Kennedy was a regular at the SoHo store.
Just being a saleswoman had a certain zeitgeisty allure. Ms. Rothberg was a lawyer in Brooklyn Family Court when she started working as a part-time cashier at Scoop. “I did it so I could get a discount on the clothes,” she said.
She remembers fashion crazes the store helped spread: jeans from Seven for All Mankind, some of the first designer jeans to cost well over $100; Jimmy Choo boots that, at $1,000, still had wait lists “longer than my body,” and the way some women bought up tiny shirts in bulk from the French line Petit Bateau. Even a $30 headband made from a bra strap became a covetable object.
Its shopping bags, emblazoned with the round logo and seasonal colors, were enough of a status symbol that people regularly tried to buy them. They were available only with purchase of a full-price item.
In 2007, the Yucaipa Companies, the private equity firm founded by Ronald Burkle, acquired Scoop.
Susan Davidson, Scoop’s chief executive since 2009, cited increased competition from e-commerce sites, other brands and larger stores as factors in the store’s decline. “Are we a harbinger? That’s what I’ve been thinking about,” she said. “We were imitated widely by those who became our fiercest competitors: Alice and Olivia, Rag & Bone, IRO, just to name a few. We helped establish them, and now they’re competing against us, across the street, down the block, in the same towns.
In recent months, the company had retained an investment banker to assist in the sale. “There was an expression of interest, but headwinds were too strong for us to overcome,” she said. Last Friday and Saturday, May 6 and 7, the company began winding down the business.
For Scoop’s corporate employees, Friday will be their last day. The rest of the 200 employees will remain until the stores close in the second week of July.
Reached by phone in Cannes, France, Frank Quintero, a principal at Yucaipa, said that “while Scoop faced the same challenges that other retailers have faced,” the company ultimately made money on the investment because of its real estate holdings. “We were opportunistic enough to have bought and sold much of the underlying real estate,” he said.
Last Friday, the meatpacking district Scoop was deserted despite large red and white signs announcing 20 percent discounts. Four employees were chatting in the center of the store and listening to the Tom Tom Club’s “Genius of Love” when a single shopper came in from the rain. She looked at a floral blouse from MSGM and a white eyelet top from Ulla Johnson. She asked why everything was on sale.
“We’re closing,” said Rachel Leven, a senior member of the sales staff.
The news had come as a surprise, Ms. Leven said: “It’s all starting to make sense. Business has not been great, and it has become less of a place you could get special items.” She was not sure what she would do for work next.
