As mighty a city as New York claims to be, its power and pride seem nowhere in evidence on Hart Island, a desolate spot off the Bronx shore where the most pauperous and forgotten citizens are buried in tiers of coffins for their eternal rest in a potter’s field. Since the Civil War, the lives and misfortunes of those anonymously interred in bulldozed pits have gone untold and unmourned while the rest of the city teems with life around them.
Now, however, an investigation by The Times’s Nina Bernstein has penetrated some of those lost histories and uncovered gruesome bureaucratic failures in a burial ritual in great need of reform. She found a scramble of laws and procedures that by far favor enrichment of the living — particularly nursing homes and court-appointed guardians in “an end-of-life industry” — over respect for the 1,500 unclaimed dead who turn up each year.
The report was able to identify people buried on Hart Island despite having plots elsewhere and their own adequate burial funds; they had outlived anyone who knew this. Others wound up on the island because of a lack of effort by authorities to reach the next of kin. So they were classified as officially unclaimed, leaving only a few days by law to catch errors that could block a Hart Island burial.
Even worse, some of the unclaimed dead were requisitioned as teaching cadavers by medical and mortician schools under questionable laws dating to the bygone era of body snatching. One body remained in a limbo-like state of student experimentation for two years before arriving at Hart Island. The investigation uncovered family enmities and deep poverty behind some decisions to allow a relative to be sent to the potter’s field. There were also families who fought valiantly to reclaim their own for reburial.
As the stories are told, identities emerge from the underground masses. It is both a privilege and a shock to encounter an 88-year-old woman who worked as a housekeeper for one family for 50 years, but who outlived the family’s protection. Her body was left unclaimed by a wayward court guardian and now resides at Hart Island. And there is the 102-year-old feminist pioneer found there three years after her family donated her body to science with the expectation that she would be cremated. “My God, she ended up there?” her daughter exclaimed when she learned the truth.
The Times investigation was conducted with assistance from the Hart Island Project, founded by Melinda Hunt, an artist who has painstakingly gathered data from old ledgers and created a website. Court records and interviews by The Times filled out individual identities with no great help from the city, which redacted cadavers’ names as if privacy were paramount for the anonymous dead. The Times had to use a drone to record burials when the city denied permission for a reporter to witness the scene.
The dead on Hart Island, of course, have the least clout in the city. But officials should at least be motivated by basic city pride to clean up the laws and mandate a new attitude toward the hundreds of thousands who lie there and the attempts by survivors to track lost kin. The medical examiner’s office, where the unclaimed bodies are held, says it is using the Internet and commercial databases to better search for relatives.
