The giant gaps between those numbers are an indication, if nothing else, of the sheer number of dishonest people who have been drawn to the fiasco around Mt. Gox and Bitcoin. They are also the latest reminders of the topsy-turvy nature of the digital-currency realm. A currency designed to bring computer precision and traceability to money has been marked by multiple unsolved mysteries swirling around it.
Journalists and others have made many unsuccessful attempts to determine the true identity of the creator of the Bitcoin technology, a programmer or group of programmers going by the name Satoshi Nakamoto.
Bitcoin experts and law enforcement officials have spent over two years trying to figure out how hundreds of thousands of Bitcoins disappeared from the Mt. Gox exchange. There have been lots of conspiracy theories but few solid answers.
The amount that claimants have requested from the Mt. Gox bankruptcy estate is absurd on its face, given that all the Bitcoins in the world today are worth about $7 billion, or 0.3 percent of the $2.4 trillion being claimed.
Most of that huge number is an outsize claim by one individual — but even after that is taken out, the rest of the claimants said they lost some $27 billion, or 54 times what the exchange claimed it held before it went under.
The trustee said on Wednesday at a meeting with creditors that $414 million of the claims appeared to be legitimate and have been approved. Each of those claimants will get some portion of the $91 million. It is not yet clear how much because of outstanding lawsuits and investigations.
Bitcoin investors have complained about how long it has taken to work through the claims, not to mention the legal and accounting costs. The trustee reports that those costs have added up to about $5.5 million so far.
Mt. Gox’s collapse in 2014 threatened to destroy the cottage industry that was built around Bitcoin in the years after it was released in early 2009. The price that people were willing to pay for Bitcoin steadily declined for over a year after the bankruptcy.
But the problems in Tokyo also led to a professionalization of the virtual currency world, with established entrepreneurs and venture capitalists getting involved and regulators establishing basic rules for businesses in the industry. These days, many banks are examining how to harness the technology underlying Bitcoin, known as the blockchain, though Bitcoin itself has been hurt by infighting among the developers working on the technology.
Mt. Gox was the most prominent company during Bitcoin’s early, Wild West years, as it became one of the first widely used places to exchange dollars or euros for Bitcoin.
The company was run from Tokyo by a young Frenchman named Mark Karpeles, who had essentially no experience working with financial software. The exchange suffered several breakdowns and attacks, but many customers still kept their money there.
Mr. Karpeles filed for bankruptcy after months of unexplained behavior. While he initially said the exchange could not locate 850,000 Bitcoins — worth about $450 million at the time — he later reported to the court that he had found 200,000 Bitcoins in misplaced digital wallets.
Those 200,000 Bitcoins form the bulk of the money that the bankruptcy trustee will return to Mt. Gox customers. In an unusual step, the trustee has indicated that he will allow valid claimants to be paid in Bitcoin rather than yen or dollars.
Mr. Karpeles was arrested by the Japanese authorities last August on suspicion of illegally adding money to an account under his control, though not on charges directly related to the missing Bitcoins. This week, the trustee said he was helping with the “ongoing criminal investigation” of Mr. Karpeles.
Japanese government officials have still given few indications of what they think happened to the missing money. A Tokyo computer security company, WizSec, has published reports on its own private investigation of the money using the blockchain ledger on which all Bitcoin transactions are recorded.
WizSec has said it appears that Bitcoins began disappearing from Mt. Gox back in 2011 and continued being transferred out of the exchange in small amounts over time. The researchers believe that the thief altered Mt. Gox’s internal records so that Mr. Karpeles did not realize the money was gone.
“The unfortunate reality of Bitcoin is that it’s just so tempting to steal it digitally,” Kim Nilsson, a researcher with WizSec, said on Wednesday.
Mr. Nilsson says he lost a few thousand dollars with Mt. Gox, some of which he hopes to recover from the estate.
Mr. Nilsson said he no longer trusted his Bitcoin to anyone other than himself. But he says he is as excited as ever about the virtual currency, in part because of the way that the blockchain made it possible for individuals like him to do their own investigation of the Mt. Gox collapse.
