If some men look a little facially frozen in their wedding photos, it’s now perhaps because of the Botox. If their chins appear more chiseled, their pores smaller, their necks tighter, it may be thanks to in-office procedures, which many grooms, groomsmen and even a father-in-law or two are getting before the big event.
Years ago, the only ones getting perfectly prettified were brides. But now, grooms are going for a brotox boost. They are making appointments with dermatologists and plastic surgeons to reduce fat, restore volume to their face, lose inches in their waist, remove wrinkles and hair, and erase those 11s — no one wants to look angry in their photos.
Recently, Dr. Dendy Engelman, an aesthetic dermatologist at Manhattan Dermatology and Cosmetic Surgery, entered one of her treatment rooms to find three patients: Mr. Baggett; Rosie Noesi, 35, his fiancée; and Corey Baggett, 32, his brother and best man. The three were there for pre-wedding fixings.
And so chins and necks were inspected for Kybella, an injectable treatment that reduces fat in that specific area. Eyes were scrutinized for crow’s-feet. Foreheads examined for lines. Reflections were stared at in the mirror while Dr. Engelman gave her suggestions. Because of timing issues, Botox was decided that day as the treatment of choice for the two nervous men, who both sat with round, pink ice packs by their eyes to numb their skin.
In March, Alfonso Diaz, 44, a director and host with the international television channel Nuestra Tele, went to Dr. Jennifer Levine’s office in New York to have his first of four sessions of SculpSure, a light-based body contouring treatment that, through intense heat and cold, targets and destroys fat cells in the flanks and stomach. Mr. Diaz and his partner of three years, Richard Saenz, 34, will wed June 4 on the beach in Cancún, Mexico.
SculpSure, which is one of a handful of contouring treatments, takes 25 minutes per session, and one can lose a belt notch after a treatment. Results can take six weeks to see, which is why Mr. Diaz scheduled sessions for his stomach and flanks in March, and had two additional treatments five weeks before his wedding. Each session cost $1,500.
Mr. Diaz attributes some of this gender-free acceptance to the gay community.
Some say it’s just a movement for treating men the same as women, and whether that is for better or for worse is in the eye of the beholder.
“For a very long time, emphasis was placed on what a man did, not how he looked, while women were judged on the opposite,” said Miles Groth, a professor of psychology and chairman of the psychology department at Wagner College in New York, who specializes in men’s gender studies.
In 2015, the American Society for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery reported recently, procedures for men were up 63 percent over a five-year period; men had more than 1.2 million procedures performed, representing 9.5 percent of the total procedures.
As for the marrying men. ...
Another category of men he sees in his office are second-timers trying to recapture their youth.
If word of mouth is helping spread the news, then words themselves, ones created specifically for men, are blending into the mainstream. Besides brotox, there is xeoman, a spin on Xeomin (a botulinum toxin injection like Botox), and a manlycure, the male version of a manicure. Then there’s guybrows, which the brow specialist Ramy Gafni trademarked two years ago when he saw how popular the word had become.
Over the last few years, he has seen a huge jump in his male clientele. Each month, he reshapes 250 to 300 men’s brows. He said that 20 percent of that number is for weddings.
Even plastic surgery and medical facilities are creating groom-specialized offerings. Shafer Plastic Surgery, in New York, has the Groomsmen Package, which includes 600 units of Botox — enough for four faces, targeting lines around the eyes, eyebrows and forehead, and for axillary sweating under the arms — and four Kybella treatments to remove double chins. The cost? A mere $13,000.
The Tiffani Kim Institute, in Chicago, has the groom-to-be treatment: a 50-minute Swedish massage, a sports buff manicure and pedicure, a gentleman’s Facial, Botox and Restylane. It costs $980.
Mr. Vazquez said a friend had undergone the treatment before his wedding, and another friend mentioned that he, too, had been to Tiffani Kim to have work done. Both suggested Mr. Vazquez have a consultation, and he later emerged a younger-looking man.
The couple married in November 2015. When Mr. Vazquez said, “I do,” his face was wrinkle-free, his marionette lines and the deep indentations around his nose gone.
By the time the Baggett brothers emerged from the treatment room, it was clear both were hooked on reclaiming their youth. They promptly made joint appointments for Kybella treatments.
The older Mr. Baggett paid the bill, a grin on his face, disbelief in his voice. “It didn’t hurt at all,” he told his fiancée, who had received filler in her smile lines.
