NEW ORLEANS — When Chené Marshall got into a fight in high school, she assumed she might be suspended. Instead, the police arrested her.
Then a 17-year-old junior with no criminal record, she did not realize that Louisiana was in the dwindling minority of states where all 17-year-olds are treated as adults by the criminal justice system.
She spent three nights in the jail before her great-aunt, who had raised her from infancy, could come up with a bondsman’s $650 fee and secure her release.
Now Louisiana and several other states among those nine appear to be on the verge of raising the cutoff to the more standard age of 18 — part of a national “raise the age” movement that has won bipartisan support, a result of concern about high incarceration rates and growing neurological evidence that young people’s brains are different from adult brains.
To allay concerns that the state’s juvenile system, already caught in a severe budget crisis, is not prepared for an influx, the bill would phase in the change, with nonviolent offenders making the switch in 2018, and the rest in 2020, said Josh Perry, executive director of the Louisiana Center for Children’s Rights, which provides public defenders for children and has lobbied for the bill.
In the peak “tough on crime” years of the 1990s, many states acted to send more young offenders to adult courts. But in the last seven years, Illinois and Connecticut increased the age for automatic treatment as adults to 18 from 16, and Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Mississippi raised it to 18 from 17.
The experience in those states has bolstered the case for change, said Vincent Schiraldi, a senior research fellow in criminal justice at Harvard’s John F. Kennedy School of Government and a former justice official in New York City and Washington, D.C.
On a recent day, the parish jail held one female and eight male 17-year-olds, awaiting adjudication for crimes that ranged from trespassing to murder.
She finished high school the next year. But now, five years later, she still lives with her great-aunt, Yolanda Wills, in east New Orleans, where a mantel in their home is filled with Ms. Marshall’s high school athletic trophies.
“They said that if she goes through the program, they’d clear her record,” Ms. Wills said.
“But it didn’t go anywhere,” she said.
“I can’t pay to expunge the record, and I can’t get a job to get the money,” she said.