Republicans spent an entire primary cycle searching for Donald J. Trump’s weak spot, to little avail.
But Elizabeth Warren, a first-term Democratic senator from Massachusetts, seems to have come up with an answer — or at least a way to rattle the New York billionaire.
On Friday evening, tensions between Mr. Trump and Ms. Warren spilled into a Twitter war, which spanned four hours and more than a dozen posts and insults — “Goofy Elizabeth Warren,” he called her; a sexist, racist, xenophobic “bully,” she countered — on both sides.
The back-and-forth, which played out in public rat-a-tat-tat bursts, 140 characters at a time, also offered a vivid preview of how the six months until Election Day could unfold, with the popular Ms. Warren emerging as a unifier of the Democratic base and Mr. Trump — so far, at least — still unable to resist small provocations as he tries to become a more disciplined general election candidate.
Ms. Warren is one of the few high-profile leaders in either party to repeatedly challenge Mr. Trump with clarity and directness, portraying him as both dangerous and a charlatan. She began her assault in a March 21 Facebook post, describing his candidacy as a “serious threat” and calling him “a loser” — one of the worst insults in the Trump lexicon.
Mr. Trump first teased Ms. Warren about her ancestry claims in an interview last summer with the New York Times columnist Maureen Dowd, saying: “She’s caught a little wave. Perhaps it’s her Indian upbringing.” He has since repeated the mockery, calling Ms. Warren “the Indian” at a news conference in Washington earlier this year.
Ms. Warren and Mrs. Clinton, the expected Democratic nominee, have had a strained relationship at times, and Ms. Warren’s decision not to endorse Mrs. Clinton so far has irked Democrats who would like to see the primary wrap up. But Ms. Warren is still often mentioned as a possible vice-presidential candidate for Mrs. Clinton, who has said she wants a running mate who can act as an attack dog.
And Ms. Warren is embracing a role right now that Mrs. Clinton cannot.
Mrs. Clinton, the former secretary of state, has made clear that she hopes to hover at least slightly above the fray, causing some Democrats to fret privately that their party is not sharply attacking Mr. Trump, who has so far proved an elusive target.
Ms. Warren, it seems, is more than happy to fill the void.
Mary Anne Marsh, a Democratic strategist based in Boston, said that Ms. Warren had a history of speaking her mind — “to anybody, on any topic, at any time,” she said — and that the political moment was ripe for that type of authenticity.
But Ms. Warren may also be trying to blunt Mr. Trump’s efforts to woo supporters of Mrs. Clinton’s primary opponent, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, no matter how unlikely Mr. Trump is to bring them to his side in large numbers. She is the person most closely aligned with Mr. Sanders’s brand of anti-Wall Street populism, and her imprimatur could help Mrs. Clinton while the Democratic primary race goes on.
In some ways, Mr. Trump is reprising the Native American attack that then-Senator Scott Brown used against her, unsuccessfully, in their 2012 contest. Ms. Marsh said that during that race, Ms. Warren won over some of the working-class men who had voted for Mr. Brown in his 2010 special election to the Senate, making her a particularly potent force on the Democratic side.
For Mr. Trump, whose preferred attack megaphone is often Twitter, engaging with Ms. Warren has its perils and could undercut his recent efforts to reassure party officials that he has the temperament to be president. He also has high negative ratings among women, and attacking two of the most prominent female Democrats could backfire.
A detailed list of the journalists, politicians and places President Trump has insulted since declaring his candidacy.
Mr. Trump’s allies view the dust-up as simply Mr. Trump’s being himself, and winning over voters in the process.
And for Democrats still struggling to take on Mr. Trump, who helped splinter his own party before beginning to turn his attention to the Democrats, Ms. Warren has increasingly become a crucial figure in the fight, helping to write the blueprint against Mr. Trump one Facebook and Twitter post at a time.
