NEW HAVEN — The image we see when the curtain rises on “Happy Days” is as bizarre as it is bleak, even by the hardly cheery standards of the play’s author, Samuel Beckett. Winnie, the central character — really the only one — is immured in earth up to her waist. In the Yale Repertory Theater production here, the Winnie who greets us after the ringing of the wake-up bell is none other than Dianne Wiest, the Oscar winner and onetime regular in Woody Allen movies who has recently returned to the stage, where her career began.
Ms. Wiest mostly makes a mouthwatering match for the role. Her still-girlish puff of a voice is perfect for Winnie’s indomitably chipper spirit as she spends her long hours babbling merrily, keeping up a bright sheen of optimism, expecting every day to be a happy day, in benign acceptance of her strange predicament. Ms. Wiest can also, of course, drop that voice to a husky growl, as she memorably did in Mr. Allen’s “Bullets Over Broadway.” She deftly uses this register when Winnie’s veneer of satisfaction occasionally, briefly, cracks open to reveal the loneliness and fear underneath.
In “Happy Days,” Beckett presents one of his most powerful emblems of the trap that human life can become. Winnie inhabits a postapocalyptic world, and greets her predicament with an absurdly blithe attitude. But in her dogged attempts to pass the days profitably — brushing her teeth, taking her medicine, filing her nails, attempting to jostle into life her companion, the barely seen and virtually immobile Willie (a convincingly decrepit Jarlath Conroy) — she represents a mordant image of the existential struggle that can haunt us all.
Like the characters in “Waiting for Godot,” Winnie will go on with her meaningless existence until it ends — if it ever does. She is an embodiment of the unquenchable, unreasoning life force, and also its uselessness against the fates that resign us all to oblivion in the end, and sometimes a living death well before it.
At times the pacing might be tighter — a pause can open up into an existential abyss for poor Winnie — and Ms. Wiest tends to slip notes of piteousness into her delivery that border on the sentimental. (“Was I lovable once?” she asks.) Even a teaspoon of sugar can be enough to dissolve the scorching effect of a Beckett play, and Ms. Wiest’s naturally winsome persona perhaps doesn’t help.
Other aspects of the play are a little softened, too; the red velvet curtain and old-fashioned scallop-shell footlights lend an antique charm that frames it too quaintly. The bell that signaled the beginning or end of Winnie’s days sounded too churchy to me: “piercingly” is the word Beckett used to describe its ringing, and here the sound could hardly be described as such.
The physical challenges alone are daunting. In the play’s second act, Winnie’s situation is more dire. The girdle of earth has swallowed her all the way up to her neck. No more resorting to the diversions in her handbag, or protecting herself from the scorching sun with a parasol.
Most ominously, the gun that Winnie pulls from her bag and kisses affectionately in the opening moments is now beyond her reach. When Willie scrabbles out of his (unseen) hole and crawls desperately toward the top of the mound from which Winnie’s head peeks out, is he reaching to comfort her, as she fondly hopes, or is he groping for the gun that lies nearby?
But pinning down the meanings in Beckett can be a mug’s game; he referred to “Happy Days,” cryptically, as “no more than another dramatic object.” As this fine production and Ms. Wiest’s fearless performance attest, call it what you will, “Happy Days” remains one of the most unsettling and unforgettable plays in the modern canon.