My mother’s chief personality traits are creativity and impulsivity. A result of this union is that I grew up in a startling variety of houses: a lagoon-side bungalow, a glossy condominium with no heat, a cottage built around 1906 for workers cleaning up after the San Francisco earthquake and several other homes of varying peculiarity.
A common factor among these homes was smallness. From age 10 to 11 I slept in a closet, on a mattress of egg-crate foam, in a 1,200-square-foot house in San Francisco. It was not a walk-in closet. The closet housed my older brother until he grew too long to fit in it, and the walls were spattered with brownish dots that had been circled in pencil. These dots were the blood-filled carcasses of mosquitoes that he had smacked blindly in the night and then circled in the morning, for reasons that I never broached but attributed partly to vengeance and partly to the psychopathy of all pubescent boys.
Not long after I took up residency in the closet, we moved an hour north of the city, and I received my next housing assignment: an outbuilding, basically a shed, 40 feet away from a one-bedroom house where the other three family members lived. The shed was 80 square feet of paradise: It had a door that locked and I could lie flat on the floor and not touch any walls. It even had a “deck” — an array of unfinished planks — where I could stand and survey my territory: a dirt road, a mulch pile and a network of puddles.
In addition to a bed and shelf, my mother stocked the shed with a flashlight and a tub of Skippy peanut butter, “in case anything happened,” like if someone broke in and forced me to make a sandwich in the dark. Was this a legally habitable dwelling under California housing law? No. Did I grieve when we moved out? Forcefully.
Related to this is the human compulsion to fit a variety of components into a contained space. This compulsion sheds light on many aspects of daily life. It explains why packing is fun and unpacking is a chore. It explains toolboxes, tackle boxes, Tangrams, the appeal of Apple’s packaging, Fabergé eggs and the reason that YouTube is full of parallel-­parking videos. It explains bento boxes, ship cabins, Marie Kondo and Muji’s entire business model. It explains many toys for children (dollhouses, tree houses, Polly Pockets) and many toys for adults (Swiss army knives, refurbished Airstreams). Things that nest tightly exercise a potent fascination. Is there a psychosexual component to this urge toward snugness? Obviously. There may also be a geographic component. Some cultures — Japan, Iceland — seem more obsessed with tiny spaces than others.
In my case, I wonder if my relocation from California to the East Coast a decade ago had something to do with the scale of nature. I’m still amazed at the delicacy of the natural landscape on this side of the country. The trees are so dainty. The beaches are diorama-size. The waves are like ripples in a cat’s water bowl. Forget about bluffs, canyons or crags. I can appreciate a 350-foot-tall redwood tree, but I feel more at home with a dwarfish crab apple or a dogwood. If tiny spaces heighten the sense of being left to your own devices, then tiny trees enlarge your relative physical presence in the world.
And this, in the end, is what I suspect the allure for tiny spaces is all about: that it’s not so much an aesthetic preference as it is an existential one. The American hunger for big cars, big screens, big personalities and Big Macs abides. Enormousness is still the easiest way to signal dominance. But scaling down can be aspirational, too. In large open spaces, we feel slight and vulnerable. In small, contained spaces, we feel large and powerful. 