Responses to David Samuels’s profile of Ben Rhodes will be featured in next week’s issue.
Emily Bazelon wrote about the growing movement of sex workers and activists that is making the decriminalization of sex work a feminist issue.
Thank you for titling Emily Bazelon’s article “Should Prostitution Be a Crime?” Since there is no one this side of the Taliban who isn’t trying to get rid of archaic laws that arrest and imprison prostituted people, the title makes clear that Bazelon has created a false dichotomy. What is absent from her article is the real world. The pimps, brothel owners and traffickers who buy and sell other people’s bodies are the force trying to decriminalize the entire global sex industry. Is that what she has in mind?
Bazelon also dismisses the only model that offers services to prostituted people, and penalizes sex buyers only with a fine and learning the realities of the global sex trade. This has been more successful than any other model because it recognizes the power difference between buyer and bought.
Is it a stretch to say that a cover story might be indicative of a paradigm shift in mainstream conversation about prostitution? The article in The New York Times Magazine is a small gain but a big deal — an actual cover story, in an actual newspaper, written by a reporter with name recognition, that centers the voice of current and former sex workers.
One complaint about the article was that the description of the activists as a “fractious bunch” felt belittling and dismissive. Fraction is bound to occur within a community as diverse and mammoth as the sex-work community. Unfortunately, Bazelon did not include, or even acknowledge, why our community is so huge. 
In her recent article, Emily Bazelon trumpeted International Justice Mission’s minimal funding under the Bush administration, failing to note that I.J.M., a nonpartisan organization, has also been funded under the Obama administration. United States government funding for I.J.M. totals less than 2 percent of the organization’s budget. Further, we were disappointed that the piece cites a comment made in a private meeting nearly a decade ago as a valid explanation of I.J.M.’s practices.
Bazelon’s article focuses on the pros and cons of decriminalizing prostitution. I.J.M.’s focus, in contrast, is on the enslavement and sexual exploitation of children and adults, which is legal nowhere. Surely no one wants it to be. Holly Burkhalter, Senior Adviser for Justice System Transformation, I.J.M.
Emily Bazelon’s article, while comprehensive, fails to recognize much of the serious economic research that ad­­dresses what decriminalization in the United States would look like.
