Bubba Wells waited until Dennis Rodman had jogged across the center circle before grabbing him near his shoulders. Rodman tried to wriggle free as play continued around them, and the players grappled for a few seconds before a referee noticed and whistled a foul.
Wells walked away, chewing gum, smiling sheepishly.
It was Dec. 29, 1997, and the Dallas Mavericks had traveled to play the Chicago Bulls. Before the game, Don Nelson, the Mavericks’ coach, asked Wells, then a 23-year-old rookie, if he would be willing to help execute a curious new game plan: Nelson wanted to foul Rodman repeatedly, whether he had the ball or not, to send him to the free-throw line, where he was shooting just 38.6 percent.
“It wasn’t no big thing,” Wells said last week.
But in the years since, it has become one. Nelson was pleased with his experiment that night — even though Rodman made 9 of his 12 attempts from the line and the Mavericks lost their 12th straight game. Nelson used the tactic often, with Shaquille O’Neal becoming his most famous target, and it caught on around the league. After all this time, though, it may finally have crossed a line.
The tactic has become controversial for the way it seems to subvert the point of the game. N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver has called the tactic Hack-a-Somebody — a nod to its original name, Hack-a-Shaq. Kiki Vandeweghe, the league’s vice president for basketball operations, calls the plays off-ball deliberate fouls. Whatever the fouls are called, Silver said last month that he hoped the league’s owners could come to an agreement over the coming weeks about how to outlaw the tactic before the 2016-17 season.
As the league sees it, things have gotten out of hand: There were 420 deliberate fouls away from the ball in the regular season, up from 179 in the 2014-15 season and 115 the season before that. The league is officially tired of it.
In 1997, though, it was a newfangled tool that caused some bewilderment and delight, and the local Chicago television commentators calling the game between the Mavericks and Bulls did not seem to know what to make of it. Intentional fouling of shooters and ballhandlers had been part of the game for years, but not this sort of persistent fouling of players away from the ball.
After Wells fouled Rodman a second time, the two players chuckled about it. After the third, Bulls Coach Phil Jackson put his head down and laughed.
“Does anybody understand what’s going on here?” Kerr said on the broadcast.
Rodman’s patience eventually wore thin. After getting fouled a fourth time, he sank a free throw and stared right at Nelson, who smiled and offered him an apologetic shrug. The crowd was restless, too.
But to Nelson — and the scores of coaches who have used it since — the plan was perfectly rational. He said in an interview that he devised the move to use against teams “we didn’t have any business beating.” The Bulls that season eventually won 62 games; the Mavericks lost 62.
Chicago that season averaged 1.08 points per possession on offense. So if Rodman missed one shot each time Nelson put him on the foul line, it seemed, it would be a good deal for the Mavericks. On top of that, it would keep the ball out of the hands of players like Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen, disrupting their overall rhythm and flow.
The teams, as it happened, met again two nights later in Dallas, and Nelson used the tactic again. O’Neal shot 14 free throws and missed 11. The Lakers, who went on to win the title that year, won both games, but O’Neal’s irritation was plain.
The issue has provoked heated debate over the last few seasons. On one side are those who feel players and teams should not be pardoned for their horrid free-throw shooting. On the other are those who cannot stand to watch as a game comes to a halting stop when a player gets fouled over and over.
Even as the tactic’s proud creator, Nelson seemed to acknowledge that he had created something of a monster.
The league found this season that games that featured three or more off-ball deliberate fouls took 11 minutes longer to play, on average. Silver said it was important to the N.B.A. to respect the two-and-a-half-hour window that broadcasters set aside for games.
From an aesthetic standpoint, it can make the league’s entertainment product unattractive. Consider the sight on Jan. 20 when the Houston Rockets deliberately fouled Detroit Pistons center Andre Drummond over and over. Drummond, a career 38 percent free-throw shooter, finished 13 for 36 from the foul line, setting an individual record for missed free throws in a game.
The league would need to decide how exactly to discourage the move. Nelson, like many, suggested that teams subjected to an off-ball deliberate foul should get to choose a player to take one shot and retain possession.
Wells, now an assistant at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, said he thought that the move should continue to be allowed, that coaches should be allowed to strategize and scheme. And for Wells, who played one season in the N.B.A., it provided a chance to play against one of the best teams of all time.
So it was worth it, even if he set a record that stands today, fouling out of the game in only three minutes of play?
