Verizon reached a series of tentative agreements with unions representing nearly 40,000 striking workers over the holiday weekend, retreating on some of the major points of contention, including pension cuts and greater flexibility to outsource work.
But after a six-and-a-half week strike, the company also gained some important tools for paring down its work force in the coming years.
The unions say the company is more than profitable enough — with nearly $18 billion in net income last year — to support a large work force with good benefits and wages.
They say that Verizon’s fiber-optic Fios network, which provides telephone, video and Internet service, remains lucrative. But they argue that the company’s interest in it has flagged because the labor costs are much higher than for its wireless business, which is overwhelmingly nonunion.
Lending partial vindication to this claim was a commitment by the company to create over 1,000 unionized call center jobs over the next four years to accommodate new demand from customers. The company also agreed to reduce the number of call center closings.
For its part, Verizon argued that the new call center rule would allow it to wring out inefficiencies. Under the old contracts, a call that originated in New York City would frequently be answered in New York City, then transferred to New Jersey or another state, where a worker with the right expertise could handle it. Now, the representative in New Jersey can answer the call directly more often.
The company also won the right to offer buyout incentives to employees once a year without first getting the union’s blessing, making it easier to eliminate jobs that the new rule could eventually render obsolete.
Elsewhere, the outcome appeared more one-sided. The unions managed to beat back proposed pension cuts, including a cap on the accrual of pension benefits after 30 years of service.
Proposals to change seniority rules and to make the company’s sickness and disability policy more strict were also withdrawn, and the company agreed to change a performance review program in New York City that many workers considered abusive.
Significantly, the new contracts also cover some 65 unionized workers at Verizon Wireless stores, signaling the first time that retail wireless workers at the company have been included in a union contract, a potentially important precedent.
The unions had largely indicated that they would accept these health care measures before the strike.
The standoff between the two sides grew more bitter during the first month after the strike began in April, and the unions came under particular strain when Verizon discontinued health care benefits for the striking workers on May 1.
Mr. Keefe said that it was quite rare for a strike in the telecom industry to have a significant economic impact on the target company, as opposed to a public relations impact. But, he said, Verizon may have been vulnerable because so few of its replacement workers, typically managers, had experience with installations.
“There’s more to running a network than hiring a few replacement workers and running them through school,” Mr. Keefe said.
Mr. Young, the Verizon spokesman, rejected that argument, saying Verizon’s replacement workers had begun installing Fios for new customers a few weeks earlier than initially planned, and for more customers than expected.
