New York City abhors a vacuum. And, in some ways, the scraggly parkland along the Bushwick Inlet in Brooklyn, pocked with industrial ruins and warehouses where a 28-acre park was to be born, is exactly that. It is a hole in the cityscape, waiting to be filled.
So it makes sense that as the city continues to struggle to make good on a more than decade-old promise to develop the park — stymied by its inability to acquire all the necessary land and slowed by the laborious process of cleaning up the area’s legacy of industrial grime — a competing idea has arisen, sprouting through the cracks in the process like weeds through a sidewalk.
And of course, since this is Brooklyn, the two visions for the site peel back to reveal something familiar: the clash of Brooklyn past and Brooklyn hipster.
The original plan would tear down the graveyard of rusting oil refineries that sit on the site, which stretches from Greenpoint to Williamsburg along the East River, and return the reedy riverbank to something closer to nature. The new idea, called Maker Park, would keep the refineries and turn them into a sort of industrial theme park — “a beautiful and otherworldly industrial topography,” according to the website of its advocates.
But the idea is anathema to longtime park advocates.
Maker Park has emerged from the larger park’s inertia: Bushwick Inlet is unfinished, in part because nearly half of the land the city promised to buy is still owned by CitiStorage, whose owner, Norman Brodsky, is seeking $250 million for the property, according to news reports. The city has already spent $198 million to buy various parcels to turn into parkland and an additional $25.8 million on development costs, according to Mayor Bill de Blasio’s office. That total is far beyond initial cost estimates of $60 million to $90 million.
The city would not say if it might consider using eminent domain to seize the land, but even then Mr. Brodsky would be entitled to some compensation. As of Monday night, Mr. Brodsky had not responded to a request for comment.
In the meantime, the Maker Park idea has grown. Its plans call for turning a decrepit warehouse with broken windows into a grand exhibition hall for local artists. Viewing platforms could be built atop the giant defunct oil tanks, which might be converted into greenhouses or gallery space to host art exhibitions. Its supporters say “Maker” connotes light industry and tinkering.
The idea for Maker Park came from Zac Waldman, who works in advertising and is a former tenant of a warehouse used for light industry that the city razed as part of the park project. Maker Park’s team also includes Stacey Anderson, the director of public events and community engagement at the Municipal Art Society of New York, and Karen Zabarsky, a creative director at Kushner Companies, a real estate development firm owned by Jared Kushner, whose father-in-law is Donald J. Trump.
Maker Park’s promoters take pains to avoid the appearance of foisting their vision on the community. They say that plans are still vague, awaiting community input.
But they have already assembled a development team led by Jay Valgora, an architect behind the redevelopment of a sprawling brick storehouse in Dumbo, Brooklyn, into a tech hub called Empire Stores. The team also includes landscape and graphic designers, as well as Suzan Tillotson, a lighting designer whose firm has illuminated Lincoln Center Plaza in Manhattan.
Mr. Valgora said initial plans had been drawn up, but he refused to share them with The New York Times on the record.
But the Bushwick Inlet site rests on heavily polluted land that the city says needs extensive remediation to make it safe. As a result, city officials call the Maker Park idea untenable.
“The necessity of environmental remediation on this postindustrial site requires the demolition of the existing buildings and contaminated tanks,” said Natalie Grybauskas, a spokeswoman for Mr. de Blasio, adding that the Maker group was told this nearly a year ago.
But in response, the Maker Park team retained an environmental lawyer and a scientist and filed a freedom of information request seeking the city’s environmental data on the site. Mr. Valgora said his team would conduct its own environmental study of the land.
No matter which vision prevails, an 11-acre piece in the middle of the site is still owned by Mr. Brodsky, threatening the park plan in its entirety. The CitiStorage site is for sale, and news reports have indicated that buyers are circling.
