Irwin Weinberg in 1976 steps into an armored car carrying the 1-cent magenta from British Guiana in a briefcase.
The handcuffs were a prop, a gimmick to get the attention of news photographers who had been alerted to his arrival — and to the arrival of the tiny item in the briefcase: the world’s most expensive postage stamp, the 1-cent magenta from British Guiana, issued in 1856. It was to be displayed at a stamp show in Toronto.
Mr. Weinberg, a stamp dealer and collector who died at 88 on May 2, bought the stamp in 1970 for a group of investors for $280,000, a record at the time. It is the only such stamp known to exist.
He went from the airport to a news conference for the stamp show, the Canadian Philatelic Exhibition. No one noticed that when he slipped the key into the handcuffs, it broke. “I thought, just keep talking and worry about it later,” Mr. Weinberg recalled in an interview in 2015.
After the news conference ended and the reporters dispersed, Mr. Weinberg told one of the stamp-show organizers that they had to find a way to free him. Security guards borrowed hairpins and tried paper clips. A firefighter who arrived produced a saw and was starting to cut into the handcuffs when the door opened and one of the reporters returned.
The story of the stamp, the handcuffs stunt and the struggle to shed the shackles was picked up around the world and in People magazine, which wrote that the steel was too thick for the firefighter’s hacksaw and that Mr. Weinberg was finally liberated with the help of a police officer’s key.
Mr. Weinberg died at his home in Kingston, Pa., said his daughter, Jan, who survives him along with his sons, John (who is known as Jack) and Robert.
Mr. Weinberg had collected stamps since he was a boy. Even before he bought a rug-cleaning operation in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., in the 1950s, he ran a stamp business there. For more than 70 years he published Miner’s Stamp News, a weekly newsletter that listed the stamps in his inventory.
In the late 1960s, Mr. Weinberg was sure that inflation would follow the end of the Vietnam War, and he concluded that nothing would be a better hedge against it than stamps. He considered luxury investments like gold or diamonds too risky. So he formed a stamp-purchasing partnership with several investors from the Wilkes-Barre area — one was a lawyer, another owned hotels, another was a furniture manufacturer — who each put up $50,000.
He was so confident in the Inverted Jenny, the United States stamp from 1918 featuring a biplane mistakenly printed upside-down, that in one month in 1969 he bought two — one for $29,000, and the other for $33,000. In 1970, at the auction at which he bought the 1-cent magenta, he bought another Inverted Jenny for $34,000. In 1971, he bought another for $31,000. Only 100 Inverted Jennys exist.
But none of the purchases brought the attention that the 1-cent magenta did, from the moment he bought it in a standing-room-only auction at the Waldorf Astoria. Mr. Weinberg went on to take the stamp to Philadelphia in 1976 for the nation’s bicentennial, and also to Japan, India and Australia. He appeared on the game show “To Tell the Truth” and on Mike Douglas’s television talk show.
He did, in 1980: John E. du Pont, an heir to the du Pont chemical fortune, paid $935,000 for the 1-cent magenta at auction.
Mr. du Pont’s estate sold the stamp in 2014 for $9.5 million. Mr. du Pont was convicted of third-degree murder but was declared mentally ill in the 1996 shooting of the Olympic wrestler David Schultz, a case fictionalized in the 2014 movie “Foxcatcher.” Mr. du Pont died in prison in 2010.
Mr. Weinberg’s stunt with the handcuffs was not the only one he orchestrated, though it did not pay off in the way he planned. On one occasion, he arranged for an armored car to meet him at a Manhattan bank where he kept the stamp in a safe-deposit box.
He intended to slip the magenta into his briefcase, climb into the armored car, ride to Kennedy International Airport and fly off with the briefcase on his lap. He drummed up news coverage by telephoning a television station, which sent a camera crew to the bank.
He rushed onto the plane with the stamp in his briefcase. Everything else he had packed for the trip — in the luggage he checked at the gate — was lost.