338 pp. Simon & Schuster, $25.
After reading “Opening Belle,” I still can’t tell you the difference between a C.M.O. and a C.D.O., but I do know that being a high-­powered woman on Wall Street, the sole breadwinner for three young children and the wife of a man who resents you for your success is a nightmare. Throw in a gorgeous ex-­boyfriend and a work environment so hostile and sexist that it makes a frat party feel like Gloria Steinem’s powder room, and you’ve got this “I don’t know how she does it” first novel from Sherry, a former managing director at Bear Stearns who, lucky for us, didn’t sign a nondisclosure agreement when she resigned after 10 years with the company.
With a sure hand, the author leads us onto the trading floor, where publicly demeaning a woman is a spectator sport. Our heroine, Isabelle McElroy, joins the all-female secret society Glass Ceiling Club. Demands are made, but nothing comes of them. The thing is, when people of your gender make up 1 percent of the company, you just can’t beat ’em. So do you give up your seven-figure salary and move your family off Park Avenue? Sherry gives us a hard-won and satisfying answer.
418 pp. Viking, $27.
Jansma’s novel is a love letter to Manhattan. True, it’s the same love letter so many of us who moved here in our 20s have written: We’re gonna make it! Make it big or at least make the rent! Make lifelong friends! Make headboard-clutching love! Like the rest of us, Jansma’s characters learn that things don’t always work out the way we plan, but if we stick with our city, our city delivers.
282 pp. Putnam, $25.
Five pages into reading “The Assistants,” you know Perri has a hit on her hands. Tina Fontana is a 30-year-old assistant to a media mogul. She doesn’t dream of moving up the corporate ladder or breaking into show business. She’s proud of her job. And she should be; she’s good at it. But her salary stinks. In her dank ground-floor apartment, she drinks out of jam jars and sleeps under a leaky ceiling. So when the opportunity to embezzle from her boss’s company and pay off her college loans presents itself, she goes for it. But she gets caught by another assistant, who makes her commit the same crime to pay off her loan. 
“The Assistants” is “Nine to Five” meets “Thelma and Louise” — except nobody dies at the end, rape is student debt and nearly every woman we meet is a survivor.
321 pp. Scout Press, $26.
Prentiss’s first novel is about art: making it, loving it and letting it go. And the book itself is a work of artistry. Prentiss plays with form: Scenes are described as human portraits (Central Park is Manhattan’s spine; Midtown, the lungs). She’s inventive: A critic sees people as colors (he is split-pea-soup green, his wife is pink wine). She pushes the plot in shocking directions, and she has done her research: Keith Haring, Jeff Koons and Jean-­Michel Basquiat all make cameos.
But what stands out is a straightforward and familiar story: A small-town girl arrives in New York City in want of a new life. She gets an apartment and a makeover, finds a job as a bartender and inevitably becomes discouraged. She is “a girl in a room full of other girls just like her, who have come here to tunnel down into their own dark parts and find the light.” But the writing — authentic and frenetic — makes the material feel fresh. I’ve been there, done that, but I held my breath the whole way.
299 pp. Melville House, $25.95.
Can you be an artist and a mom? Or do both well, that is? Shira Greene is a translator and short story writer who loves code-cracking language and burying truth in her fiction. But trouble looms: She loses a friend over what she writes, and because of her commitment to her work, she nearly loses her daughter, Andi.
When Andi was born, Shira vowed never to abandon her child, “not in thought, word or deed.” But Andi’s pajamas go unchanged, and she is left to tuck herself into bed. It’s not huge on the neglect scale, but it’s enough to convince Shira’s roommate, Ahmad, that she’s unable to care for the child. He attempts to get custody of Andi and move her to Connecticut — the land of ultimate failure for a Manhattan artist, but jackpot for a kid promised parks not overrun by rats.
There are a lot of pages ­devoted to Shira’s academic work, but the heart of the book is the idea that home is where second ­chances are and that ­every mother deserves a ­do-over.