“It takes a long time to become young,” Pablo Picasso once said. He was talking about the kind of art he wanted to create, but he may as well have been speaking of his birthplace, Málaga. The southern Spanish port town is one of the oldest cities in the world, occupied at various points through its 2,800-year history by the Phoenicians, the Romans and the Arabs, all of whom left behind their own distinctive architecture and design, the most spectacular of which is the 11th-century Moorish Alcazaba, made of a series of formidable ramparts of buff-colored stone overlooking the Alboran Sea.
And while those empires may have fallen and the seats of power may now be elsewhere, Málaga itself is newly relevant — not for nation-builders, but for culture-seekers, who throng its medieval streets visiting its surplus of museums. Along with, of course, the Museo Picasso Málaga, there’s the striking Centre Pompidou Málaga, the Iberian branch of the famous Parisian museum of modern art — partly a huge, playful cube of multicolored glass that catches the sun; the year-old outpost of the Russian Museum, housed in a former tobacco factory; a satellite of Madrid’s Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum; and the CAC Málaga (Centro de Arte Contemporáneo). In addition, there’s also the MAUS (Málaga Arte Urbano Soho) project in the city’s not-very-originally named Soho district. Here, a clutch of renowned international artists, such as Kenny Scharf and the Madrid-based painter Abraham Lacalle, have been invited by Fernando Francés, the director of the CAC Málaga, to use the city’s walls as their canvas; most of the contributions to date are by local artists.
Add to this a recent restaurant and bar boom, a thriving cafe scene and a forthcoming luxury hotel — the Gran Miramar Málaga, opening later this year — and you have a place where everything old is, finally, new again.
This recently opened hotel has an ideal central location, spacious, light-flooded rooms and, best of all, a large rooftop swimming pool. Make sure to note the building’s exterior, which was designed around the excavated remains of the Moorish walls that once surrounded the city.
This sleek Michelin-starred restaurant with an outdoor terrace serves chef José Carlos Garcia’s brilliant tasting menus. While ever-changing, they might include dishes like shrimp beignets with kimchi and muscatel grapes, monkfish liver with sweet tomato and miso soup and suckling pig with pineapple.
Not only are the tapas-cum-sushi and sushi-cum-tapas outstanding at this restaurant, the people-watching is terrific, too. The menu proves how the marriage of the seafood-centric Málagan kitchen and the equally (though different) seafood-centric Asian kitchen can make delicious mates with dishes like crispy shrimp omelets, Vietnamese rolls stuffed with wild mountain goat and tempura sushi rolls filled with asparagus and mushrooms.
This Málaga institution, housed in an 18th-century mansion near the Museo Picasso Málaga, has long been a favorite among the city’s most esteemed residents, including the actor (and Málaga native) Antonio Banderas and Salvador Dalí. The wine bar-restaurant encompasses a maze of small rooms and hidden patios, with views of the Alcazaba and the neighboring Roman ampitheatre.
Sample some of the best craft beers made in Spain at this new (and very popular) beer bar. The spot offers more than 250 different types of brews, and the owners make their own blends for local holidays.
A recently opened Arab-style hammam in the center of the city, Hammam Al Andalus has beautiful tiled walls and marble floors and offers a variety of massages and treatments. The best is the Al Andalus ritual, which includes a bath, exfoliation and a relaxing massage, followed by mint tea in the resting room, which is dreamily lit by lanterns and candles.
Founded in 1994, one of the largest botanical gardens in Europe — 56 acres in total — is a lush and shady place for a stroll. The main garden has a dazzling collection of palm trees, including rare and primitive species, along with bamboo, birds of paradise and cycads. Bring some ham and cheese for a picnic afterward.