As she campaigns to become only the second black woman elected to the U.S. Senate, the California attorney general is trying to chart a middle course on the Democratic Party’s most contentious issue: criminal justice.
Harris, who is 51, is running for office, too. She is the leading Democratic candidate in this year’s race for one of California’s Senate seats, a rare prize that last opened up a generation ago, in 1992. If she wins the June 7 Democratic primary and the general election in November, she will be the first black woman in the Senate since Carol Moseley Braun, the first ever elected, who served one term for Illinois ending 17 years ago. Harris pre-empted some potential opponents by declaring her candidacy early, a few days after Barbara Boxer announced her retirement in early 2015, but her closest rival, Representative Loretta Sanchez, pointedly told an audience in January, “I think we need a Latina in the U.S. Senate.” As of that month, Harris had raised far more money than Sanchez and had racked up endorsements from unions and other power brokers, but she was well aware that in a state that is 40 percent Hispanic, she still needed the blessing of Latino leaders.
Though he didn’t commit to an endorsement, he said, “I’d love to help you out,” and made sure to pose for a photo with Harris. A few weeks later, she endorsed his family-­leave bill, and at the end of February, Gomez tweeted a smiling picture of himself with a ballot from the California Democratic Convention, where Harris needed 60 percent of the delegates present to win the party’s endorsement: “Just voted for @KamalaHarris for Senate at #CADEM16 !!!” Harris won 78 percent of the vote. In April, Gomez’s family-­leave bill, which passed easily, was signed into law.
Harris’s timing and record have made her worth watching in another respect. She has made her career in law enforcement, elected twice as the district attorney in San Francisco. As the state attorney general for five years, she sits atop a giant law-­enforcement apparatus, with a staff of almost 5,000 in a state with the country’s second-largest nonfederal prison system, with about 135,000 inmates and a death-row population of almost 750. The rise of Black Lives Matter and the protracted protests in New York, Cleveland, Baltimore and Ferguson, Mo., have propelled criminal-­justice reform onto the national agenda. But when it comes to politics and policy, most Democrats (like Republicans) haven’t fully grasped the new sense of possibility.
In the 1970s, California’s rising crime rates fueled Ronald Reagan’s law-­and-­order rhetoric when he was governor, shaping the conservative revolution waged in his name as he ascended to the White House. Twenty years later, the public’s fear of urban gangs and the plague of crack cocaine led another crop of California politicians, Democrats among them, to promote the kind of harsh sentencing laws that soon swept the country. Now the failures of that approach, in terms of both efficacy and human rights, have come sharply into view. Harris embodies the party’s ambitions and contradictions on this issue as its leaders try to navigate a swing in the opposite direction.
In September 2012, Harris took the stage at the Democratic National Convention to the chords of “Don’t Stop Believin’ ” by Journey and a roar from the crowd. “Let’s get right down to business,” she said.
What followed, however, was a pro forma critique of Obama’s Republican opponent: a rundown of the laws and rules that “Mitt Romney would roll back.” She praised Obama and ended on an evocation of the American dream: “It belongs to little girls who have the joy of watching their mother, like I did, buy her first home.” Aside from this note, the speech was notably impersonal — especially in comparison with Obama’s career-making convention speech in 2004 detailing his family history. Harris’s biography resembles his in some of its contours and is also inextricably tied to her political identity.
Harris’s Indian-­born mother, Shyamala Gopalan Harris, the daughter of a diplomat, came to the United States at 19 in 1958, to attend the University of California, Berkeley. On her way to earning a doctorate in nutrition and endocrinology, she met Donald Harris, a Jamaican fellow graduate student. He joined the economics faculty at Stanford, and she became a noted breast-­cancer researcher. After Kamala was born, her parents wheeled her in a stroller to civil rights marches. They divorced when she and her sister, Maya, were young. The girls saw their father every other weekend, but it was Shyamala who shaped their upbringing.
She brought up her daughters, in the late ’60s and early ’70s, in a black neighborhood in Berkeley, sharing a house with a friend who ran a small preschool. “She had two black babies, and she raised them to be two black women,” Harris says of her mother’s choice of community. Stacey Johnson-Batiste, one of Harris’s oldest friends, remembers Shyamala turning ingredients like chicken or okra into either Indian dishes or soul food, depending on the spices she used. The girls sang in a Baptist choir, and every two years, Shyamala took her daughters to India.
Shyamala’s extended circle included intellectuals who were tuned in to the black political consciousness of the era, like the scholar Mary Lewis, whom Harris knew as “Aunt Mary” and who hosted a salon attended by Fannie Lou Hamer, Maya Angelou and Malcolm X, who visited the year before Harris was born. For the most part, though, Harris lived among working-­class families. One of her proudest accomplishments as attorney general involved “helping folks like the folks I grew up with” by holding out for a higher settlement with the country’s five largest mortgage servicers over their foreclosure practices during the financial crisis. Most of her counterparts around the country — and the Obama administration — wanted her to sign off on a deal that would have brought $4 billion to California. With Attorney General Eric Schneiderman of New York, Harris refused, and in the end California homeowners got $20 billion. “She was determined that the people of California would not get cheated on her watch,” Senator Elizabeth Warren told me in an email.
After the Saturday labor breakfast in January, Harris’s driver took her through the hills north of Los Angeles to a beachfront inn for the annual lunch of the Ventura County Women’s Political Council. Getting out of the S.U.V., Harris did a quick stretch (she had worked out early that morning) before heading inside, past a sign featuring the council’s logo: a high-­heeled pump with the stars and stripes of the American flag. “We used to call it ‘stiletto justice’ when I was the D.A.,” she told her greeters.
Improving the public “return on investment” for criminal justice, as Harris puts it, is central to her philosophy. “If we were talking about any other system where you have a failure rate of about 70 percent, the investors would say, at the very least, do a wholesale reconstruction, if not shut it down,” she told me, referring to California’s estimated rate of recidivism. In her 2009 book, “Smart on Crime,” she argued for re-­entry services for prisoners returning home and programs to help children in violent neighborhoods deal with trauma, in the name of crime prevention. As district attorney in San Francisco, Harris started a program that offered first-time offenders caught selling drugs the chance to earn a high-school diploma and get a job instead of going to prison. The initiative is small, with fewer than 300 graduates over eight years, but has a strikingly low recidivism rate. Around the country, other district attorneys and Obama’s Justice Department have embraced a “smart on crime” approach similar to Harris’s — a data-­driven riposte to Reagan’s enduring rhetoric.
Harris’s critics also charge that she has failed to take on prosecutorial misconduct — a responsibility that is “core to the attorney general’s job,” Simon says. In 2015, judges called out her office for defending convictions obtained by local prosecutors who inserted a false confession into the transcript of a police interrogation, lied under oath and withheld crucial evidence from the defense. “Talk to the attorney general and make sure she understands the gravity of the situation,” federal appellate Judge Alex Kozinski instructed one of Harris’s deputies in court last year. Harris says that as a career prosecutor, she takes allegations of misconduct very seriously. “My office evaluates each case based on the facts and the evidence,” she told me.
Harris has also been criticized for her response to accusations of misconduct by prosecutors and sheriff’s deputies in Orange County. Two years ago, Scott Sanders, an assistant public defender in Orange County, discovered hidden records showing that sheriff’s deputies in the local jails were placing coveted informants in cells next to inmates who were awaiting trial — and for decades maintaining a secret database about them. The district attorney’s office also appears to have repeatedly failed to disclose evidence from its own files on some informants. Defendants were convicted based on the testimony of informants whose credibility, the secret records showed, prosecutors and the police questioned, unknown to the judge and jury. One informant labeled “unreliable” helped convict a man who was executed in 1998 for a murder he insisted he did not commit. Last March, following the revelations about the database, a judge described the performance of the Orange County district attorney’s office, in the murder case before him, as “sadly deficient” and instructed Harris and her office to take over the case.
Aspects of Harris’s policy record point to the limits of the smart-on-crime philosophy, for her and other Democrats. They also most likely reflect the power of California’s police, sheriffs and local prosecutors, a force in statewide elections. Harris has had to work particularly hard to win their favor, ever since she was San Francisco’s district attorney. Being a black woman made her stand out then too: 95 percent of the country’s roughly 2,400 elected district attorneys are white, and 83 percent are men. State Senator Holly Mitchell of Los Angeles, who has endorsed Harris’s Senate campaign, argues that running for office as a black woman, “you’re held to a different standard.” And Harris has had to contend with the aftershocks of perhaps the boldest move of her career.
In April 2004, four months after she took office in San Francisco, a 29-year-old police officer, Isaac Espinoza, was shot and killed on patrol. The city’s police union urged Harris to seek the death penalty for the suspect. Three days after Espinoza’s death, Harris announced that she would not. More than 2,000 uniformed police officers packed St. Mary’s Cathedral for the funeral. With Harris in the front row, Senator Dianne Feinstein, one of the state’s most powerful Democrats, took the pulpit and called for the death penalty. Waves of cops rose to their feet and applauded. Shyamala sent white roses to her daughter’s office with a card that read “Courage!” Harris held firm, and Espinoza’s killer received a sentence of life in prison. “Our members never forgave Harris,” says Gary Delagnes, then the president of the union.
Harris felt the reverberations of that anger statewide when she ran for attorney general for the first time in 2010. Only one law-enforcement group endorsed her, and she barely squeaked by her Republican opponent. Once in office, she made a point of building bridges, and some of the law-­enforcement leaders I spoke to praised her support (as they saw it) for Rackauckas in Orange County and the distance she has kept from sentencing reform. They also said she reassured them on the death penalty. In 2014, Harris appealed a federal judge’s decision striking down California’s system of capital punishment as unconstitutional. By the time of her re-­election campaign two years ago, she had the endorsement of four dozen law enforcement groups, and she won easily.
