356 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
Well, I was close enough. Now the busboy — my apologies, that’s back waiter — has written a book too. And she has done an outstanding job of it.
What was only one generation ago a menial job in New York — clearing plates, running the food silently and invisibly — performed exclusively by a Bengali, ­Pakistani, Salvadoran or Mexican man we referred to as the busboy for all the racist reasons you can surmise — is now a ­coveted position. Both in fact and in the fiction of this book, it’s filled by an ­educated and energetic, young and most likely white woman on a career path.
Tess moves to New York and lands a job at a barely fictionalized Union Square Cafe, where Danler herself once worked. As sure as she discovers her palate with her first oyster, as reliably as a junior somm learns to say, without wincing, “Champagne is the fulcrum of the terroir debate,” Tess develops a self-destructive appetite for too much sex and drugs and rock ’n’ roll.
The book follows a love triangle between Tess; Simone, the highly competent senior server with a maternal streak; and a veteran bartender named Jake, who is one of those grad school dropouts treading eternal water in the restaurant pool.
This part of the story is lightweight and can get tedious — I had to push through for a minute. It’s not that gripping after a while to watch someone do more coke and continually obsess over the bad-boy ­bartender. But Tess is a character you root for and collude with. Danler has a deeply endearing habit of inviting you, the reader, to participate in Tess’s own becoming. “Let’s say I was born in late June of 2006 when I came over the George Washington Bridge at 7 a.m. with the sun circulating and dawning,” she says. It’s the refrain of “Let’s” and “Let’s say” throughout that allows us to imagine that Tess’s sense of herself is still up for grabs — undefined, hypothetical. We take part in confirming her identity.
If that’s not a baptism or a bat mitzvah or a quinceañera or a coming-of-age in New York, I don’t know what is.
