King of Falafel & Shawarma is a bold, throw-down-the-gauntlet title for what started out as a lone street cart in the shadow of the elevated train in Astoria, Queens. It might suggest hubris if it weren’t so well earned.
The magnanimous monarch and chef is Fares Zeideia, known as Freddy, who for 14 years was a fixture on the southwestern corner of Broadway and 30th Street, clad in billowy pants with look-at-me prints, calling his subjects by name and handing out free falafel like alms.
The falafel hasn’t changed. It is still shaped like an egg with squared-off ends, not the usual lopsided sphere found around town. This is strategic, to expand surface area, for more crust, without sacrificing inner tenderness.
Made in the Palestinian style, from his mother’s recipe, it shuns fava beans in favor of all chickpeas. These are soaked overnight, longer in winter and shorter in summer, and ground first with fresh parsley and onion, then with a dozen “secret” spices, the most forthright among them coriander, anise and cayenne, for a thrum of heat.
It arrives as a nicely prickly oblong and sits in the hand as if nothing’s there, leaving the barest shimmer of oil on the fingers. Its shell is coppery, like an early stage of caramel, not yet fully dark, so you can still see flecks of spice. The outside is crisp enough to fracture instantly, the inside crumbly yet fluffy, moist without being damp.
Never mind the technical specifications. It is delicious, whether eaten alone or anointed with tahini sauce, for which Mr. Zeideia imports a Lebanese paste made with sesame seeds harvested in Ethiopia (“the best in the world”). Or, better yet, folded inside a house-made pita and crowded with a small fury of pickled cucumbers shipped from the West Bank and turnips brined alongside beets until pink.
Then there is the hybrid “shawafel,” a pita of falafel and strips of shawarma, Mr. Zeideia’s other claim to royalty. Here the falafel registers as mostly crunch and spice; the meat is the focus, chicken possessed by curry powder, or beef interleaved with a few cuts of lamb and steeped for 24 to 36 hours in the likes of cumin, cardamom, allspice, sumac, nutmeg and cloves.
Much of the menu is devoted to platters of meat, great mounds of shawarma peeled from the spit and blackened kebabs and kofta. I wanted more of the basmati rice below, the grains first soaked, then toasted, then boiled with garlic, onion and more of Mr. Zeideia’s secret spices.
There is also falafel writ large, as a thick patty bolstered with ground zucchini and kale, and stacked with confettied lettuce, tomatoes, Jack cheese, fried onions and more of those maddened pickles. This comes not on pita but brioche, stained yellow from butter, with a swab of hummus below and a trickle of tahini sauce above. It’s flagrantly appealing, a vegetarian burger without culinary contortions. Ask for it with shatta, which is partly tomato paste but mostly chiles, raging.
Mr. Zeideia came to New York City in 1981, at age 15. A high school dropout, he sold bedsheets, pizza and stationery; drove a yellow cab; and briefly ran a coffee shop, baking muffins and serving blue-plate specials of turkey, goulash and Hawaiian chicken. In the back of his mind, always, was the city’s dearth of decent falafel.
Now, at 50, he runs a fledgling empire with the help of his son, Nidal. The awning above the restaurant announces #YEAHHHHHBABY, his catchphrase at the cart. (“Mostly for the ladies,” he said.) A model of his truck’s lime-green nose is mounted to the facade, with the license plate FALAFEL1.
When he rolled out his cart in 2002, its sign simply said, “Halal Meats.” Then he realized that all the carts had the same sign. So he listened to his regulars, who greeted him by saying, “What’s up, King?” and ascended to the throne.