One lifelong reader examines modern headlines.
In the mid-’90s I was in my early 20s and living on the Upper West Side. Down the block was a laundromat where I’d sit and read old magazines while my clothes spun. One day I found three back issues of Vogue Italia. I flipped through the copies, seeing the work of Mats Gustafson, Steven Meisel, Roxanne Lowit, Bruce Weber and Anna Piaggi for the first time. Despite not being able to read a word, I felt like I’d fallen under some spell, or entered some chilly and glamorous portal. I folded my laundry and took the three copies home with me. From that day, whenever I could afford to buy them, I’d buy Italian Vogues over American and British fashion magazines. I’d been seduced by fashion magazines before. My mother’s copy of Vogue from June 1988 was formative, and still inspires the clothing I buy. I contributed to Elle, W, Nylon, Vogues U.S. and U.K. I married a Condé Nast editor. My immersion in women’s magazines was consistent. Then one day I stopped looking at them. I had a baby. I worked on some journalism that didn’t involve consuming or recommending things. I spent nine months reading about Victorian naval history. I co-wrote a book about how women really decide on what to wear. I got really busy, got depressed, got a new apartment. Then, finally, I got a pedicure. As I sat in the undulating chair, I flipped though some glossies.
It was like a hit of a long-kicked drug, like tasting a banana Popsicle after the winter, like bumping into an old flame. In my flip-flops (my toenails Tom Ford Scarlet Chinois), I walked to the nearest magazine stand and bought my favorite old American and British monthlies. At home I spread them on the couch. My daughter toddled over. “Let’s look at pictures,” I said as she climbed onto my lap. The pages still delivered, image-wise. Crackling photography, beautiful styling, even a little racial diversity (if not other forms). But the words ... the grammar was bad, the messages completely contradictory, condescending or self-loathing, the writing mostly mediocre. I was sad. I felt like my old friends had gone a bit batty, a bit shrill, they were trying too hard, talking too much and making no sense. I wished, like my daughter, that I could just look at the pictures. One line referred, opaquely, to “the mingled emotions of beauty and style.” I considered the emotions that beauty inspires. Images make emotional sense that words can’t. I thought back to those old Italian Vogues. I loved the illustrations, the photography, the inclusion of fine art curated by Mariuccia Casadio and grimy French movie stills. I didn’t need to know what the articles were about or what advice they were offering. Fashion magazines are best read in a foreign language, where emotions can mingle and reason can’t.