President Meyer is more often defined by her ambition, narcissism, salty tongue or barely veiled disdain for her daughter than she is by her romantic relationships. That makes “Veep” both progressive and refreshing from a gender perspective. She has been vice president or president of the United States for five seasons now: When would she have time to find, or even care about finding, a man?
Only in Washington — or, possibly, some corners of Manhattan’s financial district — would the term “banking task force” be used as a euphemism for sex. In Selina’s case, it’s also coded language for the person with whom she wants to have sex: Charlie Baird, the financial power player portrayed by John Slattery, is a C.E.O. with whom she immediately clicks at the banking task force meeting originally organized by Tom James. Since everything on “Veep” involves at least 50 shades of awkward, Selina’s efforts to flirt with Charlie are less than deft; at one point she tries to telegraph her attraction by showing him a random closet in the White House where “Harding fathered a child with his teenage mistress.” Wow. What a turn-on.
Nevertheless, Charlie and Selina manage to, um, “task force,” which seems like a terrible idea. It’s obvious that their liaison will become public knowledge (it does) and that, presumably, being romantically linked to a 1 percenter from the business world will reflect poorly on Selina. “President in Bed, Literally, With Wall Street”: The headline-writing is right there on the wall. But “Veep,” in its brilliance, makes the Selina/Charlie encounter a mistake that politically weakens Selina for unexpected reasons. It turns out Charlie may be tapped by Selina’s rival, Bill O’Brien, to serve as treasury secretary if O’Brien wins the presidency, a fact the silver-haired fox doesn’t bother to share with Selina. His failure to fully disclose before disrobing leads to their immediate breakup and hits on the core theme of this episode: rampant miscommunication.
In practically every scene, there are moments that involve misunderstandings: glitchy video conference calls, inscrutable comments scrawled on Nevada ballots, nonsensical jokes made by the veteran political adviser Bob Bradley (Martin Mull) and, to bring this back to romance again, the “banking task force” moment that doesn’t quite happen for Dan and Amy.
For a few moments, all the Dan and Amy fans out there surely thought those two crazy, politically cutthroat kids were finally going to get together. All the elements are certainly in place for them to make a love connection. They’re in Carson City together. They’re basking in the afterglow that invariably sets in from affirming enough votes to trigger a statewide recount. When Amy has some trouble with her hotel room key card and looks up into Dan’s eyes, it feels like their moment has arrived. Then, once again, “Veep” zags when you think it’s going to zig.
Amy’s insufferable sister Sophie shows up and everything’s ruined. But wait! Things zag again when Amy and Dan go out later for drinks. But then — another zag — Amy decides to go home and — more zagging — Sophie worms her way in and invites Dan back to her room.
This is a bad sign for the Dan/Amy relationship because there’s no way Amy would get involved with Dan if her sister got to him first. The worst part is that it’s so clear these two are twisted soul mates. At the end of this episode, Amy texts Dan and begs him to have a nightcap with her. But she inadvertently sends those requests to Ben, an echo of Dan’s pathetic attempt last week to quit his job via text. (The result of that attempt? A message that said, “I quiv.”) 
Of all the twists that occur in this episode — including Mike nearly passing out during a news conference after Catherine, still skulking around with her camera, spills the remainder of his master cleanse concoction — perhaps the loveliest and most subtle is the one that involves Gary and Charlie. Given Gary’s overprotectiveness of Selina, one would expect him to instantly resent Charlie and at first, it seems that’s what’s happening. But once Charlie shows an interest in him, Gary’s demeanor changes. Suddenly, the aide’s eyes light up and his hand gently strokes the shoulder that Charlie just touched.
Tony Hale has always played Gary like a 9-year-old boy trapped in the body of a grown man; his performance is almost the political comedy equivalent of what Tom Hanks did in “Big,” or, if you prefer, an alternate version of what Hale himself did as Buster Bluth on “Arrested Development.” But instead of resenting the guy who’s suddenly stealing mommy’s attention, Gary morphs into the kid who just wants to impress his potential new daddy. It’s an amusing choice — “I do come from a big family,” he tells Charlie, then sheepishly adds, “It’s actually just me, I’m an only child” — and one that’s almost touching. Gary may not be seeking out a “banking task force,” but like everyone else on “Veep,” he desperately wants to connect with people and has absolutely no idea how to do it. Yes, there probably is a political metaphor in that.
Most inflated title of the week That belongs to Jonah Ryan who is now, at least in his own mind, senior deputy recount strategist.