1 hr. and 50 min.
Sheen Center, 18 Bleecker St.
“This Time” is a skillfully constructed, beautifully acted play about one woman’s quest for liberation at a time and in a place where that struggle could not have been easy. But there is nothing triumphant about the tale. Sometimes, escaping from one prison only lands you in another.
The play, written by Sevan K. Greene and being given a fine production at the Sheen Center by the Rising Circle Theater Collective, presents an alluring Egyptian woman named Amal who in the 1960s was swept off her feet by a dashing Canadian, Nick (Seth Moore). Mr. Greene conjures scenes of the young Amal (Rendah Heywood) as she meets Nick and decides to leave her husband and three children for a life with him in Canada and the United States. These are smartly intercut with scenes of late-in-life Amal (Delphi Harrington), living temporarily with her daughter, Janine (Salma Shaw), and periodically hallucinating moments from her past.
Handled poorly, this time-jumping technique can lead to muddy storytelling, but Mr. Greene proves adept at the balancing act, showing a subtle touch that lets the audience fill in the details of Amal’s long, eventful life. The director, Kareem Fahmy, makes the transitions seamless, and Ms. Harrington manages the difficult trick of showing remnants of the fiery Amal incarnated by Ms. Heywood while also being convincingly frail.
The play is inspired by a memoir by Amal Meguid, Mr. Fahmy’s grandmother, and the story touches on Egyptian political upheavals, cross-cultural friction and Muslim views of a woman’s role. But this is really the story of any woman who gives up something in hopes of finding herself.
That kind of choice is rarely clear-cut, and it isn’t for Amal. Not only did her decision fracture her relationship with her children, but it also, we gradually come to learn, did not exactly result in a blissful new romance of equals. For the older Amal, Nick is long gone, her attraction for him having turned into a suffocating existence just as unrewarding as what she would have faced in Egypt. Yet she still clings to that brief moment when she was brave enough to upend her life for love. In her old age, she’s still not fully liberated, imprisoned by her own memories.