ABERDEEN PROVING GROUND, MARYLAND — As sometimes happens in rural America, someone has shot up a road sign. Given the gape of the hole and the fact that the road traverses Aberdeen Proving Ground, there’s a good chance it wasn’t made by a bullet.
A proving ground is a spread of high-security acreage set aside for testing weapons and the vehicles meant to withstand them. I’m headed for Aberdeen’s Building 336, where combat vehicles come to be up-armored — as the military likes to up-say — against the latest threats.
Mark Roman, my host this morning, oversees the Stryker “family” of armored combat vehicles. He’ll be using them for an impromptu tutorial in personnel vulnerability: the art and science of keeping people safe in a vehicle that other people are trying to blow up.
My extremely uneducated guess is that some sort of shaped charge hit that sign. A shaped charge is an explosive double whammy used for breaching the hulls of vehicles and harming the people inside them.
R.P.G.s (rocket-propelled grenades) are the shaped charges most people have heard of, though there are ever bigger, deadlier iterations. Iran is said to have one that can push through 14 inches of steel.
For years now, military scientists have been looking for ways to defend soldiers in armored vehicles from explosives like R.P.G.s and, more recently, improvised explosive devices, or I.E.D.s. The work is extraordinarily difficult — an alchemy of physics and medicine that has begun to yield insights into the human body under the great duress of battle.
By and large, an army shows up to a war with the gear it has on hand from the last one. In 2003, the Marines arrived in Iraq with Humvees. “Some of the older ones had canvas doors,” says Mr. Roman, who was one of those Marines.
They were no match for the R.P.G.s trained upon them. So the Army tried plating vehicles with armor panels, which work well against heavy machine-gun fire. You might as well have armored your vehicle with road signs.
“We were like, ‘Crap, this does not stop an R.P.G.,’” Mr. Roman told me.
Something cheaper and simpler eventually was found to work. This morning, Mr. Roman leads the way to a Stryker in a hoopskirt of heavy-duty steel grating called slat armor.
The nose of an incoming R.P.G. gets pinched between two slats, which duds it. It’s like squeezing your nose to stop a sneeze: It either prevents the explosion from happening or blocks the expulsion of nasty stuff.
Either way, it proved effective. In Iraq, Strykers would lumber back to base like up-armored hedgehogs, bristling with R.P.G.s. Slat armor worked so well that Iraqi insurgents largely gave up on R.P.G.s.
And switched to making bombs.
Early in the Iraq war, improvised explosive devices were hidden on the sides of roads. Since these I.E.D. blasts hit vehicles broadside, the Army responded by flanking them with armor plates and replacing windows with “Pope glass” — two-inch-thick transparent armor of the type that keeps His Holiness whole on his own tours of duty.
In Afghanistan, land of the 100-pound I.E.D., insurgents took a new tack. To get around the up-armoring, they came at vehicles from below, burying the explosives in the middle of the road rather than on the sides of it.
As on most trucks, the chassis or base frames of American combat vehicles at that time were flat. Where newer generations of vehicles have V-shaped or double-V-shaped chassis to deflect the energy unleashed in a blast, the flat ones took it head-on. And because the seats were bolted to the passenger compartment floor, the energy would transmit directly to passengers’ feet, spines, and pelvises, often leading to casualties.
Newer vehicles have higher clearances, and the force of a blast diminishes rapidly as it radiates outward. Still, the energy at one or two feet is so condensed that it can act like a solid projectile and break through vehicle floors.
Once the hull is breached, any loose piece of vehicle or gear becomes a projectile. Soldiers and Marines would pile sandbags on the floors of Humvees for the same reason aviators used to sit on their body armor instead of wearing it: Because death came up from below.
The underbody blast scenario was soon dire enough that United States Central Command rolled out a Joint Urgent Operational Need statement. The gist was this: Get us some combat vehicles that can drive over bombs and keep everyone inside alive.
Nine vendors submitted prototypes for what would come to be known as MRAPs (em-raps): mine-resistant, ambush-protected. But without fielding them first, how do you know which one is safest — and precisely how safe it is?
The Army Research Laboratory snapped up Nicole Brockhoff, pre-med at Johns Hopkins with a graduate degree in biodefense. Early on in her tenure at the Pentagon, Dr. Brockhoff found herself talking to a general about the challenges of “high-speed energy mitigation.” He suggested she talk to Nascar.
Dr. Brockhoff knew she was dealing with a problem far different.
Racecar drivers are packed in their seats like mail-order stemware. Heads are braced and supported, so necks don’t break and brains don’t ricochet against skulls. Danica Patrick can’t even look out the driver-side window and wink at the pit crew.
That’s no good for combat vehicles. Drivers and gunners need to be scanning in all directions, looking out for suspicious elements: piles of trash or dead goats that might be hiding bombs, people holding cellphones that might be wireless detonators, children with their fingers in their ears.
At the same time that the Army was working to make vehicles like the Stryker safer, they were scrambling to evaluate the new MRAPs. When Dr. Brockhoff arrived, her colleagues were using the crash test dummy that the auto industry uses: the Hybrid III.
Here’s the problem. Automotive crash-test dummies were designed for measuring force mainly along two axes: front to back (for head-on impact), and side to side (for “T-bone” crashes). But with a blast coming up from below, the axis of impact runs vertically through the body: heels to head.
To see the difference, a Hybrid III was filmed alongside a cadaver in a controlled blast. It is clear, from the slow-motion footage, that the dummy wasn’t built for this. It’s like watching an elderly, arthritic man try to follow along in a Zumba class.
So the Army began building a dummy of its own. WIAMan — the Warrior Injury Assessment Manikin — will be specifically tailored to assess the impact of underbody explosions.
The scientists creating the WIAMan are starting the way the automotive crash-test dummy people started: with cadavers and controlled impacts of varying magnitudes, followed by autopsies to document the injuries.
But before military researchers could start any of that, they had to build a “blast rig,” something robust enough to withstand an explosion directly below it. By setting off blasts in the rig and recording the effects on cadavers, scientists simulate the effects of I.E.D.s on soldiers in armored vehicles. Data from the cadavers is used to calibrate the WIAMan.
The tower, as it is conversationally known, is a one-story platform with a set of rollaway stairs undergirded by a lot of complex machinery. It stands in a meadow near what the mapmakers call Bear Point and the Aberdeen Explosive Effects Branch calls Experimental Facility 13.
On the day I visited, the cadavers were there already, sitting in seats on the tower platform. They had arrived a day earlier from bioengineering labs at three universities. Some made the trip in a modified horse trailer, disappointing the children in passing cars craning their necks for a glimpse of tail or rump.
The cadavers, one in an orange Lycra bodysuit and one in yellow, sit slumped in their seats on the rig, chins on their chests like dozing subway commuters. Because the setup takes two days, the dead men spent the night in the meadow with a pair of guards.
Around 2:45, the bioengineers and investigators and hangers-on like me were escorted to a nearby bunker while the threat was buried in the special dirt and a detonating wire was attached.
The cadavers had their connectivity rechecked: Data will be gathered from sensors mounted on their bones and then transmitted along wires laid down along the insides of their limbs and spines, a sort of man-made nervous system.
A bundle of wires exits at the back of each cadaver’s neck and feeds into the system. As with the real deal, the nerves lead to a brain, in this case the WIAMan Data Acquisition System, software that collates information about the stresses experienced by the bodies.
After the blast, the cadavers will be autopsied and the injuries documented. This is the information that will allow vehicle evaluators to interpret the G-forces and strains and accelerations that WIAMan’s sensors will register.
Because of the cadavers’ contributions, WIAMan will be able to predict what kind and what degree of injury these different magnitudes of force would be likely to cause in an actual explosion.
WIAMan won’t be ready for routine use until 2021, but in the meantime, the cadaver injury data can be used to create a sort of auto-translate program for the Hybrid III, making it better able to predict underbody blast injuries.
The cadavers are coaxed into a straight-backed dinner-table posture, some duct tape keeping them from slumping. A bioengineer strings thin wires to hold the head in that eyes-right position, though not so firmly that it interferes with its movements, which will be captured on video cameras set up in bunkers on all four sides.
There’s a protocol for everything: the angle of the cadavers’ knees, the position of their hands on their thighs, the newtons of force with which their boots are laced. The hover and fuss of the scientists exaggerates the abiding stillness of the bodies.
They’re like anchormen sitting for their makeup. How nice, I find myself thinking, to be in the company of people who long ago agreed to this strange job that only they, as dead people, are qualified to do.
Who would sign such a thing? Plenty of people. Patriots, vets, their family members — anybody, really, glad to see their corpses put to use protecting the living. If you’re fine with a medical student dissecting every inch of you to learn anatomy, or with a surgeon practicing a new procedure or trying out a new device on you, then you are probably fine riding the blast rig.
In World War II they called it deck-slap. Explosions from underwater mines and torpedoes would propel a ship’s decks upward, smashing sailors’ heel bones.
Like “combat fatigue” for post-traumatic stress disorder, it was a cavalier toss-off of a name for what would often turn out to be a life-altering condition.
The calcaneus (the heel) is tough to break, tougher still to repair. By one early paper’s count, 84 different approaches had been tried and discussed in medical journals. Few statistics from the era exist, but one paper cites a foot amputation rate of 25 percent.
Underbody blasts have brought heels back to the attention of military surgeons. These days, the amputation rate for deck-slap injuries is higher than ever: 45 percent, in one recent review of 40 cases.
Fat pads are frequently damaged in underbody blasts, sometimes badly enough that they have to be removed. Without the padding, the pain of walking is acute.
In the bunker, we stand and stare at the video feed, waiting to see this deck-slap in real time. A slight breeze moves the trees beyond the tower. Eventually someone begins a countdown.
The explosion, half a mile away, is muffled. On the monitors, the cadavers appear to be thrown by the blast, but not in an action-movie way. More a took-a-speed-bump-too-fast way. The cadavers in an underbody blast test are blown up, as in upward, not apart.
The event is filmed at 10,000 frames a second. Playing back the footage at 15 or 30 frames a second allows the researchers to step inside the half-second life span of the event. Now we can see what in real time we could not.
First the boots flatten, their sides bulging noticeably. An index finger rises from where it was resting on a thigh, as though the cadaver were about to make a point. The lower legs extend and rise. The head comes down and the arms shoot out in the manner of a hurdler midleap.
The camera zooms in on one of the cadavers. As the energy of the blast moves to the seat pan, the dead man’s pelvis rises, shortening his torso and expanding his paunch. Underbody blast can compress a seated soldier’s spine by as much as two inches.
Played at this speed, there’s grace and beauty to the limbs’ extensions, nothing brutish or violent. In real time, the forces that move the limbs pass too quickly for the tissue to accommodate. Muscles strain, ligaments tear, bones may break.
Imagine pulling apart a wad of Silly Putty. Pull slowly, and it will stretch across the room. Yank it fast and it snaps in two. Likewise, different types of body tissue have different strain rates.
For the forces of any given blast, one type may stretch, say, a fifth of its length without tearing, while another may manage just 5 percent. WIAMan will be calibrated to reflect these differences and predict the consequences.
The long-term quality of a soldier or Marine’s life is a relatively new consideration. In the past, military decision makers concerned themselves more with go/no-go: Do the injuries keep a soldier from completing the mission?
WIAMan will answer that question, but it will answer others, too. Following a vehicle blast, is this soldier likely to have back pain for the rest of his life? Will she limp? Will his heel hurt so much that he’d rather lose the foot?
The answers may or may not affect the decisions that are made in the preparations for war, but at least they’ll be part of the equation for those inclined to do the math.