Opera on video has been around for practically as long as video. But video opera — that is, operatic works conceived for video — has a spottier history, which is curious. As part of its mission, the Experiments in Opera initiative commissioned five video operas from five composers and their teams. Anthology Film Archives presented the premieres of these fascinating works (of 20 minutes or less) on Friday night.
They all offered inventive stories, concepts, musical scores and imagery. But only one, “I Screwed Up the Future,” with music and story by Jason Cady, embraced what has been the defining element of opera: telling stories through sung dialogue.
Take the first video on the program, with story and music by Dorian Wallace and David Kulma. The main title contains an expletive; the subtitle is “Stories From the Microchasm.” It focuses on a disconsolate man (Mr. Kulma) wandering New York who encounters protesters, ponders the emotional troubles of his sister and, it would seem, is consumed with thoughts as he is pushed onto subway tracks. His monologue is at once rambling and riveting, his words backed by music that blurs distinctions between jazz and contemporary classical styles. At one point he sings a wry song, “Glucose High.” But the song is no dramatic aria.
“Tea Before You Go,” with music and story by Aaron Siegel, is also engrossing. A terminally ill 60-year-old man (John Hagan) enters the office of his therapist, having agreed to experiment with a hallucinogenic treatment. Once his mind cuts loose, the teeming visuals hook you along with the restless music. There are various sung lines in a kind of arioso, but mostly in the background.
“In the distance go on forever/the story of contemporary Frankenstein,” with text, music, concept and images by the composer Anna Mikhailova, is a visually and musically rich piece. A group of women, appearing in negative compositions (with dark and light reversed), are enmeshed in a tangle of sticky strings and coils that sometimes look like nerves or vessels being drawn from their bodies. The music, mostly for a chorus of female voices, skillfully blends busy counterpoint and evocations of ethnic folk music. There are sung words throughout, but only rarely do the actors sing them.
“Public,” with music and concept by Emily Manzo, is centered on personal experiences with Islamophobia as related on screen by Sonny Singh and Mawia Khogali, and includes two somberly expressive dance duos. Again, it’s a powerful piece but operatic in the loosest sense.
Only Mr. Cady’s “I Screwed Up the Future” draws on standard techniques of opera, however playfully. This charming fantasy is set in 2016. The world is still enduring the disastrous aftermath of Y2K: power outages, food shortages, self-ignited nuclear explosions. An intrepid programmer, Cassandra (Katie Eastburn), builds a time machine to return to 1996 and tweak computer networks to prevent it, which she does. But when she returns, the world has changed, including the lives of her friends. All the vocal lines skirt rhythmically square recitative and tender arioso, sung over a subdued disco track. The stylistic sameness, at once drably comic and spacey, enhances the allure of the opera, which in this case is one.