The English pianist Imogen Cooper is a valued performer of wide experience. But on Sunday afternoon, she seemed to have difficulty adjusting to the small concert space of the Frick Collection and the Steinway piano that occupied it.
She began with Robert Schumann’s lovely “Geistervariationen,” or “Ghost” Variations, whose opening Theme is marked to be played softly and intimately (“Leise, innig”). It was not so much that Ms. Cooper played loudly here as that she played bluntly. Everything, it seemed — melody, harmony — was foreground, and the texture grew muddled.
Some of this clatter continued into the early variations as well, though by the time she had completed all five, Ms. Cooper appeared to have settled into a nice groove. The Theme, on its return to round out the work, was everything it should have been at the start: quiet, inward, shapely, atmospheric.
Ms. Cooper continued in like fashion with the two books of Schumann’s “Davidsbündlertänze” (“Dances for the League of David”), named for the composer’s imagined society of artists at war against philistinism. The work contains 18 brief items, with tempo and character shifting rapidly from one number to the next and even within a single piece.
Now squarely in her comfort zone, Ms. Cooper traced the many moods vividly. As with the “Ghost” Variations, she was most touching near the end, in the “Wie aus die Ferne” (“As if from a distance”), which indeed seemed to emanate from some remote universe.
After intermission came Schubert’s Sonata in B flat (D. 960), a broadly paced, tightly structured work. Still, it has within it many fleeting gestures similar to Schumann’s: notably, those seemingly heaven-sent incursions of lyricism in the Andante sostenuto.
After the wonderful first two movements, the third and fourth can, in the wrong hands, sound empty and rattling by comparison. Ms. Cooper sustained attention admirably, adding rhythmic interest with subtle touches of rubato (well, not so subtle in the Scherzo). Many performances of this sonata prove memorable for the beauty of individual moments. This one stood out in making the work a satisfying whole.
For her encore to this narrowly focused program, Ms. Cooper returned to Schumann: the Romance in F sharp (Op. 28, No. 2), in a melting performance.