The final season of “The Good Wife” found Alicia Florrick (Julianna Margulies), after a failed stint in politics, rebooting her law career by working in the Chicago bond court. Serving the indigent, she had scant seconds to consult with clients, get the facts, make a plan. Then it was on to the next — bang bang, no time to fuss or look back.
Bond court was a comedown for Alicia, once an elite lawyer. It was also a metaphor, if unintentional, for broadcast TV. That, too, is a kind of piecework.
The show’s creators, Robert and Michelle King, turned out 22 or 23 episodes a season on CBS, for seven years. Their peers at HBO or Netflix — the white-shoe firms of the TV world — might make half that many, allowing more time for planning and polishing.
“The Good Wife,” which ends its run Sunday, was one of a fading breed: the broadcast network hour that delivered quality in quantity.
While the networks had all but ceded ambitious drama to the cable channels, “The Good Wife” competed with them backward, in heels and twice as fast. It was swaggeringly proud of this, taunting cable with the show-within-the-show “Darkness at Noon,” a parody of pay TV’s sour testosterone-and-pain cocktails.
Of course, TV is not Olympic diving. Viewers judge the product, not the degree of difficulty. “The Good Wife” sometimes showed its strains: plots suddenly abandoned, midseason course corrections, personnel issues (e.g., whatever Nameless Thing We Shall Never Speak Of that kept Ms. Margulies and Archie Panjabi from sharing screen time until Ms. Panjabi was finally written off).
But the sheer volume allowed it to be a TV portmanteau, several shows in one. It was a tart backroom-politics story. It was a tragic romance and one of the funniest shows on TV. It was fascinated with technology, building a universe of fictional tech companies (ChumHum! Scabbit!) and basing cases on Bitcoin and N.S.A. surveillance.
Above all, it was Alicia’s story.  Hence the title — but she was more than a wife, and not dully good. Re-entering the law, at a firm whose partners included her old flame Will Gardner (Josh Charles), she applied her political skills, including the ability to make moral trade-offs.
Alicia was an unusual network TV protagonist: enigmatic, shrewd, controlled. (She was also an open atheist, another rarity on TV.) She had passions, but unlike the male antiheroes of cable, she didn’t have the luxury of letting them spew volcanically. In court and in the media, “Saint Alicia” had to manage her presentation.
Being herself — her selves — was work, and it was constant. No wonder she kept so much red wine on hand.
In the courtroom, “The Good Wife” saw the law as the exercise of power, for good, for ill or for money. Like “Game of Thrones,” it believed power does not accrue to saints. When its principals were accused of wrongdoing — Peter, Will, Alicia herself — it would allow the possibility that they might be guilty and that we might be rooting for them to get off anyway.
The series was also a piñata of candy-bright supporting roles: Alan Cumming as Eli Gold, a devilish dervish of a political consultant; Carrie Preston as the flighty lawyer-savant Elsbeth Tascioni; Michael J. Fox in the role of his career as the manipulative lawyer Louis Canning.
It had a vast bench of eccentric recurring judges; it employed so many New York theater actors, it should have come with a Playbill. It was well-written not only for women but also for characters beyond the 18-49 demographic, like Diane Lockhart (Christine Baranski), who made getting older — becoming more capable, accruing power and means — look sexy and enviable.
The series stayed lively longer than most, but it lived too long. It sustained collateral damage from the gunshot that killed off Will, after Mr. Charles decided to leave the show. For a while, the death — and Alicia’s prolonged wrestling with grief and what might have been — deepened the drama.
Instead the series stepped back and reset its premise, having Alicia strike out on her own (again) and rejoin the firm (again). Even the romantic subplots of the last years felt like do-overs, a flirtation with her fellow lawyer Finn Polmar (Matthew Goode), then a fling with Jason Crouse (Jeffrey Dean Morgan), a laconic, bearded sex cowboy straight out of a fan-fictioneer’s dreams.
Did “The Good Wife” need to replace Will at all? Not to deny Alicia a good time, but the show’s most interesting relationship was always between her and her hard-to-know self.
“The Good Wife” finally couldn’t transcend the limits of broadcast TV — down to the pressure to give the audience what it’s used to. But it did great work trying. And its medium may have been the most fitting one for a series that was, beginning to end, about compromising in an imperfect world.