Frank Modell, a classically trained artist who contributed more than 1,400 cartoons to The New Yorker — customarily, he said, “of angry men and sexy women and dogs” — during an illustrious era for the magazine, died on Friday at his home in Guilford, Conn. He was 98.
A friend, Florence Hammond, confirmed his death.
For more than 50 years, beginning in 1946, Mr. Modell’s moon-faced characters leapt from The New Yorker’s pages in a perpetual state of exasperation or pandemonium, evoking for readers their everyday vexations.
“Modell is the quintessential gag cartoonist,” Richard Calhoun, a social historian, wrote in “The World Encyclopedia of Cartoons” (1980).
He had no illusions about the role his cartoons played at The New Yorker, well known for its long articles: to break up “great slabs of type,” as he put it.
Franklyn Bruce Modell was born in Philadelphia on Sept. 6, 1917, the only child of Irving Modell and the former Daisy Simon. His father, an immigrant from Russia, was a traveling furniture salesman.
Frank began to draw at 6, when he was quarantined with scarlet fever. His father had given him pencils, crayons and a sheaf of hotel stationery from his travels. His parents, his doctor and the cleaning woman lauded his illustrations.
That he was more interested in art than athletics came to bother his father, Mr. Modell was quoted as saying in “The Life, Loves and Laughs of Frank Modell” (2013), a book by James Stevenson, a fellow cartoonist.
But he became popular with his classmates, impressing them with his portraits of Lincoln drawn from pennies.
After graduating from the Philadelphia Museum School of Industrial Art, he was drafted into the Army and served in Europe during World War II as a sergeant with a signal radio intelligence company.
Mr. Modell was hired as an assistant to the magazine’s art editor, James Geraghty.
His cartoons and covers would appear for the next 50 years, under the editors Harold Ross and William Shawn.
Mr. Modell, who once said that he had “no expectations for a postdeath social life,” took pleasure in mocking mortality in his cartoons.
Mr. Modell, who moved to Guilford in the early 1980s, carried a sketchbook in his pocket into his 90s. But he seemed to subscribe to the view that few cartoonists leave an enduring legacy, a notion echoed by Iain Topliss in his book “The Comic Worlds of Peter Arno, William Steig, Charles Addams and Saul Steinberg” (2005). “Instantly enjoyable and instantly disposable, the single-panel comic cartoon is also instantly forgettable,” Mr. Topliss wrote.
