“Hamilton” is already a sold-out smash hit, that rare piece of theater to cross over into popular culture, showered with prizes and accolades, celebrated by artists and politicians, memorized by children and late-night talk show hosts.
On Tuesday, the hip-hop musical about America’s first Treasury secretary added another mark of distinction: It was nominated for 16 Tony Awards, more than any other show in Broadway history.
Tony nominators deemed the show prize-worthy in every category of theatermaking — acting, writing, directing, dance, music and design. A whopping seven “Hamilton” performers were singled out; in two categories, “Hamilton” actors will compete against one another.
“It’s unbelievable — it’s absolutely humbling and incredible,” said the show’s 36-year-old creator and star, Lin-Manuel Miranda, who was nominated for three awards himself, for his book, his music and his performance in the title role. Mr. Miranda has already won a Pulitzer Prize for his work on the show.
“When I had the idea, I did say to myself, ‘I can’t believe no one’s done this yet,’ because it felt to me like a good idea — Hamilton’s life was uniquely suited to the things that are my strengths: hip-hop and musical-theater storytelling,” Mr. Miranda said in a telephone interview shortly after the nominations were announced.
Thoughts from Lupita Nyong’o, Sara Bareilles and other nominees.
The current theater season, led by “Hamilton,” has been the most diverse in Broadway history, and the Tony nominations reflect that: Of the 40 acting nominations, 14 went to black, Hispanic and Asian-American actors. The nominee diversity is a particular point of pride for Broadway this year, when Hollywood has been convulsed with controversy over the lack of Oscar nominations for nonwhite performers.
“Hamilton” is the overwhelming favorite to win the most coveted Tony Award this year, the prize for best new musical. But four other musicals hope to benefit simply from being nominated in that category: “Bright Star,” “Waitress,” “School of Rock — The Musical” and “Shuffle Along, or, The Making of the Musical Sensation of 1921 and All That Followed.” Those shows can now market themselves as best-musical contenders, hoping the nominations will help them at the box office.
The race for best new play is likely to be more competitive.
The nominees are “Eclipsed,” by Danai Gurira, about a group of Liberian women kept captive by a warlord; “The Father,” by Florian Zeller, about a man’s struggle with dementia; “The Humans,” by Stephen Karam, about a close-knit family grappling with disappointment; and “King Charles III,” by Mike Bartlett, imagining a crisis that might ensue after Queen Elizabeth II’s death.
The nominees for best play revival are “Blackbird,” “Long Day’s Journey Into Night,” “Noises Off” and two plays by Arthur Miller — “The Crucible” and “A View From the Bridge” — both given adventurous reinterpretations by the Belgian director Ivo van Hove.
Several emotionally grueling plays scored multiple acting nominations, including “Long Day’s Journey Into Night” (Gabriel Byrne, Jessica Lange and Michael Shannon), “Eclipsed” (Lupita Nyong’o, Pascale Armand, Saycon Sengbloh), “Blackbird” (Jeff Daniels and Michelle Williams), “The Crucible” (Sophie Okonedo and Bill Camp) and “The Humans” (Reed Birney and Jayne Houdyshell).
The 16 Tony nominations for “Hamilton” broke the record shared by “The Producers” (2001) and “Billy Elliot” (2009), each nominated for 15 prizes. With 12 Tonys, “The Producers” is the winningest show of all time. “Hamilton” is unlikely to surpass that, partly because it earned multiple nominations in two categories.
He lost that battle, but “Shuffle” did well on Tuesday, garnering 10 nominations, second only to “Hamilton.” Its creators, however, were stung that the show’s star, the six-time Tony Award winner Audra McDonald, was overlooked for her performance in the show.
The nominations dealt a blow to several shows that could have used help luring ticketbuyers, including “American Psycho,” based on the Bret Easton Ellis novel, and “Tuck Everlasting,” adapted from the book by Natalie Babbitt, about a girl whose encounter with an immortal family forces her to make a difficult choice.
The single Tony nomination for “Disaster!” (for Jennifer Simard’s scene-stealing performance as a guitar-slinging, slot-machine-loving nun) was not enough to save that musical spoof from sinking; nine hours after the nominations were announced, the show’s producers said that “Disaster!” would close on Sunday.
But Tuesday’s announcement offered a big boost to “Bright Star,” a soulful Southern romance with bluegrass music by the comedian Steve Martin and the singer-songwriter Edie Brickell. The musical, which has been struggling at the box office, received five Tony nominations, including one for Carmen Cusack, a veteran of touring productions who finally snagged a Broadway lead and earned critical praise for her performance.
This year’s nominees were selected by a panel of 47 theater experts, many of whom work at nonprofit organizations and in academia. The winners will be chosen by the 846 Tony voters — a mix of producers, performers and other theater industry professionals — and will be announced at a ceremony, presented by the Broadway League and the American Theater Wing, on June 12, hosted by James Corden and broadcast on CBS.