Some people say that bringing an animal to your wedding is as inadvisable as inviting an ex-lover with a drinking problem — trouble, if not injury, seems inevitable.
Weddings are zones of perfection, organization, cleanliness and control; many animals prefer rolling in dirt. They howl when they don’t get their way and jump on people to show their love, even if those people are wearing long white gowns.
Nevertheless, pets — especially dogs — are becoming more and more commonplace at weddings. Looking through wedding blogs like Style Me Pretty and A Practical Wedding, you can find dogs serving as the best man, ring bearer, flower girl and bridesmaid. They’re wearing signs with messages like “I loved her first,” floral wreaths, bow ties, tutus, bandannas and pearl collars.
“I bet you 50 percent of the weddings I’m going to do this summer are going to have some dog involvement,” said Jeff Woodward, a photographer in Vermont.
Including a pet in your wedding is a leap of faith, in addition to the one you are already making.
“It’s a wild card: You don’t know what’s going to happen,” said Alyssa Guilmette, 33. She married Brad Guilmette, 36, in a public park in Lexington, Mass., on Oct. 26, 2014.
They said their vows while standing on an rug placed between two trees, with their rescued mutt, Rusty, sitting nearby in a black-and-white houndstooth bow tie.
It did not go smoothly. “My uncle is trying to start the ceremony, and there’s Rusty whimpering and whining and howling, a mix of all three really,” Ms. Guilmette said. “Then he just plopped down and started chewing the fringe of the Oriental rug.
Many couples say the presence of a pet takes away the pressure of having a perfect wedding, because that is probably impossible even with a well-trained animal around.
Dogs were part of Anne Surman and Tom Seidenberg’s love story from the beginning. Both live in Exeter, N.H., where he teaches math at Phillips Exeter Academy and she is a member of the town’s Board of Selectmen.
They were married March 12 in St. Johnsbury, Vt., at the Dog Mountain Chapel. Many churches and synagogues do not welcome animals, but this chapel has stained-glass windows and hand-carved wooden pews featuring images of dogs.
The couple’s wedding party included two humans and seven large, beautifully groomed dog “attendants” — four belonging to the couple and three to friends. “The moment they walked in, I thought, ‘My family is here,’” Ms. Surman said.
The degree to which some people treat animals as family varies widely. Carol Bryant, 47, and her wife, Darlene Bryant, 59, do not view their cocker spaniel, Dexter, as a pet. “He’s my son,” said Carol, firmly.
In their hometown, Forty Fort, Pa., Darlene surprised Carol in June 2014 with a proposal, immediately followed by a prearranged ceremony that included a minister, two human guests and Dexter.
“I would have been devastated if Dexter wasn’t there,” said Carol, who is the social media manager for BlogPaws.com, a community of pet bloggers. She has a tattoo that reads, “My Heart Beats Dog.” “He’s my heartbeat,” she said.
Linnea Sanderson, 32, thinks of her mellow Terrier, Penny, as a sister. This year, Ms. Sanderson married Robert Davidson, 42, in a pair of wedding ceremonies in Gloucester, Mass. Penny attended both. For the first, she wore a collar of bells and lace snowflakes, and for the second, a magenta leash. “I like to go everywhere with her, on a walk in the morning and on a walk down the aisle,” Ms. Sanderson said.
Last summer, the couple were married in Saratoga Springs, where Mr. Wieseneck walked down the aisle with Cooper, who wore a corsage of white and coral-colored flowers.
Sometimes, if a pet is not likely to be happy at a wedding full of noise and strangers, brides and grooms will include it in other ways. “There was one couple who knew they couldn’t have their cat attend because of the cat’s demeanor, so they made all these buttons with their cat’s face and passed them out,” said Zachary Hunt, a wedding photographer based in Austin.
