Last November, after the Philadelphia Orchestra played “One Land, One River, One People,” a quirkily mystical new oratorio by the American jazz-classical musician who goes by Hannibal, the composer bounded onstage for a bow. A hulking man with a spray of braids, he headed straight for the orchestra’s music director, Yannick Nézet-Séguin, who at 41 is boyish, diminutive and widely considered to be one of the most talented conductors of his generation.
Hannibal embraced Mr. Nézet-Séguin and, grinning broadly, lifted him a few feet in the air. The audience went wild; Mr. Nézet-Séguin seemed unembarrassed — even delighted. As I watched, I asked myself: Is there another conductor in the world of his skill and stature who could have pulled off the moment?
It’s that sense of charisma and charm he exudes, coupled with broad and swiftly developing technical gifts, that have brought him to the forefront of his field. With James Levine now officially retired as the music director of the Metropolitan Opera, much of the speculation about his successor has revolved around Mr. Nézet-Séguin.
There are many reasons to celebrate the possibility of his coming to New York. He made his Met debut with a galvanizing “Carmen” in 2009 — has that opera ever opened so explosively? — and in 2013 led a sumptuous “La Traviata,” its dramatic twists underlined with grand, and sudden, shifts of speed.
His conducting can be fierce and assertive but, as in a 2014 “Rusalka,” nuanced, too: He found subtle echoes of Dvorak’s haunting door-knock motif all over the score. Most impressive has been the speed of his maturation. Compare his takes on “Don Carlo” in 2010 and 2015; the more recent version was ineffably yet unmistakably deeper, as Mr. Nézet-Séguin did something unusual with the duet for Carlo and Elisabetta. He lightened the orchestral textures, making the music seem to emerge from another time and place, a profound vehicle for the agony of the characters’ lost love. This was opera conducting on the highest level. I’ll never forget it.
But what kind of music director would Mr. Nézet-Séguin be? Elsewhere, he has led operas from Monteverdi to Janacek, but his work at the Met has been squarely in the standard repertory.
In Philadelphia, too, where I traveled for a number of performances this season, Mr. Nézet-Séguin has been confident, yet his broader intentions, his artistic identity, has felt vague. The Philadelphia Orchestra is among the most conservative of the major American ensembles. While it presents a handful of premieres, including “One Land, One River, One People,” those don’t seem to define it: Over the orchestra’s four concerts at Carnegie Hall this year, just 12 minutes — the length of HK Gruber’s “Charivari” — was devoted to music by living composers.
When I asked him, though, which underappreciated composers, works or corners of the repertory he might seek to champion — the Nézet-Séguin equivalents of Mr. Levine’s advocacy for Berg, marginalized Mozart or “Moses und Aron” — he seemed slightly at a loss.
Mr. Nézet-Séguin mentioned wanting to be a voice in the concert hall for Kurt Weill and Szymanowski — neither of whom is really lacking for performances these days, though Weill’s brooding Second Symphony had never been done in Philadelphia before he led it there. He also mentioned that when he ran a Baroque ensemble in his early days in Montreal, he programmed unfamiliar helpings of Zelenka, the overlooked Czech master. But for better or (I think) worse, he would not arrive at the Met with an agenda, particularly in modern and contemporary music.
Part of the problem — but it’s not entirely a problem — is that he has seemed more keen to fit his repertory to the needs of his ensembles than to mold orchestras in his likeness. The Rotterdam Philharmonic, of which he’s been principal conductor since 2008, was previously led by Valery Gergiev, who emphasized his native Russian music.
In Philadelphia, where he has been music director since 2012, there was the opposite issue: The orchestra had been fed a steady diet of French music, and Mr. Nézet-Séguin, wanting to get back to the ensemble’s signature rich, sustained sound, thought that Strauss, Mahler and Bruckner were the thing to begin with. Only next season will he really bring the players back to major French works.
The results I witnessed in Philadelphia this season have been well-executed — and even, on occasion, idiosyncratic: Mr. Nézet-Séguin led a lovely, poignantly restrained “Messiah” this winter that was creamier and gentler than the crisp, sharp norm these days.
But the Met doesn’t suffer from the kind of stylistic imbalance that he observed when he started in Rotterdam or Philadelphia. It is Mr. Levine’s great achievement that his ensemble is at this point largely faultless, whether it’s playing Handel or Nico Muhly.
Were Mr. Nézet-Séguin to join the company, it would be an event worth applauding. His performances are exciting and thoughtful, and he would be an energetic, peerlessly personable advocate for the company — and for opera. But while his geniality and ability both seem nearly endless, the Met and Mr. Nézet-Séguin would do well — now, not once he’s begun — to think carefully about his vision, about what he would bring to the job that no one else could.
The guidance now required in New York is broader, a question less of reviving a tradition or recalibrating a sound than of managing the direction of an entire art form. Mr. Nézet-Séguin would doubtless give us memorable takes on “Otello.” Is that enough?