Until two years ago, when she and her husband signed a lease for the top three floors of a townhouse on the Upper West Side, Diane Paulus, the director of the Tony-nominated musical “Waitress,” knew nothing of life without doormen. And, quite honestly, she didn’t want to know anything of life without doormen.
A New York native, Ms. Paulus, 49, had always lived in buildings where there was someone to take packages and groceries, where the hallways were long and lined with apartments.
She was taken with the notion of a front door that was for her family and her family alone: her husband, Randy Weiner, 51, a playwright and producer, and the couple’s daughters, Katharine, 9, and Natalie, 11.
“One visit and I knew this was the place,” Ms. Paulus said. She loved the roof deck, and not only because it provided a view of a neighboring rooftop that was the site of her 1995 wedding. And she was delighted by the bike storage possibilities provided by a foyer.
But come on, who was she kidding? What really captured Ms. Paulus’s fancy was the idea of so many floors, so much space on those floors and so many stairs between them. Her children could be in the kitchen; she could be two flights up in her bedroom. And vice versa.
No longer would she have to deal with the inconvenience of work sessions with collaborators in public places like Cafe Luxembourg, Nice Matin or the Lambs Club. No more sotto voce business calls conducted while sitting on the edge of the tub in the bathroom, because it was the one quiet spot she could find in her apartment.
Fortunately, she has friends. They told her to paint all the walls white, and the director took their direction. Those same friends told her about the ABC Carpet & Home warehouse outlet in the Bronx, where she and her husband bought almost everything for the house in one fell swoop. The haul included a glass-and-chrome étagère, a glass-and-chrome coffee table, a dining table and a pair of gray velvet tufted benches that Ms. Paulus has since conceded should have stayed on the showroom floor.
So it was back to ABC for a sleek gray couch and an easy chair. One of the tufted benches now resides in Ms. Paulus’s office. Its mate was relegated to the foyer, a handy perch for visitors, who are asked to remove their shoes before heading upstairs. This is a nod to Ms. Paulus’s heritage; her mother was Japanese. Further honoring the family’s background, Ms. Paulus’s sister, Janet, made 1,000 origami cranes as a housewarming present for the family’s previous residence. A symbol of good luck and good health, they hang in multicolored strands in a corner of the den/playroom.
Her daughters have taken to their new surroundings with gusto. They installed a pulley to haul objects between floors, and have discovered that a gym mat has great pickup when ridden down a flight of stairs.
