A photograph is not the same as the thing photographed. But sometimes photographs make you conscious of that thing in a way the thing itself never quite did. More precisely, they make you aware of things — stuff — about that thing of which you were barely conscious or entirely oblivious. Whether photographing a pepper or a toilet bowl, the great early-20th-century photographer Edward Weston repeated insistently that the camera was uniquely equipped “for rendering the very substance and quintessence of the thing itself.” Back then the potential of the camera was still being established, was inevitably drawing attention to itself. In the case of Peter Mitchell’s pictures of scarecrows, it is as if the photographs do not exist, as if we just chanced upon these creatures in the course of walks we’ve taken hundreds of times before. So how did we miss them?
Well, partly because Mitchell was only recently persuaded that the pictures, taken over a 40-year period from 1974 through 2015, might be of interest to anyone besides himself. Which is strange, given that he has long been regarded as one of the most important British photographers working in color. In his 70s now, he was included in Martin Parr’s “Colour Before Color,” a 2007 exhibition in New York that sought to challenge the standard art-world narrative in which color photography only got going with William Eggleston’s show at the Museum of Modern Art in 1976. A number of American photographers were using color before then, but — as that extra ‘u’ in the title hinted — Parr extended the catchment area to include British and European photographers like the quiet visionary Luigi Ghirri.
The first picture by Mitchell I ever saw had the same quality of oneiric lucidity associated with Ghirri: a red telephone box amid the desolate and lyrical emptiness of a housing estate in Leeds, something dropped out of time in the middle of nowhere, which — a fundamental lesson of photography — is always somewhere.
If Mitchell has worked obsessively close to his home in Leeds, this should not be confused with limited ambition or parochial appeal. His 1979 exhibition “A New Refutation of the Viking 4 Space Mission” presented the city as it might appear to visitors from Mars. (The show will touch down again in the gorgeously alien setting of the Arles photo festival this summer.) Unwavering in his commitment to the specificity of the universal, Mitchell insists in his book “Some Thing Means Everything to Somebody” that the scarecrows “are essentially Yorkshire.” Further research is needed to discover the regional variations and consistencies in scarecrow design and construction, but to me, they are ... essentially Gloucestershire, where I grew up. They take me back to afternoons spent at my father’s allotment with these silent beings in dilapi­dated attendance. I mean that literally; they waited in a state of transient permanence.
The scarecrows were, I see now, signposts from the past, in that they seemed always to have been there. Looking back on his childhood in “Nottingham and the Mining Country,” D.H. Lawrence writes that he was conscious, as a boy, of “Robin Hood and his merry men” not as a memory but as a felt presence in the landscape. In both cases, we are talking less about history — which is necessarily concerned with dates — than the pre-existent. While for archaeologists the past has to be dug up and uncovered, Mitchell enables us to see that it’s there before our eyes.
Since he didn’t, I will. We have to start with the fact that scarecrows are nearly human. In a sense, they are homeless — rough sleepers — and out in all weathers. They tend, consequently, to be wrapped up warmly whatever the temperature, on the grounds that while being overdressed for the heat is uncomfortable, it is not life-threatening (in England), as the cold can be. So even in a field of sunflowers in midsummer, they dress as if for a February blizzard in the Alps.
I said that they are homeless, but only statues or trees are more firmly attached to a particular place. One appears to be walking, as if the photographs rather than the ontological limits of existence have frozen him in his tracks. To that extent, they’re entirely at home — in themselves. And they never sleep. Eternal vigilance is their motto and modus vivendi. They have a consciousness, that is obvious (because everything in a photograph is obvious). This consciousness is of the kind usually achieved through deep meditation.
Devoid of ego, they are at one with the earth and the sky and, by extension, all of creation. Including, um, crows? After all the years in which the relationship of scarecrow to bird was one of hostility and repulsion, could it be that the scarer longs to shake off the limiting function for which he was intended? If only there were a photograph of a crow perched on the shoulder of the thing designed to instill fear. That would offer proof, on the one hand, that it was not fit for its purpose; on the other, it would be a lovely reconciliation. A pipe dream, clearly: The scarecrow nation still waits for its Francis of Assisi.
I am torn between the urge to generalize and the need to recognize diversity. Each scarecrow has its own personality. Some wear waterproofs (always a good idea in rainy Yorkshire). One looks like a cross between a melting ice cream and a condom at that critical juncture when the would-be wearer realizes (a chicken-and-egg situation if ever there was one) that the penis might not attain a viable rigid­ity. Which seems a good moment to raise the issue of pronouns. It’s easy to speak in the plural of “they” and “them.” But given that each scarecrow is singular, should we speak of “it,” “he” or “she”?
Most seem masculine, none more so than the lewd character slumped in a chair and red in the face — well, what do you expect when you’re caught masturbating in the middle of a winter field? The reason for this chilly expediency is that scarecrow women are so hard to come by. As far as I can make out, there’s only one real looker: decked out in a pink body stocking, revealing sparkly grass skirt and green wig, the whole ensemble glamorously polished off with silver necklace and pink pompoms. Talk about all dressed up and nowhere to go. The (doomed) party atmosphere is heightened by the fact that this is one of only a couple of pictures taken at night.
The Danish photographer Henrik Saxgren published a series of photographs called “Unintended Sculptures” featuring structures that, viewed in a certain light, from a given angle, might be considered works of art. The scarecrows could be regarded as folk art, but this ignores an important dimension of their being. For their aesthetic and practical value seems inseparable from some ritual or religious purpose, as if they are leftovers from seasonal rites that have been forgotten. Looking at Mitchell’s pictures I am reminded of the Guy Fawkes effigies — also made from discarded clothes, bulked out with straw or waste paper — we used to wheel around in old baby carriages or carts in the weeks leading up to Bonfire Night, when they were burned. T.S. Eliot’s poem “The Hollow Men” (“We are the hollow men/We are the stuffed men/Leaning together/Headpiece filled with straw”) is preceded by a line slightly misquoting what we used to call out: “A penny for the Old Guy.” (We never said “old.” Did we get it wrong — inconceivable — or did Eliot?) Conscious only of wanting money, we were mouthpieces or conduits for larger forces — what Eliot would have called tradition — that continue to find explosive expression every Nov. 5.
Like these effigies, and unlike statues, the scarecrows are far from permanent, let alone immortal. So it is appropriate that Mitchell’s photographic record does not aspire to the taxonomic rigor associated with, say, Bernd and Hilla Becher’s gridded images of industrial structures.  Time, in its physical manifestations — rain, wind and sun — takes its toll. The snowsuit becomes smeared in what looks like blood, as if it has barely survived some frosty and atrociously extended ordeal. A bloody wound suggests that crows have begun to peck away at its Promethean liver. Eventually the clothes rot away, so that the scarecrows acquire a Lear-on-the-heath air of tragedy: “Off, off you lendings!” The difference is that whereas Lear discovers that beneath the clothes are “poor naked wretches,” these guys are their clothes. Patched together not from stolen body parts but lent clothes, there is, nevertheless, a Frankensteinian quality to them: They are, by definition, scary.
As the scarecrows collapse in on themselves, it’s as if they end up consuming their own body fat just to stay alive — if that is the word, which clearly it is not. One photograph resembles a police view of a crime scene: in it, a scarecrow ends up flat on its face, decomposing like the remains of a murder victim. Another looks as if he has been lynched. This sacrificial quality becomes more pronounced as the skeletal structure is laid bare by time. Eventually all that’s left is a wooden cross with a few tatters blowing in the wind.