The companies certainly made a splash. The celebrity chef Paul Qui hitched the first ride, and both Uber and Lyft gave free rides for two glorious weeks. The city has too few cabs, and with several college campuses and the endless blocks of bars along Sixth Street, Uber and Lyft seemed to fit right in.
A new culture came along in the 1990s, as tech companies tried to harness the brain power coming out of the local colleges. New sections of the city sprang up, threatening the familiar, worn fabric of old Austin. But since 1992, locals, including young tech workers, repeatedly dealt “new Austin” bone-crushing defeats in rejecting developments that would threaten the endangered Barton Springs salamander.
That spirit continues today, even if most of the country thinks of Austin through the corporatized lens that is the South by Southwest festival. Locals know different. We are obsessed with our city’s identity and sense of community, and we are particularly wary of outsiders who come in promising to change us. That’s not because we don’t like outsiders, mind you. But as a rebellious patch of blue in a deep-crimson state, we learned a long time ago that there are people who are eager to change who we are, and not for our benefit.
To be clear: The city never told Uber and Lyft to leave. But it did insist that they play by our rules and have drivers be fingerprinted, just like cabbies — particularly after the police investigated at least seven alleged sexual assaults by ride-share drivers in 2015. Instead, the companies responded by helping to put Proposition 1 on the ballot: They would be absolutely exempt from fingerprinting by the city. Period.
That was the second mistake. They arrogantly confused a convenience for a few as a necessity for the many. Sure, over-served music fans and run-of-the-mill drunks got home safe and sound. Hipster techies from New York and San Francisco jetted in, summoned “their” drivers and jetted back out.
Will the Battle of Austin become a model for other cities looking to regulate ride-sharing companies? Maybe. What it does show, though, is that Uber and Lyft will have a harder time bullying cities with strong local identities, places where convenience is not the same as necessity, especially when the price is selling out a large chunk of public control.
If nothing else, folks in Austin are feeling pretty good about themselves this week. We may be slackers, but we’re not pushovers.