Complete polling data from Chicago poll conducted by The New York Times and the Kaiser Family Foundation from April 21 through May 3, 2016.
The survey was conducted as Chicago confronts a daunting array of problems. Six months ago, protesters took to the streets after the release of video showing a white Chicago police officer shooting a black teenager named Laquan McDonald 16 times. The Justice Department began an investigation into the Police Department, the police superintendent was fired and a task force last month issued a scathing report denouncing systemic racism at the department.
These problems and divides are not unique to Chicago. Cleveland, Baltimore and Ferguson, Mo., have all been convulsed after black people died in encounters with police officers, and neighborhood segregation and budget and school problems are common in the nation’s major cities. Here, though, the challenges reached a fever pitch all at once. And the survey shows how difficult it will be to win the trust of a divided city as it confronts some of the most fraught issues facing urban America today.
A survey of 1,123 Chicagoans recently found a majority of every race agreeing that the city has veered off course.
The telephone poll was conducted April 21 to May 3 using landlines and cellphones with 1,123 adults throughout the City of Chicago. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus four percentage points for all adults.
Nearly equal numbers of blacks, whites and Hispanics live in Chicago, a city of about 2.7 million, but they often live on separate sides of town, and, the survey shows, find themselves leading vastly different lives.
By consistent double-digit margins, African Americans and Latinos on the South and West Sides are more likely than North Side whites to be dissatisfied with aspects of their neighborhoods, like the condition of public recreation facilities, services like trash removal, and the availability of public transportation.
The split between neighborhoods can feel like a gulf. Only on the North Side do a majority of residents say it is very likely for a typical young person to graduate from high school. On the West Side, just three in 10 think so.
A boy played in the lot behind his family’s home in East Garfield Park on the West Side of Chicago.
Latinos in Chicago attest to experiencing slightly less discrimination and generally live in less segregated neighborhoods. But they share some of the frustrations felt by African-Americans citywide. Fewer than 20 percent feel very safe in the area where they live.
Few issues define Chicago’s divide more than schools. Most Chicagoans say their neighborhood lacks quality public schools, but the misery is lopsided: On the South Side, 71 percent of African-Americans say so. In 2013, Mr. Emanuel’s administration oversaw the closing of nearly 50 schools, many in black and Latino communities, a move that contributed to a tense re-election fight for the mayor last year.
The blowback has invigorated public support for the Chicago Teachers Union, which says it may strike if a contract deal cannot be reached. Fifty-nine percent of residents citywide support the decision to strike, and that soars to almost three-quarters among African-American parents living with children.
Nearly half of all parents living with children said they would like to leave Chicago.
Chicagoans are more united in viewing crime and violence as the most pressing issues facing the city. Chicago has long wrestled with guns and gangs, and the splintering of large gangs into smaller, disparate groups has added to the bloodshed that largely plays out on the South and West Sides. As of late April, murders were up 54 percent from last year, and shootings were up by 70 percent.
The homicide rate has slowed in recent weeks, the police say, and gun seizures and murder arrests are increasing.
Some parts of the city’s mostly white North Side seem insulated from these trends. Fewer than one-fifth of residents there say they feel unsafe in their neighborhood, and 64 percent of North Side whites say their area is a good or excellent place to raise children. But south and west of the city’s gleaming Loop skyline, the fallout feels different — immediate and urgent. Nearly half of African-Americans say they have changed their daily routines in recent months in response to crime.
“When I was his age, I could go out without my mother being worried I would get shot,” Tierra Cooper, who is black, said of her 7-year-old son. She said she was afraid to send him outdoors without intense supervision.
The city was jolted by video that showed Laquan McDonald crumpling on a Southwest side street amid a spray of police bullets. Across neighborhoods and races, residents followed the case, and 56 percent consider the shooting unjustified. Only 7 percent say it was justified.
Distrust in the police began long before that video emerged. Still vivid to many are the clashes at the Democratic National Convention in 1968 and confessions coerced using Russian roulette and electric shocks on black men in the 1970s and 1980s by a “midnight crew” of detectives.
Now, only one-third of residents say the police are doing a good job. Nearly six in 10 think officers are not punished harshly enough in cases of excessive force. And a majority of residents believe the police are more likely to use deadly force against black people and that African-Americans and Latinos are usually treated unfairly by the city’s criminal justice system.
Two-thirds of Chicagoans disapprove of Mr. Emanuel’s handling of the police, yet more approve than disapprove of his surprise choice for new superintendent of Eddie Johnson, a longtime officer who is African-American.
Chicagoans agree even more strongly that a range of reforms — some of which the city has already began to undertake — could help reduce police-involved shootings, including hiring an independent police monitor, expanding crisis and de-escalation training, and adding more police dashboard cameras.
“In recent months, the Chicago Police Department has implemented dozens of reforms aimed at rebuilding public trust, restoring accountability at every level of the department, and promoting transparency,” said Anthony Guglielmi, a spokesman for the Chicago Police Department.
But serious doubts linger. A majority of black Chicagoans doubt that calling the police will improve a dangerous situation. Forty-two percent said they thought calling the police would not make much difference, and 12 percent said they thought it would actually make matters worse.