WASHINGTON — The Obama administration on Friday will announce the latest in its scientific “moonshots,” this one in the red-hot field of microbiomes — the trillions of micro-organisms in places like soil and the human gut.
The new National Microbiome Initiative is intended to create scientific tools, discoveries and training techniques that could advance efforts to cure asthma and depression, clean up oil spills and even increase crop yields. The initiative will involve more than a dozen federal agencies, top universities, major philanthropies and corporate giants.
Microbiomes have become the focus of intense study and public interest. The microbes that live inside the human body, for example, play important roles in health, like fighting diseases, helping children develop and maintaining a balanced immune system. Microbiomes in the oceans produce half of the oxygen we breathe.
The research has generated interest in part because it suggests that even simple remedies like eating certain foods could result in substantial changes in human health.
More than 100 institutions will participate in an event at the White House on Friday to announce the initiative, and many will come with promises of money or new efforts to study microbiomes.
The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation will announce $100 million in new grants over the next four years. The University of Pittsburgh will announce the creation of a Center for Medicine and the Microbiome.
The Obama administration is committing $121 million in a two-year effort, a small figure in government scientific efforts. Because much of the money is proposed for next year, the initiative will need congressional approval, and to have any hope of yielding results, it will need to be embraced by President Obama’s successor.
Some experts expressed skepticism about the government effort.
The federal government has been sponsoring research into the microbiome for decades. In 2007, the National Institutes of Health began the Human Microbiome Project in an effort to create a comprehensive dictionary of these micro-organisms.
Since then, the field has exploded, and researchers across different disciplines — crop science, immunotherapy and biofuels — have begun to realize that they are working on similar problems.
Few areas of research are generating as much excitement as the microbiome is. New research, for instance, suggests that much of the world’s childhood malnutrition arises not from a lack of food, but from problems with children’s intestinal microbiomes caused by poor sanitation. The field has also begun to show that antibiotics, by killing off beneficial bacteria, could lead to long-term problems.
Dr. Holdren said he hoped the initiative would help create scientific tools that could be used in places as diverse as the bottom of a volcano and the skin of a newborn to help uncover the secrets of the microbiomes in each environment.
