AINISSA, Syria — On a recent reporting trip the photographer Mauricio Lima and I, along with our driver and a Syrian fixer, came to this town in the middle of nowhere in northern Syria because it is the location of the media office and headquarters of the Syrian Democratic Forces, the coalition of militias dominated by the Kurds and aligned with the American-led international coalition. We were required to report there for yet another piece of paper, having already accumulated a hefty sheaf after some eight hours of road travel over two days.
The office was in an unheated building with no telephone service, like the rest of this town, which is best known for its refugee camp for Syrians fleeing the Islamic State. Dust coated the furnishings and doors did not close properly. A dozen S.D.F. media workers milled around in the lobby and a couple of adjoining offices, and all came out to greet visitors with the ritual of multiple handshakes.
Despite the crowd, there was no one to give an interview, since the head of the office, Mustafa Bali, was said to be in Afrin, far to the west. A Turkish offensive there was threatening to overrun the Kurds’ autonomous region in northern Syria, which they now call Rojava.
The S.D.F. workers were friendly and helpful, however, and quite willing to take care of our paperwork, even though a couple of them had gathered in a back room to weep; word had just come that one of their colleagues had been killed in Deir al-Zour, in the south.
This is what the Turks seem to fear from the Kurds: their efforts at trying to set up in northern Syria what looks like a government, or at least a bureaucracy. That and their relationship with the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, or P.K.K., which the Turks consider a terrorist group bent on carving out a Kurdish homeland in eastern Turkey.
As a result, the Turks have launched the Afrin offensive, and President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has vowed to wipe out the Kurdish forces throughout northern Syria all the way to the easternmost areas. “Step by step, we will clean our entire border,” the Turkish president said in a speech at the end of January, overlooking the inconvenient fact that American forces are active in northern Syria, as allies of the S.D.F.
As anyone who has worked in Syria knows, paperwork is an obsession here. The paper chase was a way of life when the regime of Bashir al-Assad ruled this area, and it seems just as obsessive where the S.D.F., dominated by Syrian Kurds, is in charge.
We had entered Syria by ferry across the Tigris River from Iraq, at a place called Fishkabour. The ferry was an oversized, open motorboat with a 150-horsepower Evinrude outboard motor, and it made the crossing in about 3.5 seconds.
Our first stop in Syria was the Kurds’ Semalka customs post, an ornate building that looked out of place in a mostly muddy lot. Inside was the affable representative in charge, Aziz Ahmad, as well as an official rubber stamp, a printer and a photocopier — all of which would prove common in official spaces here, even where electricity was scarce and heat spotty.
The above-mentioned document, issued after the customary cups of tea and Turkish coffee, declared that the Democratic Self-Administration Government of the Al Jazeera Canton of Rojava (Western Kurdistan), office of media and nongovernmental organization affairs, had granted each of us permission to enter Rojava.
Alas, that did not include permission to move along Rojava’s roads. For that we had to go to the city of Qamishli, which in any case had the nearest hotels, and apply to the State Security office, known here as the Asayish.
Unfortunately, the Asayish could not issue such a permission until we were registered as journalists with the Self-Administration Government’s High Media Council, and to do that we would have to proceed to the city of Amuda, about an hour’s drive west of Qamishli. Since the office there closed at 2:30 p.m., that meant a wait until the next day.
There we presented passports, our white customs entry slips, press cards and our letter of introduction from The New York Times.
“This is not correctly addressed,” Mr. Baravi said.
“It says ‘To Whom It May Concern.’ That is not my name.” But after some discussion Mr. Baravi agreeably agreed to overlook the issue, this one time.
Once back in Qamishli, inside the Asayish compound, getting our road permit required visits to two more offices and one photocopier. That allowed us to proceed west back to Ainissa, a four-hour drive. The S.D.F. media office added to our growing sheaf of paperwork a permit that allowed us to work in military areas of Rojava.
Just when we thought we were done, a friendly official named Ali in the S.D.F. media office informed us that we would have to come back the next day, and every day, to renew that permission. Since the nearest hotel was an hour and a half away in the town of Kobani, that meant potentially three hours of daily paper-chase commuting lay ahead.
Not so quick, though. Since we were staying in Kobani we would also need to register there and get another permission slip. That office was now closed, so we would not be able to do that until it opened at 9 a.m. the next day.
At the hotel late that night we learned that the office’s employees were going into hiding, fearing Turkish airstrikes. So instead of opening at 9 a.m., the Kobani office would be closed all day, and then again the next day when a mass demonstration was called to protest the Turkish assault on Afrin and all public offices emptied out to join it.
The day after that (now four days since our initial arrival in Syria), the head of the media center in Kobani, Ghosn Rajb, finally issued the Kobani paperwork, but only after scolding us for failing to register all week.