Making her campaign debut, the actress Cynthia Nixon wasted no time in confronting Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo in sharp and personal terms on Tuesday, questioning his standing as a “real Democrat,” accusing him of being beholden to corporate donors and linking him and his “cronies” to Albany corruption.
In Ms. Nixon’s first speech, delivered before a small, mostly African-American crowd in Brownsville, Brooklyn, she outlined the themes of her insurgent bid to knock off Mr. Cuomo, a two-term incumbent, in the Democratic primary: tackling the “very segregated” school system, fixing the subways and addressing the “crushing inequality” in the state.
One of the crucial early questions surrounding Ms. Nixon is whether Democratic voters have any interest in elevating a celebrity while Donald Trump is serving as president, let alone doing so at the expense of Mr. Cuomo, whose liberal accomplishments as governor include legalizing same-sex marriage, increasing the minimum wage and establishing paid-family leave.
Appropriating an attack line from her friend Mayor Bill de Blasio and the former presidential candidate Senator Bernie Sanders, Ms. Nixon cast New York as divided between the haves and have-nots.
“New York State itself is the single most unequal state in the country,” she said.
Only 4 in 10 voters know anything about Ms. Nixon, according to a Siena College poll released this week. That same survey showed Mr. Cuomo leading her among registered Democrats by nearly 40 percentage points, including among every subgroup including women, liberals and minorities.
Mr. Cuomo has cast Ms. Nixon, best known for her role on “Sex and the City,” as a B-list celebrity — “I’m hoping that Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie and Billy Joel don’t get into the race,” he said dismissively earlier this month — but he and his allies have reacted swiftly to her entry.
On Tuesday, Christine Quinn, the former New York City Council speaker who has been discussed as a possible running mate for Mr. Cuomo, called Ms. Nixon an “unqualified lesbian.” Ms. Nixon backed Mr. de Blasio over Ms. Quinn in the 2013 mayor’s race.
Ms. Quinn later apologized in an interview. “I was clearly trying to make, perhaps, a tongue-in-cheek comparison that was ill-advised and poorly delivered, and I should never have tried to make,” she said, though she stood by her comments that Ms. Nixon was unqualified.
Mr. Cuomo was silent on Tuesday, in Albany with no public schedule ahead of the April 1 state budget deadline.
But late on Monday, hours after Ms. Nixon jumped into the race, Mr. Cuomo did make a splash of his own: directing the state attorney general to review the Manhattan district attorney’s handling of a 2015 sexual assault allegation into Harvey Weinstein.
Celebrities, including the actress and producer Reese Witherspoon, had called on him to do so hours earlier.
Ms. Nixon’s candidacy also got a boost from celebrities; a “Sex and the City” co-star, Kristin Davis, and Rosie O’Donnell quickly endorsed her for governor. But in a sign of Ms. Nixon’s political climb ahead, no prominent elected official attended her event on Tuesday; hours afterward, Senator Kirsten Gillibrand of New York formally endorsed Mr. Cuomo.
On her first full day as a candidate, however, Ms. Nixon seemed more than happy to put the focus on Mr. Cuomo.
She mocked him for his handling of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which runs the subways. Ms. Nixon barely made her own launch in time because of train delays.
She was just getting warmed up.
She hammered Mr. Cuomo for raising only 0.1 percent of his campaign funds from small donors. “If you are a regular person in New York, the chance that Andrew Cuomo is going to care about your concerns is exactly that: 0.1 percent,” she said.
She linked him to the Koch brothers, two conservative billionaires who have become liberal boogeymen in recent years. “The Koch brothers donated $87,000 to Andrew Cuomo when he first ran in 2010 because they knew a good investment when they see one,” she said.
In her speech, Ms. Nixon touched only briefly on her own biography — born in New York City, attended public schools, the mother of public school attendees — as her wife, Christine Marinoni, looked on from the side of the room.
She answered a couple of questions from reporters after her speech, including about her qualifications, as her aides tried to drag her from the scrum of cameras and recorders.
“I think it is time, not just in New York State but all over this country, to hear from the voices of real people who understand that our government in New York, and in many places across this country, including federally, is in the clutches of millionaires, billionaires and corporations,” she said.