An article on Wednesday about a Chinese reporter whose exasperated expression went viral in China referred incorrectly to Jason Quin, the president of American Multimedia Television U.S.A. Mr. Quin is also the president of the Confucius Institute of Education, which is unrelated to the Confucius Institutes supported by the Chinese government; he is not the president of a Los Angeles Confucius Institute.
An article on Wednesday about a history professor’s critique of National Geographic’s coverage of race over the years misstated how many years the magazine has been publishing. The magazine began publishing 130 years ago, not 120.
An article on Monday about pervasive myths related to picking winners in the N.C.A.A. tournament misidentified the team that won the tournament for the first time before Florida did in 2006. It was Syracuse in 2003, not Maryland in 2002.
An article on Monday about the children’s book author Andy Griffiths misstated Mr. Griffiths’s age. He is 56, not 57.
An article on Page 14 about Barbara Haskell, a longtime curator at the Whitney Museum of American Art, omits the current owner of works in two photo credits. “The Midnight Ride of Paul Revere” (1931) is Figge Art Museum, Estate of Nan Wood Graham/VAGA, New York, NY, via The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
An article on Page 18 about art museums in Puerto Rico misstates the name of a federal agency. It is the National Endowment for the Humanities, not the Endowment for the Humanities.
An entry on Page 42 in a listing of art exhibitions around the country this spring gives an incorrect location for the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art (MASS MoCA). It is North Adams, Mass., not West Adams.
An article on Page 43 about new strategies museums are using to improve gift shop sales misspells the surname of the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s vice president of merchandising. He is Rich Pedott, not Perdott.
A picture caption on Page 10 about the digital art immersion space Artechouse in Washington, D.C., misspelled the name of an experience design company that created “IceNeon.” It is Noirflux, not Noriflex.
