Charles Wilson, a pioneering and virtuosic San Francisco neurosurgeon who used operating rooms like stages, sometimes performing as many as eight surgeries a day, all while building a leading brain tumor research center, died on Feb. 24 in Greenbrae, Calif. He was 88.
His wife, Frances Petrocelli, said he had been living in a skilled nursing facility and had recently developed a heart problem.
During more than 30 years at the University of California, San Francisco, Medical Center, Dr. Wilson worked on parallel tracks: in the operating room and in his research center, where he and colleagues sought to advance the treatment of glioblastomas and other tumors.
Dr. Alex Valadka, chairman of neurosurgery at Virginia Commonwealth University, compared Dr. Wilson to the renowned cardiovascular surgeon Michael E. DeBakey, who turned Baylor College of Medicine in Houston into a major center for heart surgery and research.
Dr. Wilson sometimes worked in three operating rooms simultaneously: Residents would surgically open and prepare patients for his arrival, and he would then enter to seal an aneurysm or remove a tumor before moving on to the next case.
They also gave him silence. He allowed no music, no ringing phones and no idle chatter. Scrub nurses were expected to anticipate his requests.
Dr. Wilson became world renowned for excising pituitary tumors through the sinus in a surgery called transsphenoidal resection. He had embraced the procedure, which had been done for decades, after being displeased with results that U.C.S.F. surgeons had achieved using another technique.
His zeal to understand the operation had led him one day to call the chairman of neurosurgery at the University of Florida, in Gainesville, with an unexpected request: Could the chairman acquire 100 cadaver heads, regardless of the cost, and bring them to the university’s laboratory so that Dr. Wilson might then fly there to study the anatomy he would encounter in the surgery?
“Sometime later, when the laboratory was fully stocked, Charles traveled on a Friday to Gainesville and, over a weekend, practiced his technique on each and every one of the cadavers,” Dr. Andrews wrote in the biography.
The writer Malcolm Gladwell, in a profile of Dr. Wilson in The New Yorker in 1999, described one of those pituitary cancer surgeries. Looking at a tumor through a surgical microscope, Dr. Wilson used an instrument called a ring curette to peel the tumor from the gland.
A wrong move could nick an artery or damage a nerve, endangering the patient’s vision or his life.
When Dr. Wilson saw bleeding from one side of the gland, he realized that he had not gotten all of the tumor. He found it and removed it. The surgery took only 25 minutes.
Dr. Wilson performed the surgery more than 3,300 times.
He told Mr. Gladwell that he had a special feel for surgery that he could not entirely explain.
Charles Byron Wilson was born on Aug. 31, 1929, in Neosho, Mo., a farming community in the Ozark Mountains with a population of 5,000. His father, Byron, was a pharmacist who owned a local drugstore; his mother, the former Margaret Polson, also worked there.
Charles, though slightly built, was a three-sport athlete in high school and received academic and football scholarships to Tulane University, where he played running back as a freshman. But he went no further in football because of an ankle injury. He eventually turned to running marathons.
A skilled pianist, he also played Dixieland jazz at a French Quarter nightclub during his college years in New Orleans.
Dr. Wilson graduated from the Tulane School of Medicine and spent a year as a pathology resident at Charity Hospital, also in New Orleans, where he gained expertise in removing brains as well as hearts, lungs and abdominal organs. He considered becoming a pathologist, but he also wanted to help living people.
After a residency in neurosurgery that had been jointly offered by Tulane and the Ochsner Clinic (now part of the Ochsner Health System), Dr. Wilson became a neurosurgery resident at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in New Orleans. He later returned to Charity as chief resident, taught neurosurgery at Louisiana State University and, in 1963, joined the University of Kentucky, where he started its division of neurosurgery.
He joined U.C.S.F. in 1968 as chairman of its neurosurgery division and soon expanded the brain tumor research he had begun in Kentucky.
Dr. Wilson continued to operate into his early 70s, retiring in 2002 after performing one last pituitary tumor surgery.
He had already planned for his retirement. He had co-founded the Global AIDS Interfaith Alliance, which develops health care programs in African countries greatly affected by AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria. And he helped raise money and set policy for Clinic by the Bay, which provides free medical services to uninsured working people in the Bay Area.
In addition to his wife, Dr. Wilson is survived by his daughter, Rebecca Cohn; his son, Byron; a stepdaughter, Kathryn Petrocelli; and six grandchildren. Another son, Craig, died in 1983. Dr. Wilson’s three previous marriages ended in divorce.
In 1994, in a speech to a medical conference, he offered his thoughts on how patients can better cope with a brain tumor. They cannot control the diagnosis, he said, and suggested that they face their mortality.
