MARGATE, England — At the eastern and western extremes of England’s coast this spring, art galleries are celebrating the life and work of two giants of British modernism. But the artists at the center of these exhibitions aren’t painters or sculptors — they are the writers T.S. Eliot and Virginia Woolf. Diverse in content, featuring visual art from the 1920s up to the present day, the shows use their literary starting points to explore the relationship between the self and nature, as well as the dramatic social upheavals of the authors’ times.
The town of Margate sits at the outermost lip of the estuary where the River Thames meets the North Sea. Here, in 1921, Eliot, who had come to the town on doctor’s orders after a nervous collapse, looked out onto the English Channel as he worked on “The Waste Land.” Drawing together allusions high and low, from the Fire Sermon of the Buddha and the “Confessions” of Saint Augustine to gossip from Eliot’s maid, the fragmentary poem reads as a clamor of voices, linked together by imagery of water and desolation.
“Journeys with ‘The Waste Land’ ” at Margate’s Turner Contemporary gallery brings together art that engages with the poem’s themes, as well as works inspired by it. “There’s something very interesting about looking at one poem as opposed to a career,” said the curator, Mike Tooby. He worked with local experts and volunteers to create a show that echoes the polyphonic structure of “The Waste Land,” and explores its roots here in a specific time of postwar crisis.
The result is an idiosyncratic but evocative exhibition in which a nocturnal painting by Edward Hopper hangs beside a bittersweet video work by John Smith in which the artist recites a segment of the poem in the toilets of a London pub.
Presenting the exhibition in the Turner Contemporary, which looks directly onto the sea, gave poignancy to the poem’s motifs of “drowning, voyages and shipwrecks,” Mr. Tooby said.
Eight hours away by train, Tate St. Ives is perched on Cornwall’s toe as it kicks into the Atlantic. It is one of a family of galleries that also includes Tate Modern in London, and a local joke has it that the next art gallery to the west is MoMA. Virginia Woolf took vacations with her family at their holiday home, Talland House, in St. Ives until she was 13, and returned to the town in adulthood. “She came back here a lot: It’s the place where she locates her aspirations to be a writer,” Laura Smith, the curator of “Virginia Woolf: An Exhibition Inspired by Her Writings,” explained.
“There’s a great quote from Woolf about not being able to write and feeling trapped: She runs to the station and gets on the train to Cornwall, ‘without my checkbook or a change of underwear or my cigarettes,’ ” Ms. Smith said.
This substantial show of female artists from the last 100 years is divided into themes related to Woolf’s writing: landscape, the domestic sphere, public and private identity. Paintings by Woolf’s sister, Vanessa Bell, are shown alongside works by artists that came after her, many recently rediscovered by curators such as Ms. Smith who are keen to redress art history’s masculine bias. Among them are Claude Cahun’s surrealist performances for the camera, Ithell Colquhoun’s fleshy and sensual depictions of nature, and audacious landscapes and portraits by the painter Hannah Gluckstein, known as Gluck.
Woolf’s “To The Lighthouse,” published in 1927, is the exhibition’s most significant literary reference. While the novel was set on a Scottish island, Woolf drew inspiration for it from Talland House and the surrounding coast.
The end of World War I brought huge changes to Britain. The 1918 Representation of the People Act gave the vote to millions of men returning from the battlefield, and to some women over the age of 30, many of whom had worked in factories in the men’s absence. At St. Ives, portraits by women evoke the call to self-determination and independence in Woolf’s 1929 essay “A Room of One’s Own,” showing the artists and their peers as serious, professional people in their own work spaces.
Ms. Smith has united little-known artworks by women that show a female viewpoint that she said echoes the perspective on the natural world in Woolf’s writing. Ms. Smith has identified a particular attitude to landscape in paintings by Laura Knight, Gluck and Dora Carrington that she says comes from these artists situating themselves “within, above or below,” the scene they paint, rather than surveying the natural world proprietorially, as male artists have tended to.
The intertwining of the natural world — particularly on the coast — with social and emotional forces evoked in Woolf and Eliot’s writing allow these exhibitions to explore artists’ engagement with land and sea from unconventional perspectives. The shows acknowledge, too, the influence that visual art has on literature, and that literature has on art: a reminder that creative acts don’t occur in a cultural vacuum.