PFLUGERVILLE, Tex. — Investigators sifted through mounds of evidence and hundreds of leads on Thursday, hoping to unearth a motive for a bombing spree that killed two people and terrorized the Texas capital.
Included in the evidence is a roughly 25-minute recording made by the bombing suspect, Mark A. Conditt, 23, the night before he died in an explosion as law enforcement officials closed in.
Among the questions that investigators, as well as friends and family, were trying to answer: How had Mr. Conditt learned to make the bombs, and, more important, why had he done so?
“I would love to understand what motivated him to kill,” said Sierra Davis, a longtime friend who recently lost touch with Mr. Conditt.
A.T.F. agents remained on Thursday at Mr. Conditt’s home in the normally tranquil neighborhood of Pflugerville, just north of Austin. An A.T.F. vehicle was parked on the street near Mr. Conditt’s house, which was blocked off, though the official presence had thinned considerably since Wednesday.
Besides the discovery of the recording on Mr. Conditt’s cellphone, the authorities said they had found “componentry and the homemade explosive material” in his house.
Law enforcement officials also said Thursday that they had questioned and released two of Mr. Conditt’s roommates. A.T.F. officials have not ruled out the possibility that Mr. Conditt had accomplices.
The attacks began early this month when a package bomb exploded on an Austin front porch, killing Anthony Stephan House, 39, as he helped his daughter get ready for school. Ten days later, two more bombs exploded outside homes, one of which killed Draylen Mason, 17, a promising classical musician. Four people were injured in the five explosions.
The bombing spree came to a fiery end Wednesday morning when, the police said, another explosive device ignited inside a vehicle Mr. Conditt was driving as officers chased him along a stretch of Interstate 35 in Round Rock, Tex. An officer also fired his gun at the vehicle, the police said.
On Wednesday, the Austin police chief, Brian Manley, said a full understanding of Mr. Conditt’s motive was elusive, even though he had listened to the recording. “We are never going to be able to put” a rationale behind these acts, Chief Manley said.
He called the recording a “confession” and said Mr. Conditt had spoken extensively about the similarities and differences between the bombs he had built.
Investigators said that the crucial first break in the case came when Mr. Conditt mailed two packages at a FedEx store this week. One of the packages exploded prematurely at a FedEx processing center; the other was recovered. Surveillance tape in and near the FedEx store led to a pickup truck that investigators began tracking.
A nurse at a downtown spa, Anita Ward, said Thursday that the authorities had told her that a bomb found before it exploded had been addressed to her daughter, who did not wish to be identified.
She said the F.B.I. told her that Mr. Conditt got her daughter’s name from a website of the Austin Med Spa, where they both work.
“We don’t know of any direct link between my daughter and the bomber,” Ms. Ward said. Her comments could not be independently confirmed.
A local television affiliate, KXAN, reported that A.T.F. agents also had access to security video from an electronics store in North Austin. The station said that A.T.F. agents had visited a Fry’s Electronics store more than a week ago, looking for receipts and surveillance video of people who had bought components found in the bombs.
An A.T.F. official said investigations like this one would generally involve numerous receipts and videos. The official declined to confirm if the agency had obtained surveillance footage of Mr. Conditt previously, but said the bureau was not zeroing in on him in recent weeks.
In Mr. Conditt’s neighborhood on Thursday, residents were trying to return to normal after law enforcement officials surged in Wednesday and ordered an evacuation while they searched for explosives in Mr. Conditt’s house.
“It’s good to see a little quiet in the neighborhood,” said Gloria Kuempel, 79, whose country-style home on Wilbarger Street is a half-block from the police barricades at the entrance of Mr. Conditt’s street.
“I often thought about going over to welcome him to the neighborhood, but I never did,” she said, adding that she never suspected that the young man she saw working outdoors to remodel his house would turn out to be a serial bomber.
Speaking at a City Council meeting in Austin, Mayor Steve Adler said the city had been through a harrowing few weeks.
“There was a feeling that there was not much that we could do, there was a collective helplessness,” Mr. Adler said.
