After months of speculation, Burberry has named Riccardo Tisci as its new chief creative officer. He will be responsible for all of the men’s and women’s wear collections and accessories as the brand looks for a turnaround in fortunes after several years of stagnant sales.
Mr. Tisci, who was creative director at Givenchy from 2005 to 2017, will replace Christopher Bailey, who ended 17 years at Burberry’s creative helm with a final runway collection during London Fashion Week last month.
Mr. Tisci, 43, a graduate of Central St. Martins in London, will start in the role March 12 and be based at the Burberry headquarters in London. Other names that had been touted for the position — one of the most powerful in British fashion — included John Galliano, creative director at Maison Margiela; Kim Jones, former men's creative director at Louis Vuitton; Phoebe Philo, former artistic director at Céline, and Stuart Vevers, creative director at Coach.
Mr. Gobbetti and Mr. Tisci — both Italians — had worked together at Givenchy, where Mr. Gobbetti was the French brand’s chief executive and hired Mr. Tisci in 2005. Mr. Tisci was responsible for transforming the brand from a house defined largely by the relationship between Hubert de Givenchy, the founder, and Audrey Hepburn, his greatest muse, to a house beloved by 21st-century celebrities such as the Kardashians and a social media force.
Burberry, Britain’s largest luxury brand by sales, now is a house looking for a creative transformation. Following Mr. Bailey’s decision last fall to step down, after years of flatlining sales and a failed experiment that saw him take on a dual role as both chief creative and chief executive, the brand unveiled a turnaround strategy at the end of last year.
Mr. Gobbetti intends to take the brand more upmarket to the realm of rivals like Gucci or Dior, with higher prices and profit margins to match. But sales thus far have continued to miss analyst forecasts, and the industry had been waiting to see who would be appointed to lead the creative aspects of Burberry into the next era.
Now, with most editors and buyers in Paris for fashion week, they have their answer.
And most seemed impressed — if somewhat surprised — by the decision.
Luca Solca, head of luxury for Exane BNP Paribas, called the appointment “an incremental positive, given Mr. Tisci’s strong track record and high profile,” in a note to investors. He cautioned, however, that any improvement in Burberry’s fortunes could take some time, with Gucci taking 18 months to show positive organic growth after the appointment of Alessandro Michele.
Mr. Tisci also seemed excited about a return to London and the challenge of tackling another major luxury brand in need of a Renaissance man.
