An article on Monday about primaries testing the divide in the Democratic Party, misspelled the name of a Chicago suburb. It is Lemont, not Lamont.
An article on Friday about a carbon tax proposed by Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington misstated the origins of Microsoft. The company was started in New Mexico, not Washington. It later moved to Washington.
A picture caption with an article on Monday about the death of a man who went missing in 1990 misstated his name. He is Kevin Germany, not German.
A capsule summary for an article about sewage overflow in parts of Brooklyn and Queens misstated the number of gallons of combined sewer overflows that discharged annually into waterways in New York. As the article correctly noted, it is 20 billion, not 2018 billion.
Because of an editing error, a picture caption on Saturday misstated the result of the spring training game Friday between the Yankees and the Braves. The Yankees won, 5-4; they did not lose by that score.
A picture with an article on Friday about a community health program for soccer fans battling memory issues was published in error. It showed the 1967-68 Everton team that lost the F.A. Cup to West Brom, not the West Brom team that won.
A review on Saturday about a performance of the ballet “Giselle” at the Royal Opera House in London misstated the date when Mr. Hallberg is next scheduled to perform in the show. It is March 9, not May 9.
An article on Friday about free and low-cost museums in New York misstated the address of the American Folk Art Museum. It is 2 Lincoln Square, on Columbus Avenue near 65th Street, not 2 Columbus Avenue.
An article last Tuesday about the concern in the public health industry over “fat acceptance” misstated how many adults are overweight or obese. It is two in three, not one in three.
A capsule summary for the obituary of David Ogden Stiers on Monday described incorrectly the honors he received for his role as Maj. Charles Emerson Winchester III on the television show “M*A*S*H.” As the article correctly noted, he was nominated for two Emmy Awards in the role. He did not win two Emmys.
An obituary on Sunday about Harvey Schmidt, a commercial artist who wrote the music for “The Fantasticks,” the world’s longest-running musical, misstated the number of years “The Fantasticks” played continuously at the Sullivan Street Playhouse in Greenwich Village. It was 38 years, not 18.