ALBANY — A’ja Wilson’s father named her after a Steely Dan album, coached her when she wanted to learn soccer, and taught her to throw a spiral when she developed an interest in football.
Eventually, A’ja (pronounced “Asia”) would grow to 6 feet 5 inches, and at 13 she turned reluctantly to basketball. Her father, who played professionally in Europe and South America, put her in a 20-pound vest to simulate the push and pull of defenders. She used a five-pound ball and jumped repeatedly against a backboard to simulate rebounding, then took 60 shots at a time, scooping the heavy ball in with her left hand, then her right.
“She absolutely hated it,” said the 65-year-old Roscoe Wilson, now a consultant.
Eventually, A’ja Wilson found value in her father’s strict lessons. She remained in her home state for college and last season led South Carolina to its first national championship. This season, she is the consensus national player of the year, and is expected to be the first player selected in the W.N.B.A. draft next month. Her father, she said on Sunday, knew what he was talking about, after all.
“We’re on talking terms,” she said.
Wilson is now a victory away from a third trip to the Final Four. Second-seeded South Carolina (29-6) and top-seeded Connecticut (35-0) will meet Monday in the highly anticipated final of the Albany Region, the past two national champions vying to reach the national semifinals on Friday in Columbus, Ohio.
Hers is an impeccable résumé but for one omission: In four tries, Wilson has never defeated UConn, an 11-time champion and the standard by which the women’s game is measured.
Outside of South Carolina, the Gamecocks’ 2017 N.C.A.A. championship carried a whiff of anticlimax, coming 48 hours after Mississippi State had stunned UConn in the semifinals, snapping the Huskies’ 111-game winning streak on a jumper by Morgan William in the final seconds of overtime.
Scheduled to graduate in May with a degree in communications, Wilson is gregarious, funny, open, often leading her team in dances. She is the product of a family of preachers, educators and civil-rights activists devoted to helping the less fortunate.
On Saturday, she revealed an aspect of herself that was not widely known outside her team. In an essay posted on The Players’ Tribune, Wilson wrote that she has long struggled with dyslexia. Once afraid to admit weakness, she said on Sunday that she felt liberated to have acknowledged vulnerability.
A transformational moment came during her sophomore season at South Carolina, Wilson wrote in her Players’ Tribune essay, when Coach Dawn Staley began having her read aloud from Scripture in the locker room before games.
Wilson also confronted a separate vulnerability before her teammates this season. On Feb. 1, South Carolina lost at home to UConn, 83-58. Wilson felt distracted and shot only 4 for 18 from the field. Afterward, she apologized publicly to her teammates. It has sometimes been difficult, she said Sunday, to focus on carrying her team while looking ahead to the W.N.B.A. and preparing for graduation.
Her struggle that night, Wilson said, revealed to herself and her teammates that she was not invincible.
