PYEONGCHANG, South Korea — After parking his car at the Paralympics Alpine skiing venue, Chang W. Lee climbed 40 steep steps, scaled a hill with an imposing gradual incline, passed through security, climbed some more steps, walked up another hill, climbed two more sets of metal steps labeled “Caution: Slippery Surface,” trudged across a flat expanse of snow, scaled another small hill to ride a chair lift, climbed still more slippery steps, trudged across more snow and then finally lumbered down a ramp.
That was just to get to the media center.
To reach his position on the mountain, he had to take a gondola further up the course. Throughout the whole trek, he lugged 50 pounds of gear.
While most of the thousands of journalists who covered the Winter Olympics went home once the games ended, Mr. Lee remained to cover the Paralympics, the games for athletes with impairments. Though it was his first time covering the Paralympics, he was as dogged as when he covered previous Olympics. Over the last two weeks, he captured moments with such precision and emotion that he made other photographers here envious. Searching for those moments on ice and snow, he did not find them so much as they found him. Coming back with me on the chair lift late one afternoon, Mr. Lee said that the venue’s photo manager told him that all the other photographers see his shots and wonder where he positioned himself to get them.
Much of it is skill and anticipation, of course — understanding the terrain to know where to stand and when. But a fair amount of instinct is involved: And he has exceptional instincts.
At the biathlon on Tuesday March 13, he positioned himself where he could not only see the skiers cresting a hill, but also the finish line, framed by flags whipping in the wind. Then, one of his favorite images from the games unfolded right before him in a moment that he called a triumph of the human spirit. The American biathlete Oksana Masters, who had dislocated her elbow in a fall a few weeks earlier, reinjured it late in the race and, crying, had to stop. Eileen Carey, the head coach of the American para-Nordic team, ran over, bent down so Masters could climb on her back and then carried her off the course.
Mr. Lee said he was the only photographer to chronicle it.
Although new to the Paralympics, Mr. Lee is a veteran of Olympic coverage. The only differences between the two events, he said, were contending with fewer photographers at the Paralympics and the privileges he was granted at times — admittance to the waxing cabins, where technicians apply wax to skis, access to a visually impaired American skier, Jake Adicoff, at the Nordic skiing venue, and an invitation to the starting line for snowboarding.
For much of our time together, Mr. Lee photographed subjects, and themes, that corresponded with stories I wrote. But when I left on Friday, he was pleased to have three full days to shoot what he wanted, when he wanted and how he wanted.
On Sunday, that meant a frenetic dash across the sprawling Paralympic ecosystem. In the morning, to the Nordic venue, for the final two cross-country races. In the evening, to the Olympic Stadium, for the closing ceremony.
In between, Mr. Lee overcame transportation problems to arrive in Gangneung, about 40 minutes away, as overtime dawned in the Para ice hockey final between the U.S. and Canada. He had two remote cameras set up on the catwalk above the ice. Rushing inside, though, he had time to grab only one camera and a 400-millimeter lens. His legs cramped as he ran.
Less than four minutes into overtime, Declan Farmer of the U.S. scored the winning goal. As the team celebrated, Mr. Lee noticed out of the corner of his eye the backup goalie, Jen Lee, limping onto the ice. An American flag draped around him, his prosthetic leg in full display, Lee bent to hug Farmer.
Follow @nytimesphoto on Twitter. Chang Lee is on Twitter and Instagram. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.