MONDAY PUZZLE — Jack R. O’Brien returns for his third time in The New York Times Crossword with an interesting theme set. I can honestly say that I never thought about what this set has in common, but if you keep your eye on the theme entries, you should eventually spot the reasoning behind the set.
Mr. O’Brien offers us a set of four — I’m not sure what you would call them as a group, because they’re all different — but it’s a set of four. And what they have in common is that they all have ONE EYE, which is the revealer split between 39A and 32A.
5A: An AGORA was an open space in ancient Greece that was used for markets. You won’t see the word outside crossword puzzles that much, but it’s good to know for solving.
18A: POLYPHEMUS, the Cyclops that met up with Odysseus in Greek mythology, has appeared only once before in The New York Times Crossword, in 1978.
24A: “Tin lizzies” were another name for the Ford MODEL TS that hit the road from 1908 to 1927.
58A: “Part of a list with bullets” refers to bullet points, and each one would be an ITEM.
61A: Crossword bird alert! You can learn more about the NENE in our Crossword Aviary.
12D/41D: We’ve got quite an explosive grid today, with ERUPT and SPEW both clued to volcanoes.
50D: If you’ve never heard this joke before, it goes like this: “When is a door not a door? When it’s AJAR.” Chortle.
This is my third acceptance by The New York Times, with enough rejections to give me a batting average below Bob Uecker.
I am grateful to Joel Fagliano for his patience in getting me through this. My academic background was the Classics, and I always wanted to do a “one eye” theme about the Cyclops. One theme answer was SEWING NEEDLE, but that was not acceptable. I was lucky to see a deck of cards with a one-eyed Jack.
Almost finished solving but just need a bit more help? We’ve got you covered.
Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but now you can take a peek at the answer key. While the answers are free to everyone, the Crossword puzzles require a subscription.