The art collector J. Tomilson Hill announced two years ago that he was establishing the Hill Art Foundation and planning an exhibition space in the Chelsea section of Manhattan, which is set to open this fall.
But in the meantime, Mr. Hill — a New York billionaire who serves as vice chairman of the Blackstone Group, running its hedge fund businesses — is offering a warm-up act of sorts in Hong Kong, in the new art-focused development H Queen’s.
“Christopher Wool: Highlights From the Hill Art Collection,” featuring 15 works, will be on view there from March 27 to April 8, overlapping with the art fair Art Basel Hong Kong. The show moves to the foundation’s New York space in September.
Mr. Hill, 70, is on the board of the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Friends of the High Line. He and his wife, Janine, have spent decades amassing a collection of hundreds of works that includes postwar masterpieces by a dozen artists and Renaissance bronzes. Lately, the focus has been on contemporary art, particularly by American women artists and Chinese makers.
Why is this a good show for Hong Kong?
I said, “Where is there a market that doesn’t really understand Christopher Wool?” It’s Hong Kong. They think all Christopher Wool did was essentially word paintings. Well, guess what? He did those in the late ’80s and ’90s, but he’s an abstract artist and has been since Day 1.
You’ll be on hand for the fair. What’s your experience of Art Basel Hong Kong so far?
I went about five years ago. I was really impressed with the cross-section of people from all over Asia and the quality of the collectors. Plus, every museum director that I know goes. I don’t usually go to fairs, because everyone knows the artists that I collect. So, if there’s a Francis Bacon on the market, or there’s a Cy Twombly on the market, or there’s a Wool on the market, I get a call from the dealer.
What will you do after the fair?
My daughter Astrid and I are going to go to Beijing. We’re going to go to the studios of these artists that we’ve collected, including Liu Wei, who shows at Lehmann Maupin gallery.
What’s the attraction of Chinese art now?
I know that you lent to the Frick Collection for a show that mixed your Renaissance bronzes with some of your contemporary highlights. Why?
What attracts young people today is contemporary art. I got Jeff Koons to give a talk on how the Renaissance, particularly bronzes, influenced his art. I got Ed Ruscha to come and give a talk about how the Renaissance had influenced his drawings. Some 75,000 people came to that show, but the average age was much younger than the typical Frick audience. I like to connect the dots between art from different centuries and different disciplines.
Is there an area you’ve thought about but decided against collecting?
I wanted to collect Greek and Roman. But I am also risk-averse, and I didn’t want to go to jail. You had all of this great material that was being taken from Turkey, taken from Italy, and put on the market without proper provenance. So, if you’re risk-averse, you can’t buy it.
What are the connections between being successful in business and being successful in collecting?
That’s a really good question. First, it all starts with research. The discipline of actually doing the research is the same in both fields. And you can’t start down the path of putting a collection together unless you know first, who you are, because you’ve got to really like it, and you’ve got to know what your taste is.
Second, you’ve got to know the artist. You’ve got to read everything you can about the artist. Then you’ve got to know what’s the difference between a good work and a great work, and that takes study and connoisseurship.
So what was the first big piece you bought?
An Andy Warhol soup can from 1962. It was in the mid-90s, at a Christie’s auction. I saw it and said, “This is really great.” I knew Andy a bit back in the late 1960s, when I was at Harvard and he was hanging around there. So back in the ’90s, nobody really understood how great Warhol was. And you could buy it for half a million bucks.
Now we have 12 Warhols. I think Andy is actually an even more important artist than Picasso, and you know why? Every artist post-1962 has Warhol on his brain. If Andy were living today, he would fit right in with texting and Instagram.
Were you exposed to art as a kid?
I got lucky because I had a mother who would take me to museums. My father was interested, too.  She did sculpture, worked in bronze, worked in clay. She would work every day — in her 90s she would go to her studio.
That must dovetail with your interest in living artists. What is enjoyable about knowing them personally?
Because I can have a conversation with them. I was emailing Christopher Wool this morning. I can ask Christopher, “What are you thinking about in these new sculptures?” Invariably, I learn about how they’re thinking about the art.