INDIAN WELLS, Calif. — Philippe Dehaes, Daria Kasatkina’s new and understandably delighted coach, was swinging an imaginary tennis racket in the players lounge late Tuesday night.
He was showing me what he wants her to avoid: a typical tennis player’s ideal hitting zone, which is mid-hip to just below the shoulder.
This is, of course, much more difficult than it might seem. Controlled power typically trumps finesse in women’s tennis: See Serena Williams’s results over the last 20 years or, for a more recent example, Jelena Ostapenko’s big-swinging and risk-ignoring upset of Simona Halep in last year’s French Open final.
But an antidote appears to be brewing, and Kasatkina, a 20-year-old Russian, is a big part of the mix.
She does have power, as anyone who has watched her rip a topspin forehand can attest. But she also has a wide array of solutions and strokes, including wicked drop shots, and a gift for rhythm shifts that borders on the musical.
She is in the midst of a hot streak and in the quarterfinals of the BNP Paribas Open after consecutive victories over Sloane Stephens and Caroline Wozniacki, who happen to be the last two women to win Grand Slam singles titles.
With a 6-4, 7-5 victory on Tuesday night, Kasatkina, the 20th seed here, gained her second win against Wozniacki this season. It was more meaningful than the first, which came in St. Petersburg, Russia, where Wozniacki was jet-lagged and emotionally drained less than a week after she had won her first major title at the Australian Open.
“She outsmarted me today, which is fair enough,” the second-seeded Wozniacki said on Tuesday.
She is hardly alone. Kasatkina also beat Ostapenko in the third round of last year’s United States Open and defeated Garbiñe Muguruza, the 2017 Wimbledon champion, on her way to the final in Dubai last month.
That means that since September, Kasatkina has beaten all four reigning major champions. She also beat Halep, now the world No. 1, in Wuhan, China, last fall.
Next week, Kasatkina is set to become the highest-ranked Russian for the first time, at around No. 15. She is currently ranked 19th, one spot behind Svetlana Kuznetsova, and could break into the top 10 if she defeats Angelique Kerber, another former No. 1, in the quarterfinals Thursday and goes on to win the title here.
Insiders already know Kasatkina is a big-time talent, but outsiders will soon figure out that she is an entertainer as well.
If you have access to all the colors, it seems a pity not to make use of as many of them as you can.
Dehaes, a Belgian, became Kasatkina’s full-time coach late last year after she split with Vladimir Platenik, a Slovakian who coached her for three seasons.
Dehaes has worked with a string of prominent Belgian players, including Kristof Vliegen, Xavier Malisse and Christophe Rochus. Dehaes first saw Kasatkina in December 2013, when she came to Belgium seeking financial backing from a foundation.
He said what persuaded him was her performance in a Belgian tournament during that two-week testing period.
Though the foundation was unable to reach agreement with Kasatkina and her family, Dehaes said he kept close track of her in the coming years as she won the 2014 French Open junior title and broke into the top 100.
Kasatkina said her new coach had helped her confidence, pounding the table on Tuesday as she described his upbeat message. But Dehaes said he was happy that she had not called him on court during the Stephens and Wozniacki matches.
For now, Kasatkina has yet to get past the fourth round at a major, but if she can remain healthy and in form, her game should translate well to clay and the French Open.
And avoid that danger zone while making art.