Haider Ackermann will leave Berluti, the LVMH-owned fashion label and footwear house, the company announced on Friday. Mr. Ackermann had been at the label since September 2016, a short tenure even in the current cyclone of the fashion industry, where designer entrances and exits are common and many contracts are for three-year terms.
His departure comes at a moment of upheaval in the men’s wear industry and in particular at LVMH. Within the last three months, the company announced a new designer for its Dior Homme label (Kim Jones, formerly of Louis Vuitton, the LV in LVMH), a new designer for Vuitton (Virgil Abloh) and a new men’s collection for Céline (by its incoming designer, Hedi Slimane, the original designer of Dior Homme). Kris Van Assche, who led Dior Homme for 11 years, is currently without a position.
In 2003, he founded his namesake women’s collection, which he continued throughout his Berluti appointment, and added men’s wear, in the rich, luxurious mold of the women’s, in 2013.
Mr. Ackermann brought much of his own style to Berluti, a footwear label founded in 1895 and family run until LVMH acquired it in 1993, expanding it over time and adding ready-to-wear in 2011, with ambitions to make it into a fully fledged men’s wear brand. Under Berluti’s previous artistic director, Alessandro Sartori, the label emphasized tailored suiting, handmade shoes and, eventually, big-budget sneakers for the unbudgeting man.
Mr. Ackermann softened the shape, dimmed the lights and dressed women as well as men. If the Berluti label “is a definitive sartorial marker of how the other one-half of 1 percent lives,” as Guy Trebay wrote in The Times in January, that man of the 0.05 percent is now a wandering poet who prefers to style himself as a wandering poet than as a captain of industry.
In a statement, Antoine Arnault, the chief executive of Berluti, thanked Mr. Ackermann. “His feel for materials, colors and his wonderful shows will always be linked to the history of the house,” he wrote.
According to the brand, a successor will be named shortly. Executives declined to comment further.