The word “gook,” a hangover from the Korean War, no doubt had a racist, contemptuous tone, but in the Vietnam context, it also connoted a certain futility, a sense of resignation. As the war dragged on, to many men on the ground, it didn’t really matter which side won, good guys or bad guys. They wanted to survive their one-year tour and go home.
The distinction between friend and foe blurred after the Tet 1968 offensive. Until then, chatting with G.I.s in the field and back in Saigon and other urban centers, I had an impression of support, if not exactly enthusiasm, for whatever they were doing. They tended to believe what they were told, that the war was just and, yes, that our side was winning. Young draftees derided antiwar demonstrators as “draft dodgers,” notably those who escaped the draft using college deferments. They might not have liked serving in Vietnam, but they accepted it.
I am not sure whether to be proud, puzzled or disappointed to have so distressed General Sidle. I rather liked the man, with whom I had many conversations, but I never convinced him of what I had seen and heard since Tet, and how much that compared with what I’d seen before the offensive.
It seems almost beside the point to say that the men I encountered in these sorts of operations were in relatively good spirits. They believed in what they were doing — or, at least, believed what they were doing would win the war. After Tet, the violence and brutality continued, but it came from a different place — frustration, anger, resignation, nihilism. After all that destruction, for the enemy to mount such a widespread, if strategically futile, campaign spoke to the great distance between the generals’ grand pronouncements about “light at the end of the tunnel” and the reality on the ground.
The Tet attacks also coincided with the arrival of a new type of G.I., men who had witnessed or heard about antiwar activism and rising drug use back home, experiences they brought with them to Vietnam. Drug use, in particular, reached epidemic proportions in the years after Tet. The decline in morale intersected with a growing trade in heroin, sold in vials of white powder purveyed by roadside hucksters outside bases.
Violence, threatened or actual, against officers became common too. Not infrequently, officers found grenade pins on their bunks — a warning of the “fragging,” or detonation of a fragmentation grenade, that might befall them for hassling their men, especially about drugs — i.e., for acting like officers.
Col. Rutland Beard, commander of a brigade of army troops with headquarters on “Freedom Hill,” a promontory near Danang, understood his men. “We should have been out of here two years ago,” he told me in 1969. “Let some other people police up the world.” Those were words you never heard pre-Tet.