Corrections|Corrections: March 22, 2018.
Corrections: March 22, 2018.
The Beijing Journal on Wednesday about a bookstore run by Liu Suli, a student leader during the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests, misstated the nationality and period of service for Robert Rogers, an author of the book “How Parliament Works.” Mr. Rogers is British, not Canadian, and his parliamentary career began in the 1970s, not the early 20th century. The article also omitted the name of his co-author, Rhodri Walters.
An article on Wednesday about Macedonia’s struggles to keep its name in a long-running cultural dispute with Greece gave the incorrect year in which the country agreed to temporarily call itself the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. That compromise was reached in 1995, not 1993.
An article on Tuesday about a worker in the French Consulate in Jerusalem charged with smuggling guns into the West Bank misidentified the newspaper for which Yossi Melman is a columnist. It is Maariv, not Haaretz.
A picture caption with an article on Friday about the challenges Ford Motor has faced in the sport-utility vehicle market referred imprecisely to the vehicle shown and omitted mention of another. According to Ford, a high-performance Explorer ST was under wraps in the background and a different sport-utility vehicle, the Edge, was in the foreground; a Ford Expedition S.U.V. was not shown in the image.
A picture caption with a review on Saturday about the documentary series “Wild Wild Country” misidentified the women shown in two side-by-side photographs. The photograph on the left was an image of Jane Stork; Ma Anand Sheela was in the image on the right.
A review on Friday about the comedy “Love, Simon” referred imprecisely to the Motion Picture Association of America’s PG-13 rating for the film. The rating was for “thematic elements,” which the organization says “may include coming-of-age issues, illness, accidents, family discord, suicidal thoughts, bullying, acting out, crises in faith, sibling rivalry, death, betrayals or difficulties in friendship.” The rating does not reference sexual orientation.
To contact the newsroom regarding correction requests, complaints or other comments about our coverage, please email |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| or call 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397).
Comments on editorials may be emailed to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| or faxed to |||PHONE_NUMBER||| .
