A rendering of Graff diamond earrings inspired by Cy Twombly’s paintings.
Myriad things inspire the design of a jewel. It could be the bloom of a flower or the curve of a bird’s wing. Rarely is it a childlike scribble. And yet Cy Twombly, the American artist whose work was commonly described in those terms, inspired Graff Diamonds’ latest collection.
That Graff, a contemporary classicist among today’s jewelers, should turn to the abstract expressionism of contemporary art is perhaps less surprising given that Laurence Graff’s passion — beyond seeking the world’s rarest diamonds — is his personal art collection.
Mr. Graff, the house’s chairman, has a considerable trove of 20th-century masters, with pieces by Twombly alongside the likes of Warhol, Basquiat and Picasso.
But how does one capture the verve and spontaneity of a brush stroke or a pencil line in the painstaking process of setting hard stones in metal?
Mr. Graff said that challenge was eased considerably by the skills of artisans in the house’s design studio and workshop, and its wide selection of gemstones. “It was a challenge to capture the essence of these works,” he said.
In one pair of earrings, a seemingly spontaneous squiggle of diamonds dances down from the ear and flatters the jawline before ending with the punctuation of pear-shaped drops. A necklace is formed from what appears to be an infinite, three-dimensional loop of alternating baguette- and brilliant-cut diamonds. The unnamed collection, all one-of-a-kind-pieces with prices available on request, is to be introduced at the Baselworld trade fair this week.
Mr. Twombly, who died in 2011, once said that the creation of a piece was instinctual. “It’s more like I’m having an experience than making a picture,” he said in an interview with the art critic David Sylvester.
It is that fleeting moment, rather than the more traditional flutter of a butterfly’s wing or the fall of snowflakes that Graff seeks to freeze in time. “I am absolutely delighted with the new jewels, which capture succinctly what I love most about modern art: the spontaneity,” Mr. Graff said.