Alan Cumming leads a new drama on CBS. And “Brooklyn Nine-Nine” returns.
INSTINCT 8 p.m. on CBS. Don’t put Alan Cumming in a box: He’s spent his career ricocheting from theater (he’s a Tony winner) to television to cabaret to owning a gay bar. And even when he’s taking on more conventional roles, like this one, he’s still breaking boundaries: He will play the first gay lead of an hourlong network drama. “The fact that has taken so long is awful,” Mr. Cumming said in an interview with The New York Times. “But the character’s gayness is like the fifth most interesting thing about him, and the way it’s handled is very non-sensational.” He plays Dr. Dylan Reinhart, a former C.I.A. operative turned washed-out psychology professor who gets drawn into a murder investigation.
HAWKING (2013) 7 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). This intimate documentary tells the story of Stephen Hawking’s life through his own words, as he continued to work at the University of Cambridge late in his life. The film includes archival footage; computer-generated imagery illustrating some of his discoveries; and interviews with his former wife Jane Hawking, the astronaut Buzz Aldrin, and others.
BROOKLYN NINE-NINE 8:30 p.m. on Fox. At the merciless “Roast of James Franco” in 2013, Jonah Hill targeted Andy Samberg’s new cop show, predicting that it would be canceled after five episodes and that Mr. Samberg would have to resort to phone commercials. But here we are five years later, with Mr. Samberg still leading the zany and diverse sitcom through high jinks all over Brooklyn. In this new episode, the crew works to protect Captain Holt’s husband from kidnapping by resorting to lots of feints, wigs and identical rolling carts.
GENIUS JUNIOR 9 p.m. on NBC. He can host awards shows, star in sitcoms and films, and even win a Tony. But Neil Patrick Harris will never escape the long shadow of Doogie Houser, the prodigal teenage doctor he played for four seasons on “Doogie Howser, M.D.” So for his next hosting gig, Mr. Harris is leaning into his roots, as he presides over extremely smart kids in this game show. They will be quizzed on spelling, math and memory, with each round tougher than the last. And LITTLE BIG SHOTS, a kids’ talent show hosted by Steve Harvey, leads in with episodes at 7 and 8.
LEONARD COHEN: I’M YOUR MAN (2005) on Hulu. In the year since his death, Leonard Cohen has become something of a secular saint in his hometown, Montreal, with bars, murals and museums celebrating his work. If you can’t make the trip, you can still join in on Cohen Mania with this documentary, which combines pieces of an extended interview with footage from a tribute concert. He reflects on his relationship with Judaism and his reputation as a Casanova, flashing his distinct gallows humor.