Book Review|Jesus Died Only to Rise Again. Where Did the Concept of the Resurrection Come From?
Jesus Died Only to Rise Again. Where Did the Concept of the Resurrection Come From?
Then came the events of the Passion of Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified by Roman authorities in Jerusalem at the time of Passover around A.D. 33. As the world’s two billion or so Christians commemorate Easter, they are participating in a perennial drama whose particular origins are only dimly understood. Those origins are wonderfully explored in several books that, given the ubiquity of the Christian feast, should be better known.
To many believers — and even to many nonbelievers — the story of Christianity seems monumental and unchanging, the stuff of oft-recited creeds and hymns. It’s essential to appreciate, however, that there was no pre-existing expectation of an atoning messianic human sacrifice in the complex Judaism of the first century. No one was looking for a savior who would suffer, die and rise again to offer redemption from sin and eternal life. On the contrary, the prevailing thought was that a militaristic Davidic figure would emerge to throw off Roman rule and inaugurate what was known as “the kingdom of God,” an era of justice marked by the defeat of evil, a general resurrection of the dead and the restoration of Israel. Before the formation of the Christian story, resurrection within Judaism was less about the rising from the dead of a specific person than about a glorified vision of a triumphant Israel.
They dismissed the first report of the Resurrection because they’d been expecting a different new reality. They were still, in the painful hours after the Passion, crushed that their messiah, far from leading the forces of God to victory over the Romans, had instead been mocked and murdered. It was only in the shocked aftermath of the Crucifixion, of the empty tomb and of the post-Resurrection appearances, that the first followers seem to have worked out what it all meant. As late as the writings of Paul, believers held that a “Parousia,” or apocalyptic Second Coming, was imminent. In this view, Jesus, rather than ushering in the kingdom as one of their number — the expectation before the Crucifixion — would return to earth at any hour and set things to rights. This never happened, leaving the disciples and their heirs in the decades after Jesus to construct an enduring faith for a world that would not end. They then recalled — or believed they recalled — words of Jesus (along with miracles such as the raising from the dead of Lazarus, Jairus’ daughter and the son of the widow of Nain) that seemed to foreshadow the Resurrection and its significance.
For Wright, the Easter story is not only theologically but historically true. In part, the mystification of the disciples — presumably the ones who would have spirited away the corpse if it were all a hoax — is, from this perspective, the most compelling evidence of the accuracy of the events reported in the Gospels. So singular was the proposition that a particular person had been resurrected from the dead and that belief in him would lead to eternal salvation; it would hardly have been the early Christians’ first choice of narratives to share. Why argue something so improbable, and so unexpected, unless they believed it had actually happened the way they told the story?
Strauss works his way through the scriptural accounts, systematically arguing that the miraculous elements of the New Testament were theological inventions, not historical reports. “Piety turns away with horror from so fearful an act of desecration,” he writes archly, yet facts are facts and metaphors are metaphors. God will not be mocked, but if Strauss had his way neither would reason.
No matter where one stands in terms of faith, Jesus — be he God or man or, in the view of the church, both — was perhaps the most important figure who ever drew breath, and he will fascinate, enthrall and confound us to the end of time — and, if believers have it right, even beyond. In the Gospel of Matthew, Jesus says, “Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.” That much seems inarguable.