WASHINGTON — President Trump made no immediate moves on Friday to dismiss members of his administration, despite continuing reports of an impending shake-up that have unsettled the White House.
Two embattled cabinet secretaries — Ben Carson at the Department of Housing and Urban Development and David Shulkin at the Department of Veterans Affairs — remained in their posts despite speculation that they would be replaced because of the president’s unhappiness with their use of public funds.
John F. Kelly, the White House chief of staff, met at the White House with Mr. Carson on Friday morning, but no announcement was made about Mr. Carson’s future or Mr. Shulkin’s.
There have also been conflicting indications that Mr. Trump — at some point — intends to fire Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, his second national security adviser, after the dismissal this week of Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson.
Some resigned, others were forced out or fired.
In a briefing for reporters later in the day, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, reiterated what she said in a Twitter post on Thursday night — that reports of General McMaster’s imminent firing were not true.
“We don’t have any personnel changes at this time,” Ms. Sanders said, calling General McMaster a “dedicated public servant” who has a “great relationship” with Mr. Trump. She said the president told her he has no intention of firing him.
The absence of any formal announcements — or firings by presidential tweet — suggested that the White House was seeking to tamp down the anxiety inside the West Wing and the impression that the Trump administration is gripped by dysfunction.
Ms. Sanders said that Mr. Kelly had reassured senior members of the White House staff on Friday morning that “there were no immediate personnel changes at this time,” and had urged officials to come to work focused on the policy goals ahead.
She said senior staff members passed that message on to others working in the West Wing in an attempt to diminish concerns about the record level of churn in the White House.
“Our focus is not on a lot of the news stories that you guys would like us to be focused on,” she said.
But the lack of any resolution to the reports of coming firings is leaving many of the president’s top advisers in a kind of political limbo that threatens to undermine their effectiveness until their fates are revealed, one way or the other.
General McMaster, whose job requires him to negotiate internal disputes among factions within the administration, as well as deal directly with foreign officials, is operating with the public expectation that every day may be his last.
Attorney General Jeff Sessions remains at odds with the president, who has repeatedly — and publicly — demeaned his tenure at the head of the Justice Department, leaving it an open question how much longer he will remain in charge.
Mr. Kelly, too, is trying to run a White House under the cloud of reports that the president is looking for a replacement. Chiefs of staff to previous presidents have said that uncertainty is likely to hobble Mr. Kelly’s ability to operate effectively.
And both Mr. Carson and Mr. Shulkin are presiding over complex departments, and those efforts are likely to be more difficult if career officials and outside interest groups believe they could soon be ousted.
The Veterans Affairs inspector general issued a scathing report this year describing “serious derelictions” related to a trip Mr. Shulkin took last year to Britain and Denmark that cost more than $122,000. The report prompted bitter infighting within the department among Mr. Shulkin and his top lieutenants, generating politically damaging headlines for the administration.
Mr. Carson, the highest-ranking African-American man in an overwhelmingly white administration, had been dogged by the continuing story of HUD’s purchase of a $31,000 dining set for his office. Mr. Carson initially claimed that neither he nor his wife, Candy, were involved in the selection of the dining room table, chairs and hutch when he was confronted with reports that the purchase far exceeded the $5,000 federal limit on office renovations.
But this week, the department released emails showing that Mr. Carson and his wife were, in fact, involved, down to reviewing a dozen swatches of material used on the seats of the 10 chairs, each costing taxpayers $600 to $700.