WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — When we last saw Laura Braunstein, she was making her New York Times Crossword debut in a collaboration with Erik Agard (Here is the Wordplay column for their puzzle). Today, Ms. Braunstein, who was also the most recent subject of our “Who Made My Puzzle?” constructor spotlight, returns with her first New York Times solo outing. It’s fun and fresh, and we welcome her back.
I love a good animal pun, and Ms. Braunstein’s puzzle more than fits the bill. She offers a set of four familiar phrases that all start with animals, even if that is not the meaning of the word in the original phrase.
For example, at 20A, the original phrase DUCKS OUT OF VIEW means that someone crouches out of sight, but today it’s the answer to the riddle-like clue “Why the hunter couldn’t shoot the mallards?” And the answer, of course, is because the DUCKS were OUT OF VIEW.
All four theme entries are unique, but for some, that might be because the first word is plural instead of singular. Still, I liked the way the theme changes plain old verbs to animals, and I think that was a good catch on Ms. Braunstein’s part.
In nontheme news, I liked the sprinkling of Xs throughout the grid, and while the center felt a bit cramped with all those three-letter words, I enjoyed the long Downs that gave us: DESK SETS, IDIOT BOX, REST STOP and TAKE HOME.
6A: Wordplay alert! The “ … making the rounds” part of the clue made me think of doctors in a hospital, but that’s just what the constructor and editors want you to think. What other rounds do you know of? You can buy someone a round in a BAR, and the person in charge of making those rounds would be the bartender. Don’t forget to tip your server.
19A: I was thinking about our web and app solvers for this one. The answer is “Hawaii FIVE-O,” and I hope you didn’t type in a zero instead of the O. The show was always called “Hawaii FIVE-OH,” not “FIVE-ZERO,” at least in the original television series. The 2010 reboot, an alert reader has informed me, uses the zero.
45A: Tricky! Some might think that a “Fig. in annual reports” would be a number, but today it’s a person: the CEO of the company.
62A: PI DAY just passed. Did you celebrate with pie?
This puzzle’s theme was inspired by a text. I was chatting with a friend, and he texted, in response to something I said, “Bears repeating!” So I sent back a row of the “bear face” emoji — bears, repeating.
I realized I had a 14-letter phrase, and started looking around for others that began with the criteria “plural animal name that is also a verb.” The original grid had BEARS REPEATING (with the clue: Grizzly, panda, grizzly, panda, grizzly, panda?), along with SEALS WITH A KISS (Pinniped passion?), YAKS ON THE PHONE (Himalayan cattle call?) and the revealer ANIMAL BEHAVIOR.
This was one of the very first puzzles I submitted to The New York Times, almost a year ago. Will and Joel were very encouraging in their feedback, and suggested a second draft in which each entry had a prepositional phrase (bye, BEARS!) and no revealer. I put together a new version (with much help from Erik Agard and John Lieb, both of whom have been fantastic as mentors and collaborators), which was finally accepted.
This is my solo debut in The Times; much has happened since I first started constructing, and I feel very fortunate to be part of the crossword community.
Almost finished solving but just need a bit more help? We’ve got you covered.
Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but now you can take a peek at the answer key. While the answers are free to everyone, the Crossword puzzles require a subscription.