Basement fires are among the most dangerous for those whose job it is to put them out. Firefighters typically enter the building on the first floor, directly above the fire. Then they struggle against rising smoke and heat as they descend the stairs. And that’s just to get to the fire, where the battle begins.
Firefighter Davidson went looking for the flames. The fire commissioner, Daniel A. Nigro, described in a news conference how Firefighter Davidson “was the nozzle man of the first-to-arrive engine company.” The working assumption, Fire Department officials said on Friday, was that he entered the club — where the film crew had been shooting — and made his way down to the cellar with his team.
Immediately, they struggled.
“Somehow while backing out of that building, Firefighter Davidson was separated from the rest of the unit,” Commissioner Nigro said.
It was only when they got out that they noticed Firefighter Davidson was not with them. Other firefighters went looking for him in desperation.
He was found above the cellar, on the same level as the jazz club where the film shoot had taken place, the city official said. He had apparently run out of air — when he was found, his mask was off. The official said he may have removed it instinctively when his air supply ran out. Firefighter Davidson also had burns on his legs.
He was taken to Harlem Hospital, where he died of his injuries.
Firefighter Davidson, 37, left behind a wife and four young children. He was a 15-year veteran of the department and he came from a family of firefighters. His father was one, as was a brother and at least one cousin.
Two other firefighters were injured as well; one remained hospitalized on Friday afternoon.
Two separate inquiries are underway. One, which might take a year, will examine procedures and decision-making, and will provide a step-by-step account of the fatal fire. The second will focus on the cause and origin of the fire. As of Thursday night, there were several feet of water in the cellar that promised to slow down the second inquiry. But there was no immediate indication, a city official said, that any of the electronics associated with the movie shoot had played a role in the ignition.
The filming of “Motherless Brooklyn” had, until Thursday night, been a source of amusement, curiosity, and minor frustration for the neighborhood.
There were the usual annoyances and slights linked to movie shooting: the traffic, the demands of the crew. Some residents, for example, were told to keep quiet during filming.
But the classic cars — including a blue-finned Chevy Bel Air — were a draw, and people dropped by to take photos of them. And neighbors popped by to get a peek at how the crew had restored St. Nick’s Pub. There was speculation that some of the filming was not in titular Brooklyn because Court Street and its surrounding blocks, where so much of the book’s action take place, were no longer sufficiently — scruffy? authentic?
Spelman Beaubrun, an actor who lives upstairs from the shuttered club, said that when he learned that there would be a major movie filmed right beneath him, he was hopeful that he might be able to wrangle a bit part and catch a break.
That did not happen. He was in bed before 11 p.m. on Thursday, and the next thing he remembered was smelling smoke. At first he figured it was probably just a group of crew members smoking cigarettes outside. Then he realized the smoke was much thicker.
“So I reach for my flashlight and saw it was all over the room,” said Mr. Beaubrun, who had rented the apartment for the past five years. He leapt from bed and ran to the bathroom, intending to soak a towel that he could line the bottom of his door with to keep the smoke out while he figured out his escape.
He turned the knob of his faucet and nothing came out. Coughing and panicking, he made his way to his refrigerator for a pitcher of water. He doused his T-shirt and held it to his mouth. He groped his way to his window so he could call down to the sidewalk for help.
Then he heard firefighters through his front door.
The two firefighters began to cough along with Mr. Beaubrun as they helped him down the stairs. He said the smoke was so thick he could not see their faces.
“I’m coughing, they’re coughing, but they were not thinking about themselves, they were thinking about saving me,” he said.
He gasped fresh air when the firefighters got him outside.
Who or what started the fire was not clear by Friday evening. The landlord of the building, Vincent Sollazzo-Lampkin, 57, said “nobody has a clear answer” yet on the cause of the fire. He said that the building — a handsome five-story Harlem rowhouse at 773 St. Nicholas Avenue, built in 1920 — was well maintained, and that he was responsive to the needs of the five tenants who lived in apartments above the shuttered club.
Most major film shoots in New York City are powered by generators, although technicians do sometimes plug into what they refer to as “house power.” A burning smell is common on film shoots, sometimes traceable to nothing more than a dusty light bulb. But other times, there is a more serious problem.
“It’s too early to speculate,” a Fire Department spokesman, James Long, said on Friday afternoon, adding that fire marshals were still investigating the cause and origin of the fire.
The city official who had been briefed on the early stages of the investigation said the fire appeared to have begun in the rear of the cellar.
Marshals were particularly interested in the boiler and the electrical system, both of which are on the lower level, the official said.
The boiler attracted attention, the official said, because the building’s landlord was having work done on it beginning either on Wednesday or Thursday.
“There was an issue with the boiler that they were addressing,” the official said.
The official noted that the film crew had permits for two smoke machines and for cigarettes and cigars on set, but that at the moment none of those appeared to be connected to the blaze.