Our guide to stand-up, improv and variety shows happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
‘DEVIANT: A TRUE CRIME COMEDY SHOW’ at Caveat (March 5, 9:30 p.m.). The Lower East Side venue Caveat quickly established itself as a destination for those who like their comedy on the nerdy side, but this particular show also throws a little folie à deux into the mix. What exactly is folie à deux? A panel of guest comedians will help you find out.
‘HANDMAID’S TALE: THE MUSICAL’ at the Bell House (March 8, 8 p.m.). This original performance from the fertile brains of Marcia Belsky and Melissa Stokoski resets the backdrop of the original Margaret Atwood novel and Hulu original series to Brooklyn in the not-too-distant future, populated by millennials (it may be a dystopian future, but some things never change). The show sold out two nights at Union Hall, and this one is likely the last, so catch it while you can.
‘MAGICALLY HYSTERICAL’ at the Schimmel Center (March 3, 7:30 p.m.). Comedy and magic are very similar in that when done right, both elicit a sense of “How’d they do it?” wonder on various levels. Perhaps that’s why the comedian Judy Gold decided to team up with the illusionist Elliot Zimet. You may have seen Ms. Gold on television recently in “Broad City” or “Search Party,” or Mr. Zimet on “America’s Got Talent,” where he was a semifinalist.
‘SEEING RED ON THE RED CARPET: A DRUNK ED ANTI-ACADEMY AWARDS BENEFIT SHOW’ at Union Hall (March 4, 8 p.m.). What was once Drunk TED Talks (until TED sent a cease-and-desist letter) is now Drunk Education, but the premise remains the same: Writers, comics and artists make slide shows about whatever they’re interested in, get drunk and deliver them. This Oscars night edition, benefiting Rainn and Time’s Up, is being held “as explicit counterprogramming to the ceremony.” Mitra Jouhari, Nicole Silverberg and Liza Treyger will be there to provide not only humor and catharsis but also productive dialogue about the entertainment industry’s marginalization of certain people and how to stop it.
SINBAD at Carolines on Broadway (March 2-3, 7:30 p.m. and 10 p.m.). The veteran actor and comedian Sinbad takes to the stage at Carolines for a handful of performances this weekend. His acting credits include movies like “Jingle All the Way” and “Good Burger” and the show “It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia,” but he has also had a rich career as a comedian for the past three decades, with a number of Comedy Central and HBO specials under his belt and a spot on Comedy Central’s “100 Greatest Stand-Ups of All Time” list.
‘YEAH SHE DID: STORIES ABOUT WOMEN YOU SHOULD KNOW’ at Caveat (March 7, 9:30 p.m.). A kickoff to International Women’s Day, this event features an all-female lineup of activists, writers, storytellers and comedians celebrating women. Aparna Nancherla of “Bojack Horseman” and Keisha Zollar of “The Opposition With Jordan Klepper” are on the bill, and all proceeds will go to the Malala Fund, an organization that promotes girls’ education.