When Philine Hofman was hired a decade ago to head the merchandising and retail department at the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam, she was given the dual mandate of finding new ways to get the institution’s art out to the public and improving sales at the gift shop.
As an initial step, Ms. Hofman, a former product development executive in the Dutch food industry, commissioned a new line of Rijksmuseum-branded merchandise.
In addition to upgrading the postcards and coffee mugs that are standard fare at museum shops everywhere, she ordered origami puzzles styled from old masters imagery, silk scarves with the colors of those in Rembrandt’s “The Jewish Bride,” and pencil sets coordinated to the palette of “The Milkmaid” by Vermeer.
Though Ms. Hofman’s souvenirs sold well, she longed to bring something more imaginative to the 3,200-square-foot store.
In 2012, an opportunity came her way. The Rijksmuseum trustees announced Rijksstudio, a program that involved photographing hundreds of thousands of artworks and putting the free images online.
With a vast collection now in the public domain, Ms. Hofman saw a chance to get playful. As the museum leadership organized competitions to encourage people to make products based on the Rijksmuseum’s collection, she began stocking the works of contest winners. She also initiated a series of partnerships with local corporations so that they might use the images for new types of merchandise.
Silk frocks by the Dutch fashion brand LaDress, printed with museum imagery, are available by special order.
“Museum shops are no longer just about selling things — they are about adding a new step to the museum experience,” said Diane Drubay, the chief executive of We Are Museums, a European consultancy that advises museums worldwide on marketing.
One retail experiment Ms. Drubay considers emblematic of this new trend is the annex shop of the Musée National Picasso-Paris in Paris. This shop is not in the museum itself, but occupies a four-room apartment across the street at 4 Rue de Thorigny.
It sells books about the artist and objects made in his style. The shop is a kind of Picasso-world, selling gifts and decorative items — the kinds of things he might have owned. There’s a bin of hand-carved masks from West Africa, for example.
The shop itself is decorated to reflect the style of an actual Parisian flat in which Picasso once lived. In fact, the store’s designers purchased chairs and decorations similar to those in photographs of the artist’s home.
In some places, museum shops are playing a new role by filling a space abandoned by commercial vendors. In New York City, where high rents have made dedicated gift and design stores somewhat of a rarity, the shop of the Museum of Modern Art on West 53rd Street is the go-to place for high-concept tableware, furniture, lighting, jewelry and clothing.
Every piece offered has been approved by the museum’s curatorial staff, and some of what is sold is in the MoMA permanent collection. This is where you can find an Eames chaise, an Issey Miyake scarf or a Salvador Dalí-style cuckoo clock.
At the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, the Michelangelo exhibit spawned a bracelet imprinted with his sketch of the Libyan Sibyl.
Uptown, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s 15,000-square-foot bookstore and gift shop, the offerings tend to echo what’s being shown at the museum.
During last winter’s Michelangelo exhibit, a $185 bangle bracelet imprinted with his sketch of the Libyan Sibyl, a female figure on the Sistine Chapel ceiling in Rome, was a huge seller.
At the Met shop, merchandise has often been specifically created for the store — the silk scarves styled from patterns of the pottery collection, the bracelets reproducing ancient Roman and Greek pieces, a clutch purse based on a 14th-century silk and wool tapestry.
These are souvenirs, yes. But classy ones.
The shop offers the usual art books and posters, but it’s the impresive gallery on the mezzanine that sells original photography, Oriental rugs and limited edition lithographs and prints. Original pieces by Jim Dine, William Wegman and David Hockney can be purchased there. Last winter, when the museum staged a Hockney retrospective, the shop had vintage hand-signed prints by the artist for between $6,000 and $40,000 each.
Why would a collector spend that kind of money at the Met and not at a commercial art gallery?
In other words, the concept here is conceptual art.
Mr. Soth’s Intangible is no longer available. It has sold out.
Has the “Intangibles” line provided income for the Walker? After all, one purpose of most museum retailers is to provide additional funds for their institution’s operating budget. In a time of uncertain government funding and sometimes declining admissions receipts, the museum shop can be a valuable revenue source.
