Business|Mueller Wants Trump’s Business Records. What’s the Russia Connection?
The investigation into Russian meddling in the 2016 election has expanded to include President Trump’s family business, with the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, subpoenaing the Trump Organization for documents related to Russia.
So what about the Trump Organization’s Russian connections might be of interest to Mr. Mueller?
Perhaps the closest Mr. Trump came to launching a real estate project in Russia was during the presidential campaign, when he signed a letter of intent in late 2015 for a Trump hotel to be built in Moscow. Ultimately, the deal never materialized.
Mr. Trump signed the letter of intent with Andrey Rozov, a developer of retail and residential projects in the Moscow region. If the deal went through, Mr. Trump would receive a $4 million upfront fee in exchange for licensing his name, and his company would manage the completed hotel.
By January 2016, the project seemed to have stalled. At one point, without success, Mr. Cohen emailed an aide to Mr. Putin seeking help jump-starting it. There is no evidence the Kremlin provided any assistance for the project.
The Trump Organization has said that it received no government approvals or financing and that the effort was abandoned in early 2016.
Mr. Trump’s business opportunities in Russia got little traction until he took the Miss Universe pageant to Moscow in 2013.
A father-son pair of real estate developers, Aras and Emin Agalarov, paid nearly $20 million to license the Miss Universe name, bringing the contest to their Crocus City Hall in Moscow. As an owner of the pageant, Mr. Trump flew to Russia in November 2013 to participate. He became friendly with his partners, who were known to have been helpful to the Kremlin.
The visit left an impression on Mr. Trump and had him contemplating future endeavors with the Agalarovs.
While the plans for the tower were apparently shelved during the campaign, Mr. Trump and the Agalarovs maintained their friendship.
After the disclosure of the meeting, the president downplayed his ties to the Agalarovs in an interview with The Times. But in a September 2015 interview on “The Hugh Hewitt Show,” he had made the Miss Universe pageant seem far more important.
But one giant German bank stepped up as a willing partner.
Over the years, that institution, Deutsche Bank, offered Mr. Trump more than $4 billion in loan commitments and potential bond offerings, a majority of which were completed, The Times reported last year.
There is no indication of a Russian connection to Mr. Trump’s loans or accounts at Deutsche Bank, and there is no public evidence that Mr. Mueller has subpoenaed the bank for records about Mr. Trump.
But the bank last year landed in legal trouble over Russian money laundering — paying more than $600 million in penalties to American and British regulators.
Some Deutsche Bank executives expect they will eventually have to produce records as part of Mr. Mueller’s inquiry, The Times reported last July. The bank has already been asked to turn over documents to federal prosecutors in Brooklyn about another client with a White House connection: the Kushner Companies, the family business of Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law and adviser.
The Florida property later featured prominently in Mr. Rybolovlev’s divorce.
Mr. Rybolovlev’s wife sought control of the mansion, saying he had bought it partly to hide money from her in the divorce, a claim he denied.
He has since demolished the mansion and divided the property into different parcels that he is selling. The new owners are hidden behind murky layers of trusts and other legal entities.
In the past decade, the Trump Organization has bought and refurbished several golf courses around the world, but the financing behind those deals remains something of a mystery. A respected golf writer says that Eric Trump, a son of Mr. Trump’s who is now helping to run the Trump Organization, told him the money came from Russia.
Eric Trump has denied making the comment about Russia, but several of Mr. Dodson’s friends and colleagues confirmed that Mr. Dodson relayed the anecdote to them shortly after the conversation took place.
