It’s especially exciting when the paintings include works by Willem de Kooning, Jean Dubuffet, Hans Hofmann, Joan Mitchell, George Condo and the much-sought-after Mark Grotjahn. “Transparent Forms,” a Condo abstract oil on canvas in gorgeous soft pinks and yellows, takes up one wall in the foyer. Turn the corner and there, in the living room, above an emerald green Aldo Tura bar cabinet, hangs the de Kooning, “Woman in Landscape V,” an oil on paper from 1968.
Ms. Cohen, who is her in her 50s, and her husband, James Cohen, 59, the owner and chief executive of Hudson News Distributors, began collecting art seriously around 2009, shortly before they purchased this pied-à-terre condominium (their main residence is a Tudor-style home in New Jersey). Collecting art became a pastime for Ms. Cohen, then blossomed into a lifestyle.
She began traveling the world to educate herself on the contemporary market. She bought blue-chip artists at auctions and art fairs with an eye toward investment, gaining confidence with each big purchase.
That experience led her and her husband to create the glossy magazine Galerie in 2016. Now published by Sandow, it explores the intersection of art and design. For Ms. Cohen, Galerie’s editorial director, the globe-trotting and art-buying hasn’t slowed. She recently returned from Zona Maco, a leading art fair in Mexico City.
How do you find the one piece among thousands at an art fair?
LISA COHEN Everything that I bought, it talks to me. There’s still a piece that I didn’t get in Mexico City — and it’s still talking to me. Sometimes, I walk away and see if it’s still talking to me, then I know I should go back and get it.
What did the Mark Grotjahn painting above the couch say to you?
COHEN I’m so proud of this. He had made these butterfly paintings. I started going from show to show, and I would see them in different variations, different colors. This one came up for auction at Christie’s. I was very lucky. Now they’re in the millions, and you can’t get them.
Somehow, I’ve been really lucky in picking pieces that have appreciated. From the beginning, I not only wanted to have the best artists. I wanted to have the best representations. Really having the best work of a top artist is even more of a coup. I can say it proudly of this work.
Through Galerie and your own efforts, what have you learned about how to live with art?
COHEN If you’re lucky enough, you start with the right pieces that really bring the sentiment and the feeling to the space. Then you design around it. Originally, I had the de Kooning on this wall. No offense to Bill de Kooning, but when I saw this Grotjahn piece, I thought, wow, this will tie it all in. The butterfly central spiral brings everything together in the room.
What’s the feeling after you buy a piece?
COHEN It’s certainly a high. To have a great master painter in your own home elevates you. It just makes you feel so different about the space. When I look at them, I can’t believe I’m living with these incredibly talented artistic people.
Is there a blank wall waiting to be filled? And if so, by what?
COHEN Well, I’d love to have a Picasso. One of the hardest things about being an art collector is when you start to run low on wall space. There just aren’t enough walls.