The global axiom holds true: If dealers think they can sell a lot of art, they will show up pretty much anywhere, and the booming Asian economy makes the region attractive.
“What continues to mark this fair is the influx of great galleries coming in from all over the world — especially the Western world,” said Marc Spiegler, the global director of Art Basel. “It reflects the potential they see.” He cited two new entries this year: Tanya Bonakdar and Friedrich Petzel, both New York dealers.
In fact, there is more demand than supply in terms of booth space in the convention center.
“For the last several years, because the fair is so potentially attractive to galleries, we’ve limited ourselves to half of the total slots for those that are only active in the West,” Mr. Spiegler said, part of an effort to keep some Asian character to the fair.
They are keeping strict accounts: Of the 28 new galleries this year, 14 have exhibition spaces somewhere in Asia.
Some of the biggest international galleries have already set down roots in Hong Kong, and one building in particular has proved alluring: the art-focused, 24-story development H Queen’s. So far the tenants that have either opened space or plan to soon include the heavy hitters Pace, Hauser & Wirth, and David Zwirner. It’s also Ms. Lam’s Hong Kong outpost.
At the fair, Zwirner will show five recent works by Jeff Koons. The concurrent show in the gallery’s space at H Queen’s features the German photographer Wolfgang Tillmans. And the idea is that the exhibitions bolster each other: “People at the fair can get a taste of the gallery program,” said Mr. Xu, who formerly had his own gallery in Shanghai.
H Queen’s is only one facet of the steadily growing Hong Kong art scene. Parts of it have benefited from governmental largess, in particular the West Kowloon Cultural District. The scheduled 2019 debut of M+, a major new art center, is also expected to up the ante.
The city’s top dealers all want Hong Kong to have strong, leading voices from the noncommercial sphere — they know that a healthy art ecosystem always features that element, with New York and London as prime examples.
“We’re hoping that when M+ opens, they will step up and become that voice,” Ms. Lam said.
Although they both try to target some of the same collectors, the auction houses have welcomed other players.
“Between fairs and auctions, I see positive energy,” said Rebecca Wei, the president of Christie’s Asia, who is based in Hong Kong and attends the fair on multiple days.
The global nature of the art world means that a Mexico City-based gallery featuring a renowned Mexican artist is not out of place at an art fair in Hong Kong. The Kurimanzutto gallery will fill its booth with works by Gabriel Orozco, who has had his own solo exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
Mr. Orozco is a relatively known quantity among Asian institutions, and is featured in the collection of Tokyo’s Museum of Contemporary Art, among others. He has also been living in the region for the past several years, first in Tokyo and now in Bali.
She said that two of the limestone sculptures in the booth, “Dé Orbital” and “Dé Fleur,” both from 2018, demonstrate how Mr. Orozco has learned from Balinese carving techniques.
Taking a wider view, Mr. Spiegler pointed out that the idea of talking about Asia as a single market is somewhat absurd, given its geographical vastness and the number of countries and cultures it includes. Ms. Lam said that for her money, South Korea — about 2,000 miles away — is actually the continent’s most sophisticated art market.
But in the eyes of dealers and fair organizers, that means only that there’s room to grow.
