The Learning Network|Have You Ever Experienced Food Insecurity?
Have You Ever Experienced Food Insecurity?
Food insecurity is when someone does not have access to enough nutritious food for an active and healthy life. According to Feeding America 12.9 million children in the United States lived in food-insecure households in 2016.
Have you, or anyone close to you, ever experienced food insecurity, or worried about where your next meal would come from? If so, how did it affect your studies, your health or your social life?
Where did you turn for help, if you did? Were there any supports in place at your school? Why or why not?
The phrase “spring break” conjures up images of college students lounging on beaches by day and hitting the clubs at night. Many students do, in fact, travel from campus to far-flung places. On the assumption that most students leave, schools generally shut down. But this assumption is outdated, especially as colleges enroll a greater number of academically talented students from poor families.
This problem is more complicated and widespread than people realize. Data I collected in 2016 on colleges that have adopted no-loan financial aid policies, which is one way of measuring a school’s commitment to lower-income students, reveal that roughly one in four kept their cafeterias open during spring break the same way they do when classes are in session. At Harvard, where I teach, it was not until 2015 that the administration opened the dining halls during the break (a project I was involved in).
Some colleges, like Smith and Carleton, charge students additional fees to stay on campus during this period. Now, a daily rate of $10 or $15 might not seem like much to some. But to many lower-income students, it is substantial.
Spring break is a luxury that many students can’t afford. In a sense, though, it is one that many colleges make them buy anyway.
I faced this reality as a student at Amherst in the mid-2000s. Valentine Hall, our only cafeteria, closed. I could not afford to go home to Miami, the choice destination for many of my peers. Instead, I foraged through campus job postings to pick up extra shifts to pay off meals I put on my credit card.
Today’s students face a similar fate. With no access to a kitchen in which to cook or store food, Michael, a slim, reserved first-generation college student, told me, “I just go to Family Dollar to buy things that I can microwave.” Many students I spoke to rationed food they took from the cafeteria, oftentimes with the help of sympathetic cafeteria workers.
— What is your overall reaction to Mr. Jack’s Opinion piece, and the information in it? Why did you answer the way you did?
Food insecurity undercuts academic performance. But its effects go beyond lowering grades. Hunger in the midst of plenty weakens students’ sense of belonging and undercuts their social, emotional and physical well-being. Knowing one’s peers are away relaxing while you scrounge for food makes poor students not only keenly aware of their own economic disadvantage but also of what their colleges make them endure because of it.
— Mr. Jack writes that some colleges have changed their policies as a way to support students experiencing food insecurity, for example by keeping their cafeterias open during school breaks. Do you think more colleges should adopt that policy?
Removing the stigma from free school meals by making them available to all is an important step, but it cannot be the only step. Government, public health researchers, advocacy groups and the public must come together to identify the causes of such widespread food insecurity and develop and carry out innovative strategies for alleviating it.
Do you agree? Are there any other remedies you can think of that might alleviate students’ food insecurity in schools at all grade levels? If so, what suggestions do you have?
