Hockey|She Took Over Ohio State’s Scarred Hockey Program. A Title Is 2 Wins Away.
She Took Over Ohio State’s Scarred Hockey Program. A Title Is 2 Wins Away.
MINNEAPOLIS — Ridder Arena at the University of Minnesota is so familiar to Nadine Muzerall, the Ohio State women’s hockey coach, that glancing up at the mural never occurred to her. Her players, however, couldn’t miss it on Thursday morning as they skated out for an N.C.A.A. Frozen Four practice. High on the southeast wall, the montage honoring 16 Gophers All-Americans includes a fierce-looking Muzerall in a skating pose, wearing No. 4.
Renowned for her toughness and her scoring touch, Muzerall starred on Minnesota’s first national championship team in 2000, then won four N.C.A.A. titles in five seasons as an assistant coach to the Gophers’ Brad Frost. Ohio State hired her two years ago to fix a scandal-riddled program that had never qualified for the N.C.A.A. playoffs and was seeking its third coach in three seasons. The Buckeyes needed more than a coach — they needed a healer.

Muzerall provided that and much more. After a 14-18-5 debut season, she guided Ohio State this year to 24 victories, a record for the program, and its first N.C.A.A. tournament berth. The Buckeyes surprised Boston College, 2-0, in the quarterfinals to reach this weekend’s Frozen Four at Ridder.
Ohio State (24-10-4) is to face the defending national champion, Clarkson (34-4-1), in a national semifinal Friday afternoon; Wisconsin (31-4-2) faces Colgate (33-5-1) at night. The winners meet for the championship Sunday afternoon.
That seemed unlikely given the mess Muzerall inherited.
Nate Handrahan, the coach from 2011 to ’15, resigned under pressure when a university investigation confirmed allegations that he had sexually harassed players. Handrahan’s replacement, the 1998 Olympic goal medalist Jenny Potter, was fired after one season for multiple N.C.A.A. violations. Ohio State Athletic Director Gene Smith reassigned the women’s hockey administrator, Shaun Richard. He put Diana Sabau, the executive associate athletic director, in charge and instructed her to find the next coach.
Sabau, who also oversees football, had no hockey contacts. So she searched the internet and called dozens of hockey people while assembling a list of candidates. Muzerall, a Canadian known as Muzz or Muzzy in the Minnesota hockey community, stood out as a winner who had paid her dues.
Her 139 goals as a Gopher remain the school record. Muzerall coached and taught at Northfield Mount Hermon School in Massachusetts from 2002 to ’09, then played briefly in Switzerland before returning to Minnesota in 2011 to join Frost’s staff.
Former Minnesota Coach Laura Halldorson described Muzerall as a “spitfire” who thrived under pressure. The day before the 2000 national semifinals at Matthews Arena in Boston, Muzerall tripped at practice, banged her head on the ice and was taken off immobilized on a stretcher as a precaution. Cleared to play the next day, Muzerall scored twice as Minnesota ousted Minnesota Duluth, 3-2, in the semifinals. Then she added a goal and an assist in the 4-2 championship victory over Brown.
Two Ohio State teammates, Spring and Jincy Dunne, were part of the coaching search committee that interviewed the finalists. Muzerall was struck by how weary they appeared.
Once hired, Muzerall asked for additional resources — a full-time operations director, which the program had never had, and occasional charter flights to get students back from games quickly. Practices were harder, with more structure and greater accountability. Muzerall also instituted biweekly individual meetings with players to discuss hockey and life issues. She wanted her players to know she cared about them.
When the University of North Dakota dropped its women’s hockey program last year, Muzerall hired its associate head coach, Peter Elander, a skills specialist. Under his tutelage at North Dakota, Jocelyne Lamoureux-Davidson perfected the shootout move that won an Olympic gold medal for the United States last month.
The Buckeyes’ roster features seven Minnesotans and seven Canadians, a terrific goaltender in Kennedy Sauve (10 shutouts), and a strong freshman class led by Emma Maltais (16 goals, 40 points), the Western Collegiate Hockey Association Rookie of the Year.
Sweeping Wisconsin, then top-ranked, in a two-game series at home in early February helped the Buckeyes land an at-large N.C.A.A. Tournament bid. In the quarterfinals, Sauve made 23 of her 38 saves in the third period as the Buckeyes handed Boston College its only shutout of the season.
The gloom over the Buckeyes program has lifted, and Spring credits Muzerall.
Ohio State has the worst record among the Frozen Four participants, but Muzerall is as undaunted as she was when she took the Buckeyes job.
