Amid unrest in Sacramento over the death of Stephon Clark, 22, who was fatally shot by officers responding to a vandalism call, the city’s mayor, Darrell Steinberg, has been both criticized and praised for his response to the grief felt by his black constituents.
Questions about excessive force hover over the case. Officers fired 20 times at Mr. Clark, and although the shooting was recorded from a police helicopter and officers’ body cameras, the officers muted their body cameras after they opened fire.
In an interview, Mr. Steinberg said he was committed to hearing the community’s concerns, even as tensions persist in Sacramento. Mr. Steinberg’s comments have been edited and condensed.
Q. What do you think is your role in managing the tensions resulting from this issue?
A. I’m trying to be both a voice of calm and a voice that insists on change. I’ve said very clearly, and it’s a fine distinction, but maybe the most important distinction: While we cannot prejudge the outcome of the investigation, because that wouldn’t be fair to anybody, we must immediately begin questioning the protocol, the training and the policies that arise from watching the video. Regardless of the outcome of the investigation, which will be based on the current laws and the current policies and the current training, what happened here, the outcome, was plain wrong. A 22-year-old man should not have died in this way.
A. The question now is what are we going to do with this moment in time. We are either going to divide in despair, or we’re going to heal and hail justice and change. The question that I continue to ask around watching the video and more importantly about the more systemic issues — isn’t there a better way?
Q: What did you take away from the last few days?
A: Of course the Clark shooting is the immediate cause and source of real and deep trauma but it’s about so much more than that. It’s about people’s lives. It’s about how communities of color feel about their lives here. Here’s what I know: There is a big disconnect between our renaissance in Sacramento, which is very real, and people struggling in our neighborhoods and in our communities. People who are having a hard time paying the rent, whose kids are having a hard time in school, whose lives are tough every single day.
The police in Mendocino County are trying to unravel the mystery of a family from Washington State found dead at the bottom of a cliff off a remote stretch of Highway 1. The bodies of the parents, Jennifer and Sarah Hart, were found on Monday inside the family’s vehicle, which was upside down on the rocky shore, according to a summary of the case by the Mendocino County Sheriff’s office. The bodies of three of their adopted children were found nearby but another three children were still missing late Wednesday.
“An entire family vanished,” Tom Allman, the Mendocino County Sheriff, told reporters in a briefing on Wednesday.
One of the missing children, Devonte Hart, was the subject of a viral photograph in 2014 that captured him hugging a Portland, Ore., police officer during the nationwide protests over the killing of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo.
The Santa Rosa Press Democrat reported Wednesday that the Washington State Department of Social Services had opened an investigation into the family last Friday based on reports of potential abuse or neglect.