Seven years ago, when the conductor James Levine marked his 40th anniversary with the Metropolitan Opera, Peter Gelb, the company’s general manager, went all out to celebrate him.
The company issued two lavish boxed sets surveying the career of Mr. Levine, who defined the Met for decades. Mr. Gelb produced a PBS documentary about him and wrote, in a coffee-table book, that he was “one of the most beloved and legendary conductors of all time.” After Mr. Levine’s poor health forced him to step down that year, 2011, as music director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, and a subsequent injury left him unable to conduct at the Met for two seasons, Mr. Gelb kept him on as the Met’s music director.
How much Mr. Levine’s accusations reflect a rare window into a powerful relationship that had privately soured, and how much a tactic designed to deflect from the troubling accounts that have surfaced about him, will now be decided in court.
The company, in a statement from its lawyer, refuted the main claims of Mr. Levine’s lawsuit.
The suit accuses Mr. Gelb, who has been deferential to Mr. Levine in public, of engaging in “demeaning name-calling more usually associated with a childhood bully than a professional music administrator,” saying that Mr. Gelb had used the phrase the “2,000-pound elephant in the room,” which the suit interprets as a “blatant reference to Levine’s physical appearance.” It also claims that Mr. Gelb told Mr. Levine at least twice that he feared Mr. Levine was “going to have a heart attack” and die while conducting.
The 2015 agreement, which came after years of health problems and cancellations, allowed the Met to make him music director emeritus should he be unable to perform his duties. During that season, 2015-16, Mr. Levine grew erratic at the podium, where the Met had previously built an elevator to accommodate his wheelchair. Musicians and singers said in interviews at the time that he had become hard to follow.
But when Mr. Gelb spoke to Mr. Levine about transitioning to emeritus status, he resisted.
“Astoundingly,” the lawsuit states, Mr. Gelb invited a reporter for The New York Times to attend a meeting with Mr. Levine and his neurologist, Dr. Stanley Fahn, that winter. The doctor said at the meeting that Mr. Levine’s most serious problems could probably be solved by adjusting the medication he was taking for his Parkinson’s disease.
But in April 2016, the lawsuit says, Mr. Gelb “unilaterally forced Levine to step down as music director.” The lawsuit accuses the Met of issuing a public statement in Mr. Levine’s name that “suggested that Levine agreed with the decision to stop serving as music director, even though Levine emphatically disagreed.” As Mr. Levine’s health showed signs of improvement, he continued to conduct, and was given high-profile assignments by Mr. Gelb.
Last December, after the Met suspended Mr. Levine and launched an investigation into accusations of sexual abuse that had appeared in articles in The Times and The New York Post, Mr. Levine’s lawyers sent a letter to Ann Ziff, the chairman of the Met’s board. The suit says the letter denied the allegations and demanded that the Met lift his suspension and allow him to conduct the remaining performances he had been scheduled to lead this season. Mr. Levine claims he did not get a response.
Mr. Gelb became the Met’s general manager in 2006, and arrived as a change agent at the company Mr. Levine had guided for decades. He began staging works by composers Mr. Levine had previously shown little interest in; championing new and sometimes controversial production styles; and launching the Met’s “Live in HD” simulcasts to cinemas.
The suit claims the Met had no right to terminate Mr. Levine “based on allegations of misconduct or wrongdoing by him, least of all for conduct that predates the agreements.” His contract did not contain a so-called “morals clause,” though Mr. Gockley, the impresario, said that such clauses are “totally standard” at many performing arts organizations.
Now the issue of whether Mr. Levine could be fired for what the Met called “sexually abusive and harassing conduct toward vulnerable artists in the early stages of their careers, over whom Mr. Levine had authority,” is headed for court.