Weijia Jiang and Travis Luther Lowe were married March 17 at Casa de Monte Vista, an events space in Palm Springs, Calif. Jim Obergefell, who became a deputy commissioner for marriage in Riverside County, Calif., for the occasion, led a ceremony incorporating a Chinese tea ceremony.
The couple met at the College of William & Mary, from which each graduated.
Ms. Jiang, 34, is a Washington correspondent for CBS News, where she covers the White House and Capitol Hill primarily for Newspath, the CBS News news service affiliate servicing about 200 stations and affiliates worldwide; she also fills in on the anchor desk for the CBS Morning News. She is on the board of the Newhouse 44 at the S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse, from which she received a master’s degree in broadcast journalism.
Ms. Jiang is the daughter of Liya Wei and Huade Jiang. Her parents, who are retired, owned and operated Chinatown Restaurant in Buckhannon, W.Va.
Mr. Lowe, 35, who goes by Luther, works in Washington as the global vice president for public policy at Yelp, the website and mobile application for which consumers write reviews of local businesses and services. He oversees public policy initiatives, including competition policy, consumer free speech and open data.
Mr. Lowe is the son of Mary Hatfield Lowe and Robert M. Lowe Jr. of Fayetteville, Ark. The groom’s mother is the director of the paralegal program at NorthWest Arkansas Community College in Bentonville, Ark. His father retired as an art teacher from Van Buren High School in Van Buren, Ark.
Ms. Jiang and Mr. Lowe met in 2003 at college, and a year later began co-hosting a weekly campus television show, in which they amused viewers with their mismatched styles — she a serious news reporter and he a joking political commentator. They became close friends, with Mr. Lowe determined to someday move from the friend to boyfriend zone, and finally succeeded in 2015, after a fortune teller at a New York street fair had even predicted they were destined to spend eternity together.