I am not writing to disparage the choices made by Erik Hagerman in “taking a break” from reading the news since the election of Donald Trump. We do what we need to do to save ourselves. His choice is as valid as any other. I am writing to express disappointment that Mr. Hagerman does not even acknowledge the sacrifices of others who, as much as they would like to abdicate, don’t.
They — we, if you are reading this — stay to at least think about and possibly fight for the rights of those who do not have the means or ability to move elsewhere, help themselves or execute an “extreme self-care plan” like Mr. Hagerman’s.
He did not leave the country. He stayed and continues to benefit from what this country offers him. A fleeting acknowledgment of those who make his American ostrich life possible would have been appropriate.
In addition, I am not clear on why this is described as a “liberal fantasy.” He appears to be a liberal, but if I had to guess, I would say that the lion’s share of liberals, recognizing that they had been reading the news for years and never “doing anything about it,” would sooner start “doing something about it” than institute a news blockade.
I understand that the reason Erik Hagerman started his Blockade was that he wanted to avoid the expected stress from paying attention to the news. But it seems he’s going too far; it is far more trouble keeping the news out than the news itself would cause. His friends and family have to be careful not to let their tongues slip. He watches basketball games on mute. He listens to white noise in public instead of enjoying music, because of the slight chance he might hear a hint of someone’s conversation, which may or may not be political.
Keeping those barriers up has to be extremely stressful, and to me it sounds like a reduction in quality of life. It sounds as if he can’t enjoy being around other people, because he is so fixated on keeping any news out. That to me is far too extreme an overreaction to a president you dislike.
Look, I’m no fan of the current administration either, but if anything I’ve been following the news more closely since President Trump’s term began. If you want to be a good citizen, you have to stay informed, not bury your head in the sand.
In this moment when there seems to be a limited set of cultural scripts to follow in order to be the right kind of activist or liberal or feminist, it is inspiring to learn of someone who has discovered another way around.
We do not all have to fill the same role in the world. Acknowledging his own moral responsibility, Erik Hagerman took a step that was personally meaningful to him while also giving back to his community.
There are undoubtedly other head-buriers who have not even considered a proactive move of any kind. Mr. Hagerman’s protection of a plot of land is a relatively small gesture toward the common good, but it is far more than most people can or would do.
Rather than being criticized as selfish or dangerously ignorant, he deserves credit for his mindful and inspiring action.
“The Man Who Knew Too Little” is perplexing. Why did The Times think this is worthy of three pages of coverage and numerous photographs?
At a time when those of us living in southeastern Ohio, like Erik Hagerman, are engaged in issues such as proposed strip mining, fracking on our state lands and national forest, renewable energy initiatives, state and national legislation, and assault weapons, The Times has focused on a person who is the epitome of what we fear in American society — those who are disengaged, with an emphasis on self rather than the collective.
The irony is that Athens — the town that Mr. Hagerman visits for latte, and where I live — is a place of engagement and education on a variety of important local and national issues. Mr. Hagerman will know nothing about these issues and the people working on them.
Perhaps The Times will do an article on those working toward better government and engaged in critical issues. There are many of us.
The writer is an environmental studies instructor at Ohio University.
I don’t participate in social media for both practical and philosophical reasons. But cutting yourself off completely from all current events is also impractical unless you are really wealthy or you like living like an Australian bushman. It’s great that Erik Hagerman has this luxury (that is what it is), but he can do that only because others don’t do what he is doing. We all cannot hide in the bush country with him. Whatever you are running from will eventually catch up with you.
LARRY LOUIE, PLANO, TEX.
I’m from Louisiana and currently in graduate school. And I can tell you that The Blockade is not unusual.
The majority of people I grew up with here in the South and the people I continue to interact with choose not to pay attention to politics.  Therefore, you aren’t hearing from them in the media.
The New York Times and other usually left-leaning publications continue to be out of touch by presenting small factions of the country as representative of the whole.
The people I am talking about are educated and intelligent, but cut off from politics because of polarizing spins from the media. These are the people who have the ability to change the conversation because of their numbers. But they continue to be underrepresented in the national conversation, staying uninformed and silent while the loud extremists on both sides of the divide control the conversation.
The Blockade isn’t original or liberal.
There are times when I take a day, or a few days, off from what can feel like a relentless barrage of news. Those are days where I binge on “This Is Us,” or read anything from novels to fashion magazines, but not the news sites.
It can be good for the soul to take this kind of vacation. But living the way Erik Hagerman does requires the kind of privilege that only a white man who doesn’t have to worry about money has.
Regardless of who is in the White House, those of us who have to go out into the world to work, who have retirement savings affected by markets, who have loved ones in the military, who have children in public schools, who have family or friends affected by discrimination, who have parents on Social Security and Medicare, and so on, cannot afford the luxury of blissful ignorance.
Why is The New York Times highlighting a person who divorces himself from politics? Why was the piece in the Styles section and called a “liberal fantasy”? Why does the reporter assume that readers would be “shouting at” Erik Hagerman, who voluntarily chose disengagement, as they read?
Is civic disengagement supposed to be fashionable or stylish? As The Times and others in the so-called mainstream media opt to print some stories and not others, please consider the glaring assumptions you have made — about your readers, democratic values and, more generally, what constitutes politics, current events and smart journalism.
GLEN COVE, N.Y.
I wonder if Erik Hagerman has broken his Blockade and read the article about him in The New York Times.
