Twenty-five writers told us where pop is headed.
Despite the talents of the artists in your list, there are many more with equal or better things to share musically. To make such a bold statement related to the direction of music, one needs to understand how drastically different things are today in the music industry. The cultivation of new acts no longer applies to any development of new songs, no less new bands.
The Billboard charts do not share a mixed collection of talent from all facets of the music pool. A single sound does not constitute a future. It stagnates the ability of original acts to break the mold. It is embarrassing to imagine that such sounds, considered songs, have now been a part of the industry’s go-to algorithm for longer than any other style of music since the advent of the Top 40 format in the 1950s.
The music companies today market crossover acts who can sell merchandise to fans who are more fashion-minded than musically interested. The acts themselves are more inclined to be fashion-first as well. Meanwhile, real musicians and real singers desperately try to win contests on TV shows. In closing, there are karaoke bars with better talent than the predictions of the future your issue supplied. Jonathan Kiddrane, Glendale, N.Y.
We have been whipsawed into, and now through, millennial pop from baby-boomer pop. I get that. What effect that has in society was given little attention. Ninety percent of baby-boomer pop was about life and love. The love song in millennials’ music was a unicorn.
“I’m so ashamed of myself, think I need therapy; I’m sorry I’m not more attractive. ...” by SZA is as close as it gets to a love song in the musical era now drawing to a close.  We can hope that those born in 2007, who are 11 this year, will rediscover the love song. Then the next wave of pop, whatever it is called, may draw on artists from Cole Porter to Led Zeppelin (yup) to inject true love into the musical mélange. Rod Sullivan, Jacksonville, Fla.
Two things would have improved this very interesting issue on music: the songs’ lyrics and a glossary. Only the truly hip could understand some of the references. Louis A. Richards, Marina, Calif.
I like Cardi B’s confidence in “Bodak Yellow” and find the song catchy. Ultimately, it’s a corporate anthem about being able to buy expensive shoes. Feminism has revealed its serious failures lately. Unless the movement is about the uplift of all women, it’s a useless movement. Bragging about your own monetary success while calling other women derogatory words does not make a song feminist. Going outside mainstream pop and hip-hop would have revealed far more interesting music about gender and womanhood. AKS, Macon, Ga.
The kids are at college, and the house is too quiet. I have no new tunes. The magazine has reinvigorated my lonely Alexa with Gucci Mane, Charli XCX, Young Fathers, SZA and others. Thank you for these 25 songs. I have new favorite artists whom I might not have found otherwise. Listening to these new creations left me “out of my head. ...” Cynthia Rust-Greaves, Mountain View, Calif.