SETTING The home is a few doors south of California Street, in the lower Pacific Heights neighborhood. It is near parks, the shops on Sacramento Street and express bus transportation to downtown San Francisco.
INDOORS The unit occupies the building’s top two floors. After ascending a staircase, you enter a living room with a street-facing bay widow, a window seat with built-in storage beneath it and a decorative fireplace. The adjacent dining room has a bay window. The eat-in kitchen has stainless-steel appliances, a white ceramic tile backsplash and granite countertops.
The guest bedroom is on this level, with a decorative fireplace and room for a desk. The en-suite bathroom has a tub with a shower and a trough sink.
Upstairs is a master bedroom with a trio of arched windows and oak hardwood floors. It connects to a smaller room that could be used as an office or nursery. The master bathroom has travertine floors, double sinks and a built-in vanity convenient to a cabinet for towels or cosmetics.
OUTDOOR SPACE There is access to a leased parking space one block away.
SETTING The Bertha and Sol Friedman House, known as Toyhill, was the first built in the 100-acre Usonia development in Westchester County, a 47-home former cooperative based on Frank Lloyd Wright’s principles of affordable architecture. The building, with its overlapping pair of stone-and-concrete cylinders on a wooded lot, was one of three he designed for the community and prefigures his work on the Guggenheim Museum.
INDOORS At the core is a circular living, dining and kitchen space with a vaulted ceiling and a massive stone fireplace. A ribbon of oak-framed windows is set within the ashlar masonry walls. The floor is dyed, polished concrete. The many built-ins designed by Wright include sofas, oak bookshelves and kitchen cabinets. A three-piece oak display table can be moved to the center of the room and reconfigured with its original seating for formal dining. This level also has a full bath and a den.
An oak spiral staircase leads to a cantilevered mezzanine that was designed as a library. Also on this level are three enclosed bedrooms with custom beds and cabinets, and one and a half bathrooms.
OUTDOOR SPACE The 1.25-acre property includes a mushroom-like concrete carport and a patio reached by doors next to the kitchen. There is access to a community swimming pool and tennis courts.
SETTING Named the Jechonias Thayer House after its builder and first owner, this historic home is in a suburb 10 miles south of downtown Boston. It occupies an acre on a principal street near an intersection of two expressways known as the Braintree split. The South Shore Plaza mall is less than a 10-minute drive away.
INDOORS Formerly a convent for the Archdiocese of Boston, the house was vacant for a decade before it was bought in 2011. In the multiyear renovation that followed, most of the original details were preserved; the plumbing, heating and electrical systems were updated; and the property, including the pool area, was landscaped.
The main entrance takes you into a foyer, with a formal dining room on the left and a long living room on the right. The floors of the principal rooms here and upstairs are the original oak with walnut pegs. The living room has a working fireplace with flanking bookshelves. The dining room walls are hung with a landscape mural that was painted on linen in the 1920s (the house’s columns play a cameo role).
The kitchen, which includes both a butler’s pantry and a pastry pantry, was updated with stainless-steel appliances, slate countertops and a fourth sink. A breakfast room was enlarged with banquette seating and sliding doors to the pool area. Nearby is an office alcove.
The first floor also has a library with a working fireplace and a paneled sunroom with flagstone flooring and three walls of glass.
Up the main staircase, past a wall niche with a statue of the Virgin Mary from the home’s convent days, are four bedrooms (two with fireplaces) and three full bathrooms. The master bedroom is connected to a dressing room, a walk-in closet and a bathroom with 1920s fixtures, including a ceramic shelf over the sink for placing a lighted cigar while shaving. The fifth bedroom is now used as a laundry room.
The third-floor attic space is finished.
OUTDOOR SPACE The original carriage house has been converted into an attached garage with two bays, each of which has room for two cars. A finished upper floor was a location on the Underground Railroad. A family room at the back of the building that connects to the main house has pumpkin pine floors and a stone fireplace hearth.
