Who Holly Robinson Peete, 53, and Rodney Peete, 51.
Occupations She is an actress, he retired from the National Football League. He is now a co-host of a radio show in Los Angeles called “Lunch Time with Roggin and Rodney” on AM 570 LA Sports. Together, they are in the reality show “Meet the Peetes” on the Hallmark Channel.
Their Marriage 22 Years, 8 months and counting.
The couple married June 10, 1995 before 300 guests at the home of Leslie Moonves, the chairman and chief executive of CBS.
It was June 1993, and unbeknown to Holly Robinson, her friend, the actor Lela Rochon, was setting her up with Rodney Peete, who, at the time, was a quarterback for the Detroit Lions. “We went to a nightclub in L.A. He was super cute and he was nice, but I wasn’t impressed with the whole athlete thing, or the groupies or distance,” said Mrs. Robinson Peete, who is also an author and philanthropist. Disappointed she couldn’t find love and the direction life was taking her, she went on an “Eat, Pray, Love”-like trip to Bali. When she returned, Ms. Rochon invited her to Mr. Peete’s for a party. “It turned out he lived five minutes away from my house. There were 8 guys and 30 girls,” she said. “This wasn’t my kind of party, so I found the food, and then left.” Fifteen minutes later there was a knock at her door. “Rodney was standing there. He said, ‘The party was over when you left.’ That line was good enough to buy me a real date,” she said. “He took me to a wine-tasting party. I’d never been to one before and I thought maybe he’s not the typical jock.” He wasn’t. She learned that quickly. A year later he proposed to her on the set of “Hangin’ With Mr. Cooper,” the show Mrs. Robinson Peete was starring in at the time. They married in 1995.
Mrs. Robinson Peete Almost everyone we know who married around the same time in our L.A. peer group are divorced, on another marriage, or just didn’t make it. We’re the original gangsta couple; the one who’s still together. That took work. It still takes work.
Rodney was monogamously challenged so I asked him to go to couple’s therapy before getting married. He was opened to everything and that’s why I liked him. That gave me enthusiasm. It’s the work that he’s willing to put in that got us here.
We survived our son’s autism, we survived the N.F.L., the distance of being away, and the depression of athlete retirement. When autism hit I thought that would break us, but it didn’t.
When we argue in front of kids, it makes us feel bad. It makes them feel bad, so we’ve learned to get on the same page. That’s when we are the happiest. We try to turn down the volume of the radio. That’s supposed to take us to a place of calm and introspection. We try. It doesn’t always work. You have to put everything on the shelf and come down from it. That’s how we can get back to the same page.
I’m controlling, impatient and blunt. As a special needs mom you don’t take no for an answer, and that can make you a ball-buster. Rodney lets me know I have to soften my edges, listen, be patient and not be judgmental. I hear that from my kids, too. I need to slow down and relinquish control.
I’m a millennial mom; he’s an old school dad. He cares so much about our family. He wants to over-dad and I need to let him do that, and that’s hard for me. I’ve learned it’s not just my way or the highway, I need to share the road.
He still has the desire to be romantic and make me happy. And that’s really nice. We have not evolved parentally, we’re still working on that. But he’s evolved with me on what matters. And that’s what’s really important.
Mr. Peete You need the right partner to reach and achieve the goals you have. You need to be on the same path going forward. Meeting Holly and getting to know her allowed me to get more in touch with my own feelings. I learned what a relationship was about. She was extremely strong, independent and confident. She had her own identity. She wanted a partner and companion. I hadn’t had that before.
Usually I was the one willing to walk away. Holly had her own life and she was willing to walk away if we weren’t on the same page. That was an attractive trait. She could take it or leave it. That made me realize how much I loved her.
We learned together. I’ve learned no one’s right. I’ve learned to be more sensitive, more emotional. I was a guarded guy. And very wary of relationships getting in the way. I didn’t always let people in. I had to grow up. She did, too. Marriage is an agreement. There’s a time when you’re single and a time to know you have a significant other.
From the beginning, we were very open about wanting a big family, that was very important to both of us. Marriage has reaffirmed that fact. And we respected each other and each other’s careers, which let us thrive on our own separately.
I’ve learned Holly is stronger than I thought. She’s the rock in our family. She is family first and keeping the family strong and right. I have to fight for her to take time for herself. She doesn’t always do that.
We are so busy with kids to raise, and with work, you can lose sight of yourself and what brought you together. Three or four years ago I came up with the 20-second hug. No matter how mad you are, if one asks for the hug, it’s mandatory. It’s embracing and emotional. That runs through you while you’re not saying anything. You slow down. You become less angry. It reminds you of why you’re together.