Politics|Even by Trump Standards, a Lot Has Happened This Week. Let Us Catch You Up.
Even by Trump Standards, a Lot Has Happened This Week. Let Us Catch You Up.
Congress approved a government spending bill. The president signed it, but only after reversing a threat to veto it.
The House passed a $1.3 trillion government spending bill, called an omnibus, on Thursday that would fund the federal government through September. With a deadline looming, the Senate took up the bill early Friday morning and passed it, 65 to 32. There was a catch: Mr. Trump threatened to veto the bill.
He reversed his threat, however, and announced on Friday afternoon during a news conference at the White House that he had signed the legislation. The signing prevented what would have been the third government shutdown this year.
President Trump complained about the $1.3 trillion spending bill, but said he signed it because it increases funding for the military.
The last time we negotiated something like this — and as you know, it’s always been a problem for our country. They get together and they create a series of documents that nobody has been able to read because it was — it was just done.  As a matter of national security, I’ve signed this omnibus budget bill. There are a lot of things that I’m unhappy about in this bill. There are a lot of things that we shouldn’t have had in this bill, but we were, in a sense, forced if we want to build our military, we were forced to have. There are some things that we should have in the bill. But I say to Congress: I will never sign another bill like this again. I’m not going to do it again. We’re very proud of many of the items that we’ve been able to get. We’re very disappointed that, in order to fund the military, we had to give up things where we consider in many cases them to be bad or them to be a waste of money. I looked very seriously at the veto. I was thinking about doing the veto, but because of the incredible gains that we’ve been able to make for the military — that overrode any of our — any of our thinking.
Spending Plan Passed by Congress Is a Rebuke to Trump. Here’s Why.
H.R. McMaster is out, John Bolton is in.
Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster resigned. General McMaster, a battle-tested Army officer, became Mr. Trump’s national security adviser after Michael T. Flynn was pushed out in the early days of the administration. The president announced Thursday that John R. Bolton, the former American ambassador to the United Nations, would take his place.
The choice of Mr. Bolton, who was considered a hawk among hawks when he served in President George W. Bush’s administration, was immediately met with both acclaim and criticism.
Mr. Trump hit China with tariffs on about $60 billion worth of imports.
It’s the strongest trade action that the president has taken so far against a country he blames for lost American jobs and revenue. The White House, which says the measures are in response to China’s use of pressure and intimidation to obtain American technology and trade secrets, will come up with a list of products that will face tariffs within 15 days.
In response, the Chinese Ministry of Commerce announced it was proposing its own set of tariffs on American goods. Financial markets plunged on fears of a potential trade war between the world’s two largest economies, with the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index dropping by 2.5 percent.
Facebook had a bad week. Cambridge Analytica had a worse one.
Last weekend, The New York Times published an article about how Cambridge Analytica, which consulted for the Trump campaign, harvested private information on Facebook to help profile and influence American voters. On Friday, The Times reported that the company was hired early on by a political action committee founded by Mr. Bolton, Mr. Trump’s incoming national security adviser, who knew about the data harvesting.
Cambridge Analytica also suspended its chief executive, Alexander Nix, after a television broadcast this week in which he was recorded suggesting that the company had used seduction and bribery to entrap politicians and influence foreign elections.
More upheaval: The lead lawyer on Mr. Trump’s team for the Russia inquiry resigned.
John Dowd resigned as the lead lawyer on the president’s team for the special counsel’s investigation. He is said to have left over a disagreement about whether Mr. Trump should agree to be interviewed by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III. This comes days after Mr. Trump attacked Mr. Mueller on Twitter.
It was a signal that the president was increasingly ignoring the advice of his lawyers in favor of a more aggressive posture toward the investigation and an attempt to clear his name.
A former Playboy model spoke about an alleged affair with the president.
Prime time on Thursday went to Karen McDougal, a former Playboy model. Appearing on CNN, Ms. McDougal told Anderson Cooper new details about the 10-month affair she says she had with Mr. Trump after he married Melania Knavs.
Mr. Trump is also facing accusations of an affair with Stephanie Clifford, a pornographic film actress who goes by the name Stormy Daniels.
