Art: Cézanne’s Portraits in Washington, D.C.
Through July 1; nga.gov.
Through April 15; tfana.org.
Shakespeare wrote any number of plays with befuddling plot twists and assorted eyebrow-raisers, but “The Winter’s Tale” holds a special place — not least for its famous stage direction: “Exit, pursued by a bear.” This is also the one in which the statue of a much-mourned character comes to life.
A strange and gorgeous fusion of tragedy and wistful comedy, “The Winter’s Tale” is one of Shakespeare’s late plays, and it’s imbued with the regrets of an older man looking back on damage and loss, wishing for a do-over.
March 25; fxnetworks.com.
Now “Trust,” an FX series from the “Slumdog Millionaire” team — the writer Simon Beaufoy and the director Danny Boyle — has Donald Sutherland as Granddad Getty. Starting Sunday, March 25, the 10-episode saga leans into longstanding speculation that the teenage Paul (Harris Dickinson), in hock to Italian criminals, helped stage his own abduction in the hope that his grandfather would fork over $17 million in exchange for his heir. He miscalculated, and in the process lost an ear.
March 25-28; easyeyesound.com/tour.
As the leader of the Black Keys, Dan Auerbach has taken his efficiently re-engineered version of American blues-rock to festivals and sports arenas across the country. But his true passion is more modest in scale: Witness his recruitment of seasoned session players for the house band at Easy Eye Sound, the studio he runs in his adopted hometown Nashville. The music he makes there isn’t about hits so much as history.
She asked you to do what?
Celebrity minders will surely snicker knowingly at “Gemini,” Aaron Katz’s neo-noir caper, in which Jill, a personal assistant to the Hollywood starlet Heather, navigates the murky abyss between loyalty and servitude. That is, until Heather is murdered with the handgun Jill lent her, and she’s fingered as the prime suspect.
Zoë Kravitz plays Heather, the paparazzi-hounded actress who’d rather croon karaoke and mingle with super fans than fulfill her contractual obligations. Lola Kirke is Jill, the Exeter-pedigreed handler with unwavering patience for doing Heather’s dirty work while burying her own creative aspirations. And John Cho is the cop who chases Jill around glassy dwellings and Moroccan-style mansions — SoCal’s golden rays subverted by a moody indigo glow — as he tries to figure out why Jill, or anyone else for that matter, would want Heather dead. But the better question might be: Who wouldn’t?
March 25; newyorklivearts.com.
It was 30 years ago that Arnie Zane, just 39, died of AIDS-related lymphoma. On March 25, Mr. Zane will be honored in a daylong event — conceived and directed by Bill T. Jones — that explores his artistry, not only as a dancer and a choreographer but also as a photographer.
The co-founder of the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Company, Mr. Zane was a compelling choreographer whose love of repetition and precision lives on in works like “Continuous Replay.” Made up of 45 gestures, it’s performed as an accumulation of movements. As part of the celebration, the former company member Jennifer Nugent will teach excerpts.
Mar. 31; nationalsawdust.org.
