Who Are ‘the Beatles’ of ISIS?
The four men from West London went to fight in Syria. They were known among Western hostages for their British accents — and their brutality. Two of the men are dead, and the remaining two were recently captured. Here's what is known about them.
The Beatles were four men from Britain — all from West London — who went to fight in Syria. They eventually joined the Islamic State and participated in the torture and imprisonment and killings of Western hostages. The group beheaded 27 people. “We are an Islamic army, and a state—” “The Beatles” were known as “the Beatles” because of their British accents. So the hostages nicknamed them “the Beatles.” The four men were Jihadi John, Aine Davis, Alex Kotey and El Shafee Elsheikh. Jihadi John was killed in an airstrike in 2015. Mr. Davis has been imprisoned on terrorism charges in Turkey. And Kurdish fighters backed by the U.S. picked up Kotey and Elsheikh in early January along the Euphrates River Valley near the border between Syria and Iraq. “The Beatles” were symbolic of the evil that the Islamic State was capable of carrying out. The beheadings of Jim Foley and Peter Kassig, and Steven Sotloff really shocked the nation. And it shocked the Obama administration. Their families eventually went public. “We’ve asked our government to change its actions. But like our son, we have no more control over the U.S. government than you have over the breaking of dawn.” They felt the Obama administration hadn’t moved quickly enough to try to save their children. As a result, the Obama administration revamped the way it handled these hostage cases, and they created the hostage recovery fusion cell in the towers of the F.B.I., and they also created a special hostage envoy at the State Department. “Many of the families told us that they at times felt like an afterthought or a distraction.” That ends today.” The capture is significant because nobody has been held legally responsible for what happened to these hostages. I think people are a little stunned that these two guys are actually alive. It’s not clear what’s going to happen next. “... and to keep open the detention facilities in Guantánamo Bay.” In his State of the Union address, President Trump had said, you know, he’s going to put bad guys in Gitmo. But there are legal difficulties putting the people in Gitmo and nobody’s ever put somebody from ISIS into Gitmo. I think it’s more likely that the Department of Justice working with the F.B.I. will try to build a criminal case against these two individuals and bring them back to United States to face justice. The two men who were captured have been cooperative and could provide information about where the bodies of Jim Foley, and Peter Kassig, Steven Sotloff, as well as the other hostages are buried. For the families, there’s closure on two fronts: being able to give their children a proper burial and seeing these men be prosecuted in federal court and going to prison for the rest of their lives.
KOBANI, Syria — Two British detainees in Syria who are accused of being part of a murderous Islamic State cell denounced the United States and Britain as “hypocrites” and complained they would not get fair trials because they were reportedly stripped of their citizenship.
The men, El Shafee Elsheikh and Alexanda Kotey, were part of a group with two other British jihadis that was nicknamed “the Beatles” by captives because of their English accents, officials say.
The two were captured by Syrian Kurdish fighters in January in eastern Syria as Islamic State forces were routed and are being held in an undisclosed location, but they were taken to a Kurdish security center in the town of Kobani, where they spoke to The Associated Press.
They refused to address accusations that in 2014 and 2015 they were part of the cell that officials said held more than 20 Western hostages in Syria and tortured many of them, including the American journalist James Foley.
They are accused of beheading seven American, British and Japanese journalists and aid workers and a group of Syrian soldiers, and boasting of the butchery in videos released around the globe. The two said the killings of the captives were a mistake — but for tactical reasons.
Many in the Islamic State, known as ISIS, “would have disagreed” with the killings “on the grounds that there is probably more benefit in them being political prisoners,” Mr. Kotey said.
Mr. Elsheikh said the killings were a “mistake” and might not have been justified. But, he said, they were in retaliation for the killings of civilians by the United States-led coalition fighting ISIS.
The beheadings, often videotaped, horrified the world soon after ISIS took over much of Iraq and Syria in 2014. The group also committed wide-scale atrocities, massacring thousands of Iraqi troops and civilians and taking sex slaves.
Mr. Foley’s killing was followed by those of two other Americans, Steven Sotloff and Peter Kassig; the British aid workers David Cawthorne Haines and Alan Henning; and the Japanese journalists Haruna Yukawa and Kenji Goto.
Mr. Elsheikh, whose family went to Britain from Sudan when he was a child, was a mechanic from White City in West London. He traveled to Syria in 2012, initially joining a branch of Al Qaeda before moving on to ISIS, according to the State Department. It said he had “earned a reputation for waterboarding, mock executions and crucifixions” while serving as an ISIS jailer.
Both men seemed dismissive of the idea that they were part of the ISIS cell, depicting the allegations as created by media and foreign intelligence “so the world can say this is the bad guy and kill the bad guy,” Mr. Elsheikh said.
The men said they had been questioned repeatedly by American military officials and the F.B.I. The United States has been pressing for the home countries of foreign jihadis in Iraq and Syria to take their nationals for trial. Though Britain’s defense secretary has said they should not be allowed back into the country, officials had asked the United States for reassurance that the men would not face the death penalty.
At the Kurdish security building, the men appeared to speak openly. Mr. Elsheikh was strait-laced and reserved, referring more often to Islamic texts. But Mr. Kotey often cracked jokes — when asked whether ISIS’ leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, was alive, he joked that some people thought that Elvis never died and that Tupac Shakur is still alive.
