1. Rex Tillerson apparently learned of his dismissal by being shown President Trump’s tweet naming Mike Pompeo, the C.I.A. director, as secretary of state.
Mr. Pompeo opposes the Iran nuclear deal and doubts that talks will persuade North Korea to give up its nukes.
The Senate must confirm his appointment, as well as that of his replacement. Gina Haspel, his current deputy, would be the first woman to head the C.I.A. She has had a leading role in the torture of detainees.
More turnover: Mr. Trump’s personal assistant was forced out over security issues, and a spokesman for Immigration and Customs Enforcement resigned, saying he could no longer spread lies for the Trump administration.
2. President Trump is visiting what the White House presumably views as enemy territory: California.
Mr. Trump flew into San Diego, where he inspected prototypes of a border wall being built along the Mexican border, above, before speaking to troops at a military base. From there, he is heading to Beverly Hills for a high-roller Republican fund-raiser.
3. How young is too young to protest?
That’s what educators are asking — and deciding — across the U.S. as they prepare for what organizers call the National School Walkout in protest of gun violence. Above, a fifth-grade student in Akron, Ohio, holds the name of a victim of the school shooting in Parkland, Florida.
Many districts and schools are tolerating, if not encouraging, participation, but they’re also enforcing age limits.
In New York City, middle and high school students may walk out of class with parental approval, but elementary school students may not unless a parent or guardian is with them.
4. Pennsylvania’s 18th Congressional District voted on who would replace Tim Murphy, a Republican who resigned last year after reports he encouraged a woman with whom he had an affair to have an abortion.
But the race was too close to call early Wednesday. Conor Lamb, a moderate Democrat, led by 579 votes over Rick Saccone, a Republican lawmaker and Trump ally, with a few thousand absentee ballots still to count.
The race became an acid test for the allegiance of working-class voters, attracting millions of dollars from Republican “super PACs” and from small-donor Democrats across the country. Above, Saccone supporters in Elizabeth, Pa.
That’s how an aviation lawyer spoke of rides on doorless helicopters, like the one above before it crashed into the East River on Sunday night, killing five, the deadliest such accident in New York City since 2009.
Aviation experts point to startling safety gaps in the fast-growing industry of doors-off photo flights, once reserved for professional photographers but increasingly booked by tourists looking to share stomach-churning pictures on Instagram.
Investigators are trying to determine the cause of the crash, why pontoons did not keep the helicopter from flipping over and sinking and whether the pilot could have done anything for the passengers afterward.
6. “Nonsense.” That’s what Russia’s foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, above, called Britain’s allegation that Moscow was to blame for the poisoning by nerve agent of a former Russian spy-turned-double agent.
The dismissal came after Prime Minister Theresa May said it was “highly likely” that Russia was behind the poisoning of the former spy, Sergei Skripal, and his daughter.
Russia now has more intelligence agents deployed in London than at the height of the Cold War. Our correspondent spoke to some of the powerful expatriate Russians they watch.
7. Chilean grapes. Mexican berries. Vietnamese dragon fruit.
As it stands, more than half of the fresh fruit and almost one-third of the fresh vegetables Americans buy now come from other countries.
Is that a bad thing? Our food team tracks how it happened and examines the pros and cons for farmers and consumers.
As pundits fret about how countries might retaliate against President Trump’s tariffs on foreign steel and aluminum, our reporters in China note that it has already moved away from exporting sheets of steel or chunks of aluminum.
In fact, Beijing is forcing many Chinese companies to close wasteful, polluting factories to fix its economy and clean up its skies. Above, an aluminum-sided F-150 rolls off the assembly line in Dearborn, Mich.
9. March Madness is upon us.
Here is another look at experts’ predictions, and six bracket busters. The bracket for the women’s tournament is here.
10. Finally, here’s a television appearance our Watching team is excited about.
David Byrne, above, the onetime Talking Heads frontman and experimental musician who just released his first solo album in 14 years, appears on “The Daily Show” tonight.
