In tennis, few things arouse the crowd more than confrontations, especially those involving players, umpires and line judges.
Who can forget Ilie Nastase pulling down his pants and mooning the chair umpire Charles Hare in Palm Springs in 1976? Or John McEnroe at Wimbledon in 1981 screaming, “You cannot be serious, man!” after what he perceived to be an incorrect call, and referring to the umpire Edward James as the “absolute pits of the world”?
Or that night at the 2009 United States Open when Serena Williams cursed at and threatened to stuff a tennis ball down the throat of the line judge Shino Tsurubuchi for calling a foot fault, an incident that cost Williams her semifinal match against Kim Clijsters?
But tennis tantrums could soon go by the wayside. The ATP World Tour, the governing body of men’s professional tennis, is testing Hawk-Eye Live, an electronic line-calling device that would eliminate the need for line judges. The system will be discussed by ATP leadership and then debated by players and officials during ATP Council meetings at Wimbledon this summer.
The current Hawk-Eye system, which made its debut in 2004, acts as a check on human line-calling. Through computer-generated software and courtside integration, line calls are made and recorded but put into play only when a player challenges the validity of a call made by a line judge or the chair umpire. The replay of the ball’s bounce is projected on giant screens around the stadium, generating suspense — and often rhythmic clapping from spectators — until it is determined whether the call was accurate. Each player is allowed three incorrect challenges per set and is awarded another should the set go to a tiebreaker.
Hawk-Eye Live, which has been in the works for the last two years and was tested at the NextGen ATP Finals in Milan in November and again in Delray Beach, goes beyond the challenge system and makes every on-court call. The system sends visual and audio cues to the chair umpire and off-court monitors within a tenth of a second of a ball bouncing.
There is, however, a manned booth behind and above the court, and there will always be a chair umpire on court. In Milan, line judges wearing plain clothes sat in the stands as seat fillers, ready to intervene if the system malfunctioned.
One of the biggest issues was determining what sound Hawk-Eye Live should emit in making an “out” call.
According to Japhet, the extra cost to tournaments for upgrading to Hawk-Eye Live will be offset by eliminating the cost of paying, housing, feeding and clothing line judges.
Japhet and Bradshaw acknowledged that replacing line judges with technology will not only put people out of jobs, but it will also dehumanize the game a little bit.
“I understand that this may kill officiating, especially because our up-and-coming chair umpires are almost always linespeople first,” Bradshaw said. “We’re also taking away some of the entertainment value with the challenges because fans like to debate whether they think the call was right or not.
Japhet said Hawk-Eye Live was being used worldwide in soccer, cricket and Nascar racing.
Jesse Levine, who competed on the ATP Tour for eight years before retiring in 2014, played the Champions event in Delray Beach using Hawk-Eye Live. He saw the pros and cons.
“It’s cool because it’s a computer-generated system, so it’s never wrong,” said Levine, 30, who now coaches the WTA pro Jessica Pegula. “There can’t be any mistakes. You’re not going to argue with a machine.
