WASHINGTON — The Trump administration said on Friday that it could immediately fund 100 miles of new and replacement border fencing, a first step in the president’s plans for building a wall on part of the United States’ nearly 2,000-mile border with Mexico.
The replacement fencing includes 28 miles in the San Diego region and a new 30-foot-high barrier in Calexico, Calif., that extends for two miles. In New Mexico, the Border Patrol will replace 20 miles of barriers that are intended to stop vehicles with new fencing to prevent people from crossing into the United States.
Ronald D. Vitiello, the acting deputy commissioner of Customs and Border Protection, described the construction as part of a new wall system because it would replace older, outdated barriers. Customs and Border Protection is the parent agency of the Border Patrol.
A mix of barriers — like chain-link fences, steel walling and beams — already stretches across more than 650 miles of the border. Ultimately, Mr. Vitiello said, the administration aims to cover 1,000 miles on the border with fencing or a wall.
President Trump has made the border wall a focus of his campaign against illegal immigration that he says will stop drugs, terrorists and transnational gangs like MS-13 from coming into the United States. The wall is projected to cost $25 billion over the next 10 years.
This year, the administration asked for $1.6 billion to build a border wall in the Rio Grande Valley in South Texas. But Congress rejected that request in the spending bill it approved last week. Instead, lawmakers provided nearly $1.6 billion for border security — including new technology and repairs to existing barriers — in what the administration has since described as a down payment on a wall.
The spending plan includes just $641 million for about 33 miles of new fencing that was already authorized by the 2006 Secure Fence Act. The rest of the $1.6 billion is allocated to replace older border fencing and buy new aircraft, sensors and surveillance technology.
Mr. Trump has expressed frustration at the inability to build the border wall and has spoken with Defense Secretary Jim Mattis about having the military pay for it. Shifting budget funds from the Defense Department would require congressional approval, which some lawmakers say is unlikely.
A report last year by the Government Accountability Office found that Customs and Border Protection had not developed a system to test how border fencing or walls bolster security.
The report found that fewer people were apprehended in areas with border barriers. But it also noted other factors — including terrain, demographics, geography, technology and the number of Border Patrol officers — also probably contributed to the drop in traffic.
Officials at Customs and Border Protection acknowledged that a border wall alone would not stop illegal immigration or drug trafficking. But they said it was a critical component of a “layered approach” to securing the border, along with agents and technology like drones, sensors and cameras.
