HONG KONG — Tim Bourne, an auctioneer and watch specialist who previously held senior roles at Sotheby’s and Christie’s, joined Bonhams in late February as the international director of watches for Asia.
Mr. Bourne’s appointment comes as the auction house focuses more on the American market, and as Sotheby’s hires new talent in an effort to challenge Phillips’s dominance in watch auctions.
At the Bonhams gallery in Hong Kong, he talked about the company’s strategic priorities in Asia. The interview has been condensed and edited.
Matthew Girling, the global chief executive of Bonhams, is a jewelry specialist — and the house is not known for watches. Is your appointment an effort to move that needle?
I think so, yes. I have known Matthew for quite a few years on a professional basis, so it was good to speak with him and then have the opportunity to come to Bonhams. My field is watches, and I’ve been in this field for 20 years — so it was quite nice to come back to Hong Kong. Back in 1997 was the first time that I came over, obviously with another auction house. I’ve been in England for three years, and it’s nice to come back to where I sort of built my reputation.
Mr. Girling moved to New York from London recently to focus on the American market. What are the strategic implications of your appointment here in Hong Kong?
Bonhams is well connected logistically — it has quite a lot of offices within the United States; it has its finger in many different pies — so all of those need coordinating in the right way. And I think Matthew, as the C.E.O., has gone over to make sure it’s coordinated in the best possible way and to drive increased business and profitability for the company. Over here, my role is limited to watches as such. But I have experience within the art business, and if I can help with the profile of Bonhams in Asia, then I will do that. And I think watches is one medium that’s very good because they connect with so many different people.
Are there regional trends that you’re following or trying to anticipate?
The other houses have a goal of going online, which is good in some ways: It cuts out a lot of costs involved in auctions. But you are missing out on that connectivity with the clientele. It becomes very much more of a synthetic type of relationship; it’s a name, and a body, but it’s not somebody that you know. You have an address, and they buy, and off you go. So I think that those relationships, perhaps, are being lost.
Are there pockets of Asia that you’re watching, or markets that you find interesting?
It will be interesting to see the development of places like Vietnam. I quite like following Southeast Asian paintings, and I’ve noticed that now the sales are incorporating artists from Myanmar and places like that. So it’s interesting to see whether, in these countries, there may be pockets of collectors sprouting up. They’re all developing wealth in their own particular ways.
Is that a loaner you’re wearing on your wrist?
No, this is a Rolex Explorer II that’s been with me for years. It’s been the most reliable watch that I’ve ever had.