Corey Johnson, the newly installed and fiercely vocal speaker of the New York City Council, wants to put his money where his mouth is.
Or rather, taxpayer money.
The speaker pushed a $17 million increase to the Council’s own budget — a 27 percent increase and the largest in at least a decade — to help pay for more staff and support Mr. Johnson’s goal of establishing the city’s legislative body as a viable counterweight to Mayor Bill de Blasio.
The increase, unveiled Thursday at a committee hearing that lasted less than five minutes, passed unanimously in the committee and was approved by the full Council later in the day.
Spending on Council staff and other operating expenses are not subject to mayoral veto, and Mr. Johnson said he had not discussed the size of the increases with Mr. de Blasio.
The increases come after several years under the former speaker, Melissa Mark-Viverito, in which spending on Council staff rose steadily, but more slowly. When Ms. Mark-Viverito took over the Council in 2014, she increased spending by about 10 percent to $57 million, then to $64 million by the time she left last year.
The speaker’s office itself is set to increase its staff by four to 16, at a cost of $500,000, according to the budget. Mr. Johnson said those positions would include an extra “body man” — a person who helps with his personal needs — to cover what Mr. Johnson said was a seven-day-a-week schedule, and two positions he promised during the speaker’s race, one apiece for the Council’s women’s caucus and its progressive caucus.
Budget analysts questioned the necessity, size and timing of the increases, which come amid concern over cuts from Washington and a possible economic downturn on the horizon. Mr. de Blasio, for his part, has highlighted the reserves his budget has amassed and the spending reductions at city agencies he has requested — even as his administration grew the budget substantially to $87 billion over his first term.
Mr. Johnson said there was “nothing in this budget that I’m uncomfortable with,” and added that some of the money was aimed at seeking better pay for Council staffers whose salaries are often far lower than those across City Hall in the mayor’s office and at city agencies.
“One of the issues we have here at the Council is that we lose staff,” he said.