• A spring snowstorm is sweeping through the Northeast, the fourth nor’easter of the month.
• A foot or so of snow is expected from the suburbs of Philadelphia to parts of New York City to coastal Connecticut and Long Island, with significant snow from Washington to Boston.
• Nearly 5,000 flights have been canceled and La Guardia Airport suspended all flights.
• New York City schools will be open tomorrow (they were closed today). Boston schools will be closed.
• More than 35,000 homes in New Jersey have lost power.
Nearly seven inches of snow have fallen in parts of New York City, and there is more to come.
“An inch an hour until midnight or 1 a.m.,” Jay Engle, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service’s New York office, said around 8 p.m.
That could bring snowfall totals in the city to a foot or so, before the storm draws to a close in the wee hours of Thursday. It would be the biggest snowfall in New York City in springtime, breaking the record of 10 inches set on April 3, 1915.
The morning commute could be sloppy, with possible scattered snow showers.
In Washington, the snow had slowed by Wednesday evening.
Less than half a foot of snow was recorded in most of New Jersey, though the forecast predicted up to several inches could fall there overnight. In rural Pennsylvania, snow totals have exceeded a foot in some places.
In Boston, it wasn’t snowing yet on Wednesday evening when Mayor Martin J. Walsh canceled classes at Boston public schools for Thursday.
Forecasters have predicted up to nine inches of snow in Boston by Thursday morning, but their models have not agreed, and many have been revising their predictions downward and now say the city could receive as few as four inches.
The National Service in Boston counseled patience over Twitter, assuring the snow would come overnight.
• New York City’s subways are running, but some lines have switched to local service.
• Commuter railroads, including Metro-North, New Jersey Transit and Long Island Rail Road, are expected to run on regular schedules Thursday with residual delays.Amtrak will continue to run on a limited schedule.
• New Jersey Transit and PATH will not continue systemwide cross-honoring.
• New Jersey Transit bus service will resume service at 2 a.m.
The storm hobbled airports, stranding passengers as they scrambled to find alternative options or lodging. Hundreds of incoming and outbound flights were canceled at every major airport in the Northeast.
La Guardia Airport said it would reopen on Thursday, but called it “a recovery day for airlines” and advised passengers to check with their airlines before coming to the airport in the morning.
What is up with all these storms?
Today’s storm is the fourth serious snow to wallop the Northeast this month — the others were on March 2, March 7 and March 13.
This is an odd occurrence in March — regionwide storms of this size typically develop only about once a year, said the director of the National Weather Service, Louis W. Uccellini.
The culprit, he explained, is something called the North Atlantic Oscillation, which is related to airflow over this part of the planet. When the N.A.O. is positive — as it was from December to February — the air moves fast and storms do not have time to build up a lot of power.
But in March, the N.A.O. went negative. That means the flow gets blocked. “You get a trough that sits off northeast Canada, or between Canada and Greenland, and it tends to lock in cold air in the northeastern U.S.,” Dr. Uccellini said.
This is likely to be the last big snow of the season: The N.A.O. is predicted to go neutral-to-positive by the end of the week.
Standing in Central Park with a cluster of children around him, Matt Hoek pulled a list from his pocket: snow-covered bench, snow-covered taxicab, bus with chains, pine cone. He had the children — his two daughters, who are 2 and 5, and some of their friends from around their Upper West Side neighborhood — on a snow-day scavenger hunt.
Central Park was sparsely populated snow caked the lawns and sidewalks and stinging winds blew along Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir. Still, the runners, dog walkers and tourists held their ground.
“We don’t see snow like this — it’s pretty impressive,” Miguel Navío, visiting from Barcelona, said as he stood near the reservoir.
Some of the dogs looked like they were being dragged, slinking down as the snow hit their faces. A Labrador retriever wore an annoyed expression as he stepped through the snow to tend to his business. But a scruffy black-haired dog named Holly pranced through the snow with a coat cinched around her torso and a pink ball in her mouth.
Her owner, Caroline Koeppel, was similarly delighted. “It’s beautiful,” she said, looking out at nearly empty expanse of the Great Lawn. “My dog has the park to herself.” She wished for enough snow to be able to cross-country ski through the park. “I’m in here no matter what,” she said.
