So said an undocumented mother in California, responding to the news that the 2020 census will include a question about citizenship. Above, a naturalization ceremony in Los Angeles last week.
The Trump administration says the data will help monitor voter demographics and protect minority voting rights. But critics say it will lead to a severe undercount of immigrant communities. Several states, including California and New York, said they would sue over the decision.
Here’s why an accurate census is so important. Political representation, state and federal funding and business and public health decisions all depend on it.
2. The former dean of Michigan State University’s osteopathic medical school was accused of failing to protect women and girls from the disgraced physician Larry Nassar — and of sex crimes against his own students.
William D. Strampel “used his office to harass, discriminate, demean, sexually proposition and sexually assault female students,” a detective wrote in an affidavit.
Prosecutors began a sprawling investigation of the university after Dr. Nassar, a longtime physician for Michigan State and for U.S.A. Gymnastics, admitted that he had sexually abused scores of young women over several years.
3. A pair of white police officers in Baton Rouge, La., will not be prosecuted by the state authorities for the fatal shooting of Alton Sterling in 2016. Above, a mural of Mr. Sterling at the site where he was killed.
Mr. Sterling’s death prompted large protests in Baton Rouge, the Louisiana capital, and broadened the national debate about law enforcement tactics and the influence of race on American policing. A Justice Department inquiry into possible civil rights violations was closed last year.
4. Live lobster, French wine and entertainers.
North Korea’s leader is said to have met secretly with China’s president. It was Kim Jong-un’s first trip out of the country since taking power.
5. Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman of Saudi Arabia, the 32-year-old heir to the throne, attacked the Iran nuclear deal in a meeting with reporters and editors for The New York Times.
“Delaying it and watching them getting that bomb, that means you are waiting for the bullet to reach your head,” he said.
He also discussed the war in Yemen, dismissing a recent missile attack on Saudi Arabia by Yemeni rebels as a “last-ditch effort” that showed only that they were weak. Above, Prince Mohammed at the Pentagon last week.
6. Fair-housing groups filed a lawsuit against Facebook in federal court, saying that the site continues to discriminate against certain groups with targeted advertising.
Mr. Stevens argues that, until a 2008 Supreme Court ruling, there was no absolute right to guns. He calls the amendment “a relic,” and says it needs to go.
And after Citigroup limited firearm sales by its retail clients, our business columnist suggested two more steps that banks could take to influence the gun control debate.
8. Thank Nafta for avocados.
In 1994, Americans consumed a little more than one pound of the fruit per person per year — almost all from California growers, whose harvest comes only in the summer.
Today, that figure is up to seven pounds per person year-round — and rising. An estimated 135 million pounds of avocados were consumed in the weeks leading up to this year’s Super Bowl.
Our magazine writer says that the drug war hasn’t stopped the trade, and new tariffs might not either. But if Nafta is dissolved, avocado growers might set their sights on an even more important market: China.
That’s Eugene Ng, a cosmetic surgeon in Singapore who operates on Asian arowana fish, also known as dragon fish.
They’re a prized status symbol across Asia, with price tags that can reach tens of thousands of dollars. So for owners, less than $100 for an eyelift or chin job is pocket change.
