Credit...The New York Times | Source: Adam Lankford, The University of Alabama (shooters); Small Arms Survey (guns). Note: Includes countries with more than 10 million people and at least one mass public shooting with four or more victims.
1. Graph A, above, and Graph B, below, originally appeared elsewhere on NYTimes.com. For the purposes of this activity, we have removed some of the original text and features, all of which we will reveal on Thursday afternoon, March 15.
Share what you are noticing and what this may imply.
Where could you find the answers to what you wonder?
• What’s going on in these graphs?
Use what you notice. What can you infer from these graphs beyond what they show directly? What’s the deeper story that comes from these graphs?
On Tuesday, March 13, our collaborator, the American Statistical Association, will facilitate a discussion from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern Time by paraphrasing comments and linking to responses to help students’ understanding go deeper. You might use their responses as models for your own.
4. On Thursday afternoon, March 15, we will reveal at the bottom of this post more information about the graphs. How does the original New York Times article and the moderators’ additional questions help you see these graphs differently? You can incorporate the statistical terms defined in Stat Nuggets in your response.
With a series of high-profile mass shootings (defined as indiscriminate, multiple killings by one shooter), researchers have been digging into data to see if they can find associations between number of mass shootings and some variable. Here, by country, we see the association between mass shootings and the number of guns for countries around the world. But, we could have also looked for associations between number of mass shootings and measures of violence, crime, racial divisions, mental health care, video games or strength of gun legislation. Statisticians have the tools to analyze all of these variables, if they have accurate data. Since 1996, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which monitors public health threats such as diseases, auto and food safety, and much more, has seen cuts to its funding for research into gun violence as a public health issue. Data for the United States is not complete and the same is probably true for other countries.
Acknowledging these limitations, the two graphs come from the New York Times article “What Explains U. S. Mass Shootings? International Comparisons Suggest an Answer” and was published on November 8, 2017. It uses data from the annual Small Arms Survey, an independent research project of the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies in Geneva (Switzerland).
Some of you said that you did not have enough information. Tommy of NJ wanted to see more countries represented. Rachel from Jackson wanted to know the year of the data. Many wanted all data points labeled.
Henry of Detroit noticed when he removed the United States outlier data point, there seems to be no association between guns and mass shooters. For example, in Graph B, France, Canada, and Iraq all seem to have about the same number of guns per 100 people, but very different mass shooters per 100 million people. He wondered if there is no association. This is counter to most other responses. Before we come to any conclusion on association, we need to dig deeper into the data to investigate what we wonder. I would suggest getting a copy of the cited report by Alan Lankford and looking at the Small Arms Survey.
Here are some questions you may want to think about critically.
• Why were there two graphs? What additional insight did we gain with Graph B?
• Statisticians are careful to note that just because there is an association between two variables, it does not mean that changes in one variable are causing the value of the other variable to change. Do you think it is possible to say that having more guns is the cause of increased mass shootings? Or, are there other factors that may cause increased mass shootings? What could be the other factors?
• The United States is an outlier (defined below) in both graphs. How do you interpret its being an outlier?
• Other than the United States, none of the countries that are identified on Graph A are identified on Graph B. Even without this identification, what might you know about these countries regarding their rate of gun ownership and mass shooters?
• In Graph A, what do the identified countries have in common? How about for Graph B?
Below in Stat Nuggets, we define and explain scatterplot, total and per capita data, and outlier. Look into the archives to see past Stat Nuggets terms.
Keep noticing and wondering. Come up with conjectures based on the graphs. We continue to welcome more responses.
See you next month on Tuesday, April 10, for our next “What’s Going On in This Graph?
A scatterplot is an x-y graph that is used to investigate the relationship between two quantitative variables, one on each axis.
Scatterplots can be described in terms of direction (+ or upward, - or downward, or neither), form (linear, curved, scattered, etc.), unusual data points that are out of the pattern, and strength (strong to moderate to weak, based on how “tight” the form is).
In “What Explains U. S. Mass Shootings,” the number of mass shooters (vertical y-axis) is plotted against the number of guns (horizontal x-axis). The direction is neither positive nor negative. The form is scattered with no association for the countries’ data points in the lower left corner. The most unusual countries are the United States and Yemen in the per capita graph. They are outliers, as explained below. Ignoring the outliers, there is at best a very weak association between the number of guns and the number of mass shooters.
Some quantitative variables count the number of times something occurs for a group. To calculate a per capita (“per person”) rate, simply divide the number by the total number of people in the group.
In “What Explains U. S. Mass Shootings,” Graph A shows countries in terms of their number of guns and number of mass shooters without regard to their population size. In contrast, Graph B shows these values as a proportion of the country’s population. Note that the rate is multiplied by a larger number — 100 people for guns and 100 million people for mass shooters, to avoid decimals, which can be hard to comprehend in rates. This scaling of the data does not change the order of the countries; it just makes the values more understandable.
An outlier is a data point that is out of pattern by being distant from other points.
In “What Explains U. S. Mass Shootings,” the United States is an outlier in both graphs and Yemen is an outlier only in Graph B. For both countries, the number of guns per 100 people and the number of mass shooters per 100 million people are unusually large compared to the other countries.
The graphs for “What’s Going On in This Graph?” are selected in partnership with Sharon Hessney, the Statistics Content Director at Mass Insight Education. In addition, Ms. Hessney and Annie Fetter, a math educator formerly at the Math Forum who has worked to popularize “What do you notice? What do you wonder?”, moderated the Tuesday comments and wrote this week’s “reveal” and Stat Nuggets section.