Like a bad houseguest, the nor’easter left behind a mess.
The day after the big storm — the fourth this month alone — its presence continued to lurk in the slushy sidewalks, downed trees and longer-than-normal commutes across the New York region and beyond. Roads remained closed from flooding or debris. Schools and offices opened late, if at all.
Stranded travelers scrambled to find their way home after the storm forced the cancellation of thousands of flights at airports from Washington to Boston, and disrupted train and bus services. Others woke up in their own beds, but with no heat or power.
There were at least two storm-related deaths on Long Island, where one woman suffered a heart attack while shoveling snow and another woman died when a van overturned in a crash, according to news reports.
In New York City, the nor’easter was anticipated as the biggest spring snowstorm in the city’s history — a record held by a 10-inch blizzard on April 3, 1915 — but fell short in the end. The official tally, taken in Central Park, was 8.4 inches, though more fell in other neighborhoods, with Queens Village topping the list at 14.5 inches.
Even so, the nor’easter did set one record: the most snow seen on March 21. The old record was 7.1 inches in 1958.
Even before the slow-moving storm blanketed the region Wednesday, police and emergency crews stepped up their efforts. As of Thursday morning, New Jersey State Police had responded to 516 accidents over two days.
Diane Gutierrez-Scaccetti, acting commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Transportation, said 3,800 plows and trucks loaded with de-icing agents were deployed during the storm. “Yesterday was a very smooth day for us in terms of being able to plow,” she said.
Snowfall reached at least 10 inches in more than a dozen New Jersey counties, with a high of 15 inches in Lacey Township in Ocean County, according to the National Weather Service.
More than 86,000 New Jersey homes were without power early Thursday, of which more than half were in the Atlantic City area, according to the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities. By afternoon, 72,000 homes remained dark.
Still, Gov. Philip D. Murphy said that the number of homes without power were less than a third of what they had been during the last storm. “We have to be committed like heck to make sure we get everybody back on,” he said at a news conference in Woodbridge.
In New York City, the public school system reopened on time, and there were no residual storm-related problems reported for the subways and buses during the morning commute. The Long Island Rail Road was also largely back to normal.
Outside the city, many suburban communities were also recovering quickly, in part because the storm’s slow approach had allowed for preparations. On Long Island, where the snow topped 20.1 inches in Patchogue, the heaviest snowfall came overnight. Road crews worked through the night to ensure the roads were clear for the morning commute.
“This spring storm demonstrates the difficulty of predicting weather, and what we try to do is err on the side of caution and public safety,” said Steven Bellone, the Suffolk County executive.
New York State transportation workers kept open miles of highway lanes in the Long Island region during the storm, according to Joseph Brown, a regional director for the transportation department. They used more than 300 plow trucks, some of which were sent from upstate.
In a statement, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said that state’s aggressive preparations had paid off, with a full force of emergency workers strategically deployed and utility companies required to have a storm-response plan in place. “This weather is clearly the new normal and New Yorkers should know that no matter what Mother Nature throws our way, we will always remain vigilant and do whatever is necessary to keep people safe,” he said.
Some New Yorkers reveled in the aftereffect of the nor’easter.
Mads Jakob Poulsen, 35, a graphic designer, let his 4-year-old pit bull, Astro, sprint across the snow at Herbert Von King Park in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn — in clear violation of a “No Pets” sign. “It’s a little bit like alternate-side parking: When that’s off, this is off, too,” he said.
But for others, the brief snowy interlude was over.
