MIAMI — An engineer reported cracks on a newly installed pedestrian bridge two days before it collapsed on a busy roadway here, killing at least six people, state officials said on Friday.
The report, by the lead engineer with the company in charge of the bridge’s design, was made in a voice mail message left for a Florida Department of Transportation employee. That employee was out of the office, however, and did not receive it until Friday, a day after the collapse.
The cracking was on the north end of the span but the company did not consider it a safety concern, according to a recording of the message released by the Transportation Department.
The transportation department said on Friday that “the responsibility to identify and address life-safety issues and properly communicate them is the sole responsibility of the F.I.U. design-build team,” referring to Florida International University, which commissioned the bridge.
Earlier on Friday, the authorities in Miami-Dade County announced that they had called off the search for survivors. Officials were now turning their attention to finding out exactly why the new bridge — hailed as a breakthrough in speedy, safe construction — had given way over the road beneath, killing at least half a dozen people and sending 10 more to hospitals.
As a backhoe slowly lifted the rubble off cars, some of them with bodies still inside, investigators said they were only beginning to consider possible failures of engineering, construction and traffic planning.
What role, if any, the cracks played in the collapse has yet to be determined. “A crack in a bridge does not necessarily mean it’s unsafe,” said Robert Accetta, an official of the National Transportation Safety Board, which is investigating the accident, said at a news conference Friday night. The N.T.S.B. chairman, Robert Sumwalt, said the board has not yet determined on its own if there were cracks.
Construction crews were tightening cables on the bridge when it fell, the N.T.S.B. said, which is not unusual after installation. Mr. Accetta said the safety board also would look at whether that process contributed to the collapse, adding that the “point of failure” was still unclear.
But the possibility that cracks had occurred — and the question of when the bridge’s builders and designers, and school and state officials, had learned about them — was sure to become a focus of scrutiny and of finger-pointing.
Two days after the voice mail message was left, and one day before it was heard, the Florida Department of Transportation said, one of its consultants took part in a meeting with the bridge’s design and construction team. At the meeting the state consultant “was not notified of any life-safety issues, need for additional road closures or requests for any other assistance from FDOT,” the department said.
The meeting took place at noon on Thursday. At around 1:30 p.m., the bridge collapsed.
“At no point during any of the communications above did Figg or any member of the F.I.U. design-build team ever communicate a life-safety issue,” the state Transportation Department said in its statement.
The meeting, which took place at a trailer on the construction site Thursday morning, was convened by the builder and by Figg “to discuss a crack that appeared on the structure,” and representatives of both F.I.U. and the Florida Department of Transportation attended, the school said in its statement.
Another major question is whether Southwest Eighth Street, the busy thoroughfare below the walkway, should have been open when the walkway was undergoing crucial adjustments. The state transportation agency said it had received no requests to close the road.
None of the victims had been officially identified Friday night, possibly because their bodies were still buried in their cars. But family members of several missing people feared the worst.
Alexa Duran and her friend, Richard Humble, both F.I.U. students, had been stopped in a Toyota 4Runner under the bridge because of a red light ahead.
The concrete overhead creaked. Mr. Humble looked up, and saw the structure falling. It crushed the car and squashed his neck, trapping him inside.
“I thought when I saw the bridge coming down that I was dead,” he told NBC News.
Passers-by freed him. But Ms. Duran, a freshman who lived at home and was close with her parents, often pressing shirts at the family’s dry cleaning business, did not make it out.
An online fund-raiser for the family of another missing man, Brandon Brownfield, had raised more than $20,000 by Friday evening.
“We have not received word about his whereabouts or his medical condition,” Chelsea Brownfield, Mr. Brownfield’s wife, said in an interview. The fund-raiser page said they have three daughters.
The $14 million walkway, which was to carry F.I.U. students and other pedestrians over Southwest Eighth Street, was built using “accelerated construction,” a well-regarded method of erecting bridges that avoids the long months of street closings when a structure is built over a road or river. Instead, parts of the bridge are prefabricated away from the site and then moved into place.
Bridges made using the accelerated techniques are not more at risk of collapse than others, but moving them into place causes different stresses than what the bridge would normally have to withstand, said Andy Herrmann, a former president of the American Society of Civil Engineers.
The cables being tightened were at the north end of the bridge, the same end where the cracking was reported on the voice mail message, and the same end where the collapse appeared to begin, based on a widely circulated video of the accident.
“Just preliminary, it appears that way, but we still have a lot of work to do,” Mr. Accetta said.
An executive at a construction company that was working on the bridge confirmed on Friday that one of his employees had been killed and two others hospitalized.
Mike Biesiada, the chief sales and marketing officer for the company, Structural Technologies, said the employee who died was Navaro Brown, 37. “We look forward to learning the cause of the accident so that it’s not repeated ever again,” Mr. Biesiada said.
The bridge designers, builders and inspectors were all well-known and influential firms. Figg, based in Tallahassee, has designed a number of significant bridges in the United States, including one on Interstate 35W in Minneapolis that replaced a section that collapsed in 2007, and the iconic Sunshine Skyway Bridge over the mouth of Tampa Bay.
In response to questions on Friday, the company said that “no other bridge designed by Figg Bridge Engineers has ever experienced such a collapse.” But a 90-ton segment of a bridge across the Elizabeth River in Virginia collapsed during construction in 2012, leaving four workers with minor injuries. The company was fined $9,800 by the state, according to federal records.
The main builder of the F.I.U. bridge, Munilla Construction Management, specializes in roads, bridges and other infrastructure projects, and has a $63.5 million contract with the United States Navy to build a school on the naval base at Guantánamo Bay. It was founded by brothers who were Cuban refugees and whose father, the firm says, owned a construction company in Cuba that was confiscated by Fidel Castro.
The bridge had been a point of pride for F.I.U., which has a center devoted to accelerated bridge construction and hosted a “watch party” last Saturday when the bridge was moved into place. The university did not offer a public response Friday night regarding the report of cracks on the bridge.
Earlier Friday, Mark B. Rosenberg, the university president, said that the school was conducting its own investigation.
One of the first people to reach the accident site, Sgt. Jenna Mendez, who was heading to work at the Sweetwater Police Department, recalled being stunned as she saw the bridge fall about 300 feet in front of her.
Her first thought: Why would construction workers do such a thing?
Sergeant Mendez, 36, climbed to the top of the fallen bridge, where she found four wounded construction workers.
She started doing chest compressions on one man who was not breathing. A motorist who said she was a doctor was guided by other drivers up the heap, where she helped administer CPR.
Sergeant Mendez started crawling under the rubble to see if anyone was trapped. She had momentarily forgotten about the grave danger of sliding beneath a collapsed 950-ton bridge.
She stayed at the scene until 10 p.m., went home and gave her children, ages 21, 17, 13, 10 and 3, extra tight hugs, and took some melatonin to help her sleep.
“I told my husband, ‘I don’t want to drive under a bridge anymore,’” she said.