Dozens of speakers were installed overhead and all around, while “percussion robots” — drums and percussion instruments triggered by computer, with lights flashing as their sounds suddenly erupted — were scattered amid the spectators. Mouse on Mars was introducing its new album the way the duo had made it: in a state-of-the-art studio with sound coming from every direction. Software allowed the duo to pinpoint sounds in three-dimensional space, put those sounds in motion and even to separate and spread around overtones.
Mr. St. Werner, the more voluble half of Mouse on Mars, was at home in academe. In 2016 and 2017, he was a visiting lecturer at M.I.T.’s program in Art, Culture and Technology, and he is currently a professor for interactive media/dynamic acoustics at the venerable Academy of Fine Arts Nuremberg. At both, he has worked primarily with visual artists. “We keep sound away from music as long as we can and see what else we can do with it,” he said over coffee on Friday.
Mouse on Mars also wanted to generate computer-driven physical sound, teaming up with engineers to develop percussion robots that were robust enough to handle the demands of the music on the road. “We broke them all the time,” Mr. St. Werner noted.
Then came what Mr. St. Werner called, citing a German phrase, “the drop that made the bucket overflow.” They were working in their studio in the Funkhaus in eastern Berlin, which used to house East Germany’s top government radio station, when the conductor and arranger André de Ridder knocked on the door. He was putting together a festival and had some musicians with him, including Mr. Vernon and Aaron and Bryce Dessner of the National. Many collaborations ensued, in Berlin and in an intensive phase at Mr. Vernon’s studio in Wisconsin.
The album free-associates its way through kinetic polyrhythms, Minimalist mediations, head-spinning auditory effects, a stark fiddle tune, passages of hip-hop and pop vocal harmonies, and surreal funk, and Swamp Dogg’s career reminiscences, among many other moments. Mouse on Mars is still deciding how to take it on tour. Mr. Toma contemplated a show without a stage, with live musicians and robots “spread among the people” instead.
