Through March 31. Galerie Lelong & Co., 528 West 26th Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , galerielelong.com.
Mildred Thompson (1936-2003) graduated from Howard University in 1957, went on to study at the Brooklyn Museum of Art School, and had an early start to a strong career when the Museum of Modern Art bought two of her prints. Trips to Europe, however, convinced her that, for a black female artist, living and working there would be far more comfortable than in New York. So she returned to Germany and spent a productive decade there, exhibiting often. (She later traveled to Africa and the Middle East.) In 1974, an artist-in-residence grant brought her back to the United States. In 1985, she settled in Atlanta, painting and teaching to the end of her life.
Each of the series is color-keyed. In the “Magnetic Fields” paintings and pastels, molten yellow forms an allover ground for funnel-like swirls of red lines and fusillades of pink and lavender. The larger, horizontally oriented “Radiation Exploration” pictures are based on fields of sea-blue over which burst the equivalent of cosmic fireworks: lightning bolts, planetary fireballs and meteor showers of individual strokes. It’s a chaos that doesn’t feel chaotic. It’s a spontaneously choreographed and completely controlled dance to the music of the spheres.
In short, this is beautiful, upbeat work, backed up by an entire creative history yet to be fully explored. And it arrives at a moment of long-delayed acknowledgment of abstract art by African-American women. A Howardena Pindell retrospective recently opened at the Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago. And in Chelsea, along with the Thompson show — which comes with an excellent catalog by the art historians Lowery Stokes Sims and Melissa Messina — there’s a solo exhibition of paintings and collages by the New York City artist Nanette Carter. It’s at Skoto Gallery, and not to be missed.
Through March 30. Meredith Ward Fine Art, 44 East 74th Street, Suite G, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , meredithwardfineart.com.
This show brings the painter Edith Schloss (1919-2011) one step closer to the small but definite niche that is her due. Following a larger, somewhat confusing retrospective at the Sundaram Tagore Gallery in 2015, this show, “By the Sea,” zeros in on her best work: a group of small, delightful still lifes from the 1960s and ’70s. They were made in Italy, to which Schloss decamped for good in 1964, after about 18 years of marriage to the photographer/filmmaker Rudy Burckhardt and active participation in the nascent downtown New York art scene.
These paintings make good on Schloss’s longtime interest in still life, partly by taking cues from the painters Cy Twombly and Giorgio Morandi, both of whom she knew in Italy. The canvases feature a set cast of vases, pitchers and occasional toys (her son’s) that Schloss was never without, even when traveling. She would fill the vessels with blooms — thick circles in hearty shades of blue, orange or red balanced by whites and pinks and sometimes by patches of bare canvas. Especially in paintings from 1967 and ’68 titled “Rignalla” and “On the Ledge” from 1976, she lines up the vases on a high horizon, giving them a personable lean and monumental scale reminiscent of Philip Guston’s late works. In others, the bouquets line the bottom edge of the canvas or paper, as if on a windowsill overlooking a beach or the sea stretching beyond. At this point in her life, Schloss painted with consummate ease and abundant charm, sketching in her subjects and then applying color as needed. But don’t be fooled. Her best works are primers on the shortest route to a good, original painting.
Through April 7. Matthew Marks, 523 West 24th Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , matthewmarks.com.
Thomas Demand is a hybrid photographer. He trained as a sculptor and is best known for making cardboard and paper models of momentous events and politically charged sites — the meager kitchen in Saddam Hussein’s last hide-out in Iraq or the nuclear power plant in Fukushima, Japan — and photographing them to look deceptively realistic. In his current show at Matthew Marks, however, Mr. Demand shifts his primary focus to recreating photographs taken with his cellphone.
In the front gallery the walls are covered with gray wallpaper depicting school or workplace lockers (overtones, perhaps inadvertently, of American school shootings). Two videos shown on monitors suspended from the ceiling and a handful of photographs reproduce saccharine or banal subjects that Mr. Demand photographed with his cellphone: a red bow tied to a fence; a box with electrical wiring; blinking stoplights and balloons attached to a plastic clip. In the rear gallery are three large photographs in Mr. Demand’s recognizable style, depicting the ruins of an unidentified bombardment, the interior of a barracks tent and the warmly lit workshop of a Bavarian violin maker — all near-perfectly sculpted in cardboard and paper and photographed.
The cellphone-derived works, titled “Dailies,” are not as dramatic or captivating as the historical scenes. And yet, they accurately depict the present, merging Mr. Demand’s anesthetized aesthetic with a world in which people are attached to their smartphones, capturing images they will never look at again. In this sense, Mr. Demand memorializes the banal and the forgotten with the same painstaking care he gives to more charged moments in history and suffuses the “Dailies” with an uncanny absurdity and pathos.
Through April 2. SculptureCenter, 44-19 Purves Street, Long Island City, Queens; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , sculpture-center.org.
Constantin Brancusi made an iconic, egg-shaped marble head, which he called “Le Nouveau Né” (“The Newborn”), in 1915. In 1993, Sherrie Levine made a mold of the piece for a show at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, which owns it, and subsequently cast versions in foggy white crystal and black sandblasted glass. Carissa Rodriguez’s new video, “The Maid,” on view in the middle of SculptureCenter’s main gallery, visits several of these casts in the richly appointed collectors’ homes and the sterile white warehouses on both coasts where they’ve ended up. No people are visible, except for the gloved hands of two preparators and a cleaning woman seen through a window, and the only sound is minimal electronic music. In New York, the weather is snowy and dark; in Los Angeles, staggeringly bright.
If Ms. Levine’s appropriation was a one-to-one critique of the male artist-hero mythos that congealed around Brancusi, Ms. Rodriguez’s reframing would seem to be a critique of the old-fashioned matrix of money and power in which even Ms. Levine’s feminist reversal was still inextricably embedded. But what makes the video not merely effective but strangely moving is its air of scientific detachment. Taking in both Ms. Levine’s casts themselves and the tokens of wealth and access with which they’re surrounded — Warhols, sports cars, snapshots of the Clintons — with the same impartial attention, Ms. Rodriguez makes the entire complex social phenomenon of art making and collecting seem as blindly mechanical as evolution. If there is a critique, it’s in the suggestion that we could have dissolved our idols already just by looking at them more closely.