Hargreaves sent her children a message from the apex: “I am on the highest point of the world, and I love you dearly.” She perished months later while descending Earth’s second-highest peak, K2.
Since 1851, obituaries in The New York Times have been dominated by white men. With Overlooked, we’re adding the stories of remarkable people.
With that triumph, she became the first woman in history to conquer the Earth’s apex — 29,029 feet high — alone and without bottled oxygen. Hargreaves, one of the world’s greatest alpinists then and of all time, also did without the fixed ropes set by others on that Himalayan climb. Only the Italian mountaineer Reinhold Messner had ascended Everest in a similar manner before.
Her homeland, Britain — stoked by a front-page headline in The Times of London that read “One of the greatest climbs in history” — rejoiced.
“The rest of Fleet Street followed, keeping the story in the air” until her return, her daughter, Kate Ballard, said in January.
But the excitement did not last long. Exactly three months after Everest, in the late afternoon of Aug. 13, Hargreaves reached the summit of K2 in Pakistan, the world’s second-highest peak. Just hours later, she and five others died when they were engulfed by a storm with fierce winds that rose up the mountain. She was 33.
After her death, a backlash — fueled by a media frenzy around her death — began to mount. Some called her selfish and criticized the choice to leave behind young children to put herself in harm’s way. Similar denunciations were not leveled so harshly against the fathers who died on the mountain alongside her.
“I just hope that there was a point to Alison’s death and that, in the long term, what she achieved will help shift attitudes,” he said.
Some would say she did just that. Hargreaves was a “trailblazer,” Molly Schiot, who profiled Hargreaves in her 2016 book, “Game Changers: The Unsung Heroines of Sports History,” told the online magazine Oxy last year.
Her courageous Everest climb helped in “breaking down social constructs of what it means to be a mom,” Schiot said.
On July 28, 2017, the mountaineer Vanessa O’Brien conquered K2, becoming the first American woman to do so. (She also holds a British passport.) And at 52, O’Brien was also the oldest woman to reach the peak.
Two days later, on July 30, she paid tribute to Hargreaves in a Twitter post. “I respect & acknowledge Julie Tullis (1986) & Alison Hargreaves (1995) who lost their lives on descent of #K2 - I thought of them often #RIP,” she wrote. Tullis, a British climber, died during a storm while descending K2.
In 2015, her son, Tom Ballard, who was 6 years old when she died, became the first person to climb the north faces alone in a winter season. Her daughter is also a mountaineer.
In a way, Tom’s first Alps ascent was with his mother. In July 1988, Hargreaves scaled the treacherous north face of Eiger while six months pregnant with him. The trek was to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the first ascent of Eiger.
In her last interview, Hargreaves addressed the challenges and inequality female mountaineers faced. The interview was conducted on July 27, 1995, at K2’s base camp by Matt Comeskey, a fellow climber who went on to survive the storm after turning back early. It was obtained by The Independent, and published that September.
“I’ve always had a chip on my shoulder, I’m sure,” she said.
Alison Jane Hargreaves was born on Feb. 17, 1962, in Derby, England. She was the second of three children of John Edward Hargreaves, a senior scientific officer at British Rail Derby, and Joyce Winifred Hargreaves, born Carlisle.
She was survived by her mother and father; her husband; her two children; her sister, Susan, and brother, Richard. Her father has since died.
At 28,251 feet, K2 in the Karakoram Range of Pakistan is just under the height of Everest but is regarded as far more demanding and dangerous. Hargreaves was a member of an American expedition led by Rob Slater. Also on the mountain was a team from Spain and a New Zealand expedition led by Peter Edmund Hillary, son of Sir Edmund Hillary, the first man to conquer Everest.
Extreme weather sent most of the climbers back before reaching the top, including Hillary and some members of his team, like Comeskey. But Hargreaves and Slater teamed up with Bruce Grant and Jeff Lakes from the New Zealand group, and the Spaniards Javier Escartin, Javier Olivar and Lorenzo Ortiz for another try. It would prove fatal.
All but Lakes, who had turned back, reached the summit. Hargreaves did so without artificial oxygen. Lakes died from exposure on his descent.
Hargreaves had intended to attempt the third-highest peak in the world, Kanchenjunga in the Himalayas, next.
