Sammy Williams, who won a Tony Award in his Broadway acting debut for his wrenching monologue as Paul, the tormented young gay man and aspiring dancer seeking artistic validation, in the original production of “A Chorus Line,” died on Saturday in North Hollywood, Calif. He was 69.
The cause was cancer, his brother Carmen said.
Written in the decade before the AIDS epidemic placed gay rights on the nation’s agenda, Mr. Williams’s role was considered cathartic for people who felt in a similar position — young, bullied and reticent about their sexual orientation if not embarrassed by it.
A record-breaking musical about backstage life — it won nine Tonys and a Pulitzer Prize — “A Chorus Line” was a play within a play. The audience often squirmed as an exacting director whittled down applicants for the chorus during auditions not only by watching them perform but also by extracting revelatory confessions of why they so desperately wanted to dance.
Mr. Williams was 26 when he first played Paul San Marco, an awkward and shy gay Puerto Rican dancer from Spanish Harlem. It was his first speaking part.
When it was his turn to be grilled by the director in the play, he delivers a nearly 10-minute introspective monologue recounting how he had dropped out of Catholic school, despairingly joined an itinerant drag troupe and is now hungry for a legitimate job dancing to validate his life.
Mr. Williams won the Tony Award for best performance by a featured actor in a musical in 1976 as well as an Obie Award.
The script was a case of art imitating life. It was heavily drawn from taped interviews with actual dancers, leavened by a hefty dose of artistic license.
Paul’s story was drawn from that of Nicholas Dante, who wrote the book for the show with James Kirkwood Jr. It also mirrored Mr. Williams’s own journey from personal humiliation to self-awareness and acceptance and to professional recognition.
Samuel Joseph Williams was born on Nov. 13, 1948, in Trenton to Joseph Williams, a factory worker, and the former Nona Dibella, who worked in a hospital.
In addition to his brother Carmen, he is survived by his father; another brother, Joseph; and his stepmother, Julie Williams.
After graduating from Steinert High School in Hamilton Township, N.J., where he performed in school plays, Mr. Williams, at 19, went to New York to try his luck. Within a year he had landed in the ensemble of David Merrick’s “The Happy Time” on Broadway (where he also understudied for 20 parts). He later danced opposite Lauren Bacall in “Applause,” which opened in 1970.
After winning the Tony, Mr. Williams’s life imitated art.
In the play, Paul injures his knee during an audition, and, in a painful reminder of fleeting fame, he is dropped as one of the remaining candidates for the chorus.
In 1983, he returned to the Broadway cast of “A Chorus Line” for two years, but by then, he said, the depictions on stage seemed less authentic.
By evoking the decades when Mr. Williams was, indeed, a winner, the show’s title was an implicit reminder — if Mr. Williams or Paul San Marco needed one — of fame’s ephemerality.
