Our economics reporter broke down the reasons — and risks — behind the move.
And the European Union hit back. A top official with the bloc vowed to slap tariffs on Harley-Davidsons, Kentucky bourbon and jeans if the White House goes through with the plan. Above, steel imports in Houston.
2. A gunman fatally shot two people at a Central Michigan University residence hall, above, sending police officers swarming to the campus and setting off a search for the gunman.
Many Americans can buy a gun legally in less than an hour. We compared the laws in 15 countries. In many places, it can take months for would-be gun owners, who must undergo training and extensive background checks.
3. A fierce nor’easter punished much of the East Coast, toppling power lines, stranding travelers and causing dangerous flooding from Georgia to Maine. Above, Scituate, Mass.
Europe has also seen intense winter weather this week, with heavy snow and freezing temperatures — while the Arctic saw comparatively balmy temperatures.
Researchers say the extreme weather is most likely linked to climate change. A growing body of research suggests that the warming Arctic is weakening the polar vortex, allowing cold air to escape, much like when you leave your refrigerator door open.
4. A statewide teacher strike in West Virginia entered its seventh day, with educators defying efforts by the governor and union leaders to end the walkout with a deal to raise pay.
The walkout began after months of simmering tension over proposed changes to teachers’ health insurance plans, among other issues.
5. The Trump administration’s decision to shrink Bears Ears National Monument in Utah was guided by the prospect of drilling for oil and gas, internal documents show.
We filed a lawsuit to get documents related to the decision, which was announced last spring. It reduced the site’s size by 85 percent.
Oil and gas deposits within the boundaries of the monument could have been used to raise revenue for public schools had the land not been under federal protection.
6. We spoke at length to Leopoldo López, the most prominent leader of Venezuela’s opposition, in a series of video chats while he was under house arrest.
They were his first interviews since he was released from prison in July. He had served three years — including months in solitary confinement — for leading protests.
Getting a photograph of Mr. López was a challenge — because he was forbidden from speaking to the press, we couldn’t send a photographer. The image above was shot by his sister Diana López and is featured on the cover of this week’s Times Magazine.
After the article was published, armed guards from the Venezuelan intelligence service raided and occupied his home. His supporters gathered there, too, to protest the invasion — and threats that he’ll be returned to prison.
7. Prince Harry and his fiancée, Meghan Markle, will invite more than 1,000 members of the public to celebrate their marriage in May.
The palace said it would select applicants from a broad range of backgrounds and ages, including young people who have shown strong leadership.
The wedding will take place in Windsor Castle’s 15th-century chapel. A reception for friends and family hosted by Prince Charles will follow.
8. What should you cook this weekend? Our food editor, Sam Sifton, has many suggestions, including a simple salad like the one served by “the pizza mystic” Mark Iacono at Lucali in Brooklyn.
10. Finally, Stephen Colbert mused that White House tours must be really interesting these days.
And Hollywood is getting ready for the first Oscars of the #MeToo era, which are Sunday at 8 p.m. Eastern. Above, the preparations.
Here are our reporter’s predictions of the winners. Cast your own vote here.
