Mr. Cuomo wound up finding an audience at black churches each of the last two Sundays — rare back-to-back appearances for him at the pulpit.
In between his visits, Ms. Nixon formally declared her candidacy, making her first appearance in Brownsville, Brooklyn, speaking before a mostly black audience in one of the poorer neighborhoods in the city. And she gave her first formal interview to the oldest black newspaper in the country.
The Democratic primary for governor may be less than a week old but the battle between Mr. Cuomo and Ms. Nixon for the African-American vote is already underway, underscoring the importance of a voting bloc where Ms. Nixon’s own advisers acknowledge she must make inroads to have any chance at victory.
Ms. Nixon, an education advocate and actress best known for her role in “Sex and the City,” has also personally been reaching out to community leaders, knowing she must crack Mr. Cuomo’s hold on the black vote. He scored 77 percent support in the race’s first poll among African-American voters.
Black leaders in clergy, politics and the media are well aware of the courtship and savoring their newfound leverage.
Senior administration officials say the governor’s recent activity has nothing to do with Ms. Nixon and everything to do with the state budget, due next week, where the governor is seeking to mobilize black support for some of the thorniest remaining issues, including on public housing and school funding. Mr. Cuomo has appeared at black churches during past budget seasons.
Mr. Miller, the pastor of Brown Memorial Baptist Church, said that after he hung up with Mr. Cuomo’s team, he sent text messages to another 30 black pastors across New York City to ask that they not reflexively acquiesce. “I requested that they think carefully about hosting the governor until he becomes responsive to our concerns,” Mr. Miller said.
Mr. Cuomo has had a complex relationship with black leadership in the state dating back to his first failed run for governor, in 2002, when he challenged H. Carl McCall, then the state comptroller who was seeking to become New York’s first black governor, for the Democratic nomination.
But in recent years, black voters have provided him a bulwark of support. Mr. Cuomo’s last challenger, Zephyr Teachout, never penetrated Mr. Cuomo’s political standing in minority communities. She finished with an abysmal 14 percent of the vote in the Bronx.
“Clearly, Cynthia Nixon understands that if she can’t break through Andrew Cuomo’s African-American firewall, she has no shot at being competitive,” said Representative Hakeem Jeffries of Brooklyn, a Cuomo ally.
Before she launched her campaign, Ms. Nixon gave a quick heads-up call to the Rev. Al Sharpton, the influential civil-rights leader and media figure. She also sat down privately with the Rev. Michael A. Walrond Jr., senior pastor at the 10,000-member First Corinthian Baptist Church in Central Harlem; she showed up to services unannounced the following Sunday. Bertha Lewis, president of the Black Institute and a longtime community activist, said Ms. Nixon also called her days before announcing a run to solicit her opinion.
The exact minute that Ms. Nixon announced her campaign on Twitter — 2:02 p.m. last Monday — she personally texted Elinor Tatum, the publisher and editor of the Amsterdam News, the historic black newspaper, to alert her to the news. Ms. Nixon granted her first sit-down interview to the paper.
Ms. Nixon, who also attended services on Sunday at a predominantly African-American church, Mount Pisgah Baptist in Brooklyn, is expected to follow up her call to Mr. Sharpton with a meal together soon at the famed Harlem soul-food restaurant Sylvia’s, likely at the same window table where Mr. Sharpton met separately with Barack Obama and Bernie Sanders as they ran for president.
Mr. Sharpton “will weigh in after he’s met with Ms. Nixon,” according to Rachel Noerdlinger, a spokeswoman for Mr. Sharpton. Mr. Sharpton has worked closely with Mr. Cuomo on criminal justice-matters, praising him at the governor’s mansion as recently as last month.
Not all of Ms. Nixon’s early maneuverings have played well.
Ms. Ampry-Samuel said she still had not heard from Ms. Nixon or her team as of Friday but has spoken with the governor’s team multiple times in recent days, mostly about the state budget.
In addition to his private outreach, Mr. Cuomo has appeared alongside mostly black and Latino residents multiple times this month to decry the “filth” of New York City Housing Authority developments and to threaten to declare a state of emergency for the agency.
Earlier this month, the governor met with a small group of influential black leaders in Albany about education equity funding, related to a proposal he made in January.
One of the attendees, Rev. Alfred L. Cockfield, II, executive pastor of God’s Battalion of Prayer Church in East Flatbush, got a call from Mr. Cuomo’s team afterward asking if the governor could appear at his pulpit.
Mr. Cockfield said he knew “it was strategic” for Mr. Cuomo, and that he experienced some pushback from some Democratic elected officials, but decided to let him speak anyway.
“It’s the first time any sitting governor came to our church. Why would I turn down that opportunity?” he said.
The governor’s speech was about closing Rikers Island, fixing public housing and equitable education funding — all issues tuned to appeal to an African-American audience, and potentially at stake in the state budget.
“It tells you he thinks there’s a vulnerability there,” said Bill Hyers, a senior strategist advising Ms. Nixon.
Mr. Cuomo’s operation pointed to his track record for the black community, including increasing the minimum wage to $15 per hour, raising the age of criminal responsibility to 18 and issuing an executive order naming the state attorney general as a special prosecutor for police-related civilian deaths.
“Why in the world would we abandon him when throughout his time in office he’s never abandoned us?” Mr. Jeffries said.
Some black leaders are looking for more.
Mr. Green, president of a group of pastors named Mobilizing Preachers and Community, said he rejected Mr. Cuomo’s first request to introduce him at a black church a week ago in part because he is unhappy with the governor’s record on minority contracting. “Why should we continue to give him access to our pulpits?” he said in an interview earlier in the week.
Mr. Cuomo swayed and clapped as the congregation sang, he hugged and kissed members of the choir and he quoted scripture three times in his speech.
Assemblywoman Rodneyse Bichotte, who has been critical of Mr. Cuomo on minority contracting, said the governor’s team has begun reaching out to her almost daily about Vital Brooklyn, a $1.4 billion proposal from March 2017 to address poverty and violence, since it became clear Ms. Nixon might enter the campaign.
Another wrinkle is that Mr. Cuomo’s lieutenant governor, Kathy Hochul, is facing a challenge from Jumaane Williams, a black New York City councilman from Central Brooklyn. Shortly after Mr. Williams announced, it was floated that Mr. Cuomo was considering swapping Ms. Hochul for Lovely Warren, the mayor of Rochester, an African-American woman.
“Governor Cuomo generally is concerned about himself so I’ve found he treats people in those positions like chess pieces,” Mr. Williams said.
Mr. Cuomo has since said Ms. Hochul would be his running mate.
Eric L. Adams, the Brooklyn borough president who has been critical of Mr. Cuomo, leapt into the middle of the primary last Tuesday when he requested on Twitter that Ms. Nixon tour a Brooklyn public housing complex with him. “This campaign season gives us the chance to raise these issues,” he said.
