An article on Wednesday about George Nader, an adviser to the United Arab Emirates with ties to current and former aides to President Trump, referred imprecisely to the way in which the United Arab Emirates invested in Russian projects. The U.A.E. co-invested in projects together with the Russian Direct Investment Fund, or RDIF; it did not invest in the RDIF itself.
A comedy entry in the Listings pages on Friday incorrectly stated that the album “Apologies From Men” would be available for purchase at the show of the same title. It will not be, but it is available online.
A “Watching” article on Friday about television and film recommendations misstated the nationality of the character Edgar in “Babylon Berlin.” He is Armenian, not Albanian.
Because of an editing error, a picture caption with an article on Page 14 about the NBC drama “Rise” misidentified the character played by Josh Radnor. As the article correctly noted, he plays Lou Mazzuchelli, a fictional character based on the visionary real-life drama teacher Lou Volpe; he does not play Lou Volpe.
An article on Page 12 about the comic book artist Billy Graham described incorrectly Mr. Graham’s initial involvement with the Black Panther comics and his role in designing Wakanda, the Black Panther’s homeland. Marvel assigned Mr. Graham to the title; his friend Don McGregor did not ask him to collaborate on it. Mr. McGregor and Alex Simmons designed the maps of Wakanda; Mr. Graham was not involved.
A profile of Ida B. Wells on Page 4 referred imprecisely to voting rights during Reconstruction. Black men were able to vote. Women did not get the right to vote until 1920.
An obituary on Friday about the former Nestlé chief executive Hans O. Maucher, using information from a company spokeswoman, misstated the number of sons who survive him. It is two, not three.
An obituary on Feb. 27 about the real estate magnate George S. Kaufman, who was chairman of Kaufman Astoria Studios in Astoria, Queens, incorrectly included one title on a list of television shows that have used those studios. The police procedural “Blue Bloods” is not produced there.