Conor Grady and Catherine Chiabaut met five years ago, as graduate students at Yale University, where he was in medical school and she was getting a Ph.D. in French literature.
When Dr. Grady, now 30, left New Haven for New York City, to do his residency in neurosurgery at NYU Langone Medical Center, he decided he needed little more than a place to sleep. So he rented a small one-bedroom in Kips Bay — a ground-floor apartment with a concrete backyard and a view of the alley — for around $2,000 a month.
Inside, there wasn’t room for much more than a collapsible table. “We didn’t like keeping the table open because it swallowed all of the space,” said Ms. Chiabaut, 26, who was still living in New Haven, where she was renting a one-bedroom for $1,065.
The couple, who married a year and a half ago, traveled constantly between the two cities. And when Ms. Chiabaut completed her teaching requirements last spring, she joined her husband permanently in Manhattan.
Moving immediately became a priority.
Ms. Chiabaut works mostly from home, and the small, dark apartment felt suffocating.
The couple also disliked Kips Bay, which to them felt soulless and lacking greenery, dominated by high-rises and sports bars.
For fun, they often headed downtown. “Because Conor has relatively little free time, it was important to be in a neighborhood where we could easily go to a bar or restaurant, or meet up with friends,” Ms. Chiabaut said.
They focused on the East Village, within walking distance of the hospitals on First Avenue. Their budget was $2,400 to $2,700, a little less than they had been paying to live separately.
Ms. Arrendell took them to see one-bedrooms in walk-up buildings, the area’s most common housing stock.
One apartment on Second Avenue and East Third Street, for $2,575, felt like their old place, only not quite as small or as dark. To Dr. Grady, it — and everything else they saw — seemed fine, and certainly better than their old place. “I tended to see only the upside,” he said.
Ms. Chiabaut was more discriminating. “We were having radically different reactions to the apartments,” she said. To her, “all of these apartments looked the same”: pricier than the old place, but no better.
Both, however, were excited by a railroad-style one-bedroom on First Avenue that was a relatively large 600 square feet. As they climbed the stairs, they could see sunlight streaming from beneath the door. And the renovation was so recent they could smell the sawdust.
“I don’t think I’d seen a place that was so aggressively new-appearing,” Dr. Grady said.
Oddly, though, the bathroom was part of the kitchen, with two sliding doors: One hid a toilet and sink; the other, a stall shower.
The couple’s only reservation was about the complete lack of closets.
They visited one more prewar walk-up, on East 9th Street, listed at $2,325. It had two tiny bedrooms, but otherwise looked like all the rest. And there were other people at the open house who were ready to sign on.
Several days passed, and the bathroom-in-the-kitchen apartment was still available. Their choice was clear.
The couple agreed to a monthly rent of $2,600, and arrived in the late spring, after paying a broker’s fee of 15 percent of a year’s rent, or nearly $4,700.
Soon after, they learned that their new home had at least one drawback: the constant noise from trucks barreling up the street. Now they run a fan at night, to generate white noise.
Another, happier discovery was their new neighborhood’s specialty.
Inside the apartment, Ikea has helped with the closet situation. And the couple now has a table that seats six.
