There was nothing traditional about the union of Michelle Mead-Armor and John Armor. She was 57 and he 65, they had a total of six ex-spouses between them, and had dated each other, and broken up, three and a half decades before. They first met in 1972, when she was a 21-year-old student at Goucher College and Mr. Armor, a lawyer, was representing her husband in a case in Baltimore. She had accused her husband of assault and battery. Mr. Armor, though, won the case. Her husband then left the country.
Ms. Mead-Armor, who was living temporarily in a dorm at her college, then asked Mr. Armor to help get her belongings from the house she and her husband had shared. An unlikely romance blossomed. They were engaged in 1973 before she ended it, she said, feeling anxious about becoming a stepmother of three, and feeling tension with his family and friends.
They got in touch again by email in 2004, and met in New York for drinks in 2005. They married in June 2008. Two years and two months later, Ms. Mead-Armor would become a widow.
When they became reacquainted, Mr. Armor, an author and senior legal adviser for the American Civil Rights Union, was living in his childhood summer home in Highlands, N.C., in the Blue Ridge Mountains. At the time, she was living in Manhattan, working as a researcher of corporate loans for a German bank. With no driver’s license, she left her banking job in 2006 and relocated to be with him.
The 1918 house had no central heating, no air-conditioning, and spring water. When she moved down he had fallen behind on his utility bills, she said, and she paid them with the severance from her job.
Even after the bills were paid, the house caused problems. In the winter, she slept in a woolen hat, gloves, pajamas, and a nightgown. During one particularly frisky cold spell the windows became so loose that there was snow in the bedroom.
One summer there was no water for two weeks; the couple fetched water from their friends and ate off paper plates. She told him she was tired of it.
Mr. Armor could be whimsical. A fan of Benjamin Franklin, he often impersonated him at public events, complete with a serpent’s-head cane. At night, in bed, Ms. Mead-Armor read cookbooks, which Mr. Armor called “food porn.” In the car, when the couple came to a road they had never been down, they would take it, to see what they could find.
She helped pull him out of his shell, getting him to travel to Scotland, Ireland, Greece, Croatia and Italy. Despite his well-heeled background (he had attended a boarding school and Yale), Mr. Armor had never been to Europe. Ms. Mead-Armor, a published poet, had lived in Sydney for five years and Paris for 14 and has a master’s degree in translation from N.Y.U.
He ran unsuccessfully for a congressional seat in North Carolina, in the 2006 Republican primary, before they married. She said sometimes he could be insensitive and he began spending an increasing amount of time sitting in his bathrobe watching Fox News and expected her to tend to him.
Still, he respected her intelligence and never underestimated her. Both appreciated The Highlands Newspaper, and after a columnist died, Ms. Mead-Armor suggested that she and Mr. Armor write a column, a combination of personal and political. He was so inspired that he drove her to the editor’s office so they could pitch themselves. The editor bit. The column was named “His & Hers,” and they alternated from week to week. It featured a photo of her in a French beret and him a felt, wide-brimmed hat.
In April 2010, a colonoscopy revealed that he had rectal cancer. He breezed through chemotherapy and radiation, never losing his hair or weight. He and Ms. Mead-Armor were optimistic; his cancer had an 85 percent survival rate. After his surgery that August, he wrote a column called “The End of My Cancer,” urging readers to get colonoscopies.
After she noticed that he was being rude to the hospital workers, beeping the call button constantly, she told him he had to stop. The next morning when she returned he had a complete change of attitude, saying “please” and “thank you” to his nurses.
Even after death, life was complicated. It took three years to probate his estate. Because of legal issues surrounding the estate, the home was eventually auctioned off, as were his possessions. Ms. Mead-Armor, after having the highest bid, retained some personal items, like his Benjamin Franklin cane.
A few weeks before Mr. Armor died, his eighth book, “These Are the Times That Try Men’s Souls,” a collection of Thomas Paine’s writings that he had edited for 10 years, was published by the American Civil Rights Union. At the launch in the Highlands public library, he announced to the crowd, “There are three women without whom this book could not have seen the day,” and named his boss at the ACRU, his editor and his illustrator.
The autumn after he died, she moved to an apartment above a bookstore in town. But it was difficult to be in Highlands without him. “I had to go past the place I didn’t live, the restaurants we had eaten in, and the church I used to go to,” she said.
She also found less sympathy as a widow than she had expected. When Mr. Armor was alive, they would invite widowed and single friends to accompany them to dinner and the theater, rather than couples. But after his death, few extended that courtesy to her.
By 2013, she was reminiscing about her hometown, Waynesboro, Va., in the Blue Ridge Mountains. She found a townhouse on the banks of the South River, with Canada geese on the lawn, and fell in love with it on the spot.
She has found her home in Waynesboro, singing in a choir, serving on the board of the local concert association, and attending the Unitarian Universalist fellowship. She has developed an interest in genealogy, discovering an ancestor who fought in the Civil War — “for the right side.” Mr. Armor had always been proud of his lineage, but it turned out her ancestors arrived in America 200 years before his. In 2014, at the age of 63, she finally got her driver’s license.
