Sports can be viewed closely, in terms of the game, technique, strategy; or broadly, in terms of the culture, politics, business. I find the latter particularly interesting, especially in Major League Baseball, where nearly 30 percent of the players are foreign-born Latin Americans. So as a sportswriter for The Times, I’m always on the lookout for stories that capture the fascinating dynamics of M.L.B. clubhouses, which have a mix of players from the United States, Cuba, Venezuela, Japan, the Dominican Republic, Aruba and so on.
Stories about those themes have the potential to appeal to a wider audience — the readers who don’t necessarily wonder how Matt Harvey’s changeup is progressing this spring. Last year, I wrote about Latino players who had learned English by watching the sitcom “Friends.” The year before, I wrote about how music had bridged a cultural gap between certain Mets.
Without intending to, I encountered an idea that eventually led to the article about a supermarket cafeteria in Port St. Lucie, Fla., where many Mets players from Latin America had gotten a taste of home for years. Through its owner, a former minor league baseball player, some players had even found cheap rent or jobs.
During spring training last year, I was chatting with Ronny Reyes, a Mets minor league official, when I asked if there was a good place to get Latin American food in Port St. Lucie, the sleepy town full of chain restaurants where the Mets’ spring training facility is.
I asked half-selfishly because, as a Nicaraguan-American, I was craving rice and beans and fried plantains. But I was also curious where dozens of Latino minor leaguers get their fix of home cooking. Baseball people — and reporters — are away from home so much that there is a shared bond over how to intersperse bits of comfort into the grind of a two-month spring training and six-month season.
Reyes mentioned a nearby supermarket chain, Bravo, with a cafeteria that he and many minor leaguers frequented. I later stopped by for lunch and realized the potential for the story when I saw the selection of food at the cafeteria and the vibrancy of the supermarket.
I lived in Venezuela as a child, so I was immediately drawn to the tequeños, fried breaded cheese sticks. But I also noticed food from many different countries: Cuban coffee, Puerto Rican mofongo, Dominican oxtail stew. An assortment of people — from construction workers to families — waited in line for food. It looked, smelled and sounded like Latin America.
I told the longtime Mets infielder Jose Reyes and the top prospect Amed Rosario, both from the Dominican Republic, about my visit to Bravo, and their eyes lit up. They told me that they ate there often and that other teammates did, too. I tried to find a time when I could tag along with outfielder Juan Lagares, Reyes and Rosario on a visit.
This spring, Reyes agreed to let me and a photographer, Zack Wittman, tag along when he went to the supermarket for lunch.
A week before, I paid a visit to the supermarket and later talked to Luis Merejo, one of the owners, who told me about his baseball career, how he got into the supermarket business and how he had gotten to know many Mets players over the years.
I met him at the supermarket one morning and interviewed him over a breakfast of eggs, mangú (Dominican mashed plantains) and a pastelito de queso (cheese pastry). He walked me around the supermarket and showed me the house he owned nearby where Rosario and a few former players, who now work in the store’s meat department, rented rooms. Behind the house was a batting cage where Merejo’s son and Rosario practiced their swings.
I later interviewed the supermarket staff and the Mets’ Latino players who ate there often. Wittman spent a few days taking photos, and we hung out in the bustling kitchen and cafeteria. The cooks were all Latinas and happy to tell us what they were making. Later, my editor, Randy Archibold, helped me focus the story.
I’ll admit it: At first, I was sort of following my stomach. But I ended up finding a cultural story about a supermarket that brought a slice of home — and more — to baseball players who are far from it.