“I’m going to surround myself only with the best and most serious people,” Donald Trump told The Washington Post during his presidential campaign.
One of the people who’s been surrounding Trump is Sam Nunberg, a conservative political activist and former aide who had a protracted meltdown on live television yesterday, in separate interviews conducted by Gloria Borger, Erin Burnett, Ari Melber, Josh Robin, Jake Tapper and Katy Tur.
They shall not be moved. The West Virginia teachers’ strike is a case of hard-working people deciding that they’re no longer willing to accept substandard pay. My colleague Michelle Goldberg has a well-reported column explaining the issues.
Related: For a selection of classic American labor songs, including “We Shall Not Be Moved,” check out the Smithsonian’s Folkways project. If you’re interested in following the West Virginia strike, I recommend The Charleston Gazette-Mail, The Register Herald and The Herald-Dispatch.
Did you catch the crucial word there? It’s urging. The speaker of the House obviously has the power to do something about Trump’s announced tariffs on steel and aluminum products. Congress could pass a law that prevents him from imposing the tariffs, as Josh Barro of Business Insider explains. If Trump vetoes the law, Ryan could try to find the votes to override the veto.
But Ryan isn’t doing. He’s pretty-please urging.
That’s generally been the approach that congressional Republican leaders have taken toward Trump. They sporadically criticize him, but they rarely use their power to block behavior and policies they claim to oppose.
The one big exception to their timidity is telling. Republican senators have strongly supported Jeff Sessions as attorney general. If Trump were to fire Sessions, as he clearly wants to, the senators have made clear that they might not confirm Trump’s choice to replace him. And as a result, Trump has felt compelled to keep Sessions in the job.
As you probably learned back in school, Congress is a powerful branch of the federal government. The Constitution vested Congress with the power to do a lot more than urge. But until Ryan uses that power, the complaints don’t mean much.
The full Opinion report from The Times follows.