Son-mat, in Korean, translates literally as the taste of your hands. It refers to the natural instinct a cook brings to the kitchen, the inner jazz of cooking not by measurements but by feel, and the distinct culinary fingerprint that makes one person’s food taste like no other’s.
For Jenny Jiae Lee, a young Seoul-born, California-bred architect now living in New York, no Korean food in the city could make up for missing her mother’s son-mat. So two years ago, she asked her parents, Don and Sue Lee, who were living happily in retirement in a suburb of Los Angeles, to move across the country and open a Korean food stand in her new hometown.
Last May, after a year of hustling at the Long Island City Flea and staging pop-ups at bars, the family secured a corner in the snaking hallways of the Industry City food hall in Sunset Park, Brooklyn. Their stand, Ejen — meaning “now” in the sense of “from this moment forward” — is coolly modern in appearance, outfitted in Edison bulbs and sleek metal panels; but the food might as well have come from ancient, crusted pans in a fog of night-market smoke. It knows no time, and is all comfort.
The meatballs alone made me jealous of Ms. Lee’s childhood. Called dong-gue-rang-taeng, they’re part of a beloved category of battered and fried foods often prepared for Korean holidays and jesa, the annual ceremony to honor one’s ancestors. Here, they’re a tender meld of ground pork flecked with carrots and green onion, slightly flattened into a kind of carnal currency.
The breading — a dredge in flour, a dip in egg wash — is so light as to be barely noticeable, beyond the richness it brings. But note the high gloss, like a candy apple’s: At the last moment, the meatballs are anointed with a glaze of salty and sweet held in perfect suspension, neither flavor dominating the other.
Balance is a theme, notably in pork bulgogi, which unlike some versions in town doesn’t capitulate to sugar. Dumplings, packed with lush pork and cabbage, are steamed before frying so the skin takes on a faint crackle while the meat says juicy within.
There is a graceful economy to the small kitchen, with vegetables seasoned one by one and recurring as a steady motif. For japchae, chewy sweet-potato glass noodles the color of fading photographs are tangled with wood ear mushrooms, skinny strips of carrot, darkened spinach and cabbage still holding its crunch. Typically each ingredient is fried separately, but the elder Ms. Lee flings them together in the pan, on the theory that the brief skirmish draws out more flavor. She’s right.
In bibimbap, shiitakes, carrots, spinach and burdock are fanned out over rice and crowned by an egg with a still-quaking yolk. Pierce it and stir it in, and you have luxury; there’s hardly a need for the accompanying house-made gochujang (the one taste I found too sweet).
Fiercest of the dishes is soondubu jjigae, a long-simmered stew incarnadine from chile paste and chile oil, for which peppers are shipped from South Korea. (“Origin is important,” the younger Ms. Lee said.) One version exploits the voluptuousness of pork stock and melted fat; another, with a base of seafood stock, offers a smack of brine. Slippery blocks of tofu, nearly as soft as custard, bob at the surface.
Ms. Lee’s parents seem to have settled into their surroundings. “Welcome to my playground,” Mr. Lee said on a recent afternoon, as he tended a pot of soup. He was trained as a chemical engineer in South Korea; his wife was a nurse. They went on to run a wholesale trimmings business in the Los Angeles fashion district for 20 years. This is only their latest life.
With each order appears a small cup of kimchi. It varies by season; for winter, the elder Ms. Lee is making a gentler pickle of radish strands that can be eaten right away, without requiring prolonged fermentation. It’s bracing, from a dose of vinegar, and bears telltale chile flakes. But what else is in there?
