Carlos Flores was 17 when he and three accomplices tried to rob a bar in Queens, N.Y., in 1981. An off-duty police officer named Robert Walsh intervened, and he was shot and killed. Mr. Flores was convicted of second-degree murder, a conviction that carried a maximum sentence of 25 years to life in prison. But because he was not the shooter, the judge gave him 21 years to life.
Mr. Flores is now 54. He has served 37 years behind bars. The last time he got written up for a disciplinary offense was when he disobeyed an order to keep the mess hall line moving. That was more than 25 years ago. A recent risk-assessment test found that his release would pose the lowest risk of danger to the public. In other words, he’s the sort of person parole is designed for.
Mr. Flores is being locked up not because he’s a threat to society or has failed to show that he’s changed, but for a crime he committed nearly four decades ago. Too often, that’s the default attitude for New York’s parole commissioners, even after a state appeals court in 2016 ordered the board to weigh an inmate’s youth at the time of the crime in deciding whether he or she should be released.
While those rulings have struck down the most severe sentences for juveniles — the death penalty and mandatory life without parole — the New York appeals court rightly extended their logic to cases in which parole is technically available but is rarely or never granted. “A parole board is no more entitled to subject an offender to the penalty of life in prison in contravention of this rule than is a legislature or a sentencing court,” the state court said.
That’s right, of course, but it should go further. Parole officials should, as a rule, expect to release juvenile offenders who have served their minimum sentences. If the board has evidence that an inmate continues to pose a threat to the public, it’s reasonable to keep him or her locked up, but the inmate should still get future chances to show that he or she is ready to return to society.
In response to the state court’s ruling, New York’s Parole Board said last summer that it would start considering an inmates’ youth when deciding whether to release that inmate, but it still regularly rejects people like Mr. Flores, whom no one would describe as “irretrievably depraved.” On Tuesday, Mr. Flores filed a federal class-action lawsuit against the Parole Board, claiming that its knee-jerk denials of applications by inmates like him violate the Constitution. New York holds roughly 630 prisoners on indeterminate life sentences for crimes they committed before they turned 18.
New York’s Parole Board has long resisted modern understandings of crime and punishment, but the failure to treat juveniles as a unique category of offender exists nationwide. A 2016 report by the American Civil Liberties Union found that in just 12 states, more than 8,300 inmates were serving sentences of effective life — meaning 40 years or more — for crimes they had committed as juveniles. In Florida in 2015, 366 people were serving juvenile life sentences. Two were granted parole. And as in the rest of the justice system, race matters a great deal when it comes to who gets harsh juvenile sentences. A study of juvenile transfers to adult courts found that black juveniles were nearly two and a half times as likely as white juveniles to be tried as adults even when controlling for factors like prior records and seriousness of the offense.
Even in states with more enlightened parole procedures, release rates of juvenile lifers are not rising as they should. Many parole commissioners cling to outmoded prejudices about offenders, and most live in fear of letting out the guy who goes on to commit another terrible crime. They churn through parole applications, sometimes conducting dozens of interviews in a single afternoon. Because they face virtually no accountability for keeping people locked up, there is no incentive to vote for release. So they pay lip service to the new rules even as they disregard them, and the public generally doesn’t know the difference.
This persists despite the fact that people are far less likely to commit crimes as they get older. At a deeper level, though, parole becomes a meaningless concept if it is routinely denied in the situations where it’s most called for. That’s particularly true in the case of juvenile lifers. Parole boards in New York and elsewhere must not only make passing note of an offender’s youth. They must, as the Supreme Court has said repeatedly, give them a real chance to show they’ve grown up.