Terence Stamp and Carol White in “Poor Cow,” which will screen at the Metrograph on Saturday.Credit...Warner Bros.
CANADA NOW at IFC Center (through March 25). As usual, this annual series of recent cinema from our neighbor to the north imports some titles that screened at September’s Toronto International Film Festival. “Black Cop” (on Saturday), starring Ronnie Rowe Jr. as a police officer who faces discrimination and profiling in Halifax, offers a blunt look at Canadian race relations. “Mary Goes Round” (on Sunday) features Aya Cash as an addiction treatment counselor who has a drinking problem of her own.
‘CHARADE’ at Nitehawk Cinema (March 24-25, 11:15 a.m.). To honor the French couturier Hubert de Givenchy, who died this month, Nitehawk Cinema is hosting two brunch-time screenings of Stanley Donen’s “Charade,” for which Mr. de Givenchy designed Audrey Hepburn’s gowns. It’s a pretty glamorous get-up for her character, a translator whose husband has just been murdered, but this splashy, pseudo-Hitchcockian mystery — with memorable turns by Cary Grant, Walter Matthau, James Coburn and George Kennedy and a lively Henry Mancini score — zips along too amiably and fashionably for such pedestrian plausibility concerns.
CINEVARDAUTOPIA: THE FILMS OF AGNÈS VARDA, PART 1 at the Museum of the Moving Image (March 24-April 1). Even if she went home without an Oscar for the documentary “Faces Places,” the 89-year-old Ms. Varda (and the cardboard cutout that stood in her place at the nominees luncheon) was a delight on the awards circuit. “Faces Places,” directed with the artist JR, was her most recent work in a filmmaking career that has spanned more than six decades. The museum’s series — the first part of a planned recurring retrospective — opens with “Vagabond” (on Saturday and Sunday), a dramatic feature that reconstructs the journey of a French drifter (Sandrine Bonnaire), who, at the film’s start, is found frozen to death.
FOROUGH FARROKHZAD ON FILM at Anthology Film Archives (March 23-24, 7:30 p.m.). Anthology honors the Iranian poet Forough Farrokhzad (1935-67) with a double bill of two Persian cinema classics. “The House Is Black,” Ms. Farrokhzad’s own 21-minute documentary, shot at a leper colony, will screen with “The Wind Will Carry Us,” Abbas Kiarostami’s 2000 portrait of a production crew’s disruptive arrival in a remote Kurdish village. Ms. Farrokhzad’s poetry is read aloud in the film.
TERENCE STAMP at the Metrograph (March 23-April 1). Many actors grow up onscreen, but Mr. Stamp actually had an early role recycled. In “The Limey” (on March 31 and April 1), from 1999, he plays Wilson, a laconic criminal who travels from London to Los Angeles to avenge his daughter’s death. The director, Steven Soderbergh, repurposed scenes from Ken Loach’s “Poor Cow” (1968) to suggest Wilson’s younger days. But “Poor Cow” (on Saturday), featuring Mr. Stamp as a good-hearted thief who briefly offers the prospect of happiness for the wife (Carol White) of an imprisoned colleague, is worth seeing on its own; it may come as a surprise to viewers who know only Mr. Loach’s more didactic recent portraits of Britain’s working class. Those craving a more cryptic version of Mr. Stamp can catch him in Pier Paolo Pasolini’s influential “Teorema” (on March 31 and April 1) as an interloper who upends a wealthy household in Milan.
