LONDON — Edgar Peters Bowron was on a pre-opening inspection tour of the European Fine Art Fair in Maastricht, the Netherlands, one year when, at a new exhibitor’s stand, he spotted a large work attributed to a very well-known 17th-century painter.
The dealer was not a specialist in old masters or in 17th-century art, so the work was taken off the stand. “If we feel the painting is not in the best interest of the fair, we can remove it, and there’s no recourse,” explained Mr. Bowron, formerly the curator of European art at the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston.
Mr. Bowron is one of close to 190 vetters grouped in 29 Tefaf committees and in charge of checking that all objects pass muster. “You want to make sure that the people who come to your fair have confidence in what they buy,” said Tefaf’s New York-based chairman, Nanne Dekking, who was appointed in July and is co-founder and chief executive of Artory, a company that provides secure data on artworks.
That confidence has wavered a little since March 2017, when four galleries with stands at Tefaf were reported by the Dutch newspaper NRC Handelsblad to be under scrutiny for having sold potentially forged objects elsewhere. All four galleries have stands in this year’s fair, too.
“All of these kinds of things happening in the trade reflect badly on the trade,” he said. So his aim was to drive the number of dealers involved in vetting down to a minimum.
Currently, 8 percent of vetters are dealers, according to Tefaf. The rest are people with “no skin in the game,” as Mr. Bowron put it. The 29 vetting committees specialize in everything from ancient art, old master paintings, and modern and contemporary art to sculpture and design, photography, clocks and watches, ceramics, jewelry, glass, icons, silver, furniture and wallpaper.
Here is how the process works. Two days before the fair opens — with exhibitors strictly barred from entering the premises — the vetters gather. For the next day and a half, they scrutinize everything on sale.
They then issue one of three verdicts: that the object is fine, that the object is unacceptable (in which case it is removed and placed in safe storage), or that the object can stay but needs a label adjustment. That third option is “what happens most often,” said Cecile van Vlissingen, Tefaf’s vetting and special projects coordinator. Dealers can appeal a decision by providing backup documentation.
Those tools can be highful effective. Mr. van Langh recalled how X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometry, or XRF, showed that a jewel labeled 17th-century was in fact from the 19th century — it had traces of chromium, which did not exist in the 17th century — and was worth a lot less. “The dealer did not like that,” Mr. van Langh said.
Also involved in the screening process is the London-based Art Loss Register, which keeps a computerized record of lost or stolen artworks by pooling information from law enforcement, governments and intergovernmental organizations. The register works with more than a dozen fairs around the world.
In another incident, a painting attributed to Raoul Dufy turned out to be one in a series of fakes identified by the German police and recorded on the register. The dealer who planned to bring it to the fair had to cross it off the list, Mr. Korner said.
Yet to most gallerists, vetting is a crucial and necessary process that builds up credibility all around. Ursula Casamonti, director of the Tornabuoni Art London gallery (which has a stand at Tefaf every year), said that at the Frieze Masters fair in London last October, the vetting committee asked that a modern Italian painting bought five years earlier be taken down. “It’s always a bit unnerving when that happens, but they always give you the reason,” Ms. Casamonti said.
It turned out that the British police had not been informed by the Italian police that a lawsuit involving the painting’s previous owner had been resolved. When Italian police documentation was provided, “we were able to hang the painting back up,” Ms. Casamonti said.
Vetting has been known to yield pleasant surprises, too.
