When new firefighters arrived at his firehouse in Harlem, Michael Davidson would take it upon himself to supplement their training with advice on how to handle themselves at fires and even how to exercise. When a colleague’s daughter needed help, he organized a fund-raiser. And just a few days ago, after another winter storm, he went around to neighbors’ houses with a snowblower.
Mostly, though, his drive to help people came through on the job. He followed his father into the Fire Department, even working in the same firehouse, and he had repeatedly been cited by the department for the bravery he demonstrated and his lifesaving actions. On Thursday night, he responded to a call of a fire tearing through an old jazz club being used as a movie set. He was critically injured and taken to a hospital, where he died.
“He was a rock,” said John Hession, who grew up with Mr. Davidson in the Woodside neighborhood of Queens.
His death comes as the department mourned the deaths of two firefighters, Lt. Christopher J. Raguso and Fire Marshal Christopher T. Zanetis, who were among service members killed last week in a United States military helicopter crash during a transport mission in western Iraq.
Fire officials said Mr. Davidson, who joined the department in 2003 and was assigned to Engine 69 in Upper Manhattan, was the 1,150th person in the department’s history to be killed on duty.
Last year, William Tolley, a 14-year veteran of the department, died from falling from the roof of an apartment building while fighting a fire in Queens, and an emergency medical technician, Yadira Arroyo, was killed when a man stole her ambulance and ran her over in the Bronx. And in 2016, Battalion Chief Michael J. Fahy was killed after being hit by debris in an explosion at a drug house in the Bronx.
Mr. Davidson was cited four times for bravery and lifesaving actions, officials said. Last year, he helped resuscitate a woman who had gone into respiratory and cardiac arrest. And in 2005, he was working the nozzle as a fire swept through room after room of a Harlem apartment building, spreading across three floors; he burned his hands but did not retreat.
On Friday, firefighters in plainclothes arrived at the brick firehouse on West 143rd Street where Mr. Davidson was assigned, hugging and patting one another on the shoulders. Police officers delivered food. Jacqueline Harrison was among the people living nearby who brought flowers.
Mr. Davidson enjoyed taking his children to sports practices and fire department events, his wife said. They would play basketball in the driveway, and he recently built a snowman with his children in the yard.
Now, his family and other firefighters were grappling with his death. He had been so vital and such a force in their lives — “he had this, like, aura about him,” his brother Eric, who is also a New York City firefighter, said.
