FRIDAY PUZZLE — By the time you read this, I will be packed and ready to go to the American Crossword Puzzle Tournament, which runs this weekend at the Marriott Hotel in Stamford, Conn. Attendance is booming, I’m told, but if you want to pay a walk-in fee and compete or even just observe, I’m sure the tournament host, Will Shortz, will be happy to squeeze you in.
Standings will be posted throughout the weekend as we have time, but you can also follow the puzzle-by-puzzle proceedings on the A.C.P.T. rankings page. Wordplay daily columns will continue through the weekend (the amazingly dangerous Caitlin Lovinger will be here to make sure you don’t have any loud parties while I’m away), and I will be linking early next week to an article I’m writing for the Metro section about the joys of gathering for this pastime of ours.
Speaking of puzzles, I came away from today’s crossword by Erik Agard with my hair mussed and having broken a light sweat. That’s a good thing, by the way — a Friday puzzle should make you struggle a bit.
It’s not just the entries that did that, although there are quite a lot of beauties here. Mr. Agard debuts a total of 11 words and phrases, although one is a scene in a play with a Roman numeral, but you can’t win ’em all. The ones that really stood out to me were POLICE BOX (because I am a devoted “Doctor Who” fan who wished for a TARDIS when other kids were wishing for a jet pack); KISS ON THE CHEEK (awww …); MAKEUP TUTORIAL (these are tremendously popular on YouTube and have also become a large part of the ASMR video boom, which focuses on personal care activities to help viewers relax and fall asleep); AFROPUNK; and JANET MOCK, the creator of the #girlslikeus campaign and transgender rights activist. Also, bonus points for debuting the plural ZAMBONIS, which, to me, is one of the funniest words around.
Remember, even if there are things you absolutely don’t know — I struggled with the Bollywood actress’s name, RANI — the crossings are there to put a floor under you. It’s not for nothing that the gimme “Living la VIDA Loca” is where it is.
Nicely done, Mr. Agard. I’ll see you in Stamford.
16A: Very clever. “SsorcA-41?” is not some mysterious chemical compound, it’s a hint to what you need to do to the previous answer at 14-Across: MOOR at 14-Across gets flipped, like its clue, to ROOM.
20A: My thoughts for “Sweet farewell” went to “adieus,” but that’s not long enough. I like KISS ON THE CHEEK much better.
22A: I was baffled by the clue for CHIPPY because I thought it was an old and offensive term for a woman, but it’s apparently also a British term that can mean two things. It is slang for a fish-and-chips shop, and it is also a term for an aggressively belligerent person.
25A: If you think that solving crossword puzzles means that you have to know exactly in which scene Mark Antony buys the farm in “Antony and Cleopatra,” please see my remarks above about the Bollywood actress. No one knows which scene that was. But you can find out by solving the crossings.
40A: No offense, Africa. “One with a big mouth in Africa?” refers to the mouth of the NILE river.
57A: Nicely done. The clue “Where bills pile up” sounds like we’re supposed to be thinking about bills to pay, but in this case, the clue is hinting at paper money. Bills pile up in a TILL.
2D: Wordplay alert! An ATTIC is not a software developer, because that would be silly. But spider webs? Like you wouldn’t believe.
3D: Tricky. Both shepherds who shepherd sheep (try saying that 10 times fast) and German shepherd dogs are spelled with a lowercase S, but only one wears a LEASH, as far as we know.
31D: A common way to clue an OBIT. “End piece?” could be the last article in a magazine, or it could be a piece written about you when it’s the end.
48D: More wordplay! “Down” can be a noun (the down on a duck) or it can be an adverb, which is what the clue “Where to get down from?” might imply. Today, we’re supposed to be thinking of EIDERdown, the noun.
My thanks to whoever wrote the clues at 16-Across and 57-Across, two of my favorites in the puzzle.
Almost finished solving but just need a bit more help? We’ve got you covered.
Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but now you can take a peek at the answer key. While the answers are free to everyone, the Crossword puzzles require a subscription.