Majora Carter, an emerging-market real estate developer, is committed to further developing the neighborhood where she lives: Hunts Point, in the South Bronx. There, she is the co-owner of the Boogie Down Grind Café and also helped an entrepreneur start EyeCycleNYC, the first boutique indoor cycling and yoga studio in the South Bronx. She and her partners are also hoping to convert a former railway station on Hunts Point Avenue, designed by Cass Gilbert, into a food hall. “I have launched and exited so many organizations and companies that I’m probably unemployable,” said Ms. Carter, 51. She lives in a brownstone, two blocks from the one she grew up in, with her husband and business partner, James Chase, and their two dogs, Monkey, a German shepherd, and Khalessi, a shepherd/collie mix.
SLEEPING IN (SORT OF) I do allow myself to stay in bed a little longer on Sundays, but it’s still early, about 7ish, when I get up. It feels like a luxury, though, because during the week, I’m up by 5:30. This is my quiet time. I meditate, pray and read the Bible, then play with my two dogs. Together they weigh about 140 pounds. They still act like puppies, and one of their favorite things is to play tug-of-war while I hold a knotted rope. They make such hysterical noises that they crack me up.
GO FOR A SPIN By 8, I’m at EyeCycleNYC for a 90-minute spin class. Afterward, some of my classmates and I head to the Boogie Down Grind Café, where I have my usual two-shot cortado with skim milk, turmeric and mocha. If it’s busy, I’ll step behind the counter to help the barista and just generally hang out.
BRING ON THE PANCAKES By the time I get back home, James has run with Monkey and Khalessi and is making his famous steel-cut-oatmeal pancakes with blueberries or chocolate chips. I’m a lifetime Weight Watchers member, so we do make healthy choices — the rest of the week he makes egg whites and vegetables. We generally have friends or family join us. We call it breakfast, but it’s really more like brunch because it doesn’t start until 11 or so. Afterward, we always take some time to talk about work and plan what’s coming up during the week. Often, we loop in our business adviser on the phone, or he’ll come to see us.
CHURCH I became a Christian a year ago, so church is a big part of my Sundays. I walk 10 minutes to Restoration Community Church, which has a multiracial, multiethnic congregation, to attend the 2:30 service. Afterward, I hang out with the other members for coffee hour. .
THE GRIND On the walk home, I stop in at the Boogie cafe again, where I meet James. There’s always something going on there — we have art shows, book signings and poetry readings. We do another round of planning for the week’s work and catch up with each other. Depending on how much exercise we’ve had that day, after we get home, we sometimes do a round of high-intensity interval training together or an ab workout.
TABLE TALK Dinner is kind of late, 9ish. There’s no particular reason it’s that hour, it just takes us a while to wind down. We keep it simple — usually we have grilled vegetables and salads; meat is only a side dish. When we were dating, I thought meals were going to be a problem because I have very limited kitchen skills, and I assumed James, who was a vegetarian, would want me to do the cooking occasionally. As it turns out, he loves to cook. When he designed our new kitchen, he made the stove face out toward the island so we can talk during the preparations. We love to entertain and often invite people over.
SCREEN TIME We reserve the evening for catching up on the news, which for us means online streaming “The Daily Show With Trevor Noah” because we don’t have a TV. We also watch movies, but to be honest, I usually fall asleep on the couch while they’re on.
DOGS AND APPS By 11 or so, we pull out the dog mats — the room is small so dogs take up most of the floor space — and climb into bed. I don’t go to sleep right away. I’m trying to learn Spanish, so I sometimes practice for a while with a phone app. If I’m having trouble falling asleep, I listen to the A.S.M.R. series on YouTube. The one called “Gentle Whispering” features a lady with a soft voice and brushing sounds. It really works for me.