Style|How Do You Solve a Problem Like ‘Manhattan’?
How Do You Solve a Problem Like ‘Manhattan’?
“Manhattan,” Woody Allen’s cinematic love letter to his hometown, was released in 1979 and nominated for two Academy Awards the following year. But you would think it belonged to the 2018 awards season, given how much it is being quoted and discussed these days.
There was Seth Meyers, who hosted the Golden Globes in January, inserting a “Manhattan” joke into his opening monologue.
Last November, the writer Claire Dederer published a 5,000-word, much-talked-about essay in The Paris Review in which she re-examined “Manhattan,” a movie she had been “unable to watch” for years.
Nor will she bump into Mr. Allen at the Dolby Theater in Hollywood, where this year’s Oscars will be held. For decades, he famously declined invitations to the event; he attended exactly once, the year after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. But even if Mr. Allen wants to go this year, he would hardly be welcome.
Even when the film hasn’t been directly under fire, it has been collateral damage, as when “Manhattan” was cited as inspiration for “I Love You, Daddy,” the film by Louis C.K. that was shelved by its distributor in the wake of the comedian’s serial-masturbation scandal.
“Manhattan” practically seems pre-engineered to provoke debate in the post-Weinstein world.
Most glaring is its portrayal of a sexual relationship between a divorced 42-year-old TV writer named Isaac (Mr. Allen) and a 17-year-old high school student named Tracy (Mariel Hemingway). No characters in the movie seem very troubled by the ethics of the affair, nor did many critics at the time. But the 25-year age gap, and the obvious power imbalance, may make modern viewers feel “a little urpy,” as Ms. Dederer put it, using a term for being on the verge of vomiting.
If the Isaac-Tracy relationship is so troubling, why wasn’t it troubling two years ago, when the New York Philharmonic put on a screening of the film with live musical accompaniment, to a packed house at David Geffen Hall? Why was “Manhattan” for decades a movie that men and women enjoyed watching together?
The same could be said for untold numbers of arty, intellectual, urban or urban-aspiring men and women. For years, quoting lines from “Manhattan” or another film by Mr. Allen on a date could be a romantic litmus test, a way to find out if a potential partner also loved E. E. Cummings, Paris, 1930s jazz and the sophisticated, cultured world the films often came to represent.
Perhaps because there’s a 14-year age difference between Ms. Arndt and her husband (she was 26 and he was 42 when they met 18 years ago), they didn’t bristle at the director’s notorious casting of much younger leading ladies. They also didn’t completely turn away from the director’s films over his marriage to Soon-Yi Previn, the adopted daughter of Mia Farrow, Mr. Allen’s longtime partner. She wasn’t much older than Tracy when their relationship became tabloid fodder, in 1992.
It isn’t just men who admired the work, either. In 2011, on the style blog Design Sponge, the writer Amy Merrick showed readers how to get the “Manhattan” look in their apartments, swooning over the black-and-white opening montage of New York landmarks set to George Gershwin’s “Rhapsody in Blue.” Ms. Dederer even admitted to being “swept away” by that opening, before nausea set in.
Given her recent comments, one presumes Ms. Gerwig would not view “Manhattan” so rhapsodically these days. In this regard, she would have another thing in common with Mr. Allen. Speaking to the author Eric Lax for the 2009 book “Conversations With Woody Allen,” the director expressed wonder that so many people have made such a big fuss about the movie over the years.
