A video posted on Instagram Sunday night recorded some of their final moments: Young faces, glowing in the pink light of dusk, smiling wide as their sightseeing helicopter lifted off the ground.
“In the air!” one of the passengers, Trevor Cadigan, appears to shout over the sound of whirling blades.
Only a few minutes later, the chopper descended into the frigid and fast-moving waters of the East River. The pilot, Richard Vance, 33, cried “engine failure” in a mayday call and turned the helicopter away from the busy streets of Manhattan. Of the six people on that flight, Mr. Vance was the only one who survived.
Among the dead, the oldest was just 34.
Mr. Cadigan, 26, was aboard with Brian McDaniel, also 26, a friend from their high school days in Dallas. Carla Vallejos Blanco, 29, of Corrientes, Argentina, was visiting New York with a friend, a woman who decided to skip the flight. Two other men were killed: Tristan Hill, 29; and Daniel Thompson, 34, whom a law enforcement official described as an employee of the helicopter tour company that operated the craft.
Mr. Hill was engaged to be married, according to his younger brother, Brendan. The date was less than two months away.
Tristan Hill was one of three brothers raised in Reno, Nev. He played basketball at Missouri Valley College, and he stayed involved with the sport after graduation. He coached with the Boys and Girls Club of America and organized a charity basketball camp for children in Reno, a fund-raiser for the Boys and Girls Club.
Brendan Hill said he was always jealous of his brother’s drive, and Mr. Hill’s short career showed a young man with wide interests and varied talents. He worked at the Sierra Nevada Corporation for a time, and briefly co-owned a bar in Reno called the Stamp Social Club, which was in the basement of an old 1930s post office. He even interned on Capitol Hill for Representative Michael R. Turner, a Republican from Ohio.
Mr. Hill’s other brother, Iain Hill, wrote a tribute to him on Facebook.
Ms. Vallejos Blanco arrived in New York from Argentina on Wednesday and was planning to stay for a week, said Mateo Estremé, the consul general of Argentina in New York. Roxana Blanco, Ms. Vallejos Blanco’s aunt, told Pulxo, an Argentine radio station, that her niece’s traveling companion decided she would rather skip the Sunday evening ride.
Also on the ride was another young person who had recently moved to the city: Mr. Cadigan, the man who took the video. He studied journalism at Southern Methodist University in Dallas and recently moved to New York to work at Business Insider, a business news website. He graduated from Bishop Lynch High School in Dallas in 2010, according to WFAA, a Dallas television station and ABC affiliate, where his father, Jerry Cadigan, is the production manager.
Mr. Cadigan was on the helicopter with his friend from high school, Mr. McDaniel. The two were on the football team together and remained friends after they graduated. Mr. McDaniel was a firefighter with the Dallas Fire-Rescue Department and had been on vacation in New York. He was a fire rescue officer assigned to Fire Station 36 in West Dallas, according to a statement from Dallas Fire-Rescue officials. Mr. McDaniel had been with the department since May 2016.
Mr. McDaniel’s father, Allen L. McDaniel, said he was too distraught to talk about his son on Monday morning.
His voice caught, and Mr. McDaniel began to cry.