Last year, my dad almost died. Top-notch medical care is probably what saved him, but our family is convinced that what really pulled him through was family harmony — of the musical kind.
In October, not long after his 89th birthday, he tripped in the kitchen, hit the door jamb and fell with such force it shattered his bones and knocked him out. Mom was there and pumped on his heart. Then she called the paramedics. They took him to the hospital in the country town in Wisconsin where we grew up, where he was evaluated and then raced to the University of Wisconsin’s state of the art hospital in Madison.
Because of a neurological disease that made it hard for him to walk, he couldn’t get around much, but he still loved to sing and tell jokes. When we gathered at the family home, we sang all the old songs — “Bill Bailey,” “Buffalo Gals,” “Deep in the Heart of Texas.” My mom and sisters took the melody, and my dad, my brother and I harmonized. When we sang, even as kids, Dad always insisted on harmony.
His mind was still sharp, too. Oh, he forgot the names of friends and neighbors and sometimes even the names of his grandchildren, but he rarely forgot the words to a song or the punch line to an old joke, and he rarely missed an opportunity for a wisecrack.
But there was no joking when I got the call from Mom, and rushed to the hospital. Doctors and nurses hovered over Dad. By evening, we were all there, all 20 of us. His emergency medical team asked us end-of-life questions: Did we want heroic measures taken? Did we want a feeding tube put in? The understanding was that once they put one in for someone his age, it rarely came out. Then one of the doctors, looking grave, assembled us outside Dad’s room, out of his earshot, and explained that she thought it wise for us to consider saying our goodbyes.
Dad had fractured his spine in a number of places and had lots of broken ribs and fluid on the lungs. His recovery was unlikely. Suddenly I thought about never watching another Packers game with him and never again hearing him call me “Son.” Frankly, when I was in high school, I’d disliked it when he used the word publicly.  But as I grew older, I became fond of its sound. It had a certain melody, and when he called me “Son,” I felt how deeply he loved me.
Dad had never known that kind of love from his own father, a lieutenant in the Navy during World War I who became a dental surgeon.
My dad tells me that my grandad was a handsome Tennessean with a wonderful sense of humor, but he was also a drinker and a wanderer, and his marriage to my grandmother went poorly. When my grandmother left him, she returned with my dad to the Wisconsin farm where she was raised.
Over the years, my granddad occasionally visited, but my dad’s first memory of his father came years later, when his father traveled north by train to visit. My grandma, Dad and my dad’s younger brother, who would be my Uncle Billy, were there to greet him. But when he got off, he was drunk and wobbling. Later, in the car, he got irritated with my Uncle Billy’s whining and slapped him up. My granddad hung around for a while and, over the years, my dad would see him now and then, but mostly he was gone. It was the minister from the church who had to accompany my dad and Uncle Billy to father-son school functions.
My dad couldn’t have been more different from his father. He was a family man. At picnics, he organized games for all us kids. He took me fishing and hunting and rarely missed one of my football games. He didn’t drink and never swore except when telling a joke in which a certain well-placed word made all the difference. He was occasionally short-tempered — what father isn’t sometimes — but he loved us and he let us know it.
When I left the hospital that first night, one of the nurses assured us that if Dad showed signs of not making it, he’d call us. I slept with my cellphone on my nightstand. The next day, I arrived early and the nurse took me aside and said that Dad seemed a little better. He added the word “remarkably” and then said he likely wouldn’t need to be intubated. “He wants to live,” he told me.
Three days later, they moved Dad to the intensive care unit. He had nurses and doctors, a physical therapist and a respiratory therapist. The respiratory therapist’s job was to help him with his breathing exercises to clear his lungs of fluid. The fluid made him a pneumonia risk, which at his age was especially dangerous. When she took off his mask, which he had been wearing 24 hours a day, he looked like someone had ground his face into a wrestling mat. When the respiratory therapist was busy, I worked with him, too, making sure he did his reps. All of us kids did, but we still couldn’t get his oxygen levels up.
Slowly Dad’s oxygen levels rose. The X-rays showed less and less fluid on his lungs and the mask was removed permanently after a CT scan. Now, he could really belt out the songs.
When one of the nurses came in with a big belly and told my mom that she was six months pregnant, Dad chimed in, “Have you figured out what’s causing it?” Then, he and Mom launched into “Hush Little Baby” with Mom on the melody and Dad singing tenor, his voice getting stronger.