March Madness begins with games all afternoon and evening. And watch season finales with RuPaul and Annalise Keating.
HOW TO GET AWAY WITH MURDER 10 p.m. on ABC. The penultimate episode of Season 4 ended with an excruciating cliffhanger — a car accident involving a main character. In the finale, Annalise (Viola Davis) and her inner circle deal with the aftermath of a suspicious death that culminates with a shocking arrest.
N.C.A.A. MEN’S BASKETBALL TOURNAMENT You better have those brackets filled out, because the first large batch of March Madness games arrives on Thursday. Oklahoma has sputtered as of late, but anything is possible with the freshman phenom Trae Young’s sharpshooting prowess from all over the floor; his team plays Rhode Island at 12:15 p.m. on CBS. An intriguing No. 8- and No. 9-seeded matchup pits Alabama, with the ferocious point guard Collin Sexton, against Virginia Tech at 9:15 p.m. on TNT. And Deandre Ayton, a potential top N.B.A. prospect, hopes to dominate Buffalo at 9:40 p.m. on CBS.
FURIOUS 7 (2015) 7 p.m. on FX or on Netflix. The seventh installment of the unassailable “Fast & Furious” franchise serves as both a brisk action flick and a touching tribute to Paul Walker, in his last role filmed before his death. Before the cast members say their farewells in the final moments, cars are driven out of airplanes, come-ons are exchanged and Dwayne Johnson brawls with Jason Statham. “‘Furious 7’ is an early favorite to win the prize for most picture,” A. O. Scott wrote in his review in The New York Times. And look for footage of Gal Gadot, two years before she would become a superstar in her own right with “Wonder Woman” — which in on HBO2 at 9:45 p.m.
RUPAUL’S DRAG RACE ALL STARS 8 p.m. on VH1. This season of “Drag Race” has featured plenty of surprises, from voluntary self-eliminations to an inexplicable Nancy Pelosi cameo. This week, the season closes with one of the four remaining queens going home with $100,000. To do so, they’ll have to write and perform a new section of a RuPaul song and choreograph a dance with Todrick Hall; the eliminated contestants will return to form some sort of jury.
THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING (2014) on Amazon and YouTube. Celebrate the life of Stephen Hawking through this tender biopic, for which Eddie Redmayne won an Oscar for his portrayal of the physicist. The movie begins at the University of Cambridge, where he runs around campus with his friends and meets his future wife, Jane Wilde (Felicity Jones); his muscles begin to fail him just as his career takes off. His scientific breakthroughs, including discoveries about black holes, are documented, as are his struggles with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and family life. “At times I thought he was me,” Mr. Hawking wrote about Mr. Redmayne’s performance.