TAMPA, Fla. — Two weeks after he twice crashed into an outfield wall, Clint Frazier could not keep the names of his cats — Papi and Phoenix — straight. He gave up driving to work at times because his depth perception was off. And when he swung a bat, his head became muddled.
The symptoms did not change the prescription for the young Yankees outfielder: keep on swinging, running and throwing, and get back on the exercise bike, which he estimated riding 30 miles in the previous week.
“I’m killing it on the bike,” he said.
Such a recovery program is a reflection of how rapidly knowledge of brain injuries is increasing and how treatments for athletes are evolving.
“It’s not just go sit in a dark room anymore,” said Michael Collins, the director of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center sports medicine concussion program.
There are six types of concussions: vestibular, ocular, fatigue, anxiety/mood, migraine headaches and cervical. Each of those concussions’ symptoms has different triggers. For example, symptoms of an ocular concussion, which affects visual tasks and the ability to track moving objects, can be prompted by being in the bright light of a cellphone or being in a long passageway, Collins said. The Yankees, citing privacy laws, have not said what type of concussion Frazier has.
Each type of concussion has distinctive therapies.
As diverse as the treatments might be for a concussion, they are almost all active, involving some sort of exercise or exposure to conditions that might exacerbate symptoms, Collins said. What is important is not pushing too far or easing off too much.
Though concussions are typically associated with high-impact sports like football or hockey, or in a sport that requires heading a ball, like soccer, they do occur with some frequency in baseball. The Yankees, for example, have had a player get a concussion in six of the last seven seasons.
An ocular concussion can be significant for a baseball player, given how it impacts vision. “Try to hit a 95-mile-per-hour fastball with really good eyes,” said Collins, who treated the former Yankees infielder Stephen Drew when his 2015 season ended with a concussion he received after being hit in the face with a ground ball.
Research is indicating that even when players return from a concussion, their performance lags in the weeks upon their return. Erin Wasserman led a study of the performance of players who spent time on the disabled list with a concussion between 2007 and 2013, and used as a control group players who went on paternity or bereavement leave.
Wasserman found that batting average dropped 31 points, slugging percentage declined 62 points and on-base-plus-slugging percentage fell by 99 points in the first two weeks upon players’ returns from concussions. Performance was still lower four to six weeks after returning, but not significantly so, Wasserman said.
That may help explain why Yankees center fielder Jacoby Ellsbury, who missed a month with a concussion last season, experienced a sharp decline in his performance when he returned, leading to his eventual benching.
Ellsbury was having a solid season, batting .281 with a .771 O.P.S., when he crashed into the center-field wall at Yankee Stadium making a catch. In a little over three weeks between his return and his benching, Ellsbury batted .177 with a .497 O.P.S.
Ellsbury declined to be interviewed for this article, but General Manager Brian Cashman said that Ellsbury’s decline after the concussion was not a surprise and that it was explained by a neurologist last season.
Eventually, Ellsbury found his peak form, hitting .337 with a .912 O.P.S. in September.
A tipping point in how baseball began to view concussions came 10 years ago with Ryan Church, a Mets outfielder whose career was derailed after he was allowed to continue to play for about a week despite experiencing symptoms from his second concussion in a two-month period. After a steep decline in performance, Church retired after the 2010 season at age 31.
It also calls for a game to be stopped and a player to be evaluated on the field by a trainer if there is an incident that carries a high risk of concussion. If the trainer detects signs of a concussion, the player must be removed and examined further. But because a concussion’s cause can be so nebulous, it is hard to know just what constitutes a high-risk collision.
For example, Ellsbury was allowed to remain in a game last May after running into the wall at Yankee Stadium to make a catch. But when he was re-examined at the end of the inning, he was removed from the game. He missed a little more than a month.
It is not clear how Frazier became injured.  A trainer did not examine him until he came off the field at the end of the inning. Later in the game, Frazier caught a ball on the warning track and his shoulder hit the wall, jarring him. He did not begin experiencing symptoms — a headache and nausea — until after the team returned from Bradenton.
Frazier has undergone a CT scan and an M.R.I. and has visited regularly with a league neurologist, as well as one in the Tampa area.
After Frazier spoke with reporters last Saturday, expressing his frustration that the symptoms had improved but had not cleared up, he was barred by Cashman from speaking to the news media.
Cashman pointed to the N.F.L. and the N.B.A., which make their players off limits to the news media while they are recovering from concussions.
Asked when Frazier, who had come to spring training motivated to make the opening day roster, might get back on the field, Cashman shrugged.
“No one can predict that,” he said.