Opinion|Changes in the Cabinet and the C.I.A.
Changes in the Cabinet and the C.I.A.
Re “Tillerson Ousted as Trump Silences Dissent in Cabinet” (front page, March 14): It has been nearly a year and a half since Donald Trump became president, and only now is he assembling a cabinet he wants? That shows once again his abysmal and unprecedented unpreparedness for the office.
After Stephen Bannon was fired, and then seemingly apolitical John Kelly made chief of staff, it appeared that Mr. Trump wanted to govern more from the center. But now, with the apparent declining influence of Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump, the departures of Rex Tillerson and Gary Cohn, and the nomination of Mike Pompeo to be secretary of state, it seems that while Mr. Bannon left in disgrace, his ideology has taken hold in Mr. Trump’s mind and government.
JAMES ADLER, CAMBRIDGE, MASS.
As a former superintendent of schools and executive director of a professional association, I know how difficult it is to fire someone face to face. So I understand why President Trump decided to fire Secretary of State Rex Tillerson via Twitter instead of meeting with him.
Understanding, however, does not equate to justification. Nobody deserves to find out via a tweet that he has lost his job just because his boss does not have the courage to deliver the news in person.
The president enjoys giving bellicose speeches that attempt to bully others into doing what he wants them to do. Like many bullies, however, Mr. Trump runs away from situations in which he has to actually display courage with actions instead of just words.
The nomination of Gina Haspel, who was deeply implicated in the use of torture in the post-9/11 period, to the position of C.I.A. director is very troubling. The fact that President Trump would nominate such a person is not surprising given that he has made statements supporting the use of torture in the past.
It is just as troubling that many of Ms. Haspel’s current and former colleagues have come forward to praise her professionalism. Professionalism is indeed an important job criterion, but there are two that are far more important: integrity and ethics. Lacking the more important criteria, professionalism can result in doing wrong very well.
By all reports, Ms. Haspel did wrong very well in the post-9/11 period. Not only did she not call out the use of torture by the C.I.A., but she also embraced its practice. She was in a position of leadership and failed to lead when the need was greatest. That is not something that should earn her a promotion.
The writer is a retired intelligence analyst.
Re “Having a Torturer Lead the C.I.A.” (editorial, nytimes.com, March 13): Your criticism of Gina Haspel, President Trump’s choice to lead the C.I.A., is unfair and overlooks the obvious. Ms. Haspel was delegated a task without the authority to formulate policy. Given a chance to lead the agency, Ms. Haspel may, in fact, be the best hope for ensuring that the agency lives up to the expectations of the American people.
In the meantime, let’s hope that during confirmation hearings Ms. Haspel can summon the courage to be what the moment demands — a fierce advocate for protecting our country from attacks by foreign adversaries.
CHEVY CHASE, MD.