Ryan Currie and Kailey Gonzalez don’t just travel for work, travel is their work. When the couple, both commercial airline pilots from Phoenix, Ariz. and both 29, accepted jobs with Envoy Air, a regional American Airlines carrier based out of La Guardia Airport, they wanted to minimize the amount of time it would take them to get there.
Still, Queens is far from compact, so, ‘How fast can you get to LaGuardia?’ quickly became more than a casual conversation starter in their queries to brokers and leasing agents.
They were happy, then, when they found LeFrak City, a sprawling postwar housing complex in Corona, Queens, that, on a good day, is just a 10- or 15-minute drive from the airport.
They moved into the complex last winter, selecting a renovated one-bedroom from the options sent over from the complex’s leasing agent after an initial tour of the property. He had, at the time, lamented that he wasn’t sure how to sell them on a place where they would hardly spend much time. Between their flight schedules and personal trips — one of the main perks of being a pilot is the free flights — they sometimes spend only 12 days a month in the apartment.
“Basically, this is an expensive storage unit,” Ms. Gonzalez said. Nonetheless, they wanted a place that felt like home when they did stay there. A studio apartment they had seen in Astoria, for example, was beautiful, but they were both opposed to living in a studio.
“We’re in and out of hotels throughout the week and we didn’t want to come home to something that felt like a hotel,” she said.
The couple pays $1,900 a month. Coming from Phoenix “that seemed like a lot,” Mr. Currie said. But the apartment was no-fee and they had the option of renting a cheaper, unrenovated unit for a few hundred dollars less. They decided, however, that they were O.K. with paying a little more for hardwood rather than linoleum floors, new stainless steel appliances, and a bathroom redone with subway tiles.
They also like having a laundromat in the basement, a dry cleaner across the street for their pilot uniforms, and a grocery store downstairs. And they were able to get a unit with a decent-sized kitchen on a high floor — not necessarily an easy thing to find in historically low-rise Queens.
“The higher up, the better,” said Mr. Currie. “I like having views.” And though the view from their apartment might seem unexceptional to almost anyone else, shortly after moving in they were delighted to discover that their large windows offer an ideal vantage for watching planes coming and going from LaGuardia.
“There’s a flight approach — it’s called the expressway visual — and the planes go right over us. That was another appeal,” said Ms. Gonzalez, who once filmed Mr. Currie’s plane as it was coming in to land.
Ms. Gonzalez and Mr. Currie, who are engaged to be married next winter, met in Houston, Tex., where Mr. Currie was working as a flight instructor — a common position for recent flight school graduates, who must accrue 1,500 hours of flight time to work as a pilot for a commercial airline. Ms. Gonzalez was slated to replace Mr. Currie at the school so he could take a job in Phoenix. “But after we met, I ended up staying for another six months,” Mr. Currie said.
Another advantage, Ms. Gonzalez pointed out, is that Mr. Currie doesn’t get sick of all her plane paraphernalia, like the model of a large C-17 in the middle of their coffee table or the propeller mounted on the wall above the TV. In fact, several of the model planes in the apartment belong to him.
Their walls are decorated with several black-and-white photographs they have taken at airports: one, taken by Mr. Currie in Oregon, is from when they used to fly cargo planes. Another, taken by Ms. Gonzalez, shows the jet they fly at LaGuardia with the Manhattan skyline in the background. “It really works that we’re both pilots,” Ms. Gonzalez said.
While it’s unusual for airline couples to be able to coordinate their time off, since they joined the Envoy base in New York shortly after it opened, they now have the seniority to pick flight schedules that align, so they can travel or explore New York together when they’re not flying.
They try to take the R train into Manhattan at least twice a month and have enjoyed exploring different museums, parts of Central Park, and restaurants — they try never to eat in the same one twice.
