An Alaska Airlines pilot has sued the airline, alleging she was drugged and raped by another pilot during a layover last year.
The lawsuit by Betty Pina, 39, was filed in King County Superior Court in Washington State on Wednesday, 20 days after it was presented to the airline on Feb. 13. A copy of the complaint was provided by her lawyer, Eric John Makus.
It claims that Ms. Pina, an Army veteran who flew helicopter missions in Afghanistan, was the co-pilot on a June flight with the captain from Anchorage to Seattle to Minneapolis, where the two had a scheduled layover.
According to the complaint, the pilot asked Ms. Pina to join him for pizza and drinks in the hotel bar where flight crews spend time. Once there, Ms. Pina said she had one glass of wine, and then he brought her a second. Sitting on a stool, she had a “hard time keeping her head up” and “things appeared to be closing in,” the complaint says.
The lawsuit was reported this week by The Seattle Times and other local news outlets.
In an interview late on Thursday, Ms. Pina, reached between flights, repeated many of the details in the lawsuit. It says she blacked out, and when she came to early the next morning, she was in his hotel room bed, naked from the waist down; her underwear was in her purse.
“I knew something gravely bad had happened,” she said in the interview.
According to the lawsuit, a flight attendant told a flight operations officer that she saw the pilot walking down the hall “with a girl and two glasses of wine,” and that the attendant expressed concern about flying with him.
The two were taken off duty for the return to Seattle on June 6, the day after the episode. Ms. Pina said over subsequent weeks, she reported details of what she could remember to the union, an airline human resource official and an investigator referred by the airline. She did not report the episode to the police.
She did not fly again until January, she said.
Courts in the United States have previously tackled the issue of sexual harassment of flight crews during layovers, expanding the definition of a work site. In 2001, a federal appeals court in New York ruled that Delta Air Lines was potentially liable for not doing enough to stop what a flight attendant said was a rape by another attendant, even though the events occurred when the two were off duty in a hotel room.
In a statement, Alaska Airlines said it was taking the matter seriously.
The pilot, who is not named as a defendant, could not be reached on Friday. He has not been charged with a crime.
She started working for Alaska Airlines in 2016. She said that after years in the military, she was accustomed to reporting problems only to her superiors. That, she said, might explain why she did not report what happened to the police when she returned to the Seattle area.
Ms. Pina said that she pursued the lawsuit because she wanted the company to hold the pilot accountable. “It happened on an overnight with a captain who was abusing his position of authority in an opportunity with me being in a hotel right next to him,” she said.
