Opinion|I Served in Vietnam. Here’s My Soundtrack.
I Served in Vietnam. Here’s My Soundtrack.
“Vietnam.” The word comes camouflaged in music. Rock ’n’ roll, soul, pop and country. For those who watched the war unfold on the evening news, the music of Vietnam blurred with the sounds rising from the streets of America during a time of momentous challenge and change. For those born after the last helicopters sank beneath the waves of the South China Sea, movies, documentaries and TV shows have repeatedly used music as a sonic background for depicting Vietnam as a tug of war between pro-war hawks and pro-peace doves.
If you weren’t there, it’s possible to imagine this as so much postproduction editing, imposing a relationship between the sounds and the experience of the war. It can all feel a bit trite. Except — it’s true.
More than any other American war, Vietnam had a soundtrack, and you listened to it whether you were marching in the jungle or in the streets. For the men and women like me who served in Southeast Asia, music was what inexorably linked us to “my generation.” We sang along to the Beatles, Nancy Sinatra, Marty Robbins and the Temptations before we went to war, and we listened to them after we came back home.
And once we returned home, music became essential to our healing.
Historians of the ’60s have recognized the importance of music as a lens for understanding movements, attitudes and opinions. For Vietnam veterans and those who listen to their stories, the iconic music of the 1960s and early ’70s provides access to a truer, deeper story of what Vietnam meant, and continues to mean.
It worked the other way, too — Vietnam and the dizzying changes accompanying it in America altered the music, the musicians and the messages. You could hear it in the difference between “I Get Around” and “Good Vibrations”; between “She Loves You” and “Happiness Is a Warm Gun”; between “Please Please Please” and “Say It Loud — I’m Black and I’m Proud”; between the Shangri-Las and Grace Slick.
With the crucial exception of combat, music was ubiquitous in Vietnam, reaching soldiers via albums, cassettes and tapes of radio shows sent from home; on the Armed Forces Vietnam Network, featuring songs from stateside Top 40 stations; and on the legendary, if short-lived, underground broadcasts of Radio First Termer, a pirate station operated out of Saigon. Soldiers played it in their hooches on top-of-the-line tape decks they’d purchase cheap at the PX or via mail order from Japan; they listened to it over headphones in helicopters and planes.
Sometimes the music was live: soldiers strumming out Bob Dylan and Curtis Mayfield songs at base camps; Filipino bands pounding out “Proud Mary” and “Soul Man” at enlisted-men’s clubs and Saigon bars; touring acts from Bob Hope and Ann-Margret to Nancy Sinatra and James Brown granting momentary calm. And on many a weary war night, Hanoi Hannah, the North Vietnamese equivalent of World War II’s Tokyo Rose, would play classic tunes by Ray Charles and B. B. King as she encouraged G.I.s to lay down their weapons.
They were the same songs our friends were listening to back home, but the music took on different, and often deeper, meanings in Vietnam. Nancy Sinatra’s “These Boots Are Made for Walkin’” became an anthem to the grunts who humped endless miles on patrol in the jungles, adding layers of meaning to the story of a young woman turning the tables on her cheating boyfriend. Likewise, the Jimi Hendrix Experience’s “Purple Haze” meant one thing in an LSD-friendly dorm room and another to troops who associated it with the color of the smoke grenades used to guide helicopters into landing zones. “Ring of Fire,” “Nowhere to Run,” “Riders on the Storm” — all of them shifted shape in relation to the war.
The meaning of songs often changed for individual vets whose personal (and in several cases, political) perspectives underwent seismic shifts in the years during and after the war. The dynamic was complicated by music’s peculiar status as both a center of political or cultural resistance and a manifestation of America’s high-tech supremacy. That Barry McGuire’s hit song “Eve of Destruction,” which railed against injustice and nuclear war in 1965, was quickly countered by Sgt. Barry Sadler’s “The Ballad of the Green Berets,” the No. 1 song of 1966, is as much a reflection of the shifting politics of the country as it is about changes in musical tastes. Likewise, “For What It’s Worth” by Buffalo Springfield, the song frequently played to accompany film depictions of antiwar protests, had nothing to do with Vietnam per se — Stephen Stills wrote it about a riot on the Sunset Strip — yet it was as treasured by scores of Vietnam soldiers as it was by protesters in America.
Returning to the Bay Area after his discharge from the Navy, Joe threw himself into the growing counterculture. In the summer of 1965 he wrote the song that even today is an anthem of the antiwar movement, yet holds a special resonance for Vietnam veterans, a point we heard again and again from the hundreds of Vietnam veterans we’ve interviewed.
If you were fortunate enough to return home from Vietnam, music echoed through those secret places where you stored memories, including some you never shared with your parents, spouse or children for decades. Music was the key to survival and a path to healing, the center of a human story that’s too often lost in the haze of politics and myth that surrounds Vietnam.