NASHVILLE — Hazel Smith, the Nashville music industry matriarch credited with coining the phrase “outlaw country” to describe the unvarnished alternative to mainstream country music, died here on Sunday. She was 83.
Her death, at Skyline Medical Center, was caused by heart failure, her son Terry said.
In 1973, while working as a publicist for the vocal group Tompall and the Glaser Brothers, Ms. Smith received a query from a radio station about what to call the rugged, rock-influenced country music then being made by Waylon Jennings, Willie Nelson, the Glasers and others.
Her response, inspired by the title of Mr. Jennings’s recent hit single, “Ladies Love Outlaws,” was “outlaw music.” The phrase gained traction, and by 1976 — the year RCA released the million-selling album “Wanted! The Outlaws,” featuring Mr. Jennings, Mr. Nelson and others — a movement was born.
Ms. Smith’s legacy, though, extended well beyond her timely knack for nomenclature. Her nearly five-decade career in country music encompassed everything from songwriting and journalism to artist management and radio and television work.
Along the way she became a respected tastemaker, a trusted confidante of musicians and a prototype for women aspiring to break into the male-dominated country music industry.
Lamenting the state of country music in a 1997 interview with the weekly publication Nashville Scene, Ms. Smith observed: “We’ve got people writing songs who have college degrees. There ain’t nothing wrong with education, but I’d rather hear a song with feeling to it than a bunch of educated words written from the neck up that had no feeling at all.
Hazel Ruth Boone was born on May 31, 1934, in Caswell County, N.C. Her parents were farmers, and her father worked for a time as the local sheriff.
After she graduated from high school, Ms. Smith worked in a hosiery mill and, later, for a tobacco company. She married at age 19 and had her son Terry and another son, Billy, while in her 20s. Her husband, Patrick Smith, played banjo and fiddle and encouraged their boys to become musicians, which they did, growing up to play country and bluegrass professionally as a duo.
Shortly after she and her husband divorced, Ms. Smith met the bluegrass patriarch Bill Monroe at a music festival in North Carolina. She and Mr. Monroe began a romantic relationship that both parties wrote songs about, most notably Mr. Monroe’s “Walk Softly on This Heart of Mine.” It became a Top 40 country hit for the Southern rock band the Kentucky Headhunters.
Ms. Smith and her sons moved to Nashville around 1970. She found a job there as a publicist for the iconoclastic Texas singer-songwriter Kinky Friedman. She also did publicity for the Glaser Brothers and, by the late 1970s, was working for the rock band Dr. Hook & the Medicine Show, which recorded several of her songs.
Ms. Smith also began writing a popular column for Country Music magazine in the late ’70s, and she played a significant role in the development of the careers of several major artists, including Garth Brooks and Brad Paisley.
Ms. Smith was host of CMT.com’s “Hot Dish” program, a popular country news and cooking show, and in 2001, she published the cookbook “Hazel’s Hot Dish: Cookin’ with Country Stars,” which featured contributions from Mr. Brooks, Trisha Yearwood and Alan Jackson, among others.
Ms. Smith is survived by her sons; her brothers, James Daniel Boone and William Henry Boone — the family traces its lineage to the frontiersman Daniel Boone — six grandchildren, and one great-grandchild.
