CHARLESTON, W.Va. — The statewide teachers’ strike that shuttered West Virginia schools for almost two weeks appeared all but over on Tuesday when Gov. James C. Justice signed a bill to give teachers and other state employees a 5 percent pay raise.
A crowd of teachers wearing the red T-shirts that have come to symbolize their strike cheered as Mr. Justice, a Republican, signed the pay raise bill in a theater on the Capitol grounds. The bill had been passed unanimously earlier in the day by both houses of the Republican-controlled Legislature.
“These things come at a cost,” Mr. Carmichael said.
The strike ground the state’s public schools to a halt for nine days, a remarkable show of defiance by the teachers in a state where the power of organized labor, once led by strong mining unions, has greatly diminished. Along the way, the teachers disregarded union leaders’ advice to return to work when the governor first promised them the raise last week, deciding in meetings at malls and union halls and in Facebook groups that they would stay out until their raise was enacted in law.
Dale Lee, the president of the West Virginia Education Association, one of the teachers’ unions, said the pay raise was probably sufficient to get teachers back to the classroom. School systems in some of the state’s 55 counties, including Kanawha and Putnam, announced even before Mr. Justice signed the pay raise bill that they would reopen on Wednesday.
“It appears the strike will end,” Mr. Lee said after the deal was announced.
The pay raise was the main point of contention in the final days of the strike, but the teachers have also demanded some relief from sharply rising health insurance costs. The governor has promised to address that issue through a state task force. Both union leaders and rank-and-file teachers have welcomed that move.
Mr. Carmichael, whose resistance to the raises had made him a key antagonist for the striking teachers, insisted on Tuesday that he did not want to pass anything “just to appease a special-interest group.” The deal came about, he said, because lawmakers decided to offset the cost of the raises with budget cuts, rather than rely on optimistic revenue estimates the governor had offered.
The raises for state workers were expected to cost the state treasury a total of about $110 million a year. Some of the money for the raises would be redirected from amounts the governor had requested for tourism promotion and the state Department of Commerce, but lawmakers in the Senate said additional spending cuts would probably be required. Mr. Blair, the Republican who heads the Senate’s Finance Committee, said in a meeting that some of the money could be taken from Medicaid.
Mr. Carmichael told reporters that the scale of Medicaid cuts was “not absolutely determined,” because lawmakers were still “scouring the budget” for more places to cut.
The prospect nevertheless alarmed some Democratic lawmakers.
The teachers, who do not have a labor contract with the state, are among the lowest paid in the nation, on average, and had not had an across-the-board raise in four years. They walked off the job Feb. 22, saying they had been pushed to the brink by low pay and rising costs in their health insurance plan.
