Let’s hope it doesn’t come to that for Noëlle Santos, who will open The Lit Bar in the Bronx this spring — part of a continuing resurgence of independent booksellers in New York City. Shakespeare and Company is opening two new stores this year, in Greenwich Village and on the Upper West Side. The latter is considered a homecoming for the original Shakespeare and Company, which was an institution in that neighborhood from 1982 to 1996, and it will be joining a robust range of indies in the area including Word Up, Books of Wonder, Bank Street Bookstore and several branches of Book Culture (the one on Columbus Avenue is in the space once occupied by the beloved Endicott Booksellers).
Maybe, just maybe, the late great Nora Ephron was wrong. Twenty years ago, her film “You’ve Got Mail” seemed to punctuate the death sentence of independent bookstores. Between 1995 and 2009, the number of indies in the United States declined by 43 percent, according to the American Booksellers Association, a trade organization for independently owned bookstores. Over the past two decades, New York City institutions such as St. Mark’s Bookshop, Coliseum Books and Murder Ink bit the dust. Big boxes — really big boxes — seemed to be winning. E-books entered the market. And then there was Amazon.
“We’re never going to beat Amazon at Amazon’s game, but I think there is a craving for going back to the old New York,” said Dane Neller, chief executive of Shakespeare and Company. Multiple branches and plans for a national presence (with a Philadelphia store opening this summer) put Shakespeare and Company in the small chain category, but Mr. Neller wants to create “the biggest little bookshop in the world,” intimate and localized, with a high level of service.
Any New Yorker knows that indies in many fields have struggled in recent years. Mom-and-pop hardware stores and pharmacies have given way to Home Depots and RiteAids. But when the product is books, the losses feel particularly egregious.
“The popular presumption was that independent booksellers were a thing of the past, some vestige of a different time and place,” said Oren Teicher, chief executive of the A.B.A. “It was inaccurate as a depiction then as now, but it’s pretty difficult to convince people otherwise.” The number of A.B.A. member bookstores has risen steadily for the seventh year in a row, and their sales are up.
There’s a difference between surviving and thriving for some indies. “Thriving is a tough word,” said Christine Onorati of Word in Greenpoint, Brooklyn (with a branch in Jersey City). “We have people who are unbelievably loyal to us, and we’re digging in, trying to make our mark, but it’s a tough business.” Rent is a challenge for many. Miles Bellamy opened Spoonbill and Sugartown in Brooklyn’s Williamsburg neighborhood almost 19 years ago, long before there was a Whole Foods and an Apple store, but he recently saw his rent almost double, to $14,500 a month from $8,000 a month.
Somewhere, Nora is smiling.