In her 1948 masterpiece, Ms. Arango, a Medellín native, rendered her grotesque figures, both priestly and demonic, spiraling downward along a church bell tower set amid a city inflamed. Her image was a response to the assassination of populist leader and Bogotá mayor Jorge Eliécer Gaitán, which plunged the country into chaos and bloodshed.
In essence, the assassination and Arango’s work would be a harbinger of more than five decades of rampage to come, eventually earning Colombia the notorious distinction of suffering from the longest running conflict ever in the Americas. In September 2016 Colombia’s government signed a peace agreement with the country’s main rebel group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia — known as the FARC — effectively ending more than a half century of war.
This year, the museum is celebrating 40 years since its founding. The anniversary is noteworthy. But it’s even more remarkable considering the museum was established by some 20 artists — among them Ms. Arango — amid the country’s fighting and the mounting violence among the country’s drug cartels. The city had hosted three major art biennales in 1968, 1970 and 1972, encouraging the artists to begin planning for a museum to exhibit contemporary art.
The museum’s location in Medellín also makes it an extraordinary landmark: in the 1980s and 1990s, the city was one of the most violent in the world. It was from here that Pablo Escobar ruled his cocaine empire and where he was killed by Colombian police in 1993. According to Human Rights Watch, more than seven million Colombians were displaced, disappeared or murdered during the 52 years of fighting. The Museum of Modern Art was founded by artists in 1978 and opened its doors to the public in 1980.
Encouraged by growing popularity — it hosted the First Latin American Colloquium of Non-Object and Urban Art in 1981 — the museum by the 2000s was actually expanding. In 2006, city leaders approved the museum’s relocation to the Talleres Robledo building, in the Ciudad del Rio area. In 2010, the museum called for architectural proposals to increase its exhibition space. Five years later, it opened new galleries, a theater, book and gift stores and a cafe.
Today, the museum is a cavernous and commanding urban nucleus that, according to Ms. González, aims to draw as many local visitors as it does tourists from abroad. The museum’s steps descend onto a plaza facing high-rise apartment complexes inching up Medellín’s eastern hills and serves as a popular meeting venue for nearby residents.
“Just a few years ago, this kind of gathering would have been unthinkable,” said the museum’s photographer, Juan Felipe Barreiro.
Exhibits avoid any thematic constant, such as the war years. One recent show, “Desire: An Exhibition about Sex, Love, and Lust,” included several striking Arango depictions of sensual yet pensive women adjacent to the English artist Celia Hempton’s interpretations of anonymous sexual pleasure in the digital age.
“We wanted to do something playful, something celebratory,” said the chief curator Emiliano Valdés. He added that inspiration for the show grew partly out of protest against socially conservative Colombian lawmakers, as well as a reflection on the global transgender rights movement.
In 2017, the museum’s visitors numbered 110,000, a growth of six percent from the previous year. On March 21, it will inaugurate the exhibition “Art in Antioquia and the Seventies,” which reflects on the museum’s first exhibition in 1978.
“One of the museum’s objectives,” said Ms. González, is “to present a temporary exhibitions program dedicated to contemporary art and its intersection with modern movements, and to take on issues that are culturally, socially, politically and aesthetically relevant to the local context,” Ms. González said.
