It used to bother 17-year-old Brianna Robeck that when her name was typed into Google, one of the first things listed is an article in The New York Times about how she enjoyed summer camp as a child. A homeless child.
Today, Ms. Robeck is rewriting her story as one of 10 recipients of The New York Times college scholarship, a program for students who have excelled in the face of adversity that provides tuition money, mentorship and a summer job at The Times, among other benefits.
“I used to see it as something to be ashamed of,” she said of her rocky past during an interview at The Times, where the honorees ate pizza, discussed their upcoming summer jobs and learned of the $15,000 in financial assistance they will each receive for each year of college, funds that are provided mainly by readers.
The 10 students have endured plenty of hardship, facing down the deaths of family members, poverty, displacement, abuse and other adversities that have forced each to grow up far too swiftly. And still they have achieved, academically, in the arts and as activists.
Daisy Torres, 17, recalled a lavish home she used to spend time in on the Upper West Side of Manhattan — the one her mother worked in as a nanny. “It was the first time I witnessed privilege,” she said. Today she mentors young girls in her community of Jackson Heights, Queens, helping them fight gender discrimination outlined by her idol, the Nobel laureate Malala Yousafzai. “If we teach girls from an early stage to fight these stereotypes, they would be the first generation to do something about it,” Ms. Torres said.
Bilal Choudhry, 18, is an activist who focuses on subjects as diverse as immigration, Islamaphobia, reproductive rights and the Syrian refugee crisis. His father died when he was 7, forcing him to become the main go-between in America for his Pakistani mother. He said he realized the value of education after moving to Brooklyn and finding he was “helpless in a world where you need to be educated to survive.” He wants to become an anesthesiologist.
The scholarship winners will work in various departments at The Times, including marketing, technology and the newsroom, and each will be given a laptop computer.
Death and loss have marked the lives of several of the students, as have their vows to rise above the hand they have been dealt.
Growing up in public housing in the Bronx with her grandmother after her mother died, Sabrina Salas, 17, said in her essay that she rejected “the myth that people who live in the projects will never amount to anything.” She said she often stands in front of a mirror in a “Super Woman” pose to rev herself up to take on the world. Ms. Salas, who plans to enroll in Lawrence University in Wisconsin this fall, said she would like to become a psychologist.
Both of Cynthia Pierre’s parents died the same year — she was so close to her mother that those who knew them called Cynthia her “shadow,” she wrote in her essay, “What Is a Shadow Without Its Person?” She has gradually found her light again by throwing herself into her school work at Cathedral High School in Manhattan, as well as its marching band. But her true fascination is — everything.
So does Jahmire Cassanova, 17, who became homeless while a student at the Horace Mann School. His family, at times, lived out of their car in parking lots near the school.
A sharp dresser, he wore brogues with socks featuring cartoon dogs that said “Pugs not Drugs” and said he was interested in business and fashion.
