Well, we’ve come to the end. We’ve been through so much — Milk’s tantrums, BeBe’s speaking in tongues, Shangela’s “Game of Thrones” fan-fic — and yet, so little. This season frontloaded its villains (Morgan McMichaels, Thorgy Thor, Milk), mishandled one hero (Chi Chi DeVayne) and let another (BenDeLaCreme) go on walkabout, and came up short on what’s usually so special about “RuPaul’s Drag Race”: heart and stakes and the sense that lives are being changed. What were we supposed to root for, longer meet-and-greet lines for Kennedy Davenport?
This week’s final episode picked up where the one before last week’s left off — before Morgan Airbnb’d the workroom for an additional day — with Kennedy, BeBe Zahara Benet, Trixie Mattel and Shangela in the top four.
For the final challenge, the queens had to perform their own solo in a production number to RuPaul’s “Kitty Girl” — the biggest in the show’s history, RuPaul said. “One last thing,” she added, “the eliminated queens are coming back, back, back again.” This felt uneventful; they were just there.
Human Instagram filter Todrick Hall led dance rehearsal, and paired each queen with a hunky backup dancer. Dance rehearsals on “Drag Race” are always repurposed into high drama — someone’s struggling and just can’t get the steps — and usually have no bearing whatsoever on the actual performance, where that person pulls it together just fine.
BeBe struggled with a complicated lift-and-dip in the backup dancer’s arms. “Right now your lift is the weakest-looking, so just throw your [expletive] legs in the air,” snapped Hall, a born teacher.
Hall then led them to the studio’s loading dock to reveal that the number would be filmed in backstage areas, live and in one long tracking shot — like that insane six-minute shootout in “True Detective,” but tucked.
“That’s so fierce!” Trixie screamed, while the others looked nervous.
The next day, RuPaul walked into an empty main stage — the entire cast and crew, she explained, was participating — and kicked off the production number. I’ll admit: I love a flash mob proposal, I love an OK Go video, I love a high school theater troupe’s mannequin challenge. I love live television and I love a feat. And this got me.
In the loading dock, Kennedy and the dancers charged out of the back of a U-Haul, kicking, spinning and flipping. “Make the world remember your name,” she sang.
Trixie beckoned the camera down a side hallway, teasing, “I’m the MVP headin’ up to bat,” pushing through costume racks and pieing one of the Pit Crew.
On the runway, the queens were asked to wear their best drag. BeBe prowled in a surprisingly low-key dress with leopard print swirls and a leopard headpiece, complete with bared teeth; Kennedy wore a rainbow-ruffled mermaid dress with a flaming-red wig; Trixie was wrapped flatteringly in black sheers, with a poodle wig; and Shangela looked incredible in a glittering charcoal-grey gown, jewels and Hollywood-blonde curls.
“Guess who’s back in the house?” RuPaul asked. Seated by the runway were the six eliminated queens — Morgan, Thorgy, Milk, Chi Chi, Aja and the sheepish deserter BenDeLaCreme, probably only there because she’d been served papers in Seattle. With the exception of a blissed-out Chi Chi, they all looked pretty glum, like extended family whose flight home got canceled due to snow.
The judges offered bits of final praise — to BeBe, for her mix of high fashion and camp; to Kennedy, for her formidable dancing; to Shangela, for her stage chops and polish; and to Trixie, for her growth.
Back in the workroom, the top four went before the eliminated tribunal. Aja served Terry Gross Eleganza: “What do you think you could contribute to the future of drag that we don’t already get from Chad Michaels and Alaska?” she asked BeBe; “You’re a very good representation of where drag comes from, so I want to know how you can take that to the future?” she asked Kennedy; “Your brand is very stamped; how can you broaden that with this title?” she asked Trixie.
Thorgy wanted to know who BeBe was going to eliminate in the episode prior. “I asked the girls is it O.K. if I don’t reveal, and everybody agreed that I should not,” BeBe said, lying, and tape disproving this was immediately rolled.
“None of the top four need this as much as I do,” Kennedy told them, referencing BeBe’s prior win and Trixie and Shangela’s already-large careers.
“You did,” Thorgy said — a nice bit of peacemaking.
Trixie rattled off her post-Season 7 resume — a comedy tour; a hit album; a TV show — as proof she’d utilize the crown. “I felt like an All Star before I got here,” she said.
Kennedy and Trixie squared off in the final lip-sync, to Miley Cyrus’s “Wrecking Ball,” an angsty choice for a finale. Trixie, in Dolly Parton hair, fell to her knees while Kennedy went full Jacob’s Pillow, twirling barefoot.
The winner? Trixie.
“I remember being the weird new queen in Milwaukee nobody even wanted to give a gig to,” she said triumphantly in a confessional.
I harbor no ill will toward Trixie, whose show I watch and EPs I own. But it’s hard to feel satisfied by a competition that made itself supplemental to an already-hot career. It’s also hard to accept a top two that didn’t include Shangela, who showed up prepared, who played the game full-out every episode, winning challenges with charm and a panoply of looks. I would’ve loved her in a final lip-sync with BenDeLaCreme, who most surely would’ve been there, and whose departure we can passive-aggressively assign some blame to.
For RuPaul to cede determining the final pair to an unruly gang feels odd and lawless. If ultimately, “All Stars” is a competition that comes down to how 10 people feel about each other at any given moment, it might be time to revamp the rules.
That being said, there were highlights — I loved Kennedy and BenDeLaCreme in “The Bitchelor”; I loved Aja’s death-drops and BeBe’s Diana Ross; I loved Milk’s tentative first steps into introspection (it’s always hardest for the hottest), and Chi Chi’s knowing how long to stay at the fair.
And I loved watching it with all of you. You are all All Stars. I’ll see you in Bread Week.