WASHINGTON — President Trump on Monday abandoned his promise to work for gun control measures opposed by the National Rifle Association, bowing to the gun group and embracing its agenda of armed teachers and incremental improvements to the background check system.
But on Monday, it was the president who seemed to knuckle under, again dramatizing the sway that the N.R.A. still maintains in Republican circles.
Students around the country might be massing for a march on Washington on March 24. The victims and survivors of school shootings from Connecticut to Florida may be pushing their states to move on gun control. But Mr. Trump cited a lack of political support for raising the age limit to purchase rifles, which is not evident in public opinion polls but is very much evident in his party.
He said that his administration was studying the issue and suggested that states should decide whether to prohibit people under 21 from buying the kind of assault weapon used by the gunman who rampaged through Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla.
Most Americans Want More Gun Control. Why Doesn’t It Happen?
Polls show solid support for stricter laws, especially after mass shootings. But there is also deep disagreement, staunch opposition and growing disenchantment with gun control.
“We want change, we want change ...” “I don’t understand why I could still go in a store and buy a weapon of war.” “There’s no better time than now to talk about gun control.” These are calls the American public has heard before. After Orlando — “Democrats and Republicans we spoke with agree, suspected terrorists, like the Orlando shooter, should not be allowed to purchase firearms.” After Sandy Hook — “90 percent of Americans support universal background checks.” After each mass shooting, there’s a surge of public support for stricter gun control. “A new poll from Quinnipiac University shows record high support for stricter gun laws.” So why hasn’t Washington put stricter gun laws on the books? There are several factors, ranging from partisan divides to gun owner activism to the N.R.A.‘s political clout. No. 1: There’s broad support, but also big divisions on gun control. The most comprehensive data is from 2017, and it shows that 60 percent of Americans say they want stricter gun laws. Support is even higher for things like a 30-day waiting period for gun sales and universal background checks. But dig deeper, and you find the devil is in the details — and the divides. Most Democratic voters want stricter gun laws. But less than 1 in 4 Republicans agree. Most Americans who don’t own firearms say easy access to legal guns fuels gun violence. Fewer than half of gun owners agree. Non-owners want to ban assault-style weapons, while most gun owners don’t. “The person is the criminal, not the weapon.” Gun owners may be a minority, but they’re a very focused and vocal minority. Only about 3 in 10 Americans own a gun. But to them, gun control is not merely a policy issue — it’s personal. Nearly 40 percent say they always have a loaded firearm at the ready in their home. 74 percent say the right to own a gun is “essential” to their freedom. Gun owners are much more likely to contact lawmakers about gun policy, compared to non-owners, and far more likely to donate to gun advocacy and policy groups. No. 3: The N.R.A. is a formidable force in politics. Less than 20 percent of gun owners in America say they belong to the N.R.A., but it’s big enough, and disciplined enough, to turn elections and to end political careers. Part of what makes the N.R.A. so formidable is the money it spends helping friendly politicians and attacking those deemed enemies. “Ross voted against your gun rights.” The N.R.A.‘s vast marketing efforts have helped turn gun ownership into a badge of cultural identity. “It is not about politics. It is a way of life. I feel like we should be able to express that.” And their catchphrases have become ubiquitous.  No. 4: The N.R.A.‘s leaders are more hard-line than its members. Polls show the N.R.A. members do support some gun control policies, like outlawing sales to the mentally ill and people on terror watch lists. Most also favor universal background checks. But time and time again, N.R.A. leaders in Washington work to kill these proposals. After Sandy Hook, N.R.A. leaders flipped the script on mass shootings. Instead of combating calls for new gun control, they actually demanded more gun rights. “The only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun.” And finally, No. 5: Are Americans really clamoring for more gun control? Maybe not. We see spikes and public support for stricter laws in the wake of mass shootings like Columbine, Sandy Hook and Las Vegas. But in a matter of weeks, the bumps fade. In fact, overall Americans have actually grown less supportive of gun control over the past 25 years. The shootings, meanwhile, continue.
Without referencing an Oval Office meeting he had with N.R.A. officials this month, the president acknowledged the group’s lobbying successes.
The president’s retreat is a stark reminder — if anyone in Washington needed one — that the gun debate remains stuck where it has been for more than a decade. Despite scores of deaths from mass shootings in that time, Republican lawmakers fear the N.R.A.’s ability to stir up opposition in their districts. They continue to oppose new gun restrictions, and even a Republican president with an unconventional approach is unlikely to challenge the status quo in an election year.
Only one gun-related measure, on background checks, seems likely to pass this year, but critics noted that it would only enforce existing law.
In the face of N.R.A. opposition, the president has also retreated from his earlier openness to expanded background checks and a renewal of the expired ban on assault weapons — positions that he signaled during a remarkable meeting with lawmakers in which he demanded “comprehensive” legislation that would include longstanding Democratic efforts to restrict firearms.
Instead, Mr. Trump over the weekend released a modest plan that eschewed gun control measures in favor of more limited bills that would provide weapons training for teachers and create a commission to study other responses to school shootings.
Attorney General Jeff Sessions did announce on Monday evening that the Justice Department would more aggressively enforce the existing law making it illegal to lie on federal background checks and would step up law enforcement presence at schools.
The idea of arming teachers is vigorously opposed by many members of both parties, law enforcement officials and groups representing the nation’s teachers. But it has been pushed for years by the N.R.A., which argues that arming school officials is the best way to protect students and teachers against a well-armed attacker. “The only way to stop a bad guy with a gun is with a good guy with a gun,” the N.R.A. mantra has gone.
On Capitol Hill, several Republican senators sounded cool to the idea of federal involvement in arming teachers, saying it should be left to the states. “There would have to be tremendous training, tremendous effort to make that work,” said Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah.
The White House on Sunday proposed creating the Federal Commission on School Safety, which would study the question of raising the minimum age for purchasing rifles. That proposal came just a day after Mr. Trump himself mocked the idea of federal commissions as ineffective.
On Capitol Hill, the energy has largely dissipated for the kind of expansive gun control legislation that Mr. Trump appeared to support earlier this month. With such legislation stalled, Republican leaders are instead turning their attention toward less contentious measures that would beef up security at the nation’s schools.
The only gun-related measure that appears to stand a chance of passage this year is the so-called Fix NICS Act, a narrow N.R.A.-backed bill that would improve data reporting to the national background check database. The House has already passed it, as part of a broader bill that includes one of the N.R.A.’s highest priorities: a sharp expansion of the right to carry concealed weapons almost anywhere in the country.
The Senate’s chief sponsor of Fix NICS, Mr. Cornyn, said in an interview last week that he had not spoken to the N.R.A. about it. He sees the bill as a way to bridge the partisan divide.
But even Fix NICS is stuck. The bill has 61 co-sponsors in addition to Mr. Cornyn — two more than the 60 votes required to break a Senate filibuster. But at least two Republicans, and possibly a third, are blocking the Republican leadership from bringing the bill to the floor quickly for a vote.
And Democrats have indicated that they are not eager to consider Fix NICS as a stand-alone measure. Senator Chuck Schumer, the Democratic leader, has warned that it would be an “abject failure and dereliction of duty” if all Congress did was to pass Fix NICS.
School safety measures, meanwhile, are moving forward. The Republican-controlled House is expected to vote Wednesday on the STOP School Violence Act, which would authorize $50 million annually for safety improvements, including training teachers and students in how to prevent violence and developing anonymous reporting systems for threats of school violence.
In the Senate, a companion bill, championed by Mr. Hatch, would also give schools money for physical improvements, such as metal detectors or bulletproof windows and doors.
And even if Senate leaders were inclined to bring up gun legislation for a vote, they are short on time. This week, the Senate is considering a measure to ease banking regulations, and next week senators will be working against a deadline to pass a catchall spending measure to fund the government; the current spending bill expires on March 23. After that, the Senate will be in recess for two weeks.