Ronnie Franklin, who rode Spectacular Bid to victory in the 1979 Kentucky Derby and Preakness before their Triple Crown try was derailed in the Belmont, died on Thursday in Baltimore. He was 58.
The cause was lung cancer, said his nephew, Walter Cullum, who was also a jockey.
Franklin was 19 when he guided Spectacular Bid to victory as a 3-5 favorite in the Kentucky Derby. After winning the Preakness by five and a half lengths, Franklin’s bid to capture the Triple Crown ended in the Belmont Stakes, when Spectacular Bid finished third.
A week after the race, Franklin was charged with possession of cocaine after an arrest in the parking lot of Disneyland. He struggled with substance abuse in the ensuing years, and was repeatedly denied licenses from state commissions because of his problems.
He never rode Spectacular Bid again, having been replaced by Bill Shoemaker, the Hall of Fame jockey who guided the colt to a dominant 4-year-old season.
Franklin rode 1,403 winners in 9,242 starts from 1978-92, and had purse earnings of more than $14 million. He won the Eclipse Award as the nation’s outstanding apprentice jockey.
The Belmont was a crushing defeat, but Mr. Cullum said Franklin labeled his time riding Spectacular Bid as “the highlight” of his career.
Mr. Cullum said Franklin was working with horses in California when he was told he had cancer in March 2017. Franklin returned to Baltimore, his hometown, to receive treatment.
Mr. Cullum was 5 years old when Franklin rode Spectacular Bid, and his uncle’s success inspired the young boy to follow in his footsteps. Mr. Cullum had more than 4,000 mounts before retiring in 2010.
Born on Dec. 20, 1959, in Baltimore, Franklin grew up the youngest of six children in the hardscrabble area of Dundalk in Maryland. He dropped out of high school at 16 and headed for the local racetrack looking for work.
Franklin met a trainer, Bud Delp, who hired him as a stablehand, and Franklin began learning the racing business. Mr. Delp became a father figure to Franklin, taking him in to live with his family.
Mr. Delp sent Franklin to a training center in Middleburg, Va., where he developed a rapport with the young Spectacular Bid. The horse won seven of nine races and was named the nation’s champion 2-year-old before his Triple Crown campaign.
Survivors include Franklin’s mother, Marian; a brother, Tony; and four sisters, Sharon Wallace, Carolyn Franklin, Barbara Kaminkow and Nancy Fram.