PLAINVILLE, Conn. — When William A. Petit Jr. was campaigning door to door here for a seat in the State Legislature, he did not have to worry about getting residents to remember his name. They already knew it.
The candidate, once a successful physician who hailed from a prominent family in this Hartford suburb of 17,000, had survived an unimaginable tragedy: Nearly 10 years earlier, his wife and two daughters were brutally murdered during an hourslong home invasion, leaving him beaten and broken.
For Mr. Petit, it was a long, painful road from the aftermath of one of the most shocking crimes in Connecticut’s history to a seat in the state’s House of Representatives. In between were years of therapy; the formation of a foundation to honor his slain family’s legacy; two murder trials (one for each assailant); and his unsuccessful effort to block the state’s repeal of the death penalty, a move that led to the resentencing of the convicted killers to life without parole.
But as the 10th anniversary of the killings came and went last July, Mr. Petit, 60, was no longer defined by tragedy.
Mr. Petit gave up his diabetes practice immediately after the killings to focus on the foundation. But he has deployed his medical expertise in the legislature, where he serves on the public health committee. At a recent “pizza and politics” event for constituents, he sounded as much the doctor as the politician when asked about legalizing marijuana.
Quiet and low-key, Mr. Petit is not the first victim of a horrific tragedy to enter politics in the New York region.  Ms. McCarthy became a tenacious advocate for gun control in Congress.
Every year since the home invasion, Bob Heslin, a former high school classmate of Mr. Petit’s, and Mr. Heslin’s brother, Gary, have organized a road race to benefit the foundation. In the early years turnout was especially large, and Mr. Petit found himself speaking to crowds of up to 3,000 people. As Mr. Heslin sees it, Mr. Petit needed a new calling; politics was a natural outgrowth of his foundation work and criminal-justice advocacy.
Mr. Petit’s colleagues said that while the tragedy was certainly a factor in his public service, he has balanced his own history with broader objectives. He has backed legislation that would impose tougher penalties on career criminals, but also pressed for fiscal restraint, joining a bipartisan effort to impose caps on state spending.
There was a time, according to interviews Mr. Petit has given, when he seemed doomed to endlessly replay his family’s suffering. He himself was beaten with a baseball bat and lost several pints of blood, managing to escape moments before the house went up in flames.
In the early months of the foundation’s existence, Mr. Petit struggled to make it through meetings without crying. He attended every day of each of the two trials, fighting off nausea as he neared the courthouse. He considered suicide.
A former neighbor in Cheshire, Bob Picozzi, remembers emailing Mr. Petit at Christmas, five months after the attack. “He said, ‘I am putting on my best face, but I wish we could just cancel it this year,’” he said.
Mr. Petit considered running for Congress in 2014, but chose to spend more time with his new wife and baby, friends said. In early 2016, Helen Bergenty, then the Plainville town Republican chairwoman, telephoned him in Florida where he was vacationing to urge him to run for the State Legislature. “I said, ‘You need to get some experience in Hartford before you run for governor,’” Ms. Bergenty recalled.
During the campaign against Betty Boukus, an 11-term Democrat, Mr. Petit did his best to focus on the issues. Right before the election, however, a labor-financed political action committee unveiled an advertisement trying to tie Mr. Petit to Donald J. Trump’s “attack on women and families.” Amid denunciations from Republicans and Democrats, the union official behind the ad resigned.
In his first year in office, Mr. Petit has attended Polish festivals — his sliver of the town of New Britain is heavily Polish — and learned the intricacies of bill-making. But Ms. Bergenty has not forgotten the governorship, especially in a year when the incumbent, Dannel P. Malloy, has decided not to seek re-election.
