The former Times reporter Jennifer 8. Lee looks back on her story about the tangle of anxieties that some straight men experienced before a dinner or movie out with a buddy.
Wow, what a different era: Check the date. Yep, this article is indeed from 2005, not 1965. While some remember the aughts as a time when gay acceptance began to go mainstream (“Will & Grace” dominated sitcom ratings; “Brokeback Mountain” won a handful of Oscars), it apparently still had a ways to go. Look no further than this provocative Styles feature, which still had keyboards clacking more than a decade after the fact. The article probed the putatively awkward social dynamic created when two straight male friends hung out together somewhere other than a hockey game. To dine together, or see a movie one-on-one, it seems, required pretzel-like social contortions to avoid any “undercurrent of homoeroticism.” The dilemmas, according to the author Jennifer 8. Lee, were endless. Is it O.K. to split a bottle of wine over dinner? If you go out to a movie, do you need leave a seat open between the two of you? This article was written only 13 years ago. Was it really that different an era?
Strong reactions: Sure, the aughts were a different era. Back then, there was a former beer-chugging fraternity man in the White House, Nascar was booming and dudes, it seems, felt little shame about enacting their inner dude-osity, at least to judge by the shenanigans on “The Man Show.” Even so, this article went about as viral as viral could go in those pre-Twitter days. Gawker, of course, seized on every opportunity to mock it (in itself, hardly an indictment; Gawker mocked everything back then), finding in what it called “the most emailed story ever” some “glaringly homophobic aspects.” Bloggers of all political stripes chimed in. “This is the 21st century?” read one typical response. “What gives?”  “After decades of civil, women's and gay rights we come to the sad conclusion that two buddies can't share a bottle of wine at a trendy bistro,” wrote one reader in a letter to the editor.
Backlash to the backlash: But as much as skeptics crowed that Ms. Lee had made straight men look like homophobes and/or Neanderthals, the “man date” concept did catch on. The term was soon a cultural trope, popping up in magazine articles as well as in casual conversation, even though people who invoked the term tended to do so ironically (“Hey honey, I’ve got that dinner with Dave on Tuesday. You know, it’s our monthly man date”). By the time “I Love You, Man,” the buddy comedy starring Paul Rudd and Jason Segel, hit theaters in 2009, the term, along with the related “bromance,” had seemingly lost any taboo quality. A straight man could even fess up to a “man crush” — as long he was being, you know, totally ironic.
