But the United States is set to sharply shrink its contributions to the initiative, a point that the report omitted. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is preparing to narrow epidemic work from 49 countries to 10, an agency spokeswoman said.
The Global Health Security Agenda first received almost $1 billion from a $5.4 billion emergency spending package in 2015 during the Ebola outbreak that killed more than 11,000 people. Program directors had hoped that, after the five-year package expires in October 2019, a comparable funding level would be added into the C.D.C.’s budget.
President Trump proposed an additional $59 million next fiscal year to make up for the loss of the emergency spending in the C.D.C.’s Global Health Security Agenda activities. But that amount would fall far short of the emergency supplement, and even that sum would be drawn from other global health programs at the agency.
Over all, Mr. Trump’s February budget proposal offered the C.D.C., the United States Agency for International Development and the Defense Department’s health security programs about the same funding those agencies received between 2006 and the Ebola crisis, “objectively inadequate for the agencies’ activities” since the outbreak, said Jennifer Kates, who studies global health policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation.
Without more funding, the C.D.C. would have to cut its health security fieldwork by 80 percent, according to its plan reported by The Wall Street Journal. The new priority list would exclude nations like the Democratic Republic of Congo, Haiti and Sierra Leone, where past outbreaks of diseases like cholera and Ebola have rampaged.
Administration officials said their commitment to disease management should not be judged by budget numbers.
At the initiative’s summit meeting in Uganda last October, Admiral Ziemer and Dr. Brenda Fitzgerald, the head of the C.D.C. at the time, gave speeches urging the global community to extend the initiative until 2024 — but suggested no financial support to do so.
Critics of such multinational agreements agree.
In 2016, an independent panel convened to assess the government’s Ebola response concluded that the Department of Health and Human Services, the C.D.C.’s parent agency, needed an ongoing contingency fund to prepare for future outbreaks.
Dr. Thomas Inglesby, the head of the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, who testified during the January hearing, said that neglecting such programs would jeopardize national security.
