U.S.|Yes, People Actually Steal Tubas. Sometimes They Even Return Them.
Yes, People Actually Steal Tubas. Sometimes They Even Return Them.
Ben Jaffe has spent countless hours with his baby since he adopted it after Hurricane Katrina. They have a special, intimate relationship, he said. In fact, he’s held it so often that he says the shape of his body has conformed to its curves.
But as Mr. Jaffe’s band was packing up after a show in New Orleans late last month, his 38-pound tuba disappeared. Someone had the nerve to take it.
The Wall Street Journal last week reported this particular horn heist. And as it noted, this is not the only crime of its kind. Sousaphones, a type of tuba used in marching bands, it turns out, have been stolen from high schools and musicians across the country. Perhaps just as surprising: Some of the instruments have found their way back home.
In an interview this week, Mr. Jaffe, 47, Preservation Hall’s creative director, said his band’s signature sousaphone was returned on Monday. Though he kept the details vague, he said that someone who “came into the instrument” through unspecified circumstances had recognized what it was and reached out to the band. The handoff, which did not include law enforcement authorities, ended up being “really uneventful,” he said.
That the massive brass instruments are even a target of theft might seem strange, given their unwieldy nature. In 2011, The Los Angeles Times reported that thieves were taking them from Southern California high schools.
Tony White, the coordinator of music and entertainment education at the Los Angeles Unified School District, said that roughly a dozen were stolen from three area high schools around that time. Another high school, at which he had once been band director, had also had a dozen tubas disappear over a decade, he added.
The schools never got them back; Mr. White speculates it’s because some were taken to Mexico, where banda music — which features the tuba — is popular. Others may have been melted down for their metal. And a few of the thieves may have learned to play them as a part-time job.
Still, about a year ago, a high-end tuba was stolen out of a car in Minneapolis and taken to Woodbury, a suburb about 20 miles away, where the thief tried to sell it to two different music stores. A new tuba can cost anywhere from $3,500 to $8,000 — or more, experts said.
A quick-thinking employee at one of the music stores thought it odd that a person had been trying to offload an expensive tuba that the person didn’t seem to know much about. So he told the second store, which had already purchased it. The police eventually got the thief to confess to the heist after the person had been arrested on something unrelated, Chief Vague said.
“It’s not a great idea for a criminal enterprise,” the chief said of stealing tubas.
They are a “unique item that’s highly traceable,” he added, one that musicians often band together to search for.
That’s essentially what happened in Mr. Jaffe’s case. After filing a police report, the band turned to social media and put out an announcement about the missing tuba that “caught fire” and turned into a “citywide campaign to recover the instrument,” he said.
“Everybody in New Orleans knows a musician,” Mr. Jaffe noted, which was why he was confident he’d get the tuba back.
Mr. Jaffe said he might put a tracking device on it, too.