Sala Kirschner, right, in 1941 with Ala Gartner, whom Mrs. Kirschner described in her diary as her “guardian angel.” Ms. Gartner was later hanged at Auschwitz for her part in an uprising.
Worried that she might die during cardiac surgery without passing on a secret she had concealed for 50 years, Sala Kirschner in 1991 handed her daughter, Ann, a battered red cardboard box from an outdated children’s game.
“These are my letters from the war,” she said.
Inside was an extraordinary cache of 350 letters, postcards and photographs from family and friends that she had squirreled away from the eyes of Nazi guards as an inmate in seven forced-labor camps over five years, starting when she was just 16.
The yellowed, tattered letters — in Yiddish, Polish and German, some with Hitler stamps and inky Z’s indicating that they had been censored — offered intimate if doleful glimpses of the disintegration of Jewish life before and during World War II in Mrs. Kirschner’s hometown, Sosnowiec, in southwestern Poland, whose Jewish population was confined to a ghetto before 35,000 of them were deported to Auschwitz.
Although Mrs. Kirschner may not have been aware of the letters’ value, scholars like David S. Ferriero, the archivist of the United States, described them as exceptional in their sheer numbers and in what they reveal about life in the labor camps themselves.
The trove eventually reached the public. The letters and a diary Mrs. Kirschner kept for a few months were put on exhibit at the New York Public Library in 2006. They became the subject of a book, “Sala’s Gift: My Mother’s Holocaust Story” (2006), by her daughter, Ann Kirschner, a professor at the City University of New York. (The book has been translated into seven languages.) And they formed the basis of a play, “Letters to Sala,” by Arlene Hutton, which has been performed in schools and regional theaters.
Sala Kirschner died at 94 on March 7 in Manhattan, at the home of her daughter, who said the cause was congestive heart failure.
Mrs. Kirschner and her husband, Sidney, had raised three children in Monsey, N.Y. He was a G.I. when he spotted his future wife in the women’s balcony at a Rosh Hashana service soon after the war and brought her to the United States as a war bride.
In the Nazi camps, Mrs. Kirschner hid the letters in barracks niches or buried them in soil, risking punishment if they were discovered. She had held onto them, she said, because they were her only link to a family that she believed she might never see again.
She later kept them hidden from her children because she was afraid that her full story of the Holocaust — her parents were gassed at Auschwitz, and four siblings were killed in the war — would wound them emotionally.
“I wanted to raise them in a normal way and not have them take on the burden of their mother,” Mrs. Kirschner said.
Mrs. Kirschner, then Sala Garncarz, at age 12.
The Germans, needing slave labor in their drive to gobble up Europe, herded Jews into a constellation of camps — some in urban factories, some at sprawling sites like Auschwitz-Birkenau, known more for their gas chambers and crematories.
Mrs. Kirschner was first sent to a camp in Geppersdorf, Germany, where the male inmates built a stretch of autobahn while the women peeled potatoes and sewed swastikas onto German uniforms.
Although life in the camps was miserable, with starvation diets, outbreaks of typhus and clothes unfit for the bitingly cold winters, some offered liberties that would have startled survivors of more hellish camps; the Germans at first wanted the world to believe that the camps were routine work sites. In her first camp years, Mrs. Kirschner was allowed to send and receive mail, and for a few months she received a small salary.
“When Mother received your postcard, she was the happiest person in the world,” an early letter from her sister Raizel informed her.
Letters from the ghetto period and even before then were peppered with gossip and sketches of the family’s clinging to Jewish rituals in the face of brutal restrictions.
“Be happy, be glad and thank God a thousand times every day that you still have somebody to whom you can write with the way things are going here,” Raizel wrote in May 1942, a few months before she and her sister Blima were themselves dispatched to labor camps.
Mrs. Kirschner’s diary records her affectionate friendship with an older “guardian angel” in Sosnowiec, Ala Gartner, who was later hanged at Auschwitz for her part in an uprising.
The totality of the Germans’ destruction of Jewish life in Europe is apparent from one fact: None of Mrs. Kirschner’s letters to her family and friends survived the war.
Sala Garncarz was born near Sosnowiec on March 5, 1924. Her father, Joseph, was a rabbi and teacher; her mother, the former Chana Feldman, raised 11 children, three of whom died before the war.
Sala, the youngest, was one of the first girls to attend school in the pioneering Beth Jacob movement, started by Sarah Schenirer with the aim of educating Jewish girls. When the Germans occupied Poland, Raizel was conscripted to work, but Sala, shrewd and resourceful, felt her older sister was too bookish to weather the camp and volunteered to take her place.
Mrs. Kirschner was liberated by the Soviet Army in May 1945 and hitchhiked home to Sosnowiec, only to learn that her family had vanished. But she discovered that Raizel and Blima had wound up in Sweden, and after a time they joined Sala in America.
In addition to her daughter, Mrs. Kirschner is survived by her husband; a son, David; eight grandchildren; and eight great-grandchildren. A second son, Joseph, died in 2004.
But she never forgot the precious letters she kept in that cardboard box.