Joaquin Avila, a lawyer and civil rights advocate who helped level barriers that kept Hispanic-Americans from voting, getting jobs and going to school, died on March 9 at his home in Shoreline, Wash., near Seattle. He was 69.
The cause was complications of colon and liver cancer, his son Joaquin said.
Mr. Avila, a Yale- and Harvard-educated son of Mexican immigrants, was president and general counsel of the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund in the mid-1980s and later director of the National Voting Rights Advocacy Initiative at Seattle University School of Law, where he was an assistant professor.
Both groups counseled victims of discrimination and filed litigation to defend their civil rights.
He also helped frame amendments that in 1982 fortified the 1965 federal Voting Rights Act, and he drafted a vanguard 2001 California law that provided even greater protection against discrimination at the polls.
Mr. Avila litigated dozens of cases — twice before the United States Supreme Court — that challenged city councils, school and judicial districts, and other local jurisdictions that had tried to dilute the votes of racial and ethnic minorities by annexing white suburbs or electing their members at large instead of by district.
Many of the cases originated in Texas and California, but their outcomes often had national ramifications.
Mr. Avila maintained that low voter registration and turnout resulted from deliberate barriers, not laziness, and that going to the polls was not some feel-good utopian goal but the foundation of a democracy.
He argued that the voting rights litigation he pursued was intended not to further polarize Americans politically but to bring them together.
Joaquin Guadaloupe Avila Jr. was born on June 23, 1948, in Compton, Calif. His father was a cement mason. His mother, the former Marguerite Hernandez, was a school secretary.
Even when he was a small boy, voting rights were a concern, he recalled in 2012 when he accepted the Harvard Law School Association Award. He was haunted early on by a television image of a mob chasing an elderly black person who was trying to register.
“I could not understand why that was the case,” he said.
After earning a bachelor’s degree in 1970 from Yale, where he switched his major to political science from astrophysics, and a law degree from Harvard, he joined the Texas-based staff of the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund in 1974. He later directed the organization’s voting rights program and was its president and general counsel from 1982 to 1985.
“Joaquin’s contributions to voting rights and to Latino civil rights have had a profound and incalculable impact, to the benefit of every person living in the United States,” Thomas A. Saenz, the defense fund’s current president, said in a statement.
With Mr. Avila representing the fund, a federal district court in Texas accepted his reasoning that school boards were “political jurisdictions” under the 1965 Voting Rights Act. That meant that any changes in district boundaries and election procedures had to be reviewed in advance by the Justice Department.
Some of those requirements were overturned by the United States Supreme Court in 2013.
An amendment to the 1965 act for which he successfully lobbied in 1982 defined election practices as unfair if their effect could be proved to be discriminatory, regardless of their intent.
And his work in helping to draft California’s 2001 Voting Rights Act, the only such state legislation at the time, led to a provision requiring that a plaintiff’s legal fees be reimbursed by a government if it loses or settles a case.
Mr. Avila was among a group of civil rights lawyers who in 1990 successfully challenged a reapportionment plan that left the five-member Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors without a member of Hispanic heritage, even though Hispanics had accounted for more than 27 percent of the county’s population by 1980.
Mr. Avila joined the University of Seattle Law School faculty in 2005. He was executive director of the Voting Rights Initiative at the school’s Fred T. Korematsu Center for Law and Equality from 2009 and continued in that post after he was disabled by a stroke in 2011. The initiative’s national focus ended after he retired several years later.
In addition to his son Joaquin, he is survived by his wife, the former Sally Cabaruvias; another son, Salvador; a daughter, Angelique Avila; a brother, Jaime; and four grandchildren.
Mr. Avila devoted his career to challenging gerrymandered districts and at-large voting, which diffused the potential political power of geographically concentrated minority groups.
