‘BOBBIE CLEARLY’ at the Black Box Theater in the Harold and Miriam Steinberg Center for Theater (previews start on March 8; opens on April 3). Eleven actors crowd into Roundabout Underground’s cramped basement for Alex Lubischer’s comedy-drama of truth, reconciliation and snacks. Bobbie committed murder. Bobbie is out of prison. A town of Nebraskans are asked to apportion guilt and innocence. Will Davis directs.
‘THE FALL’ at St. Ann’s Warehouse (previews start on March 8; opens on March 12). We continue to reckon with our flags and our monuments, and there are reckonings elsewhere, too. In 2015, students at the University of Cape Town rose up to remove a statue of the colonial minister Cecil Rhodes. In this documentary-drama, seven students use dance, speech and song to recall their campaign.
‘GOOD FOR OTTO’ at the Pershing Square Signature Center (in previews; opens on March 8). Good for the New Group. In this David Rabe play, a fine cast, including F. Murray Abraham, Ed Harris, Amy Madigan, Rhea Perlman and Mark Linn-Baker, has been assembled to play doctors and patients at a New England mental health center, a metaphor for a troubled United States.
‘HELLO, FROM THE CHILDREN OF PLANET EARTH’ at the Duke on 42nd Street (in previews; opens on March 7). Space, inner and outer, is the subject of Don Nguyen’s play for the Playwrights Realm, directed by Jade King Carroll. When Betsy and Shoshana are trying to get pregnant, they tap William, an aerospace engineer, as a donor. An embryo and Voyager 1 make related journeys.
‘THE LOW ROAD’ at the Public Theater (in previews; opens on March 7). A freewheeling approach to free market theory, this 50-character picaresque from Bruce Norris (“Clybourne Park”) is set in the late 18th century and inspired by the theories of Adam Smith. Good thing a drama about unrestrained markets and morally dubious economic modes won’t resonate today. Michael Greif directs.
‘QUEENS’ at LCT3 (in previews; opens on March 5). Martyna Majok (“Cost of Living,” “Ironbound”) writes plays that explore constraint, responsibility and the difficult business of being human. In this new drama, directed by Danya Taymor, female immigrants old and young cram together in a basement apartment in the titular borough.
‘WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE’S LONG LOST FIRST PLAY (ABRIDGED)’ at the New Victory Theater (performances start on March 2). Tell “Cardenio” to get lost and forget about “Love’s Labours Won.” The Reduced Shakespeare Company has allegedly discovered another vanished Shakespeare play, written when Will was just 17, and they’re performing it for ages 10 and up in typically madcap style.
