Dave Low, the chairman of Californians for Retirement Security.
Dave Low is the chairman of Californians for Retirement Security, a coalition of public employee unions that was founded about 15 years ago to defend workers against calls for pension cuts. Today, with retirement costs ballooning, the pressure is sure to rise.
While the California Legislature and leading candidates for governor have carefully avoided any substantive discussion on pensions, cities are struggling. Rising retiree costs have forced many cities and school districts to divert more of today’s budgets to cover the gap: In Los Angeles, retirement costs swallow about 20 percent of the city’s general fund budget, up from 5 percent in 2002.
We talked with Mr. Low about pensions and city workers, many of whom collect just a few thousand dollars a month in benefits and can’t collect Social Security.
Many cities and school districts say retirement benefits are swallowing more of today’s budget. Is this accurate?
 But, if you look at total compensation, including pension costs, in most school districts that has gone down.
Doesn’t that mean, in effect, that today’s teachers are being paid less?
The reality is that pension funds are not busting most budgets and employees are going to the bargaining table to help employers ensure pensions are funded and stable and there for them when they retire. And if that means negotiating their salaries down, that’s a choice employees make. I don’t see these employees getting any credit for going to the table and eating those costs.
Do you think cities and states will eventually need to raise taxes to cover rising retirement costs?
Some cities, such as Palo Alto, have talked about opening up their labor negotiations so citizens have a better idea of what kinds of services they are paying for and how the costs break down. Thoughts?
The Westside Pavilion along Pico Boulevard in west Los Angeles was once a model mecca of retail. The mall made an appearance in “Clueless,” the 1995 film that chronicled the escapades of a group of wealthy high school students.
But the place has steadily lost its sheen over the years, eclipsed by pristine outdoor malls and online shopping. Last year, Nordstrom shut its doors and Macy’s will close by the end of the month.
Roughly 80 percent of the retail space will be converted into offices by 2021, developers announced this month. The remade building will include about 500,000 square feet for offices and 100,000 for retail.
