LONDON — As a British jeweler who for 25 years has been working behind the scenes to create couture pieces for some of the largest and best-known jewelry houses, Glenn Spiro knows a thing or two about brands.
Just don’t call his business one.
“I’d rather be called a house,” said Mr. Spiro, 55, who introduced his own jewelry line in 2014. “When you talk about a brand, I don’t know where I sit. If you go back in history, a brand was one place: one great restaurant, one great tailor in Milan, one great art dealer in New York. You built a relationship with that person.
Before opening his atelier at age 21, Mr. Spiro, a London native, apprenticed as a goldsmith in Hatton Garden, the capital’s jewelry quarter, honing his craft in the bold, proportioned forms that went on to define his work. Exceptional stones were also among his interests, and from 1994 to 2002, Mr. Spiro worked in Christie’s jewelry department as a senior director and international specialist.
Mr. Spiro’s world now primarily focuses on a core group of 30 to 50 customers for whom he creates one-off pieces based on special stones. The process often takes years. For offbeat white-gold drop earrings, he paired pearls bought more than 10 years apart: one light brown and gray, the other whitish. For a funky cocktail ring, Mr. Spiro set an 8.17-carat cushion-shaped, fancy deep orange-brown diamond that he “had for ages,” and only recently surrounded it with a medley of 52 ancient Mesopotamian beads from a specialist dealer.
A sense of old-school discretion and intimacy is Mr. Spiro’s business style. His jewelry line, for example, is simply called G. (“It feels like a signature or stamp of the house, as if you’re part of it and will know who G is, I suppose,” he said.) He has only two points of sale — Harrods in London and Bergdorf Goodman in New York — and prefers to meet clients privately in his appointment-only showrooms in Beverly Hills, Calif., and London, or in his Geneva atelier.
That’s not to say, however, that Mr. Spiro avoids making changes. In November, he welcomed Arnaud Bamberger, a luxury veteran and former Cartier executive, as the business’s honorary chairman.
The two men were interviewed recently at Mr. Spiro’s London showroom — an airy upstairs space in a Georgian mansion in the Mayfair neighborhood — where Mr. Spiro explained how he hopes to tap into Mr. Bamberger’s 40-plus years of experience at Cartier, the luxury giant owned by Richemont.
The advice has included ideas on new collections and advertising, and finding and introducing new customers.
One of the initial attractions for Mr. Bamberger was Mr. Spiro’s boundary-pushing use of titanium. During the interview, the jeweler displayed his latest creations in that lightweight metal: two sets of earrings that Mr. Bamberger was seeing for the first time.
The first, priced at $144,000, was an oversize punk design, with rubies, pink sapphires and diamonds, which threaded through the ear and looked almost like a centipede against it. The second, $72,000 chandelier earrings, had a cosmic quality with stacks of rock crystal, diamonds, blue sapphire globes and sodalite drops.
The men’s first joint project was also G’s first watch, a jeweled piece that was displayed this month in the Netherlands at the European Fine Arts Fair, best known as Tefaf, and had its official introduction at Harrods.
Four years in development, the 45-millimeter Reveal watch was fashioned as a lotus flower with eight petals that twist open to unveil a 15-millimeter dial pavéd in the buyer’s choice of white diamonds, emeralds, rubies and other stones.
The case is a mix of titanium and 18-karat gold, and it has a quartz movement by the Swiss makers ETA.
As a limited edition, only 25 watches will be made in each stone combination; prices range from $150,000 to $185,000.
Although the design has typical G elements — titanium, precision engineering, motifs from nature — it isn’t for everyone, Mr. Spiro said, much like most of his work.
One such fan is Anastasia Marsaglia, a London resident who said she had amassed “quite a lot” of Mr. Spiro’s jewelry in the last six years.
She praised the designer for laboriously tracking down stones whose colors match perfectly, regardless of time, and added that a G creation can often leave one wondering whether it was made in the 1930s, 1940s or 1950s.
“There is this mystery with Glenn’s work, while other designers just have a stamp of who they are,” Ms. Marsaglia said.
