DUBLIN — The Irish are renowned for their way with words. But the nation of bardic poetry, James Joyce and W. B. Yeats has proved a latecomer to the wordiest of music genres, hip-hop.
The first rap acts in Ireland emerged in the early 1990s. But it has taken until now for hip-hop culture to start flourishing, with rappers and groups proliferating across the country. The situation resembles Irish rock in the 1970s, when bands sprung up in a grass-roots modernization of Irish music.
Two forces lie behind Irish rap’s rise. One is a new generation of immigrants from Africa and the Caribbean, attracted to Ireland during its “Celtic Tiger” boom years in the 1990s and 2000s. Their numbers are tiny by the standards of other European countries — in the 2016 census, just under 65,000 people identified as black in a nation of almost 4.7 million — but talent in the emerging music scene is disproportionately drawn from among them. Rejjie Snow, whose given name is Alexander Anyaegbunam, has a Nigerian father and an Irish-Jamaican mother.
The other factor is the growth in popularity of hip-hop itself. Since 2010, it has eclipsed other genres to become the global lingua franca of youth culture. In 2016, Drake was the most streamed act in the world on Spotify. He was also the most streamed in Ireland, which has the youngest population in the European Union. This year’s lineup for one of the country’s main music events, the Longitude Festival, has risked rock fans’ ire by turning to hip-hop artists.
Casey Walsh, 20, and his childhood friend Alex Sheehan, 21, make up the duo Versatile, a north Dublin take on the strain of delinquent rap acts running back from Eminem to the Beastie Boys. They made a surprise appearance at Rejjie Snow’s Olympia Theatre gig, to a fervid response from the audience.
“It’s kind of repetitive,” Mr. Sheehan added.
“And no one wants to hear it,” Mr. Walsh said.
A do-it-yourself ethos predominates among Irish hip-hop acts. Audiences are built using social media and YouTube videos: Versatile get as many as a million views for theirs. But like the Irish rock bands in the 1970s, rappers in search of a record deal are forced to look to Britain or the United States. Rejjie Snow, who lives in Brooklyn, is signed to the influential New York label 300 Entertainment. His latest album was mainly recorded in London and Paris.
The positive side-effect of limited resources is artistic ingenuity. Irish rap abounds in different styles. Rejjie Snow’s songs are dreamy and off-center. Socially conscious rap is common; its criminal-minded flip side, street rap, does exist, but to a lesser degree. Grime, a vibrant Britain-based offshoot of rap, is beginning to make its presence felt. Other acts fuse hip-hop with Afrobeats, R&B and dance music.
The free-for-all mirrors wider rap trends. The last decade has seen a breakdown of the importance of region to hip-hop, its reliance on place as a marker of a particular sound. The internet has collapsed distances between scenes. But Irish rap’s lack of definition also points to a fluidity within Irish identity.
What it means to be Irish in 2018 is up for grabs. “Our identity as Irish people is socially and culturally evolving,” said Mango, whose given name is Karl Mangan, a 27-year-old rapper who makes grime music with the producer Adam Fogarty, 35, who is known as Mathman.
At Rejjie Snow’s gig at the Olympia, issues of accent and music industry infrastructure faded into the background. Here was Irish rap’s acceleration in its distilled form, a propulsive release of energy. Thinking about the destination could wait for another day. “Yo Dublin, are you ready for Rejjie Snow?” the D.J. shouted. The answering roar drowned out the beats.