U.S.|There’s Never Been a Native American Congresswoman. That Could Change in 2018.
There’s Never Been a Native American Congresswoman. That Could Change in 2018.
ALBUQUERQUE — When Deb Haaland was a child, she would rise early on this state’s sun-beaten tribal land, sling a water jar around her waist and climb the mesa overlooking her pueblo.
Now, she is among a historic number of Native American women running for elective office. None has ever served in Congress, but that could change this year if Ms. Haaland wins.
The numbers far outstrip past election cycles, longtime observers of native politics say, and they are only partly driven by the liberal energy and #MeToo declarations that have flourished since President Trump’s election.
More broadly, they are part of a decades-long shift in which native communities, long marginalized by United States voting laws and skeptical of a government that stripped them of land and traditions, are moving into mainstream politics.
Montana has more than a dozen Native Americans running for the state House this year. Utah tribes are pushing the governor to make a seat for them in his cabinet. Five native people serve in the Minnesota Legislature, and four of them are women.
Many of these candidates are running on a liberal platform fueled by opposition to the Trump administration, as Ms. Haaland is. But others are Republicans who don’t fit that mold at all.
Ms. Clahchischilliage is a fierce advocate for a coal-fired power plant that employs many Navajo people. She is hoping Mr. Trump will halt the threatened closing of the plant. Keeping it open, she said, could save 1,600 jobs.
Here in Albuquerque, Ms. Haaland, a Democrat, recently won 35 percent of the vote in a six-candidate field at the state party convention. She is a “strong contender” to win the June primary, said Joe Monahan, a longtime New Mexico political blogger. (Her district covers most of Albuquerque and has elected Democrats for a decade).
Ms. Haaland is a citizen of the Laguna Pueblo, a sovereign nation west of Albuquerque that is one the country’s 573 federally recognized tribes. A child of military veterans, she attended 13 public schools before graduating from high school, then started a salsa company and worked as a cake decorator before putting herself through college and law school on a mix of food stamps and student loans.
She entered politics in 2008 as a volunteer for Barack Obama, then spent years crisscrossing the state to register native voters in some of the country’s most remote corners. In 2015, she became the head of the state Democratic Party and helped to flip the New Mexico House of Representatives back to Democratic control.
On the campaign trail, she frequently cites her heritage, and she makes the argument that many of the issues affecting native communities — the ubiquity of low-wage jobs, violence against women — afflict other groups as well.
She faces a field crowded with qualified candidates, including Antoinette Sedillo Lopez, a former law school dean who has spent a career building social justice programs.
The main criticism of Ms. Haaland is that she is concealing a lack of policy depth by focusing on the historic nature of her candidacy. “That as a single theme could leave her vulnerable,” Mr. Monahan said.
The United States did not grant native people full citizenship and the right to vote in federal elections until 1924, and for years they were mostly absent from federal government, according to Mark Trahant, a professor at the University of North Dakota who writes extensively about Native Americans in politics.
Facing existential threats, native leaders began to exhort fellow Indians to vote and run for office. Men began to make elective inroads, and in recent years women have followed. In 2001, the coalition of tribes known as the National Congress of American Indians began a voting project that continues today.
Among the native women seeking office this year is Peggy Flanagan, a former director of a nonprofit organization who is running for lieutenant governor of Minnesota.
In an interview, Ms. Flanagan said that if she wins, she will oppose a proposed pipeline across historic Ojibwe land; send money meant to help native people to tribes rather than county governments; and bring attention to the country’s many missing and murdered native women.
But Ms. Juneau, the Montana school superintendent, warned that the hardest part of winning an election as an Indian woman is proving that you can represent the entire state, not just its tribes.
