Fashion|How About an Armani for Your Aria?
In a sunlit studio space at the Juilliard School, the prestigious arts institution at Lincoln Center in Manhattan, Marie Engle emerged from a makeshift mirrored dressing room on Wednesday in a to-the-floor fuchsia jersey gown with a plunging neckline.
“You’re beautiful!” said Pam Bernstein Friedman, 71, hurrying over to a rack of shawls.
“If I’m performing at a summer recital, wearing a pink dress could be fun,” said Ms. Engle, a mezzo-soprano from Ohio by way of Vienna who is studying for a master’s degree in Juilliard’s vocal arts department. She admired herself in a mirror and then returned to the dressing room to try on a dark brown velvet gown. Perhaps unconsciously, Ms. Engle began to hum.
“I don’t sound like that in the shower, that’s for sure,” Ms. Friedman said, as she rifled through a rack of garments, looking for more options.
It was the second annual “shopping day” for OnStage, a program created last year by Ms. Friedman in which women donate black-tie gowns and cocktail dresses to Juilliard’s students, who are expected to be outfitted in fancy attire at their many auditions and performances, as well as at galas and parties. These singers try to avoid being photographed in the same ensemble twice.
For students trying to pay the conservatory’s tuition, as well as the cost of living in New York, this all can get very expensive, very quickly.
“Last year I walked away with two Tadashi Shoji gowns,” said Felicia Moore, a soprano who played the lead role in the school’s production of “Katya Kabanova.” “I was on the verge of tears when I tried them on.” She wore one of the dresses to a gala this past summer at the Merola Opera Program in San Francisco.
She sent an email to 50 friends, many of them entering a less on-the-town phase of life, asking them to “shop in their closets,” she said. Within a few weeks, her Fifth Avenue dining room looked like a designer showroom, with 10 racks of finery by Carolina Herrera, Vera Wang and the like. She also took in their castoff satin pumps, brocade shawls and statement costume jewelry.
This year, Ms. Marcus cast off more gowns still, as well as four tuxedos belonging to the late Mr. Marcus, who was the board chairman of the Metropolitan Opera for many years. In fact, Ms. Friedman had tried to solicit a surfeit of friends’ surplus tuxedos but she learned that most men don’t have closets full of extras.
Anyway, scena: For students entering the cutthroat professional world, the gift of garment bags filled with designer clothing is like being outfitted with armor.
“This education, this profession, it’s a balance of torture and extreme satisfaction,” said Natalia Kutateladze, a mezzo-soprano from the country of Georgia, who this spring will sing a lead role in “Hippolyte et Aricie” by Jean-Philippe Rameau. She left with a knockout long black dress with a red satin crisscross sash by Lanvin. “For us, it’s Christmas today,” she said.
Daryl Roth, a producer of Broadway plays including “Kinky Boots” and “Hello, Dolly!” and a friend of Ms. Friedman’s, said that after having donated last year, she had less to give away and so went on a shopping spree at Bloomingdale’s, in part to address that the figures of opera singers are often fuller than those of women on the Manhattan benefit circuit.
Ms. Roth bought and donated 13 ensembles: dresses, shirts and tops and one jumpsuit. “It is so hard for young, talented people to make it in New York City,” she said.