Jim Harrison’s Caribbean stew.Credit...Gentl and Hyers for The New York Times. Food stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Amy Wilson.
Good morning. The news from the beach is the snowy owl is still hanging in the dunes at Breezy Point at the western end of Queens, still knocking down rats and rabbits for dinner, still letting us know that winter’s afoot, that even if spring arrives tomorrow, it’s not quite time to head north to the Arctic tundra, the back of beyond. And I’m glad the owl is down there, visiting big, old New York, eating up a storm. It’s a sign, one of many, that we’re really all part of something much bigger than our gigantic city or mid-sized hamlet, our jobs, our struggle, our narrow interests, our particular beliefs, ourselves. Things move around. Food’s a big part of that.
It doesn’t make Mondays any easier, of course. I didn’t quite get around to cooking that big vat of Caribbean stew (above) that I’d intended to make yesterday, so the family could eat big tonight. There are no ravioli verdi in the freezer to make dinner a breeze. I don’t have a roast chicken to shred into enchiladas. And I don’t have time for risotto. Not tonight.
Enter Alison Roman, under a spotlight, with a bag of chips, a carton of eggs and a smart new recipe for a kind of fake-o cheater’s chilaquiles. It makes for the best kind of breakfast-for-dinner: fast and super-flavorful. Watch the video a couple of times and then make the dish your own.
Other new recipes to try out this week or very soon include David Tanis’s vision of udon noodles with oodles of mushrooms and Melissa Clark’s bold foray into chocolate oatmeal: soft, custardy and profoundly bittersweet. Both are appropriate to midweek consumption.
There are thousands more recipes to cook this week at NYT Cooking. You should (if you haven’t already) sign up for a subscription so you can access all of them. All of us here with our laptops and fry pans think our labor is worth your money and time. Here’s hoping you agree.
If you don’t, you can tell me why at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| You can tell me anything you like, in fact, about anything. Please do. But maybe not if you have a question about technology or, like, Step 3 in a recipe for tuna surprise? For those sorts of queries, you’ll get a faster, better, smarter response from the very good people who monitor |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| See you in our inboxes.
Now, if you’ll excuse a detour: Check out these Tesla big rigs spotted in the wild and shot by cellphone, courtesy of Popular Mechanics.
Finally, some recommended reading, and not at all new: Tamara Shopsin’s “Mumbai New York Scranton.” Enjoy. And I’ll be back on Wednesday.