When a co-op at the Hotel Des Artistes on West 67th Street became available almost seven years ago, Pamela Johnson and her husband grabbed it up. The one-bedroom duplex “wasn’t large, but it was lovely,” said Ms. Johnson, an anthropologist.
The space had double-height windows, a terrace and greenhouse. But it also had quite a history as Ms. Johnson learned when the purchase neared completion — Rudolph Valentino lived there in the early 1920s.
Real estate brokers often try to gin up interest in a listing by mentioning, and mentioning again, the previous residents or the big-deal event that occurred on site. And maybe the “touched by greatness” aspect of the deal is what goaded you to sign the lease or the deed in the first place.
One intriguing feature of the apartment at Hotel des Artistes had escaped the notice of Ms. Johnson on her pre-purchase visits to the Upper West Side building. But before moving out, the seller led her upstairs and pointed to the back of a closet where there was a narrow framed slit closed off by a square of painted plywood.
During Valentino’s residency, the skinny opening (a mere 15 inches) was a door to the neighboring apartment that allowed Rambova, reportedly staying down the block with her aunt, to come and go undetected.
“I don’t know who lived next door at the time or how Natacha got access to that apartment, but she was able to go straight through into Valentino’s bedroom,” Ms. Johnson said.
Did Washington Irving Sleep Here?
The bronze plaque with the words “This house was once the home of Washington Irving” had always intrigued Dan Critchett when he walked past 122 East 17th Street (it has the alternate address 49 Irving Place), a three-story brick Italianate-style townhouse and former single-family residence that has been cut up into rental apartments.
Something fun, sure, but, as it turned out, pure fiction.
Mr. Critchett doesn’t know how long the plaque has been affixed to the building; who put it there is another mystery. But after settling in, he learned that he had plenty to dine out on without an assist from the creator of the headless horseman. The townhouse had once been the residence of Elsie de Wolfe, often called America’s first interior decorator, and her companion, Elisabeth Marbury, a literary agent and theater producer whose clients included Oscar Wilde and George Bernard Shaw. And there is reason to believe that Sarah Bernhardt, the architect Stanford White and assorted Astors, Morgans and Vanderbilts, might have turned up at the couple’s Sunday salons.
“I’m getting a lot of mileage telling people about the house,” said Mr. Critchett, who lives in what was once the de Wolfe-Marbury living room.
Jessica and Robert Nacheman are, “old home people,” said Ms. Nacheman, 63, a lawyer. When they bought a wood-fronted townhouse at 312 East 53rd Street in 2012, they knew it had a past — after all it was built in 1866 — but weren’t clear on the specifics. But as they began making plans for the property’s restoration, they learned that Lincoln Kirstein, the founder, with George Balanchine, of New York City Ballet, had lived there in the 1920s and that the society hostess, artist and social activist Muriel Draper lived there in the 1930s.
When she was a little girl, Karen Grava recalls, she watched “The Liberace Show” with her grandmother “because my grandmother loved Liberace,” said Ms. Grava, the director of media relations at the University of New Haven who — sorry, Granny — was decidedly lukewarm about the flamboyant pianist.
Fast forward to 2003 when Ms. Grava and her husband, Robert Luby, a retired accountant, bought a renovated 1924 neocolonial house in Wallingford, Conn. Some time after the couple moved in, Ms. Grava was standing in the front yard when the former town clerk happened by.
The property had been the site of many famous parties, she told Ms. Grava, and Liberace had played at one of them. That’s because a previous owner of the house, one Thomas E. Conheady, also owned a local tavern that presented famous performers of the day.
Arnold Steinhardt was the first violinist of the famed Guarneri String Quartet from its founding in 1964 until its dissolution in 2009, and the group frequently rehearsed in the expansive living room of Mr. Steinhardt’s apartment on the Upper West Side.
Oh, but they can. They can.
Two and a half years ago, Nan Newton, a Steinhardt family friend, and her husband, Dave Grusin, a pianist and composer, had dinner with Lorraine Feather, a jazz singer and lyricist with whom Mr. Grusin had just finished a recording project.
It was a first meeting for the two women, and Ms. Newton was interested to learn that Ms. Feather, a longtime resident of the West Coast, had spent her early years in New York.
Oh, really, where?
On the Upper West Side.
On 106th and Riverside.
Well, what a coincidence: Ms. Newton had good friends who lived on 106th and Riverside. What building?
Amazing. That’s just where her friends the Steinhardts live. What apartment?
“And Nan almost fell off her chair because that’s our apartment,” Mr. Steinhardt recalled.
“And I said, ‘WHAT went on in this living room?’” Mr. Steinhardt said.
Ms. Feather began to tell of jam sessions with Dizzy Gillespie and Bobby Short, and of her godmother Billie Holiday performing several numbers there in November of 1956, a week after her two sold-out “Lady Sings the Blues” concerts at Carnegie Hall — and 15 years before Mr. Steinhardt and his wife, Dorothea von Haeften, moved into the building.
“I said, ‘Billie Holiday sang in OUR living room?’ You can imagine what a strange and wonderful feeling it was,” Mr. Steinhardt said. But wait, there was more. Ms. Feather mentioned that her father, the jazz critic Leonard Feather, had made recordings of the sessions, and offered to send Mr. Steinhardt a link. Yes, please.
After 47 years, the Steinhardts are moving to Santa Fe; the prospective residents of 11A, which is now in contract, won’t be at all surprised about what happened in the living room on a special fall night in 1956. Lady Day’s concertizing was played up in the listing, and, according to Dan Douglas, a Corcoran Group associate broker, it was the story of that special night that drew the new owners to take a look at the apartment in the first place.
