WASHINGTON — Settling into a red chintz high-backed chair a week ago at Off the Record, the subterranean bar in the Hay-Adams hotel across from the White House that teems with so many of the capital’s mandarins, the British politician Nigel Farage surveyed the room over a Tanqueray gin and tonic.
“I feel very, very at home here,” he declared in his gravelly voice. “I might come out of J.F.K. and someone will say something a little bit nasty to me and I might get a comment walking down the street that’s a bit juicy, but there’s no more than that.” The political class here is more live-and-let-live, Mr. Farage believes, than in England, where he has been pelted with eggs, received death threats and had his children bullied following his effective advocacy of Brexit.
It wasn’t nighttime, but 4:30 in the afternoon — well into happy hour by English standards. Drinking at the next table were Arron Banks, the businessman who was a major financier of the Brexit campaign, and Andy Wigmore, a spokesman for the movement to leave the European Union, as well as Mr. Farage’s press agent and his radio producer.
The self-proclaimed “Bad Boys of Brexit” were in town for the Conservative Political Action Conference, where Mr. Farage was to be a keynote speaker the next day, just a few hours after President Trump spoke. Since touching down at Dulles airport 24 hours earlier, he had had dinners, speeches, very little sleep, some “Fox & Friends” banter in the morning and lots of afternoon CPAC selfies with hordes of young conservatives who idolize him.
Even with high-school students staging protests against gun laws in front of the White House?
He wondered if all schools in America will soon become “like Heathrow Airport,” with metal detectors and armed security.
Mr. Farage is perhaps the president’s closest ally in England. When he was in town this time last year, he dined with the president, the first lady, Ivanka Trump, Jared Kushner and Rick Scott, the governor of Florida, at Trump Hotel. (Mr. Farage gets some precious face time and a photo-op with the president this week, too, backstage at CPAC.) Curiously, this special relationship has not endeared him to the British establishment in D.C.; when the embassy had a party for Mr. Trump’s inauguration, Mr. Farage was not among the hundreds who received an invitation, despite the fact that he is in town half a dozen times a year, by his own assessment.
And the same month Mr. Trump won the election, he tweeted that Mr. Farage should be named ambassador to the United States, sending the British government into an uproar.
He agreed that foreign relations between the White House and 10 Downing Street, the headquarters of British government, have only grown frostier in recent months. But not because of Mr. Trump, he insisted.
“He has reached out, he’s offered the hand of friendship, and frankly we’ve spurned him,” Mr. Farage said. In November President Trump was criticized by the British prime minister, Theresa May, after sharing violent anti-Muslim videos from a fringe British ultranationalist group on Twitter. He reacted defensively.
Mr. Farage dismissed this episode as “a hysterical load of rubbish,” pointing out that Mr. Trump was simply sharing something he discovered through the conservative commentator Ann Coulter, one of only 45 people Mr. Trump follows on Twitter.
The anti-Trump sentiment is “not representative of the entire U.K.,” Mr. Farage said. It’s certainly widespread, though: During Mr. Trump’s first month in office, a petition to block him from making his first official state visit to England was signed more than a million times, at one point by more than a thousand people per minute.
If it were up to Mr. Farage, he would circumvent the British government entirely, rent out Wembley Stadium, invite Mr. Trump to speak, charge 20 pounds a ticket and donate the proceeds to charity.
Back home, the political party that Mr. Farage headed for years and used to orchestrate Brexit, UKIP, voted last week to oust its leader, Henry Bolton, after it was revealed that his girlfriend had made racist remarks about Meghan Markle, Prince Harry’s bride-to-be.
Would he consider running the party again? “No,” he said, flatly, claiming he has aged out of party politics.
Mr. Farage still speaks positively about Mr. Bannon but says that he has not talked to him since his ouster from Trumpworld. “Things have gone rather wrong in the last few months,” he said.
Mr. Farage may soon have another reason to stick around the United States, particularly California. There has been talk of “Brexit: The Movie” and Mr. Farage says he has taken several Hollywood meetings.
