‘APOLOGIES FROM MEN’ at the Peoples Improv Theater Striker (March 9, 9:30 p.m.). The #MeToo fallout brought about a flood of firings, new organizations and pledges to change, but a vast array of apologia from perpetrators also ensued. The comedian Lauren Maul has taken these and graciously turned them into animated videos and original music, a full album of which is available for purchase online.
LEWIS BLACK AT CITY WINERY (March 15, 8 p.m.).  Mr. Black, a mainstay of “The Daily Show,” is as dynamic a performer as his talents are varied, with no small number of stand-up specials, books and film roles under his belt.
‘EMPLOYEE OF THE MONTH’ at the Gramercy Theater (March 15, 8 p.m.). “Employee of the Month” is a monthly comedy show and podcast in which Catie Lazarus talks with wildly fascinating famous people about their jobs. The hilariously unassuming British actress Emily Mortimer will be one of Ms. Lazarus’s guests, as will the comedian Hannibal Buress, the “Hamilton” music director Alex Lacamoire and others.
‘OBAMA DAUGHTERS: REQUIEM FOR AMERICA’ AND ‘IMPROVISED SEINFELD’ at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theater Hell’s Kitchen (March 9, 7:30 p.m.). This show boasts two sets of skillful performers and their distinct productions for the price of one particularly extravagant Starbucks order. The first, which features the multitalented Keisha Zollar as a writer and cast member, is set in the year 2036. Trump is still president because term limits have been ignored, and President Obama’s daughters must come to America’s rescue. The second takes the “Seinfeld” we all know and love and improvises an entire episode.
‘RUNNING LATE’ at the Gramercy Theater (March 12, 8 p.m.). Savage question: Did you know that before HQ, its superpopular host Scott Rogowsky regularly served as M.C. for “Running Late,” a general interest comedy talk show he started in October 2011? He has recently resurrected the show, and for this installment, he’ll be joined by the comedian Michael Ian Black, the HQ superfan Dan Rather and others.
‘TINDER LIVE!’ at Littlefield (March 10, 8:30 p.m.). The performer Lane Moore hosts this fourth anniversary celebration of her recurring comedy show, in which the audience is treated to Tinder pro tips and tricks, a smattering of swiping and messaging in real time and the occasional live phone call. For this anniversary edition, Ms. Moore has invited Eliot Glazer of “Broad City,” the musician JD Samson of the band Le Tigre and the author Mychal Denzel Smith.