It’s an earnest, heart-heavy question in a movie, by turns droll and melancholic, that can be easier to admire than to flat-out love. As he did in “Fantastic Mr. Fox,” Mr. Anderson tells his tale primarily using stop-motion animation, an artisanal process that creates the illusion of movement frame by frame with objects like puppets. The story takes off in Megasaki City, where the thuggish Mayor Kobayashi (voiced by Kunichi Nomura), has banished dogs to an island garbage dump, beginning with Spots (Liev Schreiber), a weaponized guardian of, and loving companion to, Atari (Koyu Rankin), the mayor’s 12-year-old ward.
Wes Anderson narrates a sequence from the film.
“Isle of Dogs” takes off as Atari searches for Spots, a heroic quest that leads him to a canine penal colony, a wasteland where mysteriously sick dogs fight over morsels gleaned from rancid, maggoty garbage. It’s a horror show — and an apt, brutal metaphor for our offscreen world — with an abandoned nuclear power plant and a derelict amusement park. 
Trash Island is ugly, but its horrors are attenuated by their meticulous construction and visual splendor, and quickly contained. Mr. Anderson soon brings in his lead dogs, scene-stealers of every breed whose barks are rendered in English. There are purebreds and mutts and a silky show dog, Nutmeg, voiced with husky insouciance by, naturally, Scarlett Johansson. The top dogs, though, are an alpha male pack, a quintet of skinny throwaways voiced by Edward Norton (Rex), Bill Murray (Boss), Jeff Goldblum (Duke), Bob Balaban (King) and Bryan Cranston, whose Chief, a proud, violent stray (“I bite”), has wisely never depended on the unreliable kindness of humans.
The dogs provide the emotion in this movie. They’re surprising, touching and thoroughly delightful company distinguished by witty vocalizations, expressive eccentricities and too many heartbreaking markers of abuse — matted fur, open wounds, painfully knobby legs and that anxious, mournful look of devotion that dogs retain for even the most unworthy humans. (The head of the puppet department is Andy Gent, who worked on “Fantastic Mr. Fox.”) The dogs have been abandoned by their masters; damningly, only Atari has set off on a rescue mission. Yet most haven’t relinquished their connections to their peopled past. They yearn for a pat on the head.
The story of the abused animals of Trash Island evokes tales of pain and suffering like “Black Beauty” and “Beautiful Joe.” Mr. Anderson, who also wrote the screenplay, handles this theme unpersuasively, nodding at genocide only to skitter away and return to his embroidered visuals. “Isle of Dogs” is filled with exquisite illustrations, whimsical flourishes and nostalgic details — old-fashioned labels, computer punch cards — that thicken the texture of its imaginary world. But too often the movie feels overworked, fussy. And when an explosion darkens Trash Island, evoking the horrors of Japan’s past, Mr. Anderson feels like he’s circling a profundity he doesn’t know how to handle.
Like many of Mr. Anderson’s movies, “Isle of Dogs” is very much about storytelling — it’s narrated by Courtney B. Vance — which means that it’s about the past as much as the present or future. It opens with a fable about a boy samurai, a precursor to Atari and one of Mr. Anderson’s wise youngsters. We spend a lot of time with Atari, so it’s too bad that much of what he says is not translated into English. There are some cute interpretive moves (a translator voiced by Frances McDormand), but Mr. Anderson clearly didn’t want subtitles competing with his visuals. So when the Japanese characters speak, their words are usually reduced to the decorative, at least for non-Japanese speakers.
It’s a strange, discomfiting choice not least because it means that few of the Japanese characters, including Atari, have the depth or dignity given the dogs. Back in Megasaki City, when the mayor plots and scientists (Akira Ito and the one and only Yoko Ono) work on a cure for what ails the dogs, only some of what they say is conveyed. At the same time, high school journalists, led by a foreign-exchange student, Tracy (Greta Gerwig), investigate the mayor. Tracy speaks Japanese but mostly yammers on in English. A bossy boots with a blond puffball of hair, she is a tedious variation on Tracy Flick (of “Election”) and Mr. Anderson’s own young strivers (“Rushmore” and elsewhere).
Mr. Anderson has always drawn liberally from film history, folding allusions to favorites into his work. In “Isle of Dogs,” he gives an apparent shout-out to the director Seijun Suzuki. The mayor was amusingly (and convincingly) modeled on the actor Toshiro Mifune, known for his work with Akira Kurosawa, whom Mr. Anderson has referenced, with Hayao Miyazaki, as an influence on “Isle of Dogs.” The allusions are loving, but at times also ritualistic, distracting and uninvolving; mostly Mr. Anderson is replaying his own greatest hits, going back to familiar ideas — the fallen adult world included — that would work better if they weren’t smothered in filigree and self-consciousness.
And yet, time and again, Mr. Anderson pulls you hard into “Isle of Dogs.” His use of film space, which he playfully flattens and deepens, is one of his stylistic signatures; he likes symmetry and, in contrast to most directors these days, does a lot inside the frame. He’s especially inventive in this movie, and I could watch hours of its noble dogs hanging out, sniffing the air. Their relationships are expressed in asides and periodic growls but more poignantly when they are separated in the frame and when they’re gloriously united. (By protecting others, you save yourself.) Here, when a dog looks into the camera, the wind caressing him where a human hand once did, the movie finds its soul.