SATURDAY PUZZLE — If we were in a David Attenborough special right now he would be whispering excitedly to us about the rare, wily Saturday-themed crossword, something many have heard about but never seen in its natural environment. Hopefully, the next scene is not of us being dragged up a path to this puzzle’s well-hidden lair.
We’re getting this grid today because it was too hard for a Thursday, I imagine. This is one of the few puzzles I’ve done where the notion that someone could sit down and fill out the grid out cleanly is pretty amazing — I guess if you were so big-picture perspicacious that you established the trick that affects half the answers you might have been able to do it, but most of us toss an answer or two onto a grid when getting started. But, first things first.
There are technically two Manhattan-centric theme entries — 19A and 52A.
If you aren’t familiar with our fair isle, 19A refers to the interesting fact that about nine out of 10 cross streets — those streets running east to west, and west to east — are ONE WAY STREETS. Most of the time they alternate as they stack up the height of the borough, forming a zigzag, the widest possible slalom course from top to bottom (or bottom to top). Just like everything else in Manhattan there are plenty of complications, including streets that split in two, end unexpectedly or funnel you and your car into irreversible, borough-exiting bridge and tunnel maneuvers. But the idea of running back and forth is key to solving this puzzle.
What about avenues, the roads that run up and down the borough, from Battery Park to Inwood? Well, these tend to be wider and mainly commercial strips; but a fair number of these are also one-way. When you really look at our traffic setup it’s sort of amazing people get anywhere in a vehicle, above ground, any faster than walking.
Thus we have 52A, a “nightmarish Manhattan traffic situation,” and completely normal state for those of us who regularly spend time in Midtown — TOTAL GRIDLOCK. When traffic is so bad that the intersection in front of you doesn’t clear and let you through, even when lights change, you’re in gridlock. The term refers to all types of negotiations, and total gridlock is the subject of loads of studies, some of which relate traffic to our own neural pathways, or different states of matter — anyway, all types of complicated stuff.
The worst form of gridlock involves travelers going in all four directions, and all of them stuck. You might be heading east and cut off by someone heading north, who in turn is waiting for someone heading west to move forward in that direction — but they’re blocked by someone pointing south. A couple of entries that contribute to the theme, 35A and 41A, allude to this. “Proceeding willy-nilly” is GOING IN ALL DIRECTIONS, except these clues themselves are going WEST, so they read LLANIGNIOG (at 35A) and SNOITCERID (at 41A).
It turns out that Mr. Der has incorporated four directions of traffic into this grid. When you work the across clues, those in the odd rows are entered backward, from east to west. When you work the down clues, those in the odd rows are entered “upside down,” from south to north. I guess, in a 15 X 15 square like this, you could be reminded of weaving, with a continuous weft (or woof) line running back and forth to make fabric.
a) My time was going to be really slow. This puzzle required a lot of deliberation to overrule the instinctual direction of entering answers, all the way through.
b) The skill and deliberation needed to construct this puzzle must have been greater than that needed to solve it by a large factor. I think the clues might have been less infernal than an unthemed Saturday, for good reason, and Mr. Der wove over 25 words of six letters or longer together, going in all four directions. That is really impressive.
21A: Again, could be coincidence, but I liked this entry in the grid, YALE (entered as ELAY); in this case the clue was pretty vague and blind (surely I’m not the only one who doesn’t have the year of origin of Ivy League newspapers at my mental fingertips?). The same entry has been clued in the past, of course, as “It’s a lock,” and it is.
60A: “Progress” was hard to come by on some of the corners of this grid; in this case, ironically or not, the answer is a noun, rather than a verb: INROADS.
66A: I got stuck on this one; even though I drink a fair amount of tea, including all variety of mint herbal tea, I’d never tried SAGE TEA (entered here as AETEGAS, of course). Sage and mint are both in the Lamiaceae family (along with many other culinary herbs) but I’ve always thought of sage as either a spiritual disinfectant or a stuffing ingredient.
7D: This clue refers to Lady Nancy ASTOR, née Langhorne, who didn’t survive the Titanic but did possibly insult both Winston Churchill and Senator Joseph McCarthy, on separate occasions, among other interesting and ignominious feats. Read enough about these people and it’s hard not to think the world’s fate is in the hands of a few maniacs and their kin.
24D: If I got really sidetracked on any of this puzzle’s clues, it was this one, “Slow and stately compositions.” I had “dirges”, running from bottom to top, and it worked logically and logistically for quite some time. I got wise eventually and fixed it to LARGOS — or SOGRAL, if you’re still looking at this puzzle the “right” way.
26D: In case “Queen Lucy the Valiant” rings no bells in the monarchal factoid region of your brain, Lucy Pevensie became the queen of NARNIA in C. S. Lewis’s Chronicles of Narnia. If you’re still drawing a blank after that reminder, then you may have grown up with Harry Potter, and you should check out C. S. Lewis when you can.
It’s unclear to me how difficult it will be for solvers to grasp the theme, but I think two things will help: the clue for 19-A pins the answer fairly directly, and each section has answers going down or across in the normal direction which serve as toeholds. To make these toeholds more gettable, the clues are quite straightforward for a Saturday puzzle, and otherwise I suspect the puzzle would be near impossible to complete. Some of the more oblique clues were changed in the interest of solvability — for example, “Carnival offerings” for STATEROOMS and “One imagining a better future for herself” for DREAMER. Once the theme is revealed, keeping track of which rows and columns are reversed and entering those words backward adds a twist to the typical themeless experience.
According to my notes, this puzzle sets my personal record for length in the queue — it was accepted in the summer of 2014 at the same time as the puzzle that ran on October 15, 2015. I think it’s typical for creators of all types to look back on old work and wish for a lot of changes. That’s the case here. In terms of grid design, I would have preferred having four theme entries going in each of the possible directions, but the pair of length 13 makes this difficult because they necessarily intersect the other pair. The 13’s also necessitate a quad stack in the corners which can be mitigated with three sections, but which results in a high word count. I’m also not sure why I chose stacks of seven in each corner rather than eight and six, which I suspect could have resulted in a livelier grid.
Oh no, the next exit is seven miles away and traffic’s barely moving. Pull over, and take a peek at the answer key. While the answers are free to everyone, the Crossword puzzles require a subscription.