243 pp. Sarah Crichton Books/Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $26.
“Is there a benefit to getting old?” asks the interviewer.
That scene comes from a black-and-white video companion to “85 & Up”: a series that ran in The New York Times’s Metropolitan section during the latter half of 2015. The interviewer was the journalist John Leland. He chose an opportune moment to explore the frontier of old age. In New York, the ranks of Americans 85 and older swelled nearly 30 percent between 2000 and 2015. Nationally, the rate of growth was lower, but still remarkable.
For fans of the series, the book offers a chance to revisit six fascinating lives. Its ensemble cast includes Helen Moses, 91, who falls in love with her neighbor, Howie, at a Bronx nursing home; Fred Jones, 88, who struggles to reach his third-floor walk-up apartment after gangrene claimed parts of two toes; Ping Wong, 90, originally from Hong Kong, who lucked into subsidized housing and fills her days with mah-jongg; Ruth Willig, 91, who must readjust after an unwanted move from one assisted-living facility to another; Jonas Mekas, 92, a Lithuanian-born filmmaker who dedicates his life to art; and the sad-eyed but dignified Sorensen, who has longed to die ever since Walter, his partner of 60 years, passed away in 2009.
Unfortunately, the “lessons” on offer aren’t as compelling as the raw experiences from which they’re derived. They are a slurry of positive-psychology platitudes, with occasional dashes of Buddhism and even EST.
The book even goes so far as to suggest a positive side to cognitive decline: “learning how to use memory loss as an advantage,” a tool for wiping away bad experiences to attain greater happiness.
Many of these conclusions come early in the book. As a result, when Leland sets off on his journey to find meaning from the elders’ lives, there are few surprises. The stories feel like beams supporting a house to which he’s already revealed the blueprint.
I found myself wondering how the elders felt about having their experiences strip-mined for lessons. The author explains how “Fred’s found fulfillment in the present, because the future might not come,” while “Ping kept her spirits up by accepting her pains as a part of life.” When, late in the book, he shrugs off a woman’s suggestion that “I was reading too much into things,” it’s hard not to laugh. She’s got his number — he is old-splaining.
As it turns out, you don’t need sugar to make lemonade. Remember Sorensen, who spoke so candidly about wanting to die? Even he becomes a case study in gladness. “The lesson of John Sorensen was that to accept death was to accept life, and to accept life was to live in joy, however dire the circumstances around you,” the book explains.
