The @DietMadisonAve account has used Instagram Stories, where posts disappear after 24 hours, to publish the names of men accused of harassment.
The advertising industry, expert in the art of attention getting, has found itself riveted in recent months by an anonymously run Instagram account dedicated to exposing sexual harassment on Madison Avenue.
The account, @DietMadisonAve, is advertising’s visual version of the Google spreadsheet that circulated last fall with the names of men in the media industry who had been accused of sexually inappropriate behavior.
The group behind @DietMadisonAve also has a smaller Twitter account, where it said on Monday that it believed its Instagram page had either been hacked or taken down after people complained to Instagram about it. An Instagram spokeswoman said that the company “did not disable the account,” which was back online by early evening. It is still not clear what caused its temporary disappearance.
The account, which was recently made visible to anyone rather than just its followers, has garnered many fans, especially among younger people in the industry who see it as a vehicle for exposing men who have escaped consequences for their misdeeds. Others feel that it has led to trial-by-strangers on social media.
The account has published names of alleged harassers along with details of what they’ve been accused of through Instagram Stories that disappear after 24 hours. They often consist of blocks of text against a solid background, or captions splashed onto screenshots of news articles and messages sent to the account.
An operator of the account, communicating through private messages on Instagram, said it had shared 17 names of alleged harassers and had collected an additional 158 that it had not yet vetted. The person said the group vetted allegations before making them public, by verifying work histories and obtaining supporting documents like nondisclosure agreements. The sender declined to provide more specific details, citing legal reasons.
One of the operators of the account said that the group believed eight men it named had been fired, including by the agencies Droga5 and Wieden + Kennedy, where such exits are generally accompanied by nonspecific official statements invoking company values and guidelines.
Messages directed at the agencies and people accused of wrongdoing are often paired with phrases like, “You are on notice,” and “You had your chance to self police. And you failed.” (The account shared an observer’s recent comment comparing its tone to “Gossip Girl meets Robin Hood.”) Mixed in with the allegations are memes and other posts that celebrate diversity, feminism, female leaders in the industry and the #MeToo movement.
An operator of the account said its name was inspired by Diet Prada, an Instagram account known for calling out copying in the fashion industry that has also recently drawn attention to sexual harassment accusations in fashion.
The Instagram account follows the lead of a spreadsheet that circulated among journalists last fall that sought to collect the names of men described by colleagues as sexists, sexual harassers and rapists. It was taken down by its creator about 12 hours after it was made, but lived on through screenshots and downloads and prompted investigations at media companies. Several men whose names were on the list subsequently lost their jobs.
While the document raised questions about the ethics of anonymous accusations, it was also praised for providing women with a new way to warn one another about certain men in the media industry and to hold them accountable.
As @DietMadisonAve has solicited stories from women, its unnamed operators have said they can connect accusers with investigative reporters and with lawyers who specialize in sexual harassment litigation. The account also offers to guide women on whistle-blower laws, how to approach human resources departments with complaints and ways to find mental health counselors. The goal, those involved with the account said, is for advertising agencies to enforce zero-tolerance policies for sexual misconduct.
None of the ad agencies contacted for this article would comment on @DietMadisonAve.
Ms. Gordon of the 3% Movement said the attention drawn by the account would be noticed by agency human resources departments.
The group behind the account said that some of its members were forming separate lobbying and educational groups — although not under the @DietMadisonAve name — that would continue to address problems of discrimination, diversity and sexual harassment at ad agencies.
For now, the account seems to be moving forward, posting links to its Snapchat and Twitter accounts after the Instagram shutdown in preparation for any future disruptions.
On Tuesday, @DietMadisonAve posted a poll on Instagram Stories: “Should we stick to ad land or get into media too?” Screenshots of followers’ replies suggested people wanted more.