With the publication of two new books, Gerald Murnane might finally find an American audience.
I become confused, or even distressed, whenever I find myself among streets or roads that are not arranged in a rectangular grid. ... I have watched few films during my lifetime and hardly any in recent years. ... I cannot recall having gone voluntarily into any art gallery or museum or building said to be of historic interest. I have never worn sunglasses. I have never learned to swim. I have never voluntarily immersed myself in any sea or stream. ... I have never touched any button or switch or working part of any computer or fax machine or mobile telephone. I have never learned to operate any sort of camera. ... In 1979 I taught myself to type using the index finger of my right hand alone. Since then, I have composed all my fiction and other writing using the finger just mentioned and one or another of my three manual typewriters.
Murnane is a trim, compact man with a fierce face; in photographs, especially, he exhibits a strong disinclination to smiling, favoring the hard stare. At the Goroke Golf Club, a V.F.W.-style hall with cinder-block walls and vinyl floral-print tablecloths, he positioned himself behind the bar and flipped through a newspaper, half-listening to presentations with titles like “Intention and Retrospective Revision in Gerald Murnane’s ‘Border Districts.’ ” Later, he claimed not to have followed much of the discussions. Mostly, he remembered thinking, Oh, so that’s what it looks like to you. During breaks, he signed books, occasionally complaining about the covers, and sold beer and soft drinks to the academics.
Then again, for Murnane, who once expressed regret at not having simply allowed “discerning editors to publish all my pieces of writing as essays,” the author is always present in the text, and so for the enterprising scholar, there’s arguably legitimate hermeneutic value in buying a Carlton from the subject of your dissertation. Murnane’s life, his fiction and the landscape he inhabits — the beauty and isolation of the Victorian interior, calm seas of yellow grassland that conjure schoolbook images of the veld — are so inextricably entwined that to visit him in Goroke feels at once like a field trip and a close reading.
Murnane once described himself as a “technical writer” — meaning, he explained, that in his depictions of “the mental imagery that is my only available subject-matter,” he strove for the rigor and precision of a white paper. (He often refers to his stories as reports.)  A typical Murnane work of fiction unfolds like a procedural, often spinning out from a single, half-remembered image, something as simple as a jockey’s racing colors, as glimpsed on a youthful outing to the track in Bendigo, a city in Victoria. Other memories will follow — anecdotes, personal asides, funny or sad little stories within the story — and it can all seem digressive, until the methodical obsessiveness of Murnane’s self-interrogation becomes clear. He’s searching the furthest reaches of his memory for clues, hidden meanings, details that might have slipped away. The digressions turn out to be leads. And in the end, there’s no writing-workshop epiphany, but rather that thrilling moment when the circles and arrows linking up the photographs thumbtacked to the squad-room wall form a previously unseen web of connection.
the chief event of the afternoon might have been his sitting down beside me on a hilltop, taking out of his trousers pocket the folded form-guide from The Age, pointing to a certain name among the fields of horses, and then fiddling with his wireless until I was just able to hear, above the crackle of static and the buzzing of insects in the grass, the call of a race more than a hundred miles away with the horse that my uncle had brought to my notice in the thick of the finish.
My first day in Goroke, Murnane instructed me to pick him up at the local Men’s Shed, housed in a former bank. For the non-Australian reader, a quick explanation: A men’s shed is a communal workshop where members do things like repair shelves or bicycles, part of a national public-health initiative aimed at curbing depression among retired men. Murnane possesses few useful skills for a men’s shed, but the week after he moved to Goroke, the owner of the local service station invited him to join. He looks after the kitchen, cleans the toilet and serves as treasurer.
Murnane had been watching the street from behind the muslin storefront curtain, and he marched outside to greet me. He wore a plaid shirt tucked into light khaki trousers and had the loose, ruddy skin of an avid golfer of a certain age. A successful treatment for prostate cancer had left him unable to sleep without interruption, but he appeared sharp and full of vim.
“Your body adapts, like a soldier in the trenches,” Murnane said matter-of-factly. The shed wasn’t technically open, but Murnane led me past dusty workbenches scattered with tools into a modest lounge, where he put on a kettle and opened a jar of instant coffee. His health, he said, had been improving, and he felt “full of optimism,” and not just about his recovery. “My publishing history’s just so checkered with sudden reversals, ups and downs, confusions, wrong turnings, and at the end of my life, virtually, it seems like things are starting to work out,” he said.
Murnane moved to Goroke in 2009, after the death of his wife of 43 years, Catherine. Their eldest son, Giles, whom Murnane repeatedly described as a hermit, had come to Goroke years earlier, having chosen the town off the map for its cheap housing. Murnane had always been attracted to the country, and the first time he visited Giles, driving past the town graveyard, he had a premonition, “calmly and wordlessly,” he later wrote, “as one understands things in dreams”: That’s where my ashes will lie.
 An unpaved alley lined with corrugated-tin fencing led to the back entrance. The place had a ramshackle quality. A corrugated-tin barn stood beside five squat reservoirs used to capture rainwater — the town’s water is not potable — and a lonely clothesline tree leaned crookedly in a cement courtyard surrounded by an uneven stone wall. Murnane lived in a studio behind the main house. Both buildings were constructed from unlined blocks of white sandstone quarried nearby, giving Murnane’s quarters, especially, a bunkerlike feel.
It’s difficult to overstate the lack of shared qualities between Murnane’s room and any recognized notion of a living area. There were nods in the latter direction: the kitchen sink and minifridge; the tiny bathroom; a wooden schoolboy’s desk, facing a blank wall in the corner, where Murnane writes. But the bulk of the room had been filled with Murnane’s archives: more than a dozen filing cabinets, lining three walls and containing thousands of pages of journals, letters, lecture notes and ephemera from every stage of his life. A separate row of metal storage lockers bisected the center of the room, adding to the jarring overall motif, a blend of fanatical organization and claustrophobia, as if a squatter had taken over a secluded wing of a research library. There was no bed. Murnane keeps a folding cot in his shower stall. A threadbare sleeping pad, meant for a tent, was stored atop the storage lockers along with some blankets.
“There’s your seat,” he said, gesturing to a camping chair unfolded at the foot of his desk. It sat comically low to the ground. I settled in, the lockers containing every detail of Murnane’s mind rising on either side of me like canyon walls, and Murnane pulled out a list of agenda items he wished to discuss.
The list had been organized, I soon realized, in such a way that we would move in a counterclockwise direction around the room, stopping at various points to discuss objects of particular significance. One of the first items he pointed out, a poster covered with the racing colors of every jockey who had won the Melbourne Cup from its inception in 1861 until 2008, turned out to be part of his daily routine of memory exercises, which he compared to the offices, or hourly prayers, performed by Catholic priests.
Murnane had started talking the moment I picked him up at the Men’s Shed, and he didn’t stop, with few exceptions, for the next 12 hours, until I left for my hotel, a room above a pub in nearby Natimuk. He spoke rapidly, in a futile effort to keep pace with the speed of his own thoughts, constantly interrupting himself with muttered asides — a quote from the symbolist playwright Alfred Jarry, a self-deprecating story about his haplessness with women, a gripe about a Publishers Weekly review from the mid-1980s. He accepted my own interruptions of his monologues with good humor and often delight at the prospect of a new digression. When he excused himself to use the toilet, he closed the bathroom door and raised his voice.
At 18, Murnane entered a seminary. He lasted only three months and lost his faith by his early 20s; the lure, more than God, had been the idealized notion of a monastic writing life. He’d been reading Thomas Merton, the American Trappist monk, and envied such an ordered existence, so pure in its devotion. As a teenager, he dreamed of becoming a poet, in part because he assumed writers of prose possessed an understanding of human behavior, which he believed he lacked. “I don’t know what anyone is thinking,” Murnane told me. “People are a mystery to me.” He spent 13 years as a public servant, teaching in primary schools and working as an editor in a government office, and he married Catherine, who also worked as a teacher, in 1966, when he was 27. They settled in an unfashionable northern suburb, where she supported his decision to quit his day job and take care of their three sons, snatching free moments to work on his fiction and supplementing the family income with the occasional grant.
By the time he published “The Plains,” Murnane had begun teaching creative writing at the Australian equivalent of a community college, but despite the novel’s critical success, he maintained an ambivalent distance from the literary scene. He still did most of his writing at an ironing board set up in his kitchen, because his family’s home was so crowded for space.
As we circumnavigated his room, Murnane sipped from a plastic bottle containing a suspiciously cloudy beverage. It turned out to be water mixed with vinegar. (His doctor had instructed him to drink more water, but he didn’t like the taste.) Around 4:30, as he does every day, Murnane switched to beer, a slightly sour, high-alcohol-content pale ale he brewed himself, originally to save money, though now he’d grown partial to it. His golfing partner, the daughter of a friend from the Men’s Shed, had invited us over for dinner. Before we left, Murnane settled into his desk chair and rubbed his eyes, his unruly eyebrows squirming above his fingers.
Well, but not just that, I thought, looking around. A visit to Murnane’s room made me think of the one-way intimacy that occurs between reader and writer — that feeling, after finishing a poem or novel, of having temporarily inhabited a consciousness not your own. Only here, I had the rare opportunity to experience that sensation in a physical space. (As in his “chiseled” paragraphs, in Murnane’s archive everything has its place: While showing me the chronological files, Murane pointed at a cabinet drawer and said, “My wife dies over here.”) Stepping into the hermetic confines of Murnane’s world so perfectly mirrored his fictional project that it felt like stepping into the pages of one of his books.
Williams, looking appalled, quickly poured me a glass of wine.
During my time in Goroke, I never met Murnane’s son Giles. Murnane said he slept during the day and mostly ventured out at night to pick up snacks or fast food in Horsham, a city about 45 minutes away. Despite the “hermit” cracks, he spoke tenderly, and in protective terms, of Giles; ailing or troubled children appear in several of his stories, including, most powerfully, in the opening story in “Stream System,” “When the Mice Failed to Arrive,” in which the protagonist, a primary-school teacher turned househusband, struggles to explain suffering to a son hospitalized with asthma. Catherine also dealt with serious illnesses throughout her life, often leaving Gerald to care for the children.
He pulled a handkerchief from his pocket and wiped off the top of the stone. It was the last day of January, summer in Australia, and the shorn barley and wheat fields we’d driven past had seemed to pixelate in the bright afternoon sunlight.
Ever one for spatial precision, Murnane pointed to the spot on the ground where Catherine’s ashes had been interred, forming a small, boxlike shape with his hands. “And I’ll be buried where you’re standing,” he said.
Murnane, who has said “Border Districts” will be his final novel, did not look like someone who missed his old life. In fact, he had recused himself from the literary scene once before. Back in Melbourne, as his books after “The Plains” became more experimental and inward-looking, he felt like an increasingly marginal figure — so much so that, in 1991, he decided to quit. Over the next decade, Murnane published only a single story collection, “Emerald Blue,” comprising mostly older material; the final sentence of the final story, “The Interior of Gaaldine,” reads, “The text ends at this point.” (“Emerald Blue” sold 600 copies, affirming his decision.) For extra cash, he took a job bundling newspapers and magazines in the early hours of the morning. He returned to writing only in 2001, after Indyk, the publisher of an independent literary press, offered to give him a home.
Though Murnane never became a problem gambler like his father, one of his most cherished childhood memories involves a horse-racing game he played with a set of colored marbles. (To this day, he keeps the marbles in a jar in his room, where they occupy a place of pride just behind his writing desk.) And the strangest thing about “The Interior of Gaaldine” is that not only the obviously autobiographical first half of the story, but the entire thing, basically, minus the ghost and the briefcase, is true. Murnane, working in secret beginning in 1985, developed a wildly more intricate version of his boyhood racing game, which is how he spent most of his retirement, and how he fills many of his evenings in Goroke.
He calls the project his Antipodean Archive. Inside its cabinet’s drawers, there were maps of the two fictional countries where the races take place (including timetables for the major train networks), detailed sketches of racecourses and notebooks filled with the names and racing colors of the 1,500 full-time trainers, illustrated with head shots cut from newspapers and Murnane’s own childlike drawings of the racing silks. An index listed every horse to have raced in the Antipodes, and there were handwritten, single-spaced results of the hundreds of races, as in a racing form. His method of determining race outcomes, too complex to get into here, involves, of course, books: A randomly chosen sentence generates points for a particular horse based on the number of vowels and consonants, combined with a banked system of points Murnane can award to favorites.
As we flipped through the folders, I thought of the great Robert Coover novel “The Universal Baseball Association, Inc., J. Henry Waugh, Prop.,” about a recluse who invents a proto-fantasy-baseball game with players who become more real to him than any live human, and also about the work of outsider artists like Henry Darger, the reclusive Chicago janitor who secretly crafted his own elaborate, obsessive mythology illustrated with hundreds of paintings and collages. As Murnane explained the world he had created, he sounded as if he were speaking of a real place: “Now in New Arcady, which is the smaller island, there are only 12 racecourses. They have races about five days a week up in the North.” At one point, Murnane closed his eyes, clenched his hands into fists and broke into song. It was the New Eden national anthem, which he’d written and composed himself.
Oceans foaming, mariners roaming, never a home in perilous seas. ...
For years, he kept his project under wraps, even from his wife. “It’s an embarrassing thing for an old man, or a middle-aged man at the time, that he plays kids’ games,” Murnane said. “But they’re not kids’ games.” To help me better understand, he showed me a letter he’d written to “Fc,” his future creature. It read, in part: “All the fiction I ever wrote or read was a preparation for this, my true life’s work. In book after book of mine, I wrote about the contents of my mind, setting all my images on paper so that I could have done with them; could sweep them out of sight and leave my mind free for the infinite imagery of the Antipodes.” His reports from the interior, from his own interior, had always skirted around the edges of a central image winking at the far reaches of his consciousness, a pair of his dream jockeys crossing a finish line. How could he ignore them?
I no longer felt as if I’d stepped into a story by Murnane, but rather one by Borges: a story about a brilliant writer who discovers that the purest form of writing is, in the end, to write nothing at all.
Gingerly, I prodded Murnane. All his books had been so deeply personal, but also something any reader could enter into. But with the Antipodean Archive, Murnane had created countries where only he could travel. Did he harbor any second thoughts about diverting so much of his creativity into such a private pursuit?
Murnane smiled. He could see another connection forming. From one of his cabinets, he retrieved a typewritten manuscript page from his poetry collection. Read it, he instructed. That’s where we’d stop.
that I wanted to include in this poem but failed.
unfortunately, what they revealed to me.