A day after a United States military helicopter crashed during a troop transport mission in western Iraq, the grim news traveled nearly 6,000 miles west, back to New York: Two city firefighters were among the service members killed.
Fire officials spent the day working to gather details of the deaths — the first of New York City firefighters serving in a war zone since Christian P. Engeldrum, 39, was killed in November 2004, when a roadside bomb detonated near his convoy outside Baghdad.
In Thursday’s crash, American officials could not immediately say why the aircraft, an HH-60 Pave Hawk, went down near the city of Qaim, killing all seven service members aboard, although enemy fire was not believed to be the cause.
Officials did not immediately identify the dead. But in conversations among firefighters, in military circles and on social media, it became clear that the casualties had struck hard a band of colleagues attached to the New York Air National Guard 106th Rescue Wing, which is stationed in Westhampton Beach, N.Y., on Long Island’s East End.
Officials said that four crew members were from the New York unit. The others onboard included a combat rescue officer, and active and reserve airmen, whose job is to find and recover downed aircrews and evacuate the wounded.
As the hours passed on Friday, the names and backgrounds of the two victims came into focus.
One, Christopher J. Raguso, 39, was appointed as a firefighter in 2005, and worked for many years in Ladder Company 113 in Flatbush, Brooklyn, before being promoted to lieutenant in 2016, and going to work in Queens. Decorated six times for bravery and saving lives, he was a volunteer firefighter on Long Island, where he lived with his wife, Carmella, and two young daughters.
It was in a Facebook post by the volunteer fire department in Commack, N.Y., that Lieutenant Raguso’s life began to emerge publicly. He died “while protecting our freedom,” the post said. It featured two photos of him: one in the dress blues of his municipal uniform and another in an airman’s camouflage.
Another local volunteer department, in Northport, N.Y., posted more photos of Lieutenant Raguso. And a local news website posted a video of an interview Lieutenant Raguso gave in August to a Texas television station, in which he spoke of his efforts to help rescue people battered by the floods of Hurricane Harvey.
The other New York City firefighter who died was identified by his parents and city officials as Christopher Tripp Zanetis, 37, who was on leave from the department, where he had been a marshal in the Bureau of Fire Investigation.
Mr. Zanetis said a military chaplain and an Air Force major came to the home of his wife’s mother in Nashville to convey the news.
Christopher Tripp ZanetisCredit...
The parents, speaking together by telephone, said their son grew up in central Indiana and graduated from New York University. He was a sophomore there on Sept. 11, 2001, and, “I think that’s what made him become a New York City fireman,” said his mother, Sarah Zanetis, 63, who said he had lived three blocks from the World Trade Center.
Appointed as a firefighter in 2004, he was assigned to Engine Company 28 on Manhattan’s Lower East Side. In 2013, Firefighter Zanetis was promoted to fire marshal and the following year was recognized for his bravery as part of an investigative unit. Around then, his parents said, he joined the military and then pursued a career in law while on unpaid leave from the Fire Department.
“He loved everyone and everyone loved him,” Mr. Zanetis said.
The New York Fire Department has more than 1,400 members who are either military reservists or veterans, and 62 of them are currently on active duty overseas, said James Long, a department spokesman. Firefighter Engeldrum, who died in 2004, was a sergeant in the First Battalion of the 105th Infantry and was the first New York City employee to die serving in Iraq.
In Iraq, people who live near Thursday’s crash said the helicopter went down shortly after takeoff, Ahmed al-Mahilawi, the mayor of Qaim, said in a telephone interview. The American military uses a base in the area as a logistics center and resupply hub.
Coalition forces sealed off the site, in Anbar Province near Syria, an area that poses an continuing threat to the American-led effort against the Islamic State.
Preliminary findings indicated that the helicopter may have had a technical malfunction before hitting the ground about 18 miles southeast of Qaim, near a phosphate factory and a railroad station. Among other questions are whether the aircraft could have struck overhead power lines, whose locations are difficult to map.
The helicopter that crashed is typically flown by the United States Air Force for search-and-rescue missions and medical evacuations. The aircraft, a modified version of the Black Hawk helicopter, is frequently used by Special Operations pararescue specialists.
American forces and Iraqi partners have been winding down their operations against the Islamic State, but fighters pushed from urban centers in Iraq have escaped to the desert along the border with Syria.