Left: An ad that appeared on Snapchat for a game called “Would You Rather?!”; Right: Rihanna’s response, posted on her Instagram story.
Snapchat users noticed an ad that asked whether they would rather “slap Rihanna” or “punch Chris Brown.” On Thursday, the pop star took to Instagram, a direct competitor for Snapchat, to criticize the ad for making light of domestic violence. Stock prices for Snap Inc., the parent company of Snapchat, sank by 4 percent.
In 2009, Mr. Brown was charged in a brutal beating after he hit, choked and bit Rihanna, and tried to push her out of the car. He eventually pleaded guilty to felony assault and received five years of probation.
The advertiser has now been blocked from Snapchat, according to the company.
This most recent debacle sent the stock price of Snap Inc., which owns Snapchat, down more than 4 percent. The price jumped last month after an earnings report that exceeded expectations for the fourth quarter of 2017. Snapchat has been struggling since it went public last March, reporting dismal financial results last year for three consecutive quarters. Last week, Snap Inc. announced that it will be cutting 120 engineers.
The company relies on a patina of cool to keep its young user base engaged, even as other mobile apps with similar or competing features have risen in popularity. Influencers play a large role in Snapchat’s branding, and the stock fluctuates based on their behavior. Last month, Kylie Jenner, who has marketed her cosmetics line on the platform and is one of its most popular users, tweeted, “does anyone else not open Snapchat anymore? Or is it just me … ugh this is so sad.” Her comment has been liked more than 377,000 times. The day of her tweet, the company’s stock dropped 7 percent.
Third-party content caused a problem for Snapchat last week as well. Snapchat — and Instagram — had to halt its Giphy integration after a racist image showed up for its users. Giphy indexes most-popular GIFs and has used automated filters to screen for disturbing content. Now, the company has announced it will have human moderators screen every GIF.