Sphinx, sorceress, sacred monster. The revival of the hypnotic Clarice Lispector has been one of the true literary events of the 21st century. A national obsession in her native Brazil — her novels are sold in subway vending machines there — she was neglected in the English-speaking world until a splendid 2009 biography, “Why This World,” by Benjamin Moser, charted the clashing currents in her life of fame, glamour, unspeakable suffering and, above all — despite it all — untrammeled productivity.
In recent years, there have been fresh translations of the major work: the mystical novels and the real landmark, to my mind, her glittering and savage “Complete Stories,” translated by Katrina Dodson.
No one sounds like Lispector — in English or Portuguese. No one thinks like her. Not only does she seem endowed with more senses than the allotted five, she bends syntax and punctuation to her will. She turns the dictionary upside down, shaking all the words loose from their definitions, sprinkling them back in as she desires (along with a few eyelashes, toast crumbs and dead flies) — and doesn’t the language look better for it?
But “The Chandelier” is uniquely demanding — it’s baggy, claggy and contentedly glacial. We get interior monologues and barometric readings of the drifting moods of a young, unhappy woman named Virginia. Paragraph breaks are few; chapter breaks are nonexistent. Plot? On Page 4, a man’s hat floating down a river snags on a rock. On Page 34, a leaf comes loose from a tall tree, hovers in the air “for enormous minutes” and falls to the ground.
Did I mention that this novel is charming? Punishing, yes, and maniacally overwritten, but a vulnerable and moving performance — with a heart-stopping payoff.
I recall the British critic Christopher Ricks once saying that in every long book lies a short one evading its responsibilities. It’s a literary prejudice I share, but in “The Chandelier” I sense something else: not a shorter, better book lurking, but Lispector’s entire body of work, in miniature, biding its time. So many of the themes, philosophical inquiries and character types that appear here will return, honed as Lispector refines her style and hardens them into the diamond-like perfection of her final books, which are narrated in jagged aphorisms — “anti-literature” she called them.
If the pages of “The Chandelier” are so thickly lacquered with description, streams of adjectives and looping repetition, it’s because Lispector is flexing, coming into her power. She’s playing, she’s practicing. 
Her books stay peaceably indifferent to any imperatives of story — “The Passion According to G.H.,” regarded by some as her masterpiece, features a housewife staring into a closet for 200 pages. But with her later restraint, it was her sentences that began to have plots. With their topsy-turvy structure, they contain the drama and the surprise.
