In most performances of Donizetti’s “Lucia di Lammermoor,” it’s hard not to feel a little sorry for the lead tenor during the final scene. This tormented moment for the character Edgardo is one of the composer’s most inspired creations, but it immediately follows Lucia’s famous mad scene — usually the showstopper.
But thanks to a fearless performance by the tenor Vittorio Grigolo, Edgardo’s scene was the high point of the evening on Thursday when Mary Zimmerman’s 2007 production of “Lucia” returned to the Metropolitan Opera. Other cast members had their moments, especially the luminous soprano Olga Peretyatko-Mariotti, singing her first Lucia at the Met, who was at her best when it mattered most during the long, demanding mad scene. Still, all night Mr. Grigolo was in the zone with a fervor that no one else matched.
Mr. Grigolo put everything on the line for that final scene, at the graveyard of the Ravenswoods, a landed Scottish family in decline. Edgardo, the laird of that estate, has fallen in love with Lucia, the sister of a rival clan, the Lammermoors, now headed by her imperious brother, Enrico, who is Edgardo’s sworn enemy. But to save the Lammermoors from financial ruin, Lucia, who adores Edgardo, has been forced into a marriage of convenience with a wealthy lord.
Edgardo comes to the graveyard at the very moment he believes Lucia is entering her bridal chamber with her new husband. Mr. Grigolo mingled raw despair and feral intensity when he sang Edgargo’s wrenching aria of farewell to life, as he anticipates being killed in a duel at dawn with Enrico and welcomes it. In the second part of the scene, when Edgardo learns that Lucia is dying (having gone mad and stabbed her husband to death), Mr. Grigolo’s vocally burnished and wild-eyed singing made the young man seem unhinged.
Was his performance over the top? Perhaps. But the field of opera could use a little more of Mr. Grigolo’s animalistic intensity. This otherwise curiously tame “Lucia” certainly benefited from it.
There were admirable qualities to Ms. Peretyatko-Mariotti’s Lucia. During her first aria, when she tells her handmaid Alisa (Deborah Nansteel) that she keeps seeing the ghost of a young woman slain by a jealous lover in the waters of a fountain at the castle, Ms. Peretyatko-Mariotti conveyed the emotional shakiness of her fragile character by injecting the ornate vocal lines with a touch of skittishness.
Though the technical aspects of her singing were mostly secure, now and then, even during the otherwise compelling mad scene, Ms. Peretyatko-Mariotti seemed cautious and distracted — for example, taking a moment to prepare for sustained high notes, then singing them shakily. During the heated romantic exchanges in Act I, Mr. Grigolo, with his unbridled passion, inspired Ms. Peretyatko-Mariotti to risk more. Her scene in Act II with Lucia’s brother fell flat though, mostly because of the stolid singing of the baritone Massimo Cavalletti as Enrico. Ms. Peretyatko-Mariotti seemed disengaged.
