When John E. Sulston was 5 years old and growing up in Britain, the son of an Anglican priest, his parents sent him to a private school. There, he discovered, sports were his nemesis.
He had only one consuming interest: science. He liked to tinker, to figure out how things were put together.
And so he did for the rest of his life. He became a scientist’s scientist — almost a classic nerd, by his own description — and one of the towering figures in molecular biology, knighted and honored with the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2002.
He died, of stomach cancer, on March 6 at 75, according to the Wellcome Sanger Institute, a British genome research organization in Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, where he had been the founding director. The institute did not say where he died.
The Nobel he received, shared with two other scientists, recognized the good data he amassed in his work on the tiny transparent roundworm C. elegans in an effort to better understand how organisms develop.
A simple creature, the worm attracted scientists because they could see each of its cells without staining them. And because the worm contains so few cells, they believed it could be possible to understand every step of its 14-day life by tracking the cells as they followed a program determined by their genes.
The hope was that by eliciting changes in the DNA that made up those genes, researchers could figure out what genes were needed to drive each stage of the worm’s life, possibly deriving a road map that could lead to insights into the development of more complex organisms.
Dr. Brenner was the worm’s champion, seeing it as the scientists’ successor to the fruit fly, a favorite of researchers studying inheritance and development. Dr. Sulston was won over, and began working with Dr. Brenner.
At the time, it was widely believed that the 558 cells the worm had when it hatched were all it would ever have. But Dr. Sulston noticed that, in fact, the worm kept gaining cells as it developed. And by tracing the patterns of divisions that gave rise to those new cells, he found, surprisingly, that the worm also lost cells in a predictable way. Certain cells were destined to die at a specific time, digesting their own DNA.
Dr. Sulston’s next major project was to trace the fate of every single cell in a worm. It was a task so demanding and labor-intensive that other scientists still shake their heads in amazement that he got it done.
Each day, bending over his microscope for eight or more hours, he would start with a worm embryo and choose one of its cells. He would then watch the cell as it divided and follow each of its progeny cells as, together, they grew and formed the organism. This went on for a total of 18 months.
In the end, he had a complete map of every one of the worm’s 959 cells (not counting sperm and egg cells).
“Every cell had a fate,” explained Eric Lander, director of the Broad Institute, a biomedical and genomic research center associated with M.I.T. and Harvard.
After that, Dr. Sulston moved on to map the worm’s genes. This was in the mid-1980s, when gene mapping was in its infancy. Dr. Sulston and his colleagues broke the worm’s DNA into 17,000 large random and overlapping pieces, characterized each piece by cutting it into small fragments, and then patched the pieces together.
The map was a perfect starting point for determining the sequence of the DNA that makes up the worm’s genes. It would initiate the next stage of Dr. Sulston’s career.
He and a colleague, Dr. Robert H. Waterston, began with the worm DNA — there was no plan yet to figure out the sequence of the three billion chemical building blocks that make up human DNA — when they got an offer from an entrepreneur, Frederic Bourke, who had made his fortune in leather goods. Mr. Bourke wanted to set the two up in a laboratory, where they could create a library of human gene sequences that he would then sell to scientists.
Dr. Sulston was repelled by the idea. Data, he believed, should be free.
He met Mr. Bourke in a hotel room in Berkeley, Calif., telling him he would absolutely not help him create that database.
Dr. Sulston went on to help lead a joint effort by the National Institutes of Health and the Wellcome Trust in England to create a center to determine the sequence of the human genome. At Dr. Sulston’s urging, it was named after Fred Sanger, who figured out how to sequence DNA, earning him two Nobel Prizes.
The joint project soon had a commercial competitor: Celera, a company, now in Alameda, Calif., run by the geneticist Craig Venter, who promised to deliver the sequence of the DNA in a human’s cells — his — more quickly and efficiently and to sell his data.
Dr. Sulston was appalled.
Instead, the group wrote a 65-page paper, which was published in the journal Nature.
Dr. Sulston took a position at the University of Manchester, where he was chairman of the Institute of Science, Ethics and Innovation, retiring in 2016.
John Edward Sulston was born on March 27, 1942, outside London in Fulmer, Buckinghamshire, to the Rev. Canon Ted Sulston and the former Muriel Blocksidge, an English teacher. After attending private schools, Dr. Sulston graduated from Pembroke College at the University of Cambridge in 1963 with a bachelor’s degree in natural sciences. He received his Ph.D. in chemistry there in 1966.
That same year he married Daphne Bate, a research assistant in the university’s geophysics department. For a time in the late 1960s he did research on the molecular origins of life at the Salk Institute in San Diego.
With Georgina Ferry, Dr. Sulston wrote “The Common Thread: A Story of Science, Politics, Ethics, and the Human Genome” (2002). He was knighted in 2001.
His survivors, according to The Guardian, include his wife; his children, Ingrid and Adrian; two grandchildren; and a sister, Madeleine. He lived in Stapleford, Cambridgeshire.
