Which, of course, she had. I would recount the details for you now, in fact, except that even in the age of Trump, there are some stories that cannot be told in print.
I thought about this story a couple of months ago as I was driving back from Rochester after spending a night at the university there, observing my son Sean’s improv troupe. As I pulled over on the Massachusetts Turnpike to take five at a rest stop, I noticed a woman at the Burger King counter wearing a lovely formal dress, her hair meticulously styled; she wore heels and a pair of stockings with seams running up the back.
In one hand she carried a long white cane. Because she was blind.

I didn’t even have time to tell myself that what I was thinking was wrongheaded before the woman raised her cellphone and, to complete my astonishment, took a selfie.
As I watched her, I wondered about that question again: Who is it we see when we look in the mirror? And when we share selfies — and I post photos of myself all day long, I admit — what version of ourselves is it we are sharing? In the stranger’s case, a selfie represented, more than anything else, a work of the imagination.
When I first embarked on this practice I feared it would be too — well, I believe the technical term is “woo-woo.” But it was a revelation.  At first I thought, ugh: This is not the face of a young person.
But then, as the session continued, I thought — well, it’s not a young face, but it’s mine.  All those lines have made me myself, and mostly, as I looked at them, I felt grateful for all the years that have left their marks upon my face.
Her words put me in mind of that blind woman I saw at the rest stop. There she was, in her dark, stylish world, eating her Whopper Jr. Who was it she imagined she had photographed when she raised her camera in the air?
I got home after my long drive that night and crawled into bed. I thought about my son Sean and the world that awaits him when he graduates this spring. I thought about the person I had been when I was his age and the person I have since become, these many decades later.
What did I see when I turned out the light?
