LONDON — Last fall, President Vladimir V. Putin summoned a Kremlin television crew to his residence for a ceremony marking the destruction of Russia’s last declared stocks of chemical weapons.
The occasion called for a touch of theater: Shells were dismantled on camera, decorated with flowery Cyrillic script reading, “Farewell, chemical weapons!” Mr. Putin spoke proudly of Russia’s status as a peacemaker, and derided the United States for lagging behind. An official from the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the global body that monitors agreements to whittle down stockpiles, stood by, beaming.
Just six months later, Russia has been accused of secretly producing a strain of lethal nerve agents for years, in what would be a grave violation of its international commitments.
A team of inspectors from the global watchdog organization — the same agency that celebrated with Mr. Putin last September — this week joined the investigation into the poisoning of Sergei V. Skripal, a former Russian spy, and his daughter, who were found unresponsive in the English city of Salisbury on March 4.
Britain has accused Russia of exposing Mr. Skripal to Novichok, a top-secret, military-grade nerve agent developed in the last years of the Soviet Union. On Sunday, Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson sharply escalated the case against Russia, saying that Britain had proof that Russia had been stockpiling Novichok and researching its use in assassinations.
Russia has denied the charge.
“This is a real shock to the system,” as members question Russia’s reporting of its own stocks, said Paul F. Walker, director of environmental sustainability at Green Cross International, a disarmament advocacy group.
Mr. Walker said that he was surprised by Britain's claim it had proof Russia has been producing and stockpiling the nerve agent, and that he had not yet seen evidence to back it up.
Russia has pushed back hard against the accusation, comparing it to the American case, later discredited, that Saddam Hussein was stockpiling chemical weapons. Moscow has suggested that the nerve agent used on the Skripals could have been produced in Britain, Sweden, Slovakia, the Czech Republic or the United States.
Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova and Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov have each said that no Novichok program existed in either Russia or the Soviet Union.
But scientists have come forward to describe it. Leonid Rink, who worked at a Soviet chemical weapons laboratory, told the Ria Novosti news service that “a big group of specialists” had worked on the strains and that it would be “zero problem” for laboratories outside Russia to produce the nerve agent.
He added that, based on what he witnessed at that time, the victims were not likely to survive.
At present, inspectors from the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons have a limited task: to take samples of the agent used in the attack and send them to independent laboratories to determine whether it is Novichok.
If the dispute escalates, however, Britain could request a so-called challenge inspection of Russian laboratories to look for signs of Novichok production — a measure that has never been invoked in the monitoring group’s 21-year history. Russia, in turn, could request its own challenge inspections.
Challenge inspections are designed to be intensive and carried out at short notice; inspectors are to be allowed access to a laboratory within 36 hours of arrival.
The Chemical Weapons Convention was designed to eliminate large stocks of chemical weapons that could be used on the battlefield. Russia committed to destroying 40,000 metric tons, and the United States to 31,500 metric tons. Russia announced last year that it had completed this task. The United States has eliminated seven of nine stockpiles, holding about 90 percent of its agents.
Novichok, then an early-stage project, was not included on a list of banned chemicals compiled in 1987, so Russia was under no obligation to regularly report on its stockpiles and their destruction. But producing Novichok would be a serious violation, because the treaty broadly prohibits the development and use of chemical weapons, said Richard Guthrie, an independent chemical weapons expert and editor of CBW Events.
Experts said that Britain could have learned of a secret program in various ways: communications intercepts, moles within laboratories, publications by Russian chemists reporting their synthesis of rare compounds, or a computer virus lurking within Western equipment sold for use in Russian laboratories.
Mr. Guthrie said that concerns about a Novichok program had surfaced occasionally, but that Britain probably chose not to raise the issue publicly with the weapons-monitoring organization for fear of derailing trade deals or other agreements with Russia.
This would not be the first time the chemical weapons watchdog was shaken by great-power politics. In 2002, its director general, José Bustani, was ousted amid divisions over whether Iraq maintained stockpiles of chemical weapons. Mr. Bustani, in an interview, said the United States pushed for his removal because he had persuaded Mr. Hussein to accede to the convention, which he said would have undermined the American case for invading Iraq.
More recently, Russia has used its veto power in the United Nations Security Council repeatedly to block action against Syria, its ally, based on the monitoring group’s reporting on chemical weapons use there. Andrew C. Weber, a former assistant secretary of defense for nuclear, chemical and biological defense programs, said this had tarnished Russia’s “extraordinary achievement” in destroying 40,000 metric tons of stockpiled weapons.
“It does take away from their achievement — frankly, it’s disgraceful — and now the Russian Federation has apparently been caught in a flagrant violation of the Chemical Weapons Convention,” said Mr. Weber, who emerged on Tuesday from a routine meeting with Russian chemical weapons experts on disarmament projects. They were “embarrassed,” he said, when Novichok came up in conversation.
“They don’t want to believe that their government actually did this,” he said.