Updated, 7:35 a.m.
Good morning on this spotty Monday.
The New York Times, as part of a new project called Overlooked, has published obituaries for 15 extraordinary women who were not given one at the time of their deaths.

The transgender pioneer, prostitute and drag queen Marsha P. Johnson moved to New York with $15 and a bag of clothes, where she created her alternate persona, Black Marsha. She played important roles in the gay liberation movement and the Stonewall uprising, and she was a fixture of gay life in Greenwich Village, where she was known as the mayor of Christopher Street.
Nella Larsen, a writer, became a star of the Harlem Renaissance with her novels “Quicksand” and “Passing.” Forgotten for years, she was rediscovered in the late 20th century and is now taught in literature classes across the country.
Emily Warren Roebling oversaw the construction of the Brooklyn Bridge. After her husband (and the bridge’s chief engineer) fell ill, she taught herself engineering and took over his duties.
What is definitively known about Mary Ewing Outerbridge is that she set up the nation’s first tennis courts, on Staten Island. What we think we know about Ms. Outerbridge is that she played the first game of tennis in the United States, against her sister Laura. What is still unknown is who, exactly, won that match.
The Overlooked project will continue to add overdue obituaries to The Times’s pages each week. But New York has more extraordinary women in its history than could fit into a newspaper.
Some of them will be featured on LinkNYC kiosks this month, including Mable Lee, a jazz tap dancer and singer; Sarah J. S. Tompkins Garnet, the first African-American female principal of a New York public school; and Verina Morton Jones, the first woman licensed to practice medicine in Mississippi.
And to learn about women who wielded political influence in the city, visit the exhibition “Beyond Suffrage: A Century of New York Women in Politics” at the Museum of the City of New York.
Today will be mediocre at best.
It’s going to be a cold and cloudy Monday, with a high around 40. There’s a chance of rain this afternoon, but we’re likely to get snow overnight.
A winter weather advisory goes into effect at 8 p.m.: Two to four inches of snow are expected, and Tuesday’s commute could be slippery.
Keep springing forward.
• Rangers host Hurricanes, 7 p.m. (MSG).
• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until March 29.
One woman who won’t be featured in the Overlooked series is Juliette Gordon Low, as she was the subject of a Times obituary — albeit a short one — at the time of her death.
Ms. Low, who founded the Girl Scouts of America on this day in 1912, was from Georgia, but her activism made waves — and continues to do so — in New York and around the world.
The city’s first troop was established in Manhattan in 1913; the other boroughs founded troops a few years later.
When women won the right to vote in 1920, local Girl Scouts — despite being too young to cast ballots — helped work the polls across New York. Soon after, during the Great Depression, the group held its inaugural citywide cookie sale. And today, a century later, nearly 28,000 young female leaders in New York continue their training in business ethics, environmental conservation, scientific research and more.
Ms. Low now figures in a debate to wipe the name of former Gov. Eugene Talmadge of Georgia, a segregationist with white supremacist views, off a bridge in Savannah: Girl Scouts there are rallying to replace his name with Ms. Low’s.
