A hovering hummingbird burns energy faster than any other bird or mammal — and it often lives just hours from starvation.
Hummingbirds are pure delight, shimmering colors, wings beating up to 80 times a second. But there’s a furnace beneath those feathers. This is infrared, a glimpse of a hummingbird’s internal heat. Metabolism at full burn. When a hummingbird is hovering with its heart beating more than 1,000 times a minute, it burns more energy, ounce for ounce, than any other bird or mammal. But wait, here’s that same bird at night with its metabolism slowed to a crawl. It’s in a state called torpor. Heartbeat and temperature have dropped so low that the bird is using 1/50th of the energy it would use if it were zooming around during the day. Good thing, otherwise in eight hours without feeding, it could starve to death. No wonder scientists have long studied these birds. Ken Welch, for one, has spent more than a decade figuring out how these birds manage their energy budgets. “I learned to become a bit of the hummingbird whisperer. And eventually I figured out how to think like a hummingbird and how to get them to cooperate.” Here’s how their metabolism works. Hummingbirds are much better than most animals at switching between fat and sugar to power their muscles. And since they feed on nectar that is half glucose and half fructose, they’ve evolved a way to send that fructose directly to their muscles to use. Humans mainly fuel their bodies through glucose. For us fructose, as in high fructose corn syrup, goes straight to fat. And even glucose doesn’t move to human muscles as quickly. But hummingbirds can essentially mainline nectar. In 15 minutes, their flight muscles are burning sugars that they have just swallowed. In order to study these birds, Welch has to train them to hover and drink with their head in a mask that measures oxygen use. The mask is a lot like those used on humans with a slight difference in results. “Their metabolic rate when they’re hovering is, pound for pound, 10 times what an elite human athlete can achieve.” What Welch and his colleagues have studied recently is how size relates to energy efficiency. Some hummingbirds weigh less than a penny. Some way 10 times more, almost a full ounce. As you can see little birds have to beat their wings a lot faster to hover. And what Welch discovered is that the faster the wing beats, the less efficient the energy use. What does it all mean? Hummingbirds are pure delight, both to the eye and to science.
Hummingbirds have long intrigued scientists. Their wings can beat 80 times a second. Their hearts can beat more than 1,000 times a minute. They live on nectar and can pack on 40 percent of their body weight in fat for migration.
But sometimes they are so lean that they live close to caloric bankruptcy. At such times, some hummingbirds could starve to death while they sleep because they’re not getting to eat every half-hour or so. Instead they enter a state of torpor, with heartbeat and body temperature turned way down to diminish the need for food.
Kenneth C. Welch Jr. at the University of Toronto, Scarborough has studied the metabolisms of hummingbirds for more than a decade. His most recent research with Derrick J. E. Groom, in his lab, and other colleagues is on the size and energy efficiency in hummingbirds. By using data on oxygen consumption and wing beats to get an idea of how much energy hummingbirds take in and how much work they put out, the scientists found that during strenuous hovering flight, bigger hummingbirds are more efficient energy users than smaller ones. The research was published in Proceedings of the Royal Society B.
Excerpts from a telephone conversation with Dr. Welch have been edited for clarity and length.
Q. You manage to get hummingbirds to voluntarily put their heads in masks while they hover and feed. How in the world do you do that?
Q. And what are you watching for?
A hummingbird can easily hit 40 milliliters of oxygen per gram per hour. And if I ask the hummingbird to do extra, if I give it a little bit of extra weight to wear, that can go up to well above 60. So, their tissues are using oxygen at rates that are many, many times what we can possibly achieve.
Q. And they need the oxygen to help them metabolize the relatively enormous amounts of sugar they are taking in to get the energy to power their muscles?
A. I did a calculation back in graduate school. It turns out that when they’re hovering around and foraging during the day, they’re pretty much exclusively burning the sugar that they’ve been eating in the last 30 minutes to an hour. And so, they have this incredible ability to move sugar through their system. And I did the calculation and said, ‘O.K., if I scale one of my hummingbirds up to adult male human size, my size, how much sugar would I need to drink per minute if I were theoretically a hovering hummingbird as big as I am?’ It turned out to be right around the amount of sugar that’s in a can of Coca-Cola per minute. I haven’t actually tried to do this. My doctor advised against it.
Q. So they move sugar through their system an awful lot faster than we do?
A. Unlike us, hummingbirds can use the glucose that they’re ingesting in nectar and can move it through their guts, through their circulatory system, and to their muscle cells so fast that they can essentially keep that pipeline going in real time.
You and I can’t do that. We can support some small portion of exercise with newly ingested glucose, about 30 percent. But what’s just as remarkable is that the diet of hummingbirds is nectar and that’s half glucose and half fructose.
Fructose is getting a lot of bad press these days because of high fructose corn syrup in the Western diet and its association with metabolic disease and obesity. We’re not good at using fructose at all. Hummingbirds can use that fructose at very high rates.
A. Birds and nectar-feeding bats have evolved the ability to enhance the flux of nutrients like small sugars like fructose and glucose or amino acids to more effectively absorb their food. And getting them to their tissues is enhanced because hummingbird muscles and hummingbird hearts and hummingbird blood vessels are so good. The hummingbird heart rate is high and it’s pumping so much blood per unit of time. They have lots and lots of capillaries that allow the blood to get up close and personal to their muscle cells.
And hummingbirds can apparently take up fructose in their cells, and we’re trying to figure out what enables that. We do know that there is a different form of glucose transporter that is a specialist at taking up fructose. In our muscle cells that transporter is barely present. But hummingbird muscle fibers tend to have a lot of this transporter. So, we think we’re a little closer to understanding how they can take up fructose so fast. But the story’s not yet complete. We need to do some follow up work in order to really confirm that.
Q. What about your recent work on whether big or small hummingbirds are more efficient at energy use?
A. Hummingbirds really do vary in size. Our Ruby-throated hummingbirds weigh less than a penny, 2.5 to 3 grams. Down in South and Central America, you can find some much larger hummingbird species. Up in the range of 10-12 grams. And then there’s one species, the giant hummingbird, that sits at about 18-20 grams.
In essence, larger hummingbirds have higher efficiency. They’re converting a greater proportion of their sugar energy into mechanical power to hover than our smallest hummingbirds.
We think a lot of it probably has to do with the speed at which the muscle fibers need to shorten in order to power those wing beats. Small hummingbirds beat their wings at a higher frequency than larger hummingbirds. It’s something they need to do to generate sufficient mechanical power. But the faster you move or the faster you make a muscle shorten, there is evidence that suggests the less efficiently it does so.
And so, what we see is that the apparent efficiency of the smallest hummingbirds is down around 10 percent. If you go up to the larger hummingbirds they are — they’re up in the range of, you know, 30 percent.