About two hours in, the touring concert “Rocktopia,” which is making a six-week pit stop on Broadway, had settled into a benign, dull groove. Then the slide show, which until then had been mostly sunsets and rolling clouds, jolted me awake.
If anything, “Rocktopia” will go down as featuring one of the most misguided PowerPoint presentations ever to grace a Broadway stage.
Hatched by the singer Rob Evan and the conductor Randall Craig Fleischer, “Rocktopia” brings together the worlds of classical music and rock under the theory that they are more simpatico than a casual listener might assume. The idea is that, say, Mozart was the Mick Jagger of his time, while many beloved singalongs and air-guitar staples draw from centuries-old masterpieces.
Like a tasting menu with wine pairings, the set list is organized around not-so-odd couples: Strauss’s “Also sprach Zarathustra” segues into the Who’s “Baba O’Riley,” for instance — a song originally intended as part of a rock opera and whose title partly refers to the composer Terry Riley. Sometimes the classical composition is used mostly as a glorified intro to the song, as if we were in a stadium waiting for the entrance of a band with delusions of grandeur and a Carl Orff fetish.
The intention may be to underline the resemblances between the pieces, but the result is a cacophony. For a better integration of Puccini and rock, head to “The Phantom of the Opera,” a few blocks away.
Ultimately, though, the real problem is the set list’s utter blandness. Commingling rock and classical music has birthed such wildly diverse artifacts as Emerson, Lake & Palmer’s cover of Aaron Copland’s “Fanfare for the Common Man,” the Metallica-San Francisco Symphony collaboration “S&M” and the popular prog band Trans-Siberian Orchestra.
Sadly, no such ear-bending ambition is in evidence in this show’s selections. Taken individually, these songs are in the canon for a reason, of course; one after another, their effect is numbing. Judging by the evidence on stage here, if classical music spawned one thing, it is the power ballad.