The geopolitical implications of Mr. Trump’s trade decisions should also alarm Democrats. His decision to withdraw from the Trans-Pacific Partnership (which President Barack Obama negotiated) weakened America’s economic standing in the world and was a gift to China. If the United States is not involved in setting the rules for international trade, China and Russia will now drive these decisions. Our strong allies will be pushed into trade deals dictated by China. The alternative to TPP’s negotiated labor and environmental standards will be China’s lack of standards on labor and the environment. The same applies to technology, where either the United States will set rules with a focus on innovation or China will set rules with a focus on government control of information.
When Democrats focus on building a modern economy that competes globally, as we did particularly in 1992 and 2012, we appeal to the majority of voters who believe that trade benefits America. When we do not lean in on a positive case for competitive jobs of the future or are perceived as indecisive on America’s role in the global economy, as we were in 2004 and 2016, it can come across as hypocritical to the recent history of our party and limits our ability to win over swing voters.
Electorally, Democrats can win over small-business owners and moderate Republicans with a platform of investing in education and research to build an American economy that competes with the rest of the world. We proved this in Virginia, where the state has gone from being solidly Republican just 10 years ago to having a Democratic winning streak in statewide contests. That shift occurred both because Republicans focused on an extreme anti-woman, anti-gay, anti-immigrant agenda and because Democrats made the case directly to moderate Republicans and business owners that we were the only party focused on building a modern, vibrant Virginia economy.
In my 2013 campaign for governor, I won endorsements from many moderate Republicans because I campaigned on a welcoming Virginia economy, while my opponent was known for crusading on social issues that scared global companies away from Virginia.
As governor, I worked across party lines to help build a new Virginia economy that traded with the world. That work included 35 trade missions to five continents, which brought substantial foreign investment to Virginia and helped create over 200,000 jobs. The state’s economy was driven in part by exports, and agriculture and forestry increased 31 percent, to $91 billion. That growth in trade meant more jobs, with Virginia’s unemployment rate falling to 3.7 percent from 5.4 percent during my term.
There are some leaders in my party who believe — as President Trump does — that populist appeals against trade will benefit them politically, even if they actually believe in the benefits of trade. Putting aside the cynicism of this position, Democrats will never defeat Mr. Trump by attempting to sound more protectionist and isolationist than he is.
Instead, Democrats will win with an optimistic vision of an America that is confidently able to compete around the world because of new investments in education for our workers, research in cutting-edge industries and modernized infrastructure. It is a pro-jobs message that we should enthusiastically embrace.