Sunday Review|Don’t Delete Facebook. Do Something About It.
On March 16, as the buzzer sounded in perhaps the worst upset in N.C.A.A. tournament history, and my beloved University of Virginia went down to the 16th-seeded University of Maryland, Baltimore County, I had one thought: I need to deactivate my Facebook account. I did not want to endure the taunts and trash talk of my friends who cheer for Duke.
I do this often. When I need to focus on a project or relax a bit, I turn off the noise that comes from Facebook — the constant stream of disturbing faces, angry comments and shallow pulls on my precious attention. I also lose the lovely pictures of puppies and babies. But sometimes it’s worth it to retreat from the addictive torrent of stimuli framed in blue.
If you feel the same way about how Facebook affects your daily life, by all means suspend or even delete your account (not that Facebook makes it easy to). But don’t pretend it will make a difference to Facebook or to the state of the world.
A Twitter movement known as #DeleteFacebook is motivated by the stream of terrible things that Facebook has been involved in, including the proliferation of hate speech, harassment and propaganda meant to undermine trust in democratic institutions. The final spark was the news that the British political data firm Cambridge Analytica had acquired Facebook data on 50 million Americans.
But even if tens of thousands of Americans quit Facebook tomorrow, the company would barely feel it. Facebook has more than 2.1 billion users worldwide. Its growth has plateaued in the United States, but the service is gaining millions of new users outside North America every week. Like most global companies, Facebook focuses its attention on markets like India, Egypt, Indonesia, the Philippines, Brazil and Mexico. At current rates of growth, it could reach three billion users by 2020.
People in those countries are getting value out of Facebook; in some places, it’s one of the few reliable ways to keep in touch. In much of the developing world, Facebook is also the only news source that matters. This should horrify us. But it’s not a problem that will be solved by indignant Americans leaving the service.
Moreover, quitting Facebook lets Google and Twitter off the hook. It lets AT&T and Comcast and its peers off the hook.  Russian agents undermining trust in institutions and democracy are even more visible on Twitter. And every major telecommunications firm, as well as Google and Twitter, relies on surveillance systems similar to the one Facebook uses to run targeted advertising. Facebook is bigger and better at all of this than the others, but its problems are not unique.
The Department of Justice should consider severing WhatsApp, Instagram and Messenger from Facebook, much as it broke up AT&T in 1982. That breakup unleashed creativity, improved phone service and lowered prices. It also limited the political power of AT&T.
The European Union has already stepped up its legal efforts to protect data. Its General Data Protection Regulation, which goes into effect in May, is intended to ensure that users understand and consent to data collection and how that data is used. Users won’t have to agree to give access to their data to start using a product.
As with some recent American consumer finance regulations, data collection policies under the new European Union rules must be clear, concise and in plain language. Companies will have to declare up front how they will use the data, and users can withdraw consent at any time. This should significantly deter many abuses that companies like Facebook and Google have committed. It won’t repair the sins of the past. But it’s something.
