Some 155,000 people die between each day’s print version of The New York Times and the next — enough to fill Yankee Stadium three times over. On average, we publish obituaries on about three of them.
As The Times’s obituaries editor for the last decade, I spend a good part of my time huddling with colleagues to select those scant few. We start with a paper-thin fraction of the total — the deaths we happen to hear about, usually by email or from a wire service or other news outlet — and then get choosy.
We’re exclusive in the extreme. We have to be. We have only so much space in the print newspaper, only so many hands to produce stories and only so many hours in the day to produce them, yet we have a very wide world to watch.
We focus on people who made a difference on a large stage — people who, we think, will command the broadest interest. If you made news in life, chances are your death is news, too.
Like college deans of admission, we sift through the candidates, study their curriculums vitae, read their letters of reference and sort the prospects into piles (yes, no, maybe). We also do our own homework: We investigate, research and ask around before settling on our subjects.
Some might think our process presumptuous. Who, after all, anointed a handful of Times editors to stand by the roadside as a parade of humanity passes and single out this one, this one — but not that one — as worthy of being remembered?
The answer is that no one did, actually, because that is not precisely what we decide. We make no judgments, moral or otherwise, about human worth. What we do try to judge, however, is newsworthiness, and that’s a whole other standard.
There is no formula, scoring system or checklist. But we do hold to certain criteria, slippery as they may be. Fame, of the widespread kind, will usually get someone past the velvet ropes. Accomplishment, with wide impact, matters as much, and it often goes hand in hand with fame.
But achievement may also speak softly. Eugene Goldwasser, to name one subject among 1,195 Times obits in 2010, was a largely unsung biochemist whose 20-year pursuit of an elusive protein led to the development of a widely used anemia drug that became one of the biggest products of the biotechnology industry.
Wangari Maathai was a Kenyan environmentalist who began a movement to reforest her country by paying poor women a few shillings to plant trees. She might have died in 2011 largely unknown to the wider world had she not become the first African woman to win a Nobel Peace Prize seven years before.
Sometimes we choose a subject in part to represent a group whose contributions were forgotten or ignored. Violet Cowden, who also died in 2011, comes to mind: She helped ferry supplies for American troops in World War II as a member of the stateside Women Airforce Service Pilots.
For every person we decide to write about there are innumerable others we decide against. Fame and accomplishment are relative; the public eye is easily distracted, and only a moment or two in its fickle gaze may not be enough to merit a backward look in The Times.
The same might be said of a sparkling résumé. The best schools, a successful corporate climb, charitable good works and distinguished service awards are impressive and laudable, but not necessarily newsworthy to a global audience.
One thing to remember is that it is not our intent to honor the dead; we leave the tributes to the eulogists. We seek only to report deaths and to sum up lives, illuminating why, in our judgment, those lives were significant. The justification for the obituary is in the story it tells.
Many readers legitimately ask: Why are the vast majority of our obituary subjects white men? The answer lies in our not-so-distant history.
Unlike the rest of the newsroom, the obituaries desk covers the past, not the present. Our pages mirror the world of 1975 or 1965 or 1955, or even earlier: They’re a rearview mirror, reflecting the world as it was, not as it is, and not as we might wish it to have been.
And so we are, inevitably, a generation or three behind in tracking the evolution of gender and racial dynamics, among other things. The prominent shapers of society back then, those who held (and didn’t easily give up) the levers of power, were disproportionately white and male, be they former United States senators or business titans or Hollywood directors.
With Overlooked, our new collection of obituaries for women and others who never got them, The Times is acknowledging that many worthy subjects were skipped for generations, for whatever reasons.
Perhaps the significance of an individual portrayed in Overlooked was not fully recognized until decades after her death. Or perhaps the paper’s selection standards in eras past unfairly valued the achievements of the white, male mainstream over those of minorities and women who may have been more on the margins.
I’d like to think that those portrayed in Overlooked would be prime candidates for an obit in The Times today — precisely because they fit a broader standard of significance and impact and, by the way, offer compelling stories.
There were, of course, women who crashed glass ceilings, blacks and Native Americans and people of Asian heritage who pushed through “whites only” barriers. And their stories have been told in the obituary pages over many decades.
No doubt, we’ll see more of them in the years to come. As time goes on, I imagine that their stories will be increasingly framed not by broken barriers but simply by what they built, unencumbered by the dead weights of discrimination.