Yes, we all understand the “free trade” orthodoxy that a country benefits from having no tariffs even if its trading partner imposes tariffs on imports into its own country. But it is equally true that both countries benefit even more if neither country imposes tariffs.
Economic theory does not teach how to persuade your trading partner to lower or eliminate its own tariffs. That is the art of diplomacy and negotiation, and President Trump, to his credit, appears to recognize that trade policy is one of the tools in his chest to achieve desired ends in trade and other international relations.
After decades of ballooning United States trade deficits under a free trade regime, maybe we should give the president a chance to experiment with his fair trade policy before questioning its — and his — wisdom.
Alexander Hamilton was a believer in tariffs, but if he were President Trump’s treasury secretary, he would have resigned in disgust. Hamilton argued that the only way the fledgling United States economy could ever hope to compete with the more advanced British economy was to place tariffs to protect “infant industries” in the United States. However, he was quite clear to add that when the protected industries “matured,” the tariffs should be removed to place competitive pressure on the American industries (to keep prices down).
Tariffs protect inefficient domestic industries, and retaliatory tariffs by those countries hurt by our tariffs are levied on our most efficient industries — those industries able to compete on international markets. The effect then of Mr. Trump’s tariffs is to subsidize inefficiency and to penalize efficiency. Where does that get the United States economy in the long run?
JOHN KIRK, REDWOOD CITY, CALIF.
The writer is a retired professor of economics.
What if instead of imposing tariffs on specific goods we imposed … let’s call them “sanctions” for the sake of this argument? These sanctions would not allow into the United States, at least not without penalty, specified goods that had been produced under conditions that would be illegal in the United States. Factors such as working conditions, wages and pollution could all be criteria.
Tariffs tend to benefit few. These rules could benefit many. Their adoption could greatly benefit workers in the United States by not giving a competitive advantage to foreign companies that underpay workers, and could benefit workers abroad by promoting safer conditions and living wages. The sanctions could also provide the teeth needed to enforce pollution standards on the world stage.
SARAH PALCHER, PASADENA, CALIF.