MONDAY PUZZLE — A nice, smooth opener to the week by Lynn Lempel, wherein she tells us how to dress for the solve.
Ms. Lempel offers us a simple set of two-word common phrases clued to their surface definitions (e.g., not as puns), and the second word in each phrase is an article of clothing.
This was such a fun set that I almost wish that the clues had been puns to heighten the sense of fun even further, but that might have booted this puzzle out of Monday territory.
Sometimes the crossword stars align, and we can give our solvers even more help than usual. At the very moment that I am writing this, the assistant puzzles editor, Sam Ezersky, is putting together our “Crossword Aviary,” which is a list of 12 birds that you need to know to raise your solving game. Three of those birds are in today’s puzzle, so if you’d like to learn more about these tougher entries, take a gander (sorry) at Mr. Ezersky’s aviary.
27A: Hi, kids! Back in the day (think 18th century), a woman who was interested in academics and literary pursuits had her very own name: She was referred to as a BLUE STOCKING. She was typically called this name by men who didn’t like their women so smart, and it was considered by some to be a derogatory phrase. Thank heavens we don’t think like that anymore.
31A: “Hosts for roasts” is a cute clue that made me think of luaus at first, but the roasts we’re supposed to think of are the humorous kind, where celebrities are subjected to jokes at their own expense. These are hosted by EMCEES.
3D: I like these clues, because they are a bit different than the usual crossword clue fare. “What fishermen want from fish but not from mosquitoes” are BITES.
6D: You might come across a BRIDGE at a river, especially if you want to stay dry.
37D: JUDY Blume was a gimme for me. I grew up reading her books, including the most famous one, “Are You There, God? It’s Me, Margaret,” which taught me that I was completely abnormal as far as teenage development was concerned, and that the march to adulthood was terrifying.
42D: Hi, kids! Charles Lindbergh piloted the Spirit of St. Louis on his own from Long Island, N.Y. to Paris, France, in 1927, which was a huge thing in those days. No one had flown solo across the Atlantic at that time, and his prospects were iffy at best, but his team added extra fuel tanks and wingspan, and he made it. This is why he was called Lucky LINDY.
Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but now you can take a peek at the answer key. While the answers are free to everyone, the Crossword puzzles require a subscription.