1 hr. and 20 min.
St. Ann's Warehouse, 45 Water St.
They enter, marching, as one — seven individuals welded into the singleness of a shared purpose. Their movements are as synchronized as those of soldiers in formation; their voices, a harmonic convergence that finds the melody in anger.
But because they are seven, which in this case stands for multitudes, these young South African university students are destined to be divided. Their cries will fragment into separate, argumentative voices, each with its own thorny grievances, and they will run — not with, but away from, one another.
That is until, however fleetingly, the sweetness of being one with like-minded others returns again.
Such are the rhythms of “The Fall,” the stirring ensemble theater piece from South Africa’s fertile Baxter Theater Center at St. Ann’s Warehouse in Brooklyn. Created by its cast (with Thando Mangcu and Kgomotso Khunoane), “The Fall” is an account of the events surrounding the removal of the statue of Cecil Rhodes from the campus of the University of Cape Town.
Rhodes was a British imperialist, industrialist and South African prime minister of the late 19th century, who notoriously said of his fellow Anglo-Saxons, “I contend that we are the first race in the world, and that the more of the world we inhabit the better it is for the human race.” The continued presence of his effigy at the University of Cape Town had been a source of dissent and contention even before the end of apartheid in South Africa.
In “The Fall,” which is directed by Clare Stopford, we are invited to share the perspectives of Cape Town University students who came together in the spring of 2015 to demand the toppling of Rhodes’s statue. This was to be a resonant beginning for a wider “decolonial project,” which would erase from the national education system all possible vestiges of the years of British rule.
This movement, which became an international cause célèbre, became known as “Rhodes Must Fall,” and everyone involved was of one mind on the imperative demanded by its name. Beyond that point, agreement was far harder to come by, starting with exactly how the statue should come down.
There is no question as to where the general sympathies of this production lie. Many of its creators, after all, were students at the University of Cape Town when the events described here occurred.
Yet “The Fall” is not so much a protest play, intended to rouse the socially dormant into action, as it is a play about a protest, And that distinction is what it gives this docudrama its arresting complexity.
A mixture of song, dance and journalistic narratives, “The Fall” reminds us that even the most cohesive movements are made up of disparate parts that will never entirely mesh. People being people, no two are entirely similar or even entirely compatible. In union, inevitably, there are fissures as well as strength.
That each cast member is such a compellingly specific presence is a blessing and a necessity. (They are Ameera Conrad, Cleo Raatus, Oarabile Ditsele, Sihle Mnqwazana, Sizwesandile Mnisi, Tankiso Mamabolo and Zandile Madliwa.) For many of their characters’ shared scenes — particularly those portraying the increasingly contentious meetings among the protest’s organizers — they come across as little more than the sums of their political points of view and social backgrounds.
The variety of sexuality-based perspectives alone is dizzying and embraces several stripes of feminism, beleaguered African manhood, and nonbinary and transgender “cadres.” The resulting clashes of opinion will be familiar to anyone who has been following the gender conflicts on campus in the United States.
Further divisions arise from the characters’ geographic and financial origins, and even from the differences in their skin tones. The debaters’ doctrinaire arguments, as uncomfortable and tedious as such conflicts tend to be, are contrasted by the portrayal of those moments when they all unite in acts of physical protest.
These include not only the removal of Rhodes’s statue but also marches against Afrophobia — and the killings of African nationals (mostly non-South Africans) — and a university boycott over student tuition fees and debts. A gathering before the Parliament building in Cape Town ends with police forces using tear gas and stun grenades on the protesters.
“That day,” one of the students remembers, “for the first time I witnessed how little our lives matter as black people.” American audience members will no doubt hear echoes of similar sentiments spoken with damning frequency in their own country.
There is an infectious, heady joy in such scenes. The ensemble makes use of the sparse scenic elements of Patrick Curtis’s set (basically, four identical tables) to mount barricades, climb onto plinths and moving vehicles, and merge briefly into a transporting, time-stopping blur of communal triumph, rendered in slow-motion choreography.
 No one perhaps embodies the pain of such knowledge as acutely as Qhawekazi (Ms. Mamabolo), who has overseen the meetings of protesters and tried to maintain order among them.
Then the singing begins once more. And there is hope, as well as lamentation, in its sweet, sad sound.