San Francisco will take down a controversial statue depicting a submissive Native American man after an outcry sparked by a deadly rally last summer in Charlottesville, Va., led the city’s arts commission to vote unanimously this week to remove it.
The statue, known as “Early Days,” shows a Native American man at the feet of a Catholic missionary, who towers over him and gestures toward the ground, and a Spanish cowboy gazing off in the distance. It was built in the late 19th century as part of the Pioneer Monument, a memorial recounting California’s early history that currently sits across a park from San Francisco’s City Hall.
The statue has been the focus of heated debate in the past. In the early 1990s, when the city announced a plan to move the Pioneer Monument to its current location, Native American activists urged the city to leave “Early Days” behind. After years of debate, the city kept the statue but installed a plaque meant to add historical context.
But the decades-long effort to move “Early Days” to storage was reinvigorated in August, after a deadly white nationalist rally in Charlottesville over the potential removal of a statue of the Confederate general Robert E. Lee. The episode brought more attention to a national conversation over Confederate monuments that, for some in California, resonated.
“A lot of California Indians and Native Americans were saying, ‘Well, what about the pioneer statue?’” said Ms. Villaluna, who started a Change.org petition to take down the statue in the days after the rally.
The city is planning to remove the statue sometime this year, according to Kate Patterson, a spokeswoman for the arts commission. It will be moved to storage and replaced with a plaque that details the reasoning behind the decision.
“The arts commission heard the public outcry against the imagery represented in the ‘Early Days’ sculpture and took the appropriate steps to help rectify an historic injustice,” Tom DeCaigny, San Francisco’s director of cultural affairs, said in a statement. The commission voted on Monday to remove the statue.
In January, San Francisco’s board of supervisors also voted to replace Columbus Day with Indigenous Peoples Day. The change came amid a nationwide movement by Native American activists intended to honor their ancestors.