TUESDAY PUZZLE — When we last saw Peter Koetters, he was doing unspeakable things to vegetables, but today he is back in The New York Times Crossword doing unspeakably funny things to … well, you’ll find out.
When I worked in advertising, slogan writing was a much sought-after assignment, just because it was so much fun and the potential for coming up with funny or ribald ones was so great. We would sit around for hours, riffing on all the punny ways to talk about foot fungus powder, until it was 5 o’clock and time to go to happy hour. There isn’t a lot that I miss about the 1980s, but those were good times.
Today, Mr. Koetters continues that tradition with punny slogans for capital cities, should you want to visit them. For example, at 50A, the testimonial “‘I was afraid to ski, but in New Hampshire I ___!’” is answered by CONCORD MY FEARS, as a sound-alike for “conquered my fears” and CONCORD being the capital of New Hampshire.
That’s very clever. Now you go visit the other three cities.
11A: Were you suspicious of this clue? “Fixer at a horse race?” sounds like someone who fixes the races themselves, but the person who “fixes” the horses is the VET.
37A: A “Drawn straw, say” is not a drinking straw, but a LOT that you’ve drawn.
57A: “Belted one out of this world?” could mean hitting a ball very far, it could mean singing until you bring down the house … or, it could mean one wearing a belt, as in the constellation ORION, who lives out of this world.
6D: What, you’ve forgotten already? If you’re wearing the green and you’re having a party, your honoree is most likely going to be ST. PAT, for short.
56D: I would truly hope that if a “Babysitter?” was going to sit for a baby, that sitter would seat the baby on a LAP.
This is only my second puzzle to appear in The New York Times, the first just over five years ago. I am a pediatrician from Pasadena, Calif., who constructs crosswords as a hobby. One can find more of my puzzles in The Los Angeles Times, if so inclined.
This puzzle, featuring U.S. capital cities as puns, sat in my stack of ideas for many years. The idea came to me as I thought of how the word “Juneau” was sort of odd, and I pictured a billboard saying “Alaska, it’s more than Juneau.” I then went on to figure out some more “capital punishment.” Yes, it’s too bad The New York Times Crossword won’t print titles (or that they don’t provide 17 spaces) or I would have included that groaner too, somehow.
I thought the puzzle idea was fun but could not think of a good fourth theme entry after using Juneau, Lansing and Augusta. Denver, Raleigh and Boise all fizzled. Finally I looked at this idea again and figured out how to use Concord to round it out.
