Shifa Fahim Mahmood and Ramy Mohsen Fakhr were married March 23 at the Islamic Cultural Center of New York in Manhattan. Sheikh Saad Jalloh led a Muslim ceremony, called a nikah.
The bride, 31, is an analyst at the New York City Department of Youth and Community Development, an agency focused on after-school learning programs in public schools. She graduated from the State University at New Paltz, and received a master's degree in public administration from City College.
She is a daughter of Nighat Beig and Hafiz Fahim Mahmood of Middletown, N.Y.
The groom, 36, is a partnership manager in the Long Island City, Queens, field office of the Office of Community Schools within the New York City Department of Education. He manages partnerships with community-based organizations and public schools, providing services to students and families. He graduated from Brooklyn College.
He is a son of Maha Fakhr and Mohsen Fakhr of Manhattan.
In early 2015, Mr. Fakhr could not help but notice Ms. Mahmood’s pastel head scarf and green eyes as she walked into the room of a Harlem nonprofit group. Both were there for a presentation by the Department of Youth and Community Development, where they worked.
Ms. Mahmood was instantly annoyed.
Mr. Fakhr, who started working at the department a few months earlier, was not put off, and introduced himself.
Ms. Mahmood was now even more annoyed.
She could not resist letting him know she knew, without a doubt, he was of Egyptian origin.
“‘What gave it away,’” she recalled him saying. “I said ‘your name,’” referring to his first name, Ramy.
Over the next year they were cordial around the office, where she began seeing another side of him.
In April 2016 when her supervisor asked her to accompany Mr. Fakhr to a public school in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, Mr. Fakhr realized he had another chance to talk to her.
They spoke about the Upper West Side where she lived and he grew up, and about Ramadan (a month of strict fasting), which was nearing. A few weeks later, they broke one of the daily fasts together at New York University’s Islamic Center.
In case he got any ideas, Ms. Mahmood soon presented him with a list of reasons as to why they should not date.
They stayed friends, and a month later had lunch near their office in Manhattan. Soon they realized a future together was a real possibility, and Mr. Fakhr agreed to meet her parents for brunch at Le Monde on the Upper West Side. A few weeks later she met his at Patsy’s Italian Restaurant, also on the Upper West Side.“It just felt we kind of knew the road we were on and not scared about it,” he said. “The engagement would happen inevitably. It felt great.” He proposed six months later.