As I wrote last week, Dan Bilefsky, who is based in Montreal, will set off on his road trip through Quebec on Monday. And he will take over the next two editions of the newsletter to report on his journey. He will also write a bonus edition on March 21.
A popular detective novelist who sets her whodunit mysteries in Quebec. A Montreal curling club founded in 1807. An artery-busting expedition to a sugar shack.
These were just a few among the hundreds of suggestions I received from readers about people I should meet or what I should do during my road trip through Quebec.
I have been amazed and delighted by the enthusiastic response from Canada and beyond to my request for help in creating my itinerary. I received architectural and food tips as well as many suggestions for which Québécois crooners I should feature on my playlist.
Among those who came up frequently were the Dead Obies, a band whose members rap in Franglais (a mix of English and French), Coeur de Pirate and Arcade Fire.
One reader compared my journey to that of Lida Moser, an American photographer who traversed Quebec in 1950 for Vogue and Look magazines, armed with a camera and a desire to capture its multiple identities. That is something to aspire to! I have a similar goal in mind, only my journey will be adapted to the digital age, and I will be armed with my iPhone and my Facebook, Instagram and Twitter accounts.
Readers’ advice was eclectic but also suffused with the nostalgia of people who had previously visited Quebec or lived there. One place that came up repeatedly was the hilly region of Charlevoix, which will play host to a meeting of the Group of 7 industrialized nations. Another suggestion was to visit Little Burgundy in Montreal, an area that has played an important role in the city’s vibrant jazz scene, stretching back to the 1920s.
Alas, I am constrained by time and won’t be able to venture 860 miles from Montreal to the picturesque Îles de la Madeleine, where I hope to sample the famed lobster at another time — hopefully soon.
Mrs. Lambert famously persuaded her father, Samuel Bronfman, head of the Seagram distiller, to commission Ludwig Mies van der Rohe to build the towering Seagram headquarters in New York in the 1950s, which became an important symbol of modernism.
I have also added Louise Penny, the Canadian detective novelist and a popular request by readers, to my list of interesting cultural figures I should meet.
Ms. Penny’s Armand Gamache series features a retired homicide chief and is set in Three Pines, a community inspired by Ms. Penny’s village, Knowlton, in Quebec’s eastern townships, where eccentric neighbors grapple with snow and, sometimes, murder. I will be traveling to Knowlton to inquire about, among other things, the extent to which art imitates life.
Several people suggested that I visit a sugar shack and sample some maple syrup, a decidedly Québécois activity. With that in mind, I am planning to make a pilgrimage to Martin Picard’s Cabane A Sucre Au Pied De Cochon, in Mirabel, outside Montreal. There, Mr. Picard conjures dishes inspired by maple syrup, all washed down, of course, with a good Burgundy wine. I have been hitting the gym in preparation for enjoying his delicacies, like foie gras cake.
In getting ready for my trip, I decided to explore whether the cultural divisions between English and French Canadians — referred to as “The Two Solitudes” — still existed in Montreal in 2018, some 28 years after I left Quebec, my birthplace.
One of the first things I noticed upon my return was that the old hang-ups of the past appeared to have been largely discarded by many among the younger generation. It seemed that 20-somethings across the city, while politically engaged, seemed more intent on becoming the next Québécois Steve Jobs than in fomenting revolution.
Yet, there were still points of separation, including divisions over language and popular culture. Some people I’ve talked to warned that the proliferation of English among the younger generation, fanned by social media, threatened the future of the French language in Quebec.
I also wrote about the still powerful cultural pull of Leonard Cohen in an article about Cohen mania in Montreal.
More than a year after his death, the poet and singer-song writer has become an almost sacred figure in his hometown, where people across the cultural divide adore the lyricism of his music and the poetry of his words, which were nourished by Quebec’s multiple identities. One reader noted on Twitter that there was a neighborhood in Montreal called Saint-Leonard.
On Monday I hit the road! Please keep those emails coming with your suggestions for the trip and for music for my playlist. Follow me on Facebook, Instagram and Twitter, as well as on The Times’s Reader Center, where I will be posting dispatches of my journey.
It’s time to start this adventure!
Read: In Montreal, a Berlin Wall of the Mind?
Read: Is Leonard Cohen the New Secular Saint of Montreal?
—President Trump’s steep steel tariff was suspended for Canada but his move has soured many in Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario, a border town that depends on steel exports for its existence.
—Maryam Mombeini, the widow of Kavous Seyed Emami, the Iranian-Canadian environmentalist who was accused of spying before dying in an Iranian jail, remains trapped in Tehran.
—Sonja Bata, who died at 91, left behind more than 13,000 pairs of shoes, a unique museum and a story that includes a lifetime of global travel and the founding of a new village in Ontario.
—A musical adaptation of “Frozen,” the Disney film, is coming to Broadway, and Caissie Levy from Hamilton, Ontario, is playing the role of the self-reliant snow queen.
—And as I hand off to Dan for two weeks, I’ll leave you with some thoughts about the state of Canada’s tech industry, digitized pressure cookers, rangefinder cameras, GPS watches and film.