FRIDAY PUZZLE — At the end of the solving week, the constructing stakes are higher. Solvers want to see the most sparkling of the sparkling fill, tougher entries and evil cluing. They want a challenge.
From the puzzle editors’s standpoint, that’s quite a high-wire act, and it’s not easy to pull off. Despite what solvers who are struggling might think, the editors do want you to be able to solve the puzzle. But it’s no fun without at least a little tug-of-war.
Neville Fogarty and Doug Peterson are back, and they offer us a crossword that fits the bill very nicely. Parts of the grid were challenging for me (today I learned that those poems and songs that seem obsessed with the dawn are called AUBADEs), and parts of it fell easily, enabling me to solve the rest of the grid.
Not only that, but it’s a low word-count grid (70 words, as opposed to the earlier week maximum of 78) that gave the constructors plenty of room for those fairly long entries we love so much. I loved the crossing of NIGHTMARE FUEL and ONE DAY AT A TIME (did you know that there is a reboot of the 1970s television show of that name?), and there is a lot of good stuff in Mr. Fogarty’s and Mr. Peterson’s grid: RAT PACK, NBA JAM, KABLOOEY, JINGOISM, ADO ANNIE, EXOTICA, NO SLOUCH, EBENEZER, TASTE BUD and more.
1A: Hi, kids! RAT PACK is a nice way to open a puzzle, and the key word in this clue is “original.” The “Group in the original ‘Ocean’s 11’” was a group of entertainers called the Rat Pack by Hollywood (as opposed to the Brat Pack, which came later, and which you should also ask your parents about). The original pack included a variety of singers and actors who hung out and worked together, such as Frank Sinatra, Dean Martin, Sammy Davis Jr. and Peter Lawford.
23A: Fun story about the EDSEL: One of the things that supposedly dissuaded people from buying the car in the first place was its grille. Depending on your perspective, it was thought to resemble either a vulva or a toilet seat, and I’m sure the copywriter who came up with the line “The thrill starts with the grille” never quite lived it down.
33A/33D: Tough crossing here if you are not up on your collective seal nouns and tailoring wordplay. A group of female seals is called a HAREM, and don’t forget that when you see the word “line” used in clues with a question mark (like today’s “Bottom line?”), you are usually looking for a HEM or something that is shaped like a line.
50A: I had to Google this to be sure, but a “Rail center?” is a MARSH because rails are a type of bird that lives in a marsh.
1D: If you are “One going against the grain?” you are not necessarily blazing your own path. You could also be a REAPER, reaping your grain.
2D: As mentioned above, today I learned about the AUBADE, a poem or song that focuses on the dawn or morning. An example of this form would be John Donne’s “The Sun Rising,” which, if nothing else, shows that Mr. Donne was clearly not a morning person.
4D: Nice example of a veiled capital clue, where the first word in the clue is capitalized not just because it is the beginning of a sentence, but also because the clue is “hiding” a trick. In the clue “Giant competitor,” we’re not thinking of a large corporation, we’re thinking of a competitor to a player on the San Francisco Giants baseball team. The answer in this puzzle is PADRE, as in a player for the San Diego team. Want more practice with those devious veiled capital clues? There’s help in our solving guide under the “Cracking the Harder Clues” tab.
We’re both big fans of the “Golden Age of Television,” so we racked our brains to find some way to sneak a classic TV reference into this puzzle.
In the end, we decided there was simply no elegant way to refer to a ’70s-’80s sitcom that ran for nine seasons on CBS and was recently rebooted as a successful Netflix series. Maybe next puzzle!
Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but now you can take a peek at the answer key. While the answers are free to everyone, the Crossword puzzles require a subscription.