INDIAN WELLS, Calif. — Roger Federer’s first intergenerational duel with Hyeon Chung turned into a 62-minute letdown at the Australian Open.
Time to try again in Indian Wells.
Federer has faced few major obstacles on court in 2018. With his traditional archrivals and some promising youngsters all injured or reeling, he has been like a happy beachcomber walking a stretch of familiar, deserted beach and grabbing all the seashells he desires until the tide inevitably comes in.
He lost just five points on serve and no points at all on his first serve in his 7-5, 6-4 victory on a blustery Wednesday over the Frenchman Jeremy Chardy.
Federer is now 15-0 in 2018, with 13 of those victories coming in straight sets. Not bad for a 36-year-old. Or even a 24-year-old, which was Federer’s age when he went 16-0 to start the year in 2006.
The bespectacled Chung had to deal with misfortune of his own making in Australia, developing severe blisters after neglecting to shave down the soles of his feet. He ended up with open sores that required repeated painkilling injections, although those did not prevent him from retiring during the semifinal in Melbourne with Federer leading 6-1, 5-2.
Chung, a 21-year-old South Korean who is up to 26 in the ATP rankings, returned to action in Delray Beach, Fla., three weeks after the Australian Open, and reached the quarterfinals, just as he did at the Mexican Open in Acapulco this month.
Hardcourt tennis is particularly tough on players’ feet, and Chung’s brand is tougher than most, as he slides in an open stance into the corners like his stylistic role model, Novak Djokovic.
Djokovic was Chung’s boyhood role model, and Chung would play the part of Djokovic when he and his older brother were pretending to play Grand Slam matches in a parking lot near their home.
At this stage, Federer thinks the parallels with Djokovic are real but limited to aggressive footwork, even if both men changed their service actions in the off-season.
The elastic Djokovic is still working his way back from a chronic right elbow problem but has managed to avoid major leg injuries, in part by his daily commitment to stretching: a habit that started nearly as soon as he began playing the game in the Serbian mountain resort of Kopaonik.
After retiring in Australia, Chung spent 10 days resting at home in Seoul, South Korea, without playing tennis or even doing gym work. He has hired an experienced full-time physical therapist, Alessio Ceccarelli, an Italian who has worked with Francesca Schiavone, Flavia Pennetta, Alexandr Dolgopolov and Elina Svitolina.
“Alessio’s obviously working on the whole body, including the feet, which need to be shaved down every other day with the calluses,” said Stuart Duguid, Chung’s agent.
Chung has also been using a new shoe orthotic, one that was supposed to hold out for several months but which lasted little more than a week under his punishing style.
But he has been running and sliding with abandon in Indian Wells. After beating Tomas Berdych, 6-4, 6-4, in the third round here, Chung needed 10 match points before defeating Pablo Cuevas, 6-1, 6-3, on Wednesday.
He is now in his first quarterfinal in a Masters 1000 event. Federer has won 27 of them and won 97 tour singles titles in total, including his 20th Grand Slam title in Australia. He also reclaimed the top ranking last month, becoming the oldest singles No. 1 in ATP history.
When another enduring 36-year-old, Feliciano Lopez, was asked on Wednesday if another man would ever reach No. 1 at that age, he did not hesitate.
For now, Federer’s priority is defeating Chung, one of the game’s rising stars, for the second time in a row.