Sebastian Leone, who as borough president in the 1970s worked to raise Brooklyn’s profile long before its current renaissance, died on Nov. 14 in Brooklyn. He was 91.
The cause was complications of pneumonia, his wife, Helene Leone, said.
Mr. Leone, a Democrat, was borough president from 1970 to 1976, when Brooklyn did not enjoy the renown as a cultural center and thriving place to live that it has today. It felt then like “a neglected stepchild of Manhattan,” as the reporter McCandlish Phillips wrote in The New York Times.
Mr. Leone is believed to have been the first official to install a “Welcome to Brooklyn” sign at one of the borough’s entry points, as if declaring that Brooklyn was more than the outer-borough backwater some perceived it to be: It was a place that could hold its own.
Mr. Leone was born on the Lower East Side of Manhattan on Dec. 6, 1924, the eldest of three children of Italian immigrants, Anthony Leone and the former Josephine Gilistro. His parents moved to the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn when he was an infant. There, the elder Mr. Leone, who had been a farmer in Italy, opened a grocery store.
Mr. Leone graduated from Lafayette High School in 1940 and from St. John’s University in 1946, though his studies were interrupted when he was drafted into the Army during World War II, only to be discharged because of poor vision in his right eye.
After graduating from St. John’s University School of Law in 1949, Mr. Leone practiced law for about 15 years. He met Helene Morgenstern, a secretary, in 1965 at a luncheonette in the Court Street building where he had an office. The two were married the next year.
In 1966, Mr. Leone became the leader of a local Democratic club in Bensonhurst, the Union Democratic Organization. An opponent of the Vietnam War, he instituted draft counseling in his neighborhood to help steer young men through the draft process.
He was appointed borough president by the Brooklyn City Council delegation in 1970 after the incumbent, Abe Stark, retired midway through his term. Voters elected him two months later to serve out the rest of Mr. Stark’s term. He was re-elected a few years later.
Mr. Leone became a justice in State Supreme Court around the beginning of 1977. He retired from the bench in 2001 and lived in the Bay Ridge neighborhood.
In addition to his wife, he is survived by their son, Matthew, and two grandchildren.