• F.B.I. in the spotlight.
It appears unlikely that the F.B.I.’s review of emails belonging to one of Hillary Clinton’s aides will be completed by Election Day, but officials say there is a chance they could offer updates before Tuesday.
The decision last week to examine the messages broke the F.B.I.’s pattern of trying to stay out of the presidential race over the summer, when it kept quiet about two inquiries: one involving the Clinton family foundation and the other about the campaign chairman for Donald J. Trump.
Mr. Trump is scheduled to hold events in Florida today, and Mrs. Clinton will be in Arizona, a state that her team thinks could offset any losses in the Midwest.
The Democratic nominee is also contending with a decline in turnout by African-Americans in early voting, pointing toward a slump that many in the party feared.
• Officers killed in Iowa.
The police say two officers were ambushed and fatally shot while sitting in their patrol cars early this morning in a suburb of Des Moines.
A suspect identified as Scott Michael Greene, 46, has been arrested, the police said. Mr. Greene was on foot and did not resist officers when he was taken into custody, a police spokesman said.
• Battle for Mosul enters new phase.
Elite Iraqi troops pushed through Islamic State artillery, snipers and suicide attacks to enter the city on Tuesday for the first time in more than two years.
One crucial question is whether ISIS fighters will defend the east of the city or will go across the Tigris River to the more densely populated west, our reporters in Iraq observed.
• North Dakota oil pipeline protests.
If you’ve seen a large number of people on Facebook checking in to the Standing Rock Indian Reservation in Cannon Ball, near the site of a controversial pipeline project, it may be part of an online effort to confuse law enforcement officials.
Protesters at the reservation say officials are trying to track them on social media, but the authorities say the check-in movement isn’t fooling anyone.
Citing an apostolic letter by Pope John Paul II, Pope Francis said that the Roman Catholic Church’s ban on female priests was likely to last forever.
• Airbnb appears to be safe from any drawn-out court battles over whether it is responsible when hosts discriminate against its customers.
The company’s user agreement says cases must be settled in private arbitration, a federal judge said on Tuesday.
• Each week, at least 1.5 million Americans without paid sick leave go to work despite feeling ill. Our review of recent studies found that incentives to take time off when sick could reduce contagion, enhance productivity and reduce employee turnover.
• A British company is hoping to turn packaged air into a luxury item in fast-growing markets like China, selling jars of air from Wales — with a “morning dew feel” — for $97.
• U.S. stocks were down on Tuesday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.
• How many votes is a selfie worth?
Forget the handshake. Clinton’s supporters want a social media souvenir this election season.
Forget the handshake. Clinton’s supporters want a social media souvenir this election season.CreditCredit...Doug Mills/The New York Times. Technology by Samsung.
Technology has changed the rope line. The latest offering in our new 360 video series takes you to a campaign event where Mrs. Clinton’s supporters vied to have their picture taken with the candidate.
• World Series: There will be a Game 7.
The Chicago Cubs avoided elimination for a second time, pounding the Cleveland Indians, 9-3. One thing is certain about tonight’s decisive game: One lengthy title drought will end and another will continue (8 p.m. Eastern, Fox).
• Science roundup.
The first humans reached the South Pacific Islands over 3,000 years ago, but after a few centuries of further exploration, the voyages stopped for almost 2,000 years. New research finds that the first sailors struggled to combat the ocean’s winds, which led to the so-called Long Pause.
There’s a new species of millipede — it was found in a California cave and has 414 legs and four penises. And donkeys may no longer enjoy the elevated status they did in ancient times, but a budding movement hopes to bring respect back to the beasts of burden.
Try this earthy version of chili, which uses ground lamb and white beans.
Banning books for depicting sex isn’t common today, thanks in part to a landmark British verdict on this day in 1960.
Penguin Books was cleared of obscenity charges for publishing D. H. Lawrence’s novel “Lady Chatterley’s Lover,” about a sexually frustrated woman’s affair with the gamekeeper on her upper-class husband’s estate.
The Obscene Publications Act passed a year earlier said that a book should be “taken as a whole” and its literary merits considered.
That left the government struggling to make its case.
“Is it a book that you would even wish your wife or your servants to read?” a prosecutor asked, causing jurors to laugh.
Penguin was acquitted in three hours. “Lady Chatterley’s Lover” sold 200,000 copies the first day it was available.
Books are still being banned, of course, though only sometimes for sex. The United Arab Emirates blacklisted “Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone” in 2002, and Malaysia did the same to the “50 Shades of Grey” trilogy last year.
This year, a religious edict calling for the death of Salman Rushdie for writing “The Satanic Verses” was renewed in Iran.
Sara Marino contributed reporting.