Here’s a question about last night’s exhilarating, stomach-churning, 10-inning seventh game of the World Series between the Cubs and Indians: Was it “true baseball”?
It was not an isolated remark. Many people around baseball have reacted to the so-called “Moneyball” revolution, in which people use data to analyze the game, by saying its version of baseball lacks soul. It’s nerds crunching numbers, rather than loving the game.
I’m one of the nerds whose joy of baseball — and it’s a bleary-eyed joy this morning — feels inferior to Maraniss’s, Stewart’s and many others. And I don’t quite understand. I love watching a rifle throw from right field. I also enjoy knowing whether the right fielder who made the throw is a fielding star or just happened to make a great throw.
One of the most exciting parts of this World Series was watching two fact-hungry franchises look for every possible edge. They stationed fielders all over the diamond, as is now the norm, and turned hits into outs. They used their best relief pitchers early and often, rather than saving them for “save situations” that might never arrive. The moves frequently worked and sometimes — such as with the bullpens last night — did not.
The imperfect search for new knowledge, even in a relatively unimportant endeavor like baseball, is one of life’s thrills.
Fans don’t have to choose. They can enjoy a ballgame while simply listening to the crack of the bat and taking in the majesty of the ballpark. Fans who don’t want a lot of numbers getting in the way are no less (and no more) authentic than fans who enjoy poring over stat sheets while they take in the ballpark.
Whichever path you choose, though, you should probably hope that the people running your favorite team are at least willing to have some nerds work for them. The true-baseball Diamondbacks won 69 games and lost 93 this season, and neither Stewart nor the team’s manager will be returning next year.
The people who run the Cubs and Indians just gave us one of the most joyful World Series in a long time.