The soaring spires, the sloping shores, the straitjacket of the street grid — many things give form to the great metropolis. The skyline may be our most recognizable feature, despite how unrecognizable it can often be.
Its transformation has been nothing less than astonishing over the past decade. Even when it seems as if there were nowhere left to go, the city, with its manifold appetites, could not be contained. Thanks to new concrete technologies, we have witnessed an eruption of very slender, very tall (some might say very crass) buildings. But for every heroic skyscraper, there are more than a few more humble, human-scale ventures — a salt shed, a library, a residential hyperbolic paraboloid (see No. 10, above).
Can You Guess These New York City Buildings?
Test your New York City skyline knowledge and see how many of these buildings you recognize.
Today, apart from the Empire State or Chrysler Building, there are few icons of the skyline. The buildings outlined above, however, may someday be worthy of appearing in a Times Square souvenir snow globe. These are the projects that have captured the imagination of more than a dozen shapers and observers of the city consulted by The New York Times for their perspective on the new standouts.
You may not recognize these silhouettes, but in time, you will.
Though it is the tallest apartment tower in New York City, at 1,396 feet, the 96-story building was originally laid out with only 125 apartments, ranging in price from $7.2 million to $88 million.
Closing off a section of Broadway in 2009 has been a boon for the area: Travel times improved on Seventh Avenue by 4 percent even as pedestrian counts have grown as high as 480,000 a day from 320,000 a decade earlier.
Resembling a 69-foot-tall salt crystal, the Spring Street shed houses 5,000 tons of salt for use during snowstorms. It is part of the city’s Design and Construction Excellence program, which has seeded more than 100 projects since 2005.
The branch in Hunters Point follows six new or expanded libraries that have opened in the borough since 2000, part of a plan to create hubs for the diverse, digital needs of a 21st-century Queens.
Its profile is not the only big thing about 1 World Trade Center. The construction of the 2.6-million-square-foot tower also had the largest budget of any modern building: $3.8 billion.
The rippling facade of the 47-unit apartment building is meant to evoke the artistic energy of the neighborhood — and helped win design honors from the New York State chapter of the American Institute of Architects.
Via Verde has been praised for housing New Yorkers across a range of incomes, with 151 rentals available from $730 to $1,090 a month when it opened in 2012, as well as 71 middle-income co-ops available for less than $200,000.
The 70-room hotel has also become a cultural hub. It goes well beyond lobby art to promoting residency programs with new pieces for each room, as well as hosting openings and film screenings.
The home of the Nets and Islanders was built across the street from Robert Moses’ unrealized Dodgers stadium, though the arena was almost unrealized, too, after years of lawsuits over the use of eminent domain.
The 32-story building may resemble an off-center pyramid, but the architects prefer to describe it as a hyperbolic paraboloid. The shape developed from taking a typical apartment block and stretching out the northwestern corner to increase views of the Hudson River.
This 904-unit luxury tower may be an unusual symbol of Lower Manhattan’s rebirth, but with roughly $200 million in post-Sept. 11 bond financing, the 76-story edifice is a reminder of the many ways the area has been reshaped since 2001.
“I have no claims for aesthetic competence, but the Gehry building certainly looks nice enough to me as an economist who loves cities. The fact that it’s residential matters a lot. If anything, New York, and particularly downtown New York, has a mismatch between its residential needs and an abundance of commercial space. New York is at its healthiest when it is profoundly mixed use, when it is residential and commercial and recreational all at once. I like the fact that the apartments aren’t just apartments for billionaires. They’re not particularly cheap — it’s still New York — but it’s rental. They’re midsized, a lot are under 1,000 square feet. The fact that it has a school on the bottom floors is nice as well.
Exquisite execution with simple materials is one of the chief attributes of Japanese design, which helps explain how Sanaa turned some offset boxes of aluminum mesh into a beloved museum. And all for a mere $50 million (the new Whitney Museum of American Art cost almost nine times that).
