Half slave and half free. The last time the United States split into two countries, it didn’t work out at all well.
If that sounds like a hyperbolic reaction to the yawning red state, blue state divide, so be it. It’s prompted by the picture that President-elect Donald J. Trump painted the other day of what would happen if he achieved his goal of appointing enough Supreme Court justices to overturn Roe v. Wade.
The question of abortion “would go back to the states,” Mr. Trump told Lesley Stahl of CBS News during a conversation on “60 Minutes.” Ms. Stahl asked him what would become of women seeking abortions in states that banned the procedure. “They’ll perhaps have to go — they’ll have to go to another state,” the president-elect replied.
Mr. Trump spoke accurately: Overturning Roe v. Wade would not criminalize abortion, but would leave the question up to the states. There’s no doubt that some states would avail themselves of the option of banning abortion; Mississippi defended, all the way up to the Supreme Court last year, its right to impose regulations that would have concededly shut the state’s sole remaining abortion clinic. Women can find clinics in Tennessee, Louisiana or Alabama, the state argued.
Mr. Gaines declined the offer. Represented by Charles Hamilton Houston, a pioneering lawyer for the N.A.A.C.P., he went to court. He lost in the Missouri Supreme Court, which noted that he could attend law school with full tuition paid and with only minor inconvenience at the state law schools of Kansas, Nebraska, Iowa or Illinois, all of which accepted black students.
Given the option of admitting Mr. Gaines to the University of Missouri or opening a law school for black students, the state chose the latter. The N.A.A.C.P. planned to challenge the new law school as not equal to the University of Missouri’s, but Mr. Gaines, who had grown ambivalent about attending law school, left the state and disappeared. He was never found, and the new lawsuit was dropped.
The Gaines case is not well known today outside of Missouri, where the state university has a scholarship in his name and 10 years ago awarded him a posthumous honorary degree. But it has been rediscovered in the recent litigation over state restrictions on abortion. Two years ago, a federal district judge in Alabama, Myron Thompson, invoked the case in striking down the state’s requirement that doctors who perform abortions have admitting privileges at local hospitals.
Because most hospitals in Alabama refused to give admitting privileges to doctors who performed abortions, the requirement would have closed three of the state’s five abortion clinics. The state argued that women could go elsewhere. But “the state could identify no precedent for a court to consider conduct outside the political boundaries of a jurisdiction in order to justify the constitutionality of actions by that jurisdiction,” Judge Thompson wrote, citing the Gaines case.
Last year, the very conservative United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit struck down Mississippi’s admitting-privileges requirement, which would have closed the Jackson Women’s Health Organization, the state’s only abortion clinic. This was the same Fifth Circuit that upheld a Texas law that would have shut down three-quarters of that state’s abortion clinics, leaving only eight or nine, had the Supreme Court not ruled in June in Whole Woman’s Health v. Hellerstedt that the law was unconstitutional. Even for the Fifth Circuit, the Mississippi situation went too far. “Gaines simply and plainly holds that a state cannot lean on its sovereign neighbors to provide protection of its citizens’ federal constitutional rights, a principle that obviously has trenchant relevance here,” the court said, adding that Gaines “locks the gate for Mississippi to escape to another state’s protective umbrella.” In June, after issuing its decision in the Texas case, the Supreme Court denied Mississippi’s appeal without comment.
Getting on a plane for a domestic flight from Jackson, Miss., or Birmingham, Ala., or Indianapolis is easier, of course. All it takes is time and money. Maybe Mr. Trump’s remark was aimed at women who have both: a way of saying, don’t worry, you’ll always be able to get your abortion. In fact, most women who get abortions today are low-income, defined as less than twice the federal poverty level, a trend that is accelerating as middle-class women avoid unplanned pregnancy by availing themselves of reliable, long-lasting (and expensive) birth control methods. If the president-elect’s vision becomes reality, for women, the border — a virtual wall? — will be internal, and those most in need will be most unable to cross it.