Major League Baseball continues to struggle in its efforts to diversify the front offices of its teams, an issue that Commissioner Rob Manfred has stressed at the last few owners’ meetings.
Citing a conflict of interest, M.L.B. recently ended its relationship with a firm it had brought in to promote the hiring of candidates from minority groups, as USA Today first reported. Baseball is now relying more on in-house efforts to put more minority candidates into management jobs in front offices and on the field.
In August 2015, M.L.B. hired Korn Ferry, an executive search group, to help find and promote minority candidates through interview preparation, résumé writing, career planning and networking.
Individual teams also hired the company to help find top baseball executives. In some cases, the people whom Korn Ferry targeted on behalf of the individual clubs were not members of minority groups and were in direct competition with the candidates the firm was trying to help on behalf of M.L.B.
After hearing objections from minority candidates over Korn Ferry’s dual role, M.L.B. dismissed the company and rededicated its efforts through its own Pipeline Program, headed by the senior director Tyrone Brooks.
The Pipeline Program seeks to identify, hire and promote candidates who are members of minority groups. Manfred is also trying to encourage the hiring of minority candidates at baseball’s lower levels.
M.L.B. dismissed Korn Ferry during another off-season in which several teams have filled vacancies with nonminority candidates. The Arizona Diamondbacks hired Mike Hazen as their chief of baseball operations and Torey Lovullo as manager, and the Minnesota Twins hired Derek Falvey as their chief baseball officer and Thad Levine as general manager.
The White Sox, whose longtime president, Kenny Williams, is African-American, hired Rick Renteria, a Latino, as their manager. The Atlanta Braves and the Colorado Rockies both hired nonminority managers.
The Los Angeles Dodgers’ Dave Roberts, who won the National League Manager of the Year Award; the Washington Nationals’ Dusty Baker; and Renteria are the only minority managers in baseball.
Of M.L.B.’s 30 teams, there are four high-ranking minority executives: Williams, Al Avila of the Detroit Tigers, Mike Hill of the Miami Marlins and Farhan Zaidi of the Dodgers.
Korn Ferry was involved in the search for a new commissioner that ended with Manfred, a longtime executive in the commissioner’s office, replacing Bud Selig in 2015. Through that work, Korn Ferry met owners who later hired the company to find their baseball operations executives.
Jed Hughes, a vice chairman of Korn Ferry who heads the sports division, acknowledged the existence of the conflict of interest based on the firm’s work for the teams.
“We totally understand,” he said.
But Korn Ferry has a successful history of placing minority candidates in leadership positions in other sports — including Masai Ujiri, the president of the Toronto Raptors; Hugh Jackson, the head coach of the Cleveland Browns; Charlie Strong, the first African-American head football coach at the University of Texas; and Craig Littlepage, the athletic director at the University of Virginia.
“We’ve placed more diversity candidates in top positions than anyone else in the field,” said Hughes, who was a football coach at colleges and in the N.F.L. before turning to executive placement.
But baseball has proved a tougher challenge. Hughes said that the firm’s relative lack of success in hiring minority candidates in baseball was only because it did not have enough time — less than a year and half — to show results. The training the firm provided, he said, could bear fruit in years to come.
He also praised Manfred for trying to increase the pool of candidates. But he said teams needed to compete harder with other businesses, including the financial industry, to lure minority candidates in at entry-level positions in all departments, then identify them for reassignment into the baseball operations divisions and groom them for promotion.
