Sunlight is so scarce that it is rationed based on economic class. Schools are so packed that the poorest parents must wait in line for days to secure spots for their children.
Those are the grim scenes of Hao Jingfang’s “Folding Beijing,” a science-fiction novelette that won a Hugo Award in August, beating out Stephen King. The story is set in a futuristic Beijing, though many of its scenes seem grounded in the problems vexing Chinese society today.
Ms. Hao, 32, is the first Chinese woman to win a Hugo, conferred by the World Science Fiction Society. Last year, the Hugo for best novel went to the Chinese writer Liu Cixin, making him the first Asian winner.
In an interview at a Beijing cafe, Ms. Hao, who holds a day job as an economics researcher at the China Development Research Foundation, reflected on the line between reality and fiction, giving voice to “invisible people” and how she seeks inspiration for her stories.
Science fiction has taken off in China in recent years, and more and more Chinese authors are gaining international recognition for their work. What do you think makes Chinese science fiction unique?
Some Chinese science fiction reads like nonfiction with a few sci-fi elements mixed in. Chinese science fiction isn’t necessarily about the universe, the future, artificial intelligence or technology. It might be about the present or even ancient Chinese history.
“The Depth of Loneliness,’' a collection of Ms. Hao’s work, including “Folding Beijing.”Credit...Jiangsu Phoenix Literature and Art Publishing, Ltd.
 In “Folding Beijing,” you depict Lao Dao, a sanitation worker who resorts to illicit work to pay for his daughter’s education. How do you choose your characters?
I like characters with conflicting characteristics. Some are controversial, and some face challenges. I think good characters are people who are hard to judge, who are not pure saints or demons.
In “Folding Beijing,” you portray a deeply stratified society in which even mingling among economic classes is forbidden. Why focus on inequality?
We see from history that, at the beginning of every new empire, equality was one of people’s aspirations, but as the empire grew older, inequality appeared again, and people had to overthrow the empire and start all over again. It seems even now there isn’t an ideal solution. Inequality will continue to be a challenge for human society in the future.
In Beijing, the problem of inequality is particularly visible, with migrant workers working each day next to multimillionaires. To what extent was the story based on problems facing people today?
I talk about the future in the story, but the inspiration is current life. In today’s society, although people might live in the same city, their lives are very different, and they have little connection to one another. I wanted to show this in the story in a more direct way — the idea that people live together but can’t see one another. I want people to realize that there are so many invisible people in their lives. And also that their decisions, no matter how harmless or small they may seem, might have a huge and irreversible impact on other people’s lives.
You have a deep interest in Chinese history. What do you think defines the modern era in China?
I think now is a time of free thought if you look across the broader picture of thousands of years of Chinese history. Thirty years ago, culture and tradition were shattered during the Cultural Revolution. Our generation doesn’t have the same connection to past traditions, and we’ve absorbed so much from Western culture, which is popular.
That has advantages and disadvantages. The bad side is that foreign culture doesn’t have its roots in China, so no matter how much we learn about it, it’s not ours. We don’t know much about traditional culture, which means we are lost. The good side is that we don’t have traditional burdens and are eager to learn unfamiliar things. It’s a time full of uncertainty and potential, and nobody knows where we’re heading.