The choreographer Jonah Bokaer has written that “Rules of the Game,” his latest collaborative venture, “is about how to ‘tag’ deeply creative minds into (never onto) the very fluid medium of choreography.” Those minds belong to him, the visual artist Daniel Arsham and the musician Pharrell Williams, who came together to produce the admirably ambitious yet confused work that had its New York premiere at the Howard Gilman Opera House of the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Thursday.
Inspired in part by Luigi Pirandello’s play of the same name, “Rules of the Game” is one of those collaborations — not unlike last year’s “Tree of Codes,” by a different high-profile threesome — that sounds promising on paper (smart, famous people!) but doesn’t quite gel in practice.
In this work for eight dancers, which shares a program with two of Mr. Bokaer’s older pieces — “Recess” (2010) and “Why Patterns” (2011) — music and visuals practically clobber the dancing, despite some valiant individual performances. Rather than an enmeshing of minds, “Rules” reads like a competition among them.
Is the choreography unfocused or just difficult to focus on? The overpowering music swerves between sunny and menacing moods, too often resembling a sentimental movie score. (It was composed by Mr. Williams and David Campbell, who arranged it for the Dallas Symphony Orchestra.) Also fighting for our attention is Mr. Arsham’s striking, high-definition backdrop, a film featuring ceramic basketballs and classical busts that float through darkness like celestial bodies, colliding and shattering. These objects appear onstage, too, props for the dancers to toss, kick or regally display.
Mr. Arsham’s company, Snarkitecture, designed “Why Patterns,” which makes playful use of thousands of Ping-Pong balls. And Mr. Arsham designed “Recess,” in which Mr. Bokaer — whose own lucid dancing was a highlight — erects a dystopian landscape from a huge sheet of white paper. The two are a longtime team, yet they still seem to be operating in separate spheres.