CHARLESTON, S.C. — The judge faced the jury on Thursday morning and spoke solemnly about “what many have called the greatest justice system ever created.” Then the murder trial of a member of the most visible arm of the justice system — a police officer — began in earnest.
To the chief prosecutor, the officer, Michael T. Slager, was an aberration of American policing, a malevolent lawman who “let his sense of authority get the better of him” when he shot and killed Walter L. Scott in April 2015. To Mr. Slager’s lawyer, the death of Mr. Scott, who was black, was an “awful but lawful” killing by a white officer who patrolled a troubled neighborhood in North Charleston and believed he was in danger.
“Provocation is not the same as justification,” said Scarlett A. Wilson, the solicitor for Charleston County, who repeatedly used her 25-minute opening statement to accuse Mr. Slager of dishonesty.
“He didn’t just shoot somebody,” Mr. Savage said of Mr. Slager, adding that the officer would have been right to worry about whether Mr. Scott posed a threat when he fled on foot after being stopped for a broken taillight.
The fatal encounter between the men has been broadly dissected since a bystander recorded Mr. Slager firing eight rounds at Mr. Scott’s back, hitting him five times. Later in the video, Mr. Slager is seen dropping an item, which Ms. Wilson identified as the officer’s Taser device, near Mr. Scott.
Mr. Slager’s defense team has argued that a scuffle before the recording began, which prompted Mr. Slager to use his Taser, placed the officer at risk. But the video is expected to be central to the criminal case, as it was in the decisions to arrest and fire Mr. Slager, and for the City of North Charleston to agree to a $6.5 million settlement with Mr. Scott’s family.
For much of Thursday, discussion in the courtroom centered on the life of Mr. Scott and his choice to run from the police.
Mr. Savage made frequent references to Mr. Scott’s child support debts, which prosecutors and Mr. Scott’s family members believe led him to flee out of fear of being arrested, as well as his criminal history and drug use.
But even as she raised the matter of Mr. Scott’s actions after he was stopped, Ms. Wilson tried to redirect attention toward Mr. Slager.
Mr. Savage, who referred to “the climate of this country and the focus of the media” after police-involved killings in places like Baltimore; Cleveland; and Ferguson, Mo., asked the jurors to concentrate on Mr. Scott’s actions and how Mr. Slager might have interpreted them. He depicted Mr. Slager as an officer with an employment record of “exceptional excellence,” and he suggested that Mr. Scott had been a clear danger.
Testimony will resume Friday, when the prosecution is expected to call its ninth witness. No one who testified on Thursday, including Mr. Scott’s mother and one of his sons, was present for the shooting.
But some witnesses, in terms sober and pointed, addressed its aftermath.
Ms. Wilson asked Pierre Fulton, who was riding with Mr. Scott when Mr. Slager stopped them, why his friend had run from the police.
