Terrance Ferguson, a recent graduate of a charter school in Dallas, begins many days by taking in the view of Gulf St. Vincent from his three-story townhouse in Adelaide, Australia. He sometimes sees dolphins swimming in the waters below, which he considers “pretty cool.” He also likes to check in with peers back home who are preparing for classes as college freshmen.
“A lot of them are like, ‘Man, I should have done what you did,’” Ferguson said.
What he did was become a professional basketball player at 18 — at a time when he had expected to be playing for the University of Arizona — despite being too young for the N.B.A. draft. Not long after announcing his decision in a first-person essay in The Players’ Tribune in June, Ferguson packed up and joined the Adelaide 36ers of Australia’s National Basketball League.
By playing for the 36ers, Ferguson, a 6-foot-7 guard, receives housing, a car and compensation in the mid-six figures (because of various marketing arrangements) as he prepares for the N.B.A. draft next June, when he will meet the league’s age requirements. A likely first-round pick, he also has endorsement deals with Under Armour and PSD Underwear. He was excited about a coming photo shoot.
“I won’t have to pay for underwear ever again!” he said during a recent telephone interview.
Ferguson, of course, is not the first high-profile American teenager to head overseas rather than take the one-and-done route to the N.B.A.: a one-year pit stop at a big-time college program, then on to the draft. But he is believed to be the first to have been actively recruited by a team from Australia, a country that could lure more young stars away from the college game and emerge as the incubator of choice for N.B.A. prospects.
This all began in April, when Ferguson, a McDonald’s all-American, played in the Nike Hoop Summit in Portland, Ore. After the game, he said, his mother, Rachelle Holdman, delivered some unexpected news: A representative from an Australian team wanted to meet with them over dinner.
At the time, neither Ferguson nor his mother knew that Australia even had a professional league. But over breadsticks at Olive Garden, Ferguson learned about the 36ers and about the potential benefits of spending a season, and earning a paycheck, overseas.
Since 2006, the N.B.A. draft rules have required players to be 19 and at least one year removed from high school. Those rules ended the era of stars like Kobe Bryant, LeBron James and Kevin Garnett — as well as a few notable busts — who bypassed college for the N.B.A. The age rule is unlikely to change when the league finalizes its new collective bargaining agreement with the players’ union.
Thus, the quandary for high-caliber players like Ferguson: a year of college or a season abroad? To some, the choice is simple.
As Ferguson mulled his decision, he reached out to Emmanuel Mudiay, a friend and former teammate who had opted to play in China before the Denver Nuggets made him the No. 7 overall selection in the 2015 draft. Ferguson said that Mudiay expressed some discomfort about his experience in China — most of it related to the language barrier.
That, in part, was why Australia had been so appealing to Ferguson — and why the National Basketball League could attract more young American players.
“He had more than just this opportunity to go overseas, but this was just the most logical because of the language and the culture not being so different,” said Holdman, who moved to Adelaide to be with her son until the season ends in February.
Mudiay’s decision to sign with the Guangdong Southern Tigers had stemmed partly from accreditation concerns related to his high school, Prime Prep Academy, the now-shuttered Dallas-area charter school founded by the former N.F.L. star Deion Sanders. Ferguson had also attended Prime Prep, but transferred to Advanced Preparatory International, another charter school in Dallas that has drawn similar scrutiny from the N.C.A.A.
Reports circulated in the spring that Ferguson’s eligibility at Arizona was in question, but Ferguson said he would have been able to play as a freshman. Holdman said that her son had largely been home-schooled and that he had taken only electives at Advanced Preparatory International, although it issued him a diploma.
In the end, none of that mattered. Ferguson did not seem to regret missing out on college, and he added his voice to a growing chorus of critics who see the N.C.A.A. as a bastion of obsolete concepts of amateurism.
Ferguson’s agent, Happy Walters of Catalyst Sports and Media, said the one-and-done route made little sense for the handful of players each year who are skilled enough to make a quick transition to the N.B.A.
Wright, the Adelaide coach, said Ferguson’s maturity had impressed him. He works hard. He does not complain.
Wright often summons Ferguson to the gym for late-night workouts. “And I know Terrance will show up,” he said.
Ferguson was averaging 7.3 points per game off the bench as of Friday. His production may sound modest, but his coaches have been pleased with his progress. He is, after all, playing against grown men, and the 36ers did not sign him with the expectation that he would dominate the league. Instead, they hoped that he would be a consistent contributor, create some buzz and cement Adelaide as a destination for other American players with similar goals.
Wright said he had already been approached by rival teams wanting to know how the 36ers had landed Ferguson.
For the 36ers, signing a player like Ferguson became feasible only when the National Basketball League made a significant rule change ahead of this season, increasing the permitted number of foreign-born players, or “imports,” on each team from two to three.
In past seasons, Wright needed to know that his two imports could be effective players right from the start — seasoned professionals, in other words. It would have been too much to expect an 18-year-old, even one as talented as Ferguson, to step in and assume that sort of role.
But being allowed a third import allowed Wright to gamble on youth.
The idea, Wright said, was proposed to him by Raheim Brown, a friend who is in the process of helping to start the Dream Basketball Academy, an Adelaide-based training center that Brown hopes will become a destination for promising players with N.B.A. ambitions.
Brown showed Wright some film of Ferguson, and Wright thought Ferguson’s skill set, his shooting ability in particular, translated well to the National Basketball League.

“It’s just the accent that kills me,” he said.
Another challenge has been learning (and remembering) to drive on the left side of the road.
Ferguson, who likes to dance in the locker room before games, is a source of near-constant amusement to teammates. But he is still susceptible to the missteps of youth. When the 36ers took a trip to Darwin on a scorching day not long ago, Ferguson forgot to drink water the entire afternoon.
“He figured out what dehydration was,” Wright said.
Joe Tertzakian, the general manager of operations for the 36ers, said executives from the Chicago Bulls, the Minnesota Timberwolves and the Nuggets had already visited Adelaide to see Ferguson. Wright said six scouts had attended a recent practice, though Ferguson did not seem to notice.
Brown, whose academy supplements Ferguson’s training and development, said he was keeping tabs on four American high school seniors as potential targets for next season.
For now, the 36ers will enjoy their time with Ferguson — and continue to reap the benefits even after he returns home.
