At least since July, when the Democratic and Republican National Conventions ended and the presidential campaign began in earnest, but more likely since the spring of 2015, when Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump threw down their gauntlets, anyone could be excused for wanting to take a long vacation somewhere.
Maybe somewhere beyond the reach of Twitter and perpetual poll analysis, where words like “loser” and “deplorables” couldn’t be heard, where email servers were too small to see and sites for border walls looked indistinguishable from anywhere else on the planet.
Mr. Grant, a former brand strategist, founded the project on a whim after stumbling across a striking image on Google Earth of the irrigated farming environs around a minuscule West Texas town called Earth.
Intrigued by an idea called the “overview effect,” a profound cognitive shift said to be experienced by some orbiting astronauts looking back toward a fragile, oasislike Earth, Mr. Grant started posting daily images he had found by scouring Google Earth. Later he used raw imagery from a company that supplies such views, DigitalGlobe, which collects them with satellites orbiting 308 miles to 478 miles above the planet’s surface.
Some of the images Mr. Grant chooses document the sort of crises vast enough to alter Earth’s surface in just a few years — a California drought sapping a reservoir; the Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan, which formed on almost empty land and now looks like a city, packed with more than 80,000 inhabitants who have fled the civil war in Syria. Above the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear reactor in August of 2015, you can see the fields of steel containers used to store radioactive water after the 2011 earthquake and tsunami.
But other pictures show things like environmental endeavors (massive wind and solar farms); land art (Robert Smithson’s gyring “Spiral Jetty” on the Great Salt Lake in Utah and an Argentine forest in the shape of a guitar); and the dazzling geometries of human habitation (star-shaped cities in Italy and the Netherlands, a palm-tree-shaped artificial island in Dubai).
