Looming above Lexington Avenue, the 92nd Street Y is one of the premier cultural institutions in New York City. It was here that Emma Lazarus taught English to immigrants; here that the Nobel Prize winner Elie Wiesel gave 180 lectures; here that the cellist Yo-Yo Ma made his New York City debut; here that the choreographer Alvin Ailey first presented “Revelations” and that the writer Truman Capote introduced “In Cold Blood.” It is also a great place to swim, throw a clay pot and hear a talk about the women of the Supreme Court.
Since its founding in 1874 by Jewish financiers and businessmen, the Y has moved six times, settling in 1900 at its current location, 1395 Lexington Avenue, on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. Along the way, this community center dedicated to Jewish life kept expanding its music, dance, literary offerings, art workshops and continuing education courses, as well as its nursery school and full-service gymnasium. From dawn until late into the evening, the Y teems with activity.
The offerings are as varied as the crowds. In a recent year, the Y hosted 477 lectures and readings, 172 concerts and dance performances (80 of them premieres) and offered 3,500 classes (among them “Mah-Jongg for Beginners,” “Financial Tips for Couples,” “Reading ‘Crime and Punishment’”).
Despite its longevity, the 92nd Street Y has managed to become a kind of civic white noise. You tend not to hear about a place that is nearly 150 years old unless it’s bad news, like when Jack B. Grubman, a former star analyst on Wall Street, supposedly arranged a donation of $1 million to ensure his twin daughters’ admission into the organization’s prestigious nursery school. Or when the Y’s endowment was hit particularly hard after many donors lost considerable sums of money by investing in Bernard L. Madoff’s Ponzi schemes.
But it endures.
On a random day, a Y enthusiast could easily make several visits: Work independently during open hours in the ceramics studio, equipped with kilns, pottery wheels, buckets of glaze and tools of all kinds. Swim in the 25-yard indoor pool, lift weights, spend an hour on the yoga mat or learn about Feldenkrais, a body awareness practice. Return in the evening for the premiere of a movie, such as “American Pastoral,” an adaptation of Philip Roth’s 1997 novel, followed by a panel discussion with stars, directors or producers.
Membership is required for the health club, as well as for the senior center, but the classes and performances are open to all. Though to really make the most of the Y, it helps to live in the neighborhood. I am one of the lucky ones, just two blocks away. The guards out front have come to recognize me, as do the attendants in the locker room. The police have long had a presence at the center, but with an increase in bias-based attacks since the election, canine units have become regular visitors in recent days. My favorite of the unit is Bella, a golden lab. I’m not allowed to pet her because she is working, but I thank her handler for keeping me safe.
I regularly swim laps in the pool and have enrolled in a weekly ceramics class. I have noticed a similar type of Y user — semiretired, taking advantage of art studios and making an effort to keep up on the latest Zadie Smith book or sitting in on a political discussion led by Jeffrey Toobin. And there’s another perk to living in proximity to the Y. When the hot water goes off in my building, as it does with annoying regularity, that’s where I go to take a shower.