WASHINGTON — The immediate question for the justices at a Supreme Court argument on Monday was whether designs on cheerleaders’ uniforms were subject to copyright protection.
As the argument progressed, though, it became increasingly clear that the case raised broader issues, with vast financial consequences for the fashion industry and deep philosophical implications for how clothing signifies meaning.
Addressing a lawyer for the plaintiff, Justice Sonia Sotomayor agreed that a ruling in his favor could transform the industry.
The case, Star Athletica v. Varsity Brands, No. 15-866, concerned stripes, zigzags and chevrons copyrighted by Varsity Brands, the leading seller of cheerleading uniforms. The company sued Star Athletica, a rival company, after it started to market uniforms with similar designs.
All concerned agree that two-dimensional designs may be copyrighted but that the cut and shape of three-dimensional garments may not. The question for the court was the legal significance of fusing Varsity’s designs with cheerleading outfits.
Some justices asked whether great art remained protected when made into fabric, mentioning Piet Mondrian, Marcel Duchamp, Paul Klee and Pablo Picasso.
John J. Bursch, a lawyer for Star Athletica, said those designs were indeed protected because they added nothing to the utilitarian function of the garment.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg said the two elements could be separated, leaving the designs subject to copyright protection.
The hardest question, several justices said, concerned camouflage, which is a distinct design that serves a practical purpose. “The utilitarian function that camouflage has is to hide you in the woods,” Justice Elena Kagan said.
But William M. Jay, a lawyer for Varsity, said that camouflage may warrant copyright protection. “I do think that an original camouflage pattern could be copyrighted and then reproduced on backpacks, iPhone covers or a hunter’s garment,” he said.
Chief Justice Roberts asked about military uniforms. Mr. Jay indicated that protection might be possible there, too.
Turning aphoristic, Justice Breyer mused about how people dress to express themselves.
The observation was greeted with approval from the far side of the bench. “That’s so romantic,” Justice Kagan said.