Mark Taimanov, a virtuoso pianist and former Soviet chess champion whose lopsided loss to Bobby Fischer in 1971 in the quarterfinals of a major chess tournament cost him his government salary, died on Monday in St. Petersburg, Russia. He was 90.
Andrey Filatov, the president of the Russian Chess Federation, confirmed the death.
Mr. Taimanov became one of the leading Soviet players after World War II, when the Soviet Union dominated world chess — all while pursuing an equally successful career as a classical pianist, known for performing duets with his wife, Lyubov Bruk.
In 1953, he was among 15 participants in a tournament in Zurich that is widely considered one of the greatest chess competitions ever held.
The event, called the Candidates tournament, which determines a challenger for the world championship, included two future Soviet world champions, Vasily Smyslov and Tigran Petrosian, and one former champion, Max Euwe, of the Netherlands. Mr. Smyslov won the tournament, while Mr. Taimanov finished in a tie for eighth with his fellow Russian Alexander Kotov.
Mr. Taimanov qualified for the tournament again in 1971, but in the quarterfinals he faced Mr. Fischer, the brilliant American who was at the height of his powers.
The match, in 10 games, was to be decided by whoever got to 5.5 points first, with wins counting as one point and draws as a half point. Mr. Fischer beat Mr. Taimanov 6-0, without even yielding a draw.
It was an unheard-of result, and to the Soviet authorities, the only explanation had to be a nefarious one, so they blamed Mr. Taimanov. They barred him from traveling abroad, censured him and cut off his government salary, which all elite chess players received.
“This dramatic match changed my life into hell,” Mr. Taimanov said in an interview with Joel Lautier, a French grandmaster, on the chess news website Chessbase.com in 2002.
His internal exile lasted only two years, however, partly because of Mr. Fischer’s continued success. After beating Mr. Taimanov, Mr. Fischer overpowered Bent Larsen, a Danish grandmaster who was ranked among the top four in the world. He then vanquished Mr. Petrosian. Finally, in 1972, he wrested the world title away from the powerful Russian Boris Spassky.
The sheer dominance of Mr. Fischer made it plain to the Soviet authorities that Mr. Taimanov’s poor outing against him had not entirely been the Russian’s fault. They reinstated his benefits and allowed him to travel again.
But he never got another shot at the title because he never again qualified for the Candidates tournament. And perhaps as a consequence of the sanctions against him, his marriage to Ms. Bruk ended as well, as did their musical partnership.
They had met while studying at the Leningrad Conservatory and married when they were both 19. Soviet regulations virtually prohibited married couples from traveling together in the West, however, so they remained relatively unknown outside the Soviet bloc.
But when Philips Classics put together its “Great Pianists of the 20th Century” series, which included 200 compact discs, the Taimanovs were one of only two duos in the set.
Mark Evgenievich Taimanov was born on Feb. 7, 1926, in Kharkiv, Ukraine, and moved to Russia when he was 6 months old. His father was a passionate chess player, and his mother taught piano at a conservatory in Ukraine. She also taught her son to play.
In Leningrad he came under the tutelage of Mikhail Botvinnik, the future world chess champion, and became a formidable player. He was awarded the international master title in 1950 and two years later became a grandmaster, the highest title in chess, when he qualified for the Candidates tournament.
That same year Mr. Taimanov tied for first with Mr. Botvinnik in the Soviet championship, but he lost a playoff for the title. He tied for first again in 1956, but this time he prevailed in a playoff against Mr. Spassky and Yuri Averbakh. Altogether, he played in 23 Soviet championships, a record he shared with Efim Geller.
Mr. Taimanov often said in interviews that one of his most cherished possessions was a photograph that showed him playing in the Capablanca Memorial tournament in Havana in 1964. Behind him, just over his left shoulder, is the Cuban revolutionary Che Guevara, who is staring intently at the game.
Mr. Taimanov said that he and Guevara became friendly and played chess together several times.
Mr. Taimanov was married four times, the last time in his late 70s. He was 78 when he and his fourth wife, Nadezhda, had twins, a boy and a girl. The twins were 57 years younger than his first child and 27 years younger than his granddaughter, although they were her aunt and uncle.
