If there was one thing financial markets commentators were confident about heading into the presidential election, it was that if Donald J. Trump pulled off an upset win, it would create a classic panic reaction: a drop in stocks and other risky assets and a rally in bonds and other safe-haven assets.
The opposite has happened since Mr. Trump’s victory Tuesday. The Standard & Poor’s 500 index is up nearly 4 percent this week. The bond market has sold off, sending interest rates higher. Measures of volatility have fallen.
So what are the markets really telling us about global investors’ perceptions of what the future holds during the Trump administration?
The message that comes through after a careful reading of the data is this: Some of Mr. Trump’s campaign promises cut in the direction of higher economic growth and corporate profits. He envisions lower taxes on business, fewer regulations of all sorts and a burst of infrastructure spending. That may or may not help the overall economy, but it would definitely enhance the bottom lines of major companies, justifying the buoyant optimism evident in the stock market.
Other promises point toward lower profits and a challenging environment for major companies. Renegotiating or abandoning the North American Free Trade Agreement, for example, risks ripping apart the economic underpinnings of the United States auto industry and many others. Same goes for threatening a trade war with China and other major trading partners; it would disrupt the $165 billion in United States exports to China each year and throw into doubt the business models of American firms that import from the country (Apple is one high-profile example).
And if Mr. Trump follows through on his promises to deport millions of undocumented immigrants, it would undermine the economic model of companies that rely on immigrants, including those in the agriculture and service industries.
Essentially, markets are signaling that investors think the Trump administration will follow through more completely on the plans that are positives for growth profits and will be more cautious on those policies that are negatives. One way to interpret moves over the months and years ahead is as a continuing set of wagers over which set of policies the Trump administration will pursue with most vigor.
In his election night victory speech, for example, Mr. Trump mentioned his intention to “rebuild highways, bridges, tunnels, airports, schools, hospitals,” and to put millions to work doing it, but did not mention trade agreements or deportation. And the names that have floated around of potential Trump administration officials include many businesspeople and politicians who are historically more about cutting taxes and regulation than about resetting trade deals.
Even if we knew exactly how all of the policies Mr. Trump campaigned on were going to be implemented, it’s hard to know what the net result would be for corporate profits and interest rates.
It would most likely vary widely among industries. Lighter environment regulations would be great for the energy sector. Major banks stand to become more profitable, given his transition team’s promise to “dismantle” the Dodd-Frank Act. Trade-dependent companies, of course, have more to lose from a trade war.
Markets are already pricing in exactly those dynamics. Since Tuesday, shares of the mega-bank JPMorgan Chase are up more than 8 percent. Shares of Apple are down about 2 percent.
And it is even more clear when you look to international currencies. Most notably, the Mexican peso is down a whopping 12 percent against the dollar since Tuesday’s close, which reflects fears that the looming renegotiation of trade relations between the two countries will damage Mexico’s growth rate (though the drop in the currency will be a short-term boon to Mexican exporters).
But when all the positive and negative effects of the Trump agenda are tallied up, the net result is that investors, today at least, are betting the positives will prove more substantial.
That doesn’t mean that the relatively sunny prediction implied by the first couple of days of trading activity will necessarily prove correct over time. Markets are particularly bad at pricing in seismic events that are hard to predict with confidence.
For example, in 2007, a global credit crisis began in August, and there were signals everywhere that it could ultimately prove disruptive to the global financial system. Yet the stock market actually peaked two months later. The deepest recession in modern times began in December of that year, and stocks ultimately plummeted.
In other words, if the Trump administration is going to be economically disastrous, the markets would not necessarily reflect that today.
And after so much inaccurate prognostication about what the near-term market effects of a Trump victory would be, having some modesty about our ability to predict how his policies will play out in the years ahead is very much in order.