David Hamilton, the British photographer whose diaphanous images of prepubescent girls blurred the line between art and pornography, was found dead on Friday in his Paris apartment, one week after a former model accused him of raping her in 1987 when she was 13.
The police said that the cause appeared to be suicide but their investigation was continuing.
Beginning with “Bilitis” in 1977, Mr. Hamilton directed five erotic movies that largely centered on blossoming sexuality in flower-crowned girls. The films were shot in the dreamy soft-focus style that also defined his photographs for fashion and advertising assignments in the 1960s and ’70s, and for more than two dozen books.
The nudity prompted a number of prosecutions against book buyers on charges of possession of child pornography, though in most cases the charges were dropped or the verdicts overturned. There were also bans and boycotts of Mr. Hamilton’s books in some places.
He became the target of criminal allegations in October, when a French radio and television personality, Flavie Flament, published a novelistic memoir, “The Consolation,” in which she describes being raped by a photographer at a nudist camp in the South of France when she was 13.
Afraid of being sued, she said, she did not name Mr. Hamilton, but his portrait of her is on the book’s cover. After the book was published, two other former models anonymously told a weekly magazine that they, too, had been raped by Mr. Hamilton. On Nov. 18, after Ms. Flament said she was contacted by several former models who made similar allegations, she identified Mr. Hamilton by name.
Under French law, a woman cannot file rape charges more than 20 years after reaching the age of 18. Ms. Flament said she was so traumatized by the episode that the memories of it returned only about four years ago, when she was 38.
“The horror of this news will never erase that of our sleepless nights,” she said.
Last week Laurence Rossignol, the French minister of families, children and women’s rights, asked Ms. Flament and a criminal lawyer to explore whether the statute of limitations for juvenile rape should be extended.
In the Sunday Times interview, she said that at one photo shoot, in his apartment in Cap d’Agde, in the South of France, Mr. Hamilton appeared at the door naked, wearing only a camera around his neck.
Mr. Hamilton was born on April 15, 1933, in London. As a boy, during World War II, he was evacuated to Dorset, but returned to London for school. Afterward he worked for an architect.
He soon began a series of moves back and forth across the English Channel: working as a graphic designer for Elle magazine in Paris, returning to London to be art director of Queen magazine — and there buying his first camera — then returning to France to be art director for the Printemps department store.
It was in France that Mr. Hamilton, who had no formal training in the field, began photographing commercially.
His marriage to Gertrude Hamilton, who helped design one of his books, ended in divorce.They had no children. He divided his time between St. Tropez and Paris, where he lived in the Montparnasse district.