MEXICO CITY — On Nov. 8, this mountain capital was soaked by a ferocious off-season thunderstorm, the type of tempest that can lead to jokes about the Aztec rain god Tlaloc being angry. At the same time, over the Rio Grande, a political storm raged worthy of the deity’s fury: The United States elected a president who promised to build a border wall and make Mexico pay for it, deport millions of immigrants and rewrite or rip up a trade deal that Mexico depends on for almost a third of its income. Within hours, an economic storm also seemed to be brewing, with the peso losing value at the fastest rate since the “tequila crisis” of 1994.
The rise of Donald J. Trump to the presidency could potentially be the greatest foreign policy challenge to Mexico for generations. The actions that Mr. Trump has called for, such as slapping 35 percent tariffs on cars made in Mexico, could push this nation of 120 million into recession. Deporting millions more here could increase unemployment and crime. Moreover, Mr. Trump could change the basic nature of a relationship that has endured since World War II from one of peace and trade to one of bullying and conflict.
The phrase “could potentially” is key. Since the election, analysts here have all been trying to predict what a Trump presidency will actually do, and whether it will or won’t be what he said — whatever that is. Indeed, much of what he has said regarding Mexico is highly ambiguous.
Mr. Trump has veered from calling for a “deportation force” against all undocumented migrants to a program of sending back criminals, which is in fact the current policy. He has pushed for a wall along the entire border, but more recently he has talked about merely extending the existing fences, and hasn’t offered a realistic plan for Mexico to pay. And there is a lot of wiggle room in a revamping of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
And of course, there are limits to what Mr. Trump can do alone; Congress, the courts and business will all have much to say on all these issues, and could well force him to take a more moderate position.
But even if none of these things happen, there’s the underlying question of whether Mr. Trump will continue to use Mexico as a punching bag. Perhaps Mr. Trump’s position will merely lead to a “phony war” of words, rather than a real diplomatic or trade conflict. But perhaps it will cause major turmoil. While bullying and punishing Mexico may play to Mr. Trump’s base, it would not only cause pain south of the river, but would also bring the United States more problems.
The call to make Mexico pay for the wall is a particularly salient issue. Not only does the United States command an economy that is 10 times the size of Mexico’s, but there is a blatant absurdity in extorting another country to pay for your own building. The demand, shouted at rallies, seems to seek more to humiliate Mexico than to actually secure funding. Such bravado helped Mr. Trump win the election, but as a real foreign policy goal, it could gain nothing and cause deep antagonism.
Mexico and the United States haven’t always been at peace. They clashed repeatedly in the 19th and early 20th century, mostly to Mexico’s loss. American troops raised their flag in Mexico City in the Mexican-American War, before securing the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which gave the United States almost half of Mexico’s territory. In 1914, American troops returned to bombard and occupy the port of Veracruz. Gen. Francisco Villa, better known to history as Pancho Villa, stormed over the border into Columbus, N.M., in 1916, and in 1938, Mexico expropriated American oil companies.
In 1969, President Richard M. Nixon unleashed Operation Intercept, under which every vehicle crossing the border was searched as a way to pressure Mexico to spray poison on marijuana and opium poppy crops. In 1985, corrupt Mexican policemen worked with cartel members to kidnap and murder an American agent for the Drug Enforcement Administration, Enrique Camarena.
Yet these disputes never changed the fundamental nature of the bilateral relationship or stopped trade between the two countries from rising steadily to more than half a trillion dollars last year. And during this time, Mexico and the United States have coordinated on many actions, from disaster relief (the Mexican Navy helped after Hurricane Katrina) to sharing river water.
In 2014, a record number of unaccompanied children from El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras arrived on America’s southern border, causing what the White House called an “urgent humanitarian situation.” The flow ebbed only when Mexico stepped up its own detentions of Central Americans. After human rights groups criticized these mass arrests, Mexico has promised to make it easier for the Central Americans, many who have fled brutal gang violence, to gain asylum.
However, trying to force Mexico to pay for a border wall, or slapping on tariffs that would savage its economy, could fracture this cooperation. Mexico may be smaller than the United States, but it is still a major economic and political power. If Mr. Trump pushes too far, it could hit back with its own tariffs that hurt American exporters. It would see no incentive to reduce the flow of migrants and refugees from other countries to the United States. And pushing Mexico into recession may only make more people here pick up and head north anyway.
As much as Mr. Trump seems to like abusing Mexico and its people, President Trump would be wise to try a different tack.