Ben Schickel walked into the offices of a software firm in Boston, where he had worked in sales for more than a year. It wasn’t easy. He was coming back from a two-week vacation, time he had spent not on some faraway beach but indulging his passion for landscaping work.
At his desk, he looked over his leads. He knew he needed out.
He approached his boss and gave his two-week notice. Soon after that, he started a landscaping business in earnest.
Mr. Schickel felt he needed real engagement, given that he was still grieving for his sister Elizabeth, who had died from a brain tumor at age 15 the year before. In trimming hedges and working on flower beds, mowing lawns and hauling leaves, Mr. Schickel, who has a degree in political science and history from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, found a sense of peace.
Matthew Crawford, a senior fellow at the Institute for Advanced Studies in Culture at the University of Virginia and the author of the 2015 book “The World Beyond Your Head: On Becoming an Individual in an Age of Distraction,” sees good sense at work among those who leave office jobs for something more concrete-seeming. The reason? Much white-collar work has become similar to assembly-line work, comprising a series of mindless tasks.
“The most important distinction, whether you work with your hands or in an office, is whether the job involves using your own judgment or not,” said Dr. Crawford, who fabricates parts for custom motorcycles when he is not writing or researching. “You can’t have this separation from thinking to doing.
By all measures, Evan Lundy was a success. After earning an undergraduate degree and a law degree at the University of Mississippi, he started working at the Jackson, Miss., office of a national firm handling bankruptcy cases for large banks.
The hours were long. Worried about deadlines, he said he rarely slept through the night.
In his dwindling spare time, he built things; for instance, a toy chest. Almost immediately after he posted a photo of it on Instagram, he sold it. He found himself spending more time making furniture and selling it on Etsy or around Jackson.
Mr. Lundy, 33, who had a wife and two children to support, believed he didn’t have the luxury to turn his hobby into something more until he ran into a childhood friend who built furniture and made custom curtain rods. After learning of Mr. Lundy’s passion and his longing to escape the office, the friend offered a solution: If Mr. Lundy could install drapery 50 percent of the time, he could earn enough money to devote the other half to building furniture.
Mr. Lundy made the break this past May. While his close friends and especially his wife understood, many at the law firm did not.
In the late 1990s, Kevin Tyschper heard the call of the “new economy.” He held positions in areas like “network planning” and “inventory management” at a series of corporations.
In 2007, Mr. Tyschper started going to culinary school in the evenings. This meant driving an hour from his home in suburban Naperville, Ill., to Chicago three nights a week for a year. The class lasted from 6 until midnight.
By 2009, he was spending more and more time baking. At first, he did it for family and friends. Then came a Facebook page and a website, and a business developed through word of mouth. Just when it seemed he would have to make a choice between his day job and his passion, the company that employed him left town.
He opened DeEtta’s Bakery in 2014. For the first two months, he said, it wasn’t uncommon for him work all-nighters, with days starting at 3:30 a.m., and 100-hour workweeks were often the norm. By his account, he has taken perhaps two days off in the last year.
“If you don’t like to work long hours, this is not the business to be in,” Mr. Tyschper, 43, said. “It’s constant movement. We make everything by hand here, too. It’s not like we pull something out of the freezer and bake it. You are kneading it, scaling things out, mixing things, deep-panning things, sheeting things. There are times at 6 or 7 at night when you finally sit down and you realize you haven’t sat down in 15 hours.
“It’s blue collar, but so what?” said Shawn Kelley, a 42-year-old stonemason in Portland, Ore. He had studied at the University of Hartford and worked as a graphic designer in Northampton, Mass., before being driven mad by the monotony of moving fonts around on a screen and designing restaurant menus.
During a long drive in the New England countryside, Mr. Kelley stopped to admire a series of stone walls. He saw the effort that went into them. He liked the idea of taking heavy objects of different shapes and sizes and forming them into a cohesive whole. Soon after that epiphany, he began calling stonemasons, seeing if he might find work.
They warned him about the intense physical labor involved with carving stone and fitting it into place. But in 2005, he moved west for a full-time job in the field. Now his workday often begins at a quarry, where he selects what he needs to build stairways, walls and backyard sanctuaries.
Mr. Schickel, the landscaper, knows that conversation, that look. But he said it stopped bothering him. “If I cared what everyone else thinks, I would still be at a blue-chip company and feeling unfulfilled,” he said.
Mr. Schickel allowed that there are challenges, both physical and financial. And because his job is seasonal, he’ll have to work construction over the winter.
