GANDER, Newfoundland — Memories of Sept. 11 are a little different here. That was the morning 38 planes were diverted to this tight-knit town with a large airfield, where they were required to land because of fear about how many flights might be targeted in the terrorist attacks unfolding south of the border. The day 6,700 bewildered passengers arrived, upset and tired, unsure why they were here or how long it would take them to get out.
The community’s response has become a contemporary parable of hospitality, chronicled in news accounts and memorialized on plaques: the residents of a remote region who fed and housed thousands of strangers in schools, halls and even their own homes; the striking bus drivers who left picket lines to ferry frightened passengers; the air traffic controllers who, once the skies were silenced, used their down time to peel potatoes and cook meals for the involuntary visitors.
So imagine the scene this past weekend, when about half of the town packed into the local hockey rink cum cultural center for an early look at a Broadway-bound musical, “Come From Away,” that improbably theatricalizes five days of encounters between the so-called plane people and those who live here.
For most of the actors, it was the first time they had visited the town or met the people they have been depicting on stages around North America as the $12 million show has been in development. For the residents, many of whom have never seen a Broadway musical, it was a chance to glimpse how their memories, their personalities and even their distinctive dialect have been adapted for the stage.
“It had some kind of surreal feel,” said Donald O’Brien, an air traffic controller here for 44 years.
On Saturday night, Mr. O’Brien saw one of the two benefit concert renditions of the show, featuring a cast that begins performances in Toronto on Nov. 15 and on Broadway on Feb. 18. (Proceeds went to local charities.) On Sunday morning, he gave performers a tour of the regional headquarters of NAV Canada, which manages air traffic over Canada, patiently explaining how the Gulf Stream and contemporary travel habits create the unceasing stream of planes that pass above this stormy island.
The actors were alternately antsy and giddy. “It’s not like, ‘Oh, I hope I hit that note,’ it’s ‘I hope I honor these people the way they deserve to be honored,” said Jenn Colella, who, like all of the performers, plays multiple characters: in her case, the pilot of a grounded plane, as well as a Gander librarian.
The cast members spent the weekend nosing around the real-life locations where the show is set: the Royal Canadian Legion hall, the Trailway Pub and the animal shelter. (There were multiple cats and dogs, and two bonobos on the planes.) On Sunday the actors were “screeched in” as honorary Newfoundlanders with a local welcoming (or is it hazing?) ritual, involving shots of cheap rum followed by cod smooching (yes, kissing a fish on the lips).
A scene from the new Broadway-bound musical about a town in Newfoundland that welcomed travelers grounded amid the Sept. 11 chaos.
Gander, lovingly described in one of the show’s song titles as “Somewhere in the Middle of Nowhere,” is an unusual place: a northeastern corner of North America whose fortunes for much of the last century have been inextricably tied to the history of human flight. In the early decades of trans-Atlantic travel, the town built a capacious airport with huge runways and became a popular stop for refueling. But the jet age made those stops unnecessary for most flights, and Gander became a place planes generally passed over, except for emergency landings.
The town has been thanked in all kinds of ways. Money was donated, scholarships set up. There are letters of gratitude on the wall of the aviation museum, and a piece of steel from the World Trade Center at the airport.
But the idea that the events were the stuff of musical theater seemed, at best, far-fetched to many. Michael Rubinoff, a theater producer who oversees the Canadian Music Theater Project at Sheridan College, just outside Toronto, unsuccessfully suggested the idea to multiple teams of writers before finding a married couple, Irene Sankoff and David Hein, willing to take it on. The pair had written one previous musical, called “My Mother’s Lesbian Jewish Wiccan Wedding,” but they flew to Gander for the 10th anniversary of the attacks and spent a month in town, interviewing anyone and everyone.
But on Saturday night, Mr. Wright found himself at the hockey rink, alongside the province’s premier, the United States ambassador to Canada, the regional representative of the queen and many residents, cheering and crying as 12 actors and seven musicians performed. The show has been honed through a student production at Sheridan, at two musical-theater festivals and in professional stagings in Seattle, San Diego and Washington, D.C.
The crowds were wildly enthusiastic. They applauded a moment in which a bus driver pointed to a verse in a passenger’s Bible to reassure those who did not speak English, as well as a jokey line about “the gayest town in Newfoundland” and an anthemic song about the career path of the first female American Airlines captain (played by Ms. Colella).
They stomped their feet at the Celtic-influenced folk rock sound and cheered the ugly stick, a local instrument fashioned from bottle caps and a boot attached to an upside-down mop. There was entrance applause for Petrina Bromley, the one Newfoundlander in the cast, showstopping laughs about traffic-stopping moose, and joyful clapping at mentions of cod au gratin and cod tongue (don’t ask). During the evening performance, the standing ovation began about 10 minutes before the show ended.
“It was a real run-on-Kleenex night,” Mr. Wright said.
