Gov. Chris Christie in the New Jersey State House this week. Lawyers for the governor and other state officials argued on Wednesday that a special prosecutor should not be named in connection with a citizen’s complaint accusing Mr. Christie of misconduct in the George Washington Bridge lane-closing scandal.
HACKENSACK, N.J. — A special prosecutor should be appointed in connection with a criminal misconduct complaint against Gov. Chris Christie over the George Washington Bridge lane-closing scandal to ensure that he is held “to the same standards as everyone else,” the man who filed the complaint told a state judge on Wednesday.
Judge Bonnie J. Mizdol of Superior Court heard arguments from William J. Brennan, a Wayne resident and former Teaneck firefighter, who filed the complaint accusing Mr. Christie, a Republican, of failing to order the reopening of bridge access lanes in Fort Lee in September 2013. A different judge ruled in October that there was probable cause to let the complaint proceed. Judge Mizdol said she would issue a written ruling by the end of the week.
Mr. Christie has denied any wrongdoing in the lane-closing matter and has not been charged in what prosecutors say was a political payback scheme to create traffic jams at the bridge, which connects New Jersey and New York and is the world’s busiest. Two of the governor’s former allies were convicted in a federal trial in the case, and a third pleaded guilty and testified against them. According to testimony by the two of the three, Mr. Christie was told about the lane closings — if not necessarily the motive behind them — both in advance and while they were going on.
Mr. Brennan, representing himself, argued on Wednesday that a special prosecutor was necessary to remove the appearance of a conflict of interest. Mr. Christie appointed both Christopher S. Porrino, New Jersey’s attorney general, and Gurbir Grewal, the Bergen County prosecutor, and while both have recused themselves from the case, Mr. Brennan argued that their subordinates should also be subject to recusal.
Judge Mizdol said that though she was “very mindful” of the heightened concern over a potential conflict of interest in the case, she was bound to uphold the applicable statutes and the State Constitution.
Mr. Brennan contended that the case was novel because it involved a sitting governor as a defendant and had no guiding legal precedent.
