Opinion|Will Women Still Want to Run?
Will Women Still Want to Run?
After the ugliest campaign in recent memory, would any woman in her right mind want to run for president again?
Long answer: Some will be discouraged. Those who run will do so with the full knowledge that we do not live in a post-gender world, any more than we do in a post-racial one.
People will long debate how much being a woman factored into Hillary Clinton’s narrow loss. But to those who study gender and politics, certain issues were clear, and they will frame the campaigns of women who may run in the future.
It has been a political science truism that female candidates cannot win unless voters see them as qualified for office; men have more leeway.
Political scientists saw a double bind: political experience, branded in this election as being part of a clueless or corrupt elite, worked against the woman running for office, while political inexperience helped the man. (Exit polls showed that 18 percent of those who voted for Mr. Trump did not think he was qualified to be president).
Scholars also noticed that while past polls suggested that voters had dropped their resistance to seeing a woman as commander in chief, exit polls suggested a more nuanced reality.
“We knew that in 2008 one reason voters were reluctant to support Clinton is if they had worries about terrorism, so she became secretary of state,” said Mirya R. Holman, an assistant professor of political science at Tulane. “But it turns out foreign policy experience does not mean we trust you to protect us against terrorism.” She noted that in exit polls, 60 percent of voters who said foreign policy mattered most to them voted for Mrs. Clinton, while only 39 percent of those who rated terrorism first voted for her.
Ms. Kimmell’s research has found, however, that women have had a harder time winning an executive office such as governor or mayor than a seat in Congress. “Voters view women differently when they view them as the decision maker as opposed to a decision maker,” she said. An even higher bar, then, exists for the presidency.
Senator Gillibrand is one of many Democratic women mentioned as potential presidential candidates, along with Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts; Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota; Janet Napolitano, former governor of Arizona; Senator-elect Kamala Harris of California and Senator-elect Catherine Cortez Masto of Nevada.
On the Republican side, potential candidates include Gov. Nikki Haley of South Carolina; Gov. Susana Martinez of New Mexico; Representative Cathy McMorris Rodgers of Washington and Senator Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire.
Yet this campaign could also act as a spur, much as the hearings into Anita Hill’s accusations against Clarence Thomas did for an earlier generation of women.
So much in this campaign blew up conventional political wisdom that politicians and those who study them are still regrouping. Experience was a liability. Demeaning or bullying behavior, which memorably doomed Rick Lazio when he ran against Mrs. Clinton for the Senate in 2000, did not disqualify Mr. Trump.
Some voters were alienated in the presidential election when Mrs. Clinton explicitly positioned herself as a woman who championed issues like families, children and equal pay; others were inspired. If parties court blue-collar voters more intensively next time around, would that hurt women vying to run?
This campaign may have signaled that an ambitious woman still prompts resentment and anger among some voters. But ambition is hard to extinguish, no matter how rugged the terrain.