Book Review|A Corrupt Judge. The Mob. Indian Casinos. The Latest Thriller From John Grisham.
A Corrupt Judge. The Mob. Indian Casinos. The Latest Thriller From John Grisham.
374 pp. Doubleday. $28.95.
The email was from Dickie Scruggs, one of America’s most famous and richest trial lawyers. In 2007, as a reporter at The Wall Street Journal, I had written Scruggs’s obituary, or at least his professional one, after he was charged with trying to pay a Mississippi judge a $40,000 bribe. I traveled to Oxford, Miss., where I interviewed Scruggs in his stately offices overlooking the town’s picturesque courthouse square. Even under indictment, he had oozed country-lawyer charm.
There’s nothing boneheaded or unsophisticated about the judicial bribery scam at the heart of Grisham’s riveting new novel. Set in the Florida panhandle, “The Whistler” centers on an elaborate conspiracy involving an Indian reservation, an organized crime syndicate and a crooked judge skimming a small fortune from the tribal casino’s monthly haul.
Grisham’s heroine is Lacy Stoltz, an investigator for Florida’s judicial conduct board whose most interesting case, after nine years on the job, has been ousting a lecherous judge who preyed on women with divorces on his docket. But Stoltz’s career receives a jolt when a shady mole, looking to collect millions as a whistle-blower, tips her off to the conspiracy.
The judge is also a woman — Claudia McDover, a former small-town lawyer with a fondness for Chanel handbags, Picasso lithographs and private planes. Suspiciously, these expensive tastes emerged only after she’d overseen the land-use litigation that eased the construction of the tribal casino. She also presided over the murder trial of a Native American opposed to gambling on the reservation. Now on death row, he insists he was framed.
Grisham fans looking for courtroom drama might be disappointed by “The Whistler,” since McDover’s questionable cases are glossed over. The book feels more like the first half of an episode of “Law & Order,” with much of the story focused on Stoltz and her crime-fighting squad as they snoop around gated communities and golf courses, chasing a basket of Florida deplorables who would make Carl Hiaasen proud.
