Pro Basketball|He Works Day and Night for the Nets. And the Other Nets.
He Works Day and Night for the Nets. And the Other Nets.
It’s good to be 21 years old: no aches, no existential crises. After scoring 22 points in nearly 35 minutes of playing time on Tuesday afternoon for the Long Island Nets of the N.B.A. Development League, Chris McCullough stretched his muscles on a foam roll, iced his knees, soaked in a hot tub, ate a snack and took a nap. McCullough then changed locker rooms and uniforms inside Barclays Center in order to be ready for a game with the Brooklyn Nets at 7:30 that evening.
“We run the same offense, the same defense, in the same building, so it’s practically the same feeling,” he said after he had been brought up from the D-League yet again by the Brooklyn Nets.
This is the split existence that currently defines McCullough’s professional career, and it is no longer all that unusual. As of Wednesday afternoon, when the Nets again reassigned McCullough, and Yogi Ferrell, to the Long Island club, 45 N.B.A. players had been assigned on 103 occasions this season to stints in the D-League.
In Tuesday afternoon’s game, McCullough and his fellow Brooklyn Nets roster player Anthony Bennett, who each receive more than $1 million in salary, played alongside Long Island teammates earning the D-League’s mandated salary levels of either $19,500 or $26,000. Together, McCullough and Bennett scored 17 of the team’s first 21 points against the Windy City Bulls.
Hours later, in the layup line with the Brooklyn Nets in warm-ups before a victory over the Los Angeles Clippers, McCullough and Bennett exchanged passes with Brook Lopez, who will be paid more than $21 million this season.
While players’ compensation is wildly disparate in both situations, McCullough insisted that there was no teasing, bullying or pecking order when he played for either squad. At the HSS Training Center, the home of both teams, he practices with both rosters — mostly with the Brooklyn group — and he reported no envy.
Playing minutes are simply playing minutes, and McCullough, a Bronx native, is in desperate need of them at any level. He nurtured his game at three private high schools and academies, only to sustain a season-ending knee injury as a freshman at Syracuse after 16 games. To the surprise of many, McCullough declared for the N.B.A. draft in 2015 and was selected as the 29th overall pick by the Nets. In his rookie season, 2015-16, he played in only 24 games and averaged 15 minutes.
McCullough said he had figured that when he turned pro, he would get some D-League time almost immediately, but his N.B.A. minutes could not be supplemented at any nearby D-League affiliate until the expansion Long Island Nets began play this fall. The farm team is expected to move into the renovated Nassau Coliseum next season but for now shares space with the parent franchise.
The logistics could not be more convenient for McCullough, who lives in the Crown Heights area of Brooklyn. He can spend the whole day and night in a single borough while playing in two leagues with two sets of teammates. It has been done before, though rarely. Historically, four players — Jordan Farmar, Cleanthony Early and Coby Karl in addition to McCullough — have participated in D-League and N.B.A. games on the same day. McCullough is the first since Karl, nine years ago, to have played on both ends of a doubleheader on more than one occasion.
The situation is also ideal for the Nets’ staff, for evaluation purposes.
Many N.B.A. teams are following this same model, partnering with D-League teams that play very near the top club’s arena. At present, there are 22 D-League teams, all affiliated with N.B.A. franchises — although players not under contract with the parent clubs are free agents who can sign anywhere. The goal is to increase the D-League to 30 teams, one for each N.B.A. franchise.
The Chicago Bulls, the Charlotte Hornets and the Los Angeles Lakers are among the teams that have D-League affiliates very close to home, within easy commuting distance. Recently, Marshall Plumlee, who was playing for the Westchester Knicks in White Plains, arrived only a bit late for a noon Knicks game when he was informed at 10 a.m. that he was needed.
Players who, like Bennett, have at least three years of N.B.A. experience have the right to refuse assignment to a D-League roster. They rarely do, for both political and competitive reasons. The free agents alongside them may lose a few minutes of playing time, but the trade-off is that everyone draws more organizational eyes.
The style of play in the D-League is only somewhat recognizable by N.B.A. standards. Fast breaks are the norm, not the exception. Fouls are more common, and less often whistled. Scores are typically higher — like the 120-116 victory Tuesday by Windy City over Long Island. This is Showtime, circa 2016.
McCullough goes with the flow on the court and said he was working on “finishing at the rim.” He is 6 feet 11 inches, but with a slight build, he sometimes appears more comfortable around the perimeter. On Tuesday, down the stretch, he often lost his man on defense and finished at minus-23 in the plus-minus column. McCullough has seriously silky moves for a big man, but the Nets are still trying to figure out his natural position.
Marks pointed to Sean Kilpatrick as an example of a player who grew tremendously from his experience in the D-League. Kilpatrick, coincidentally, played the game of his career Tuesday night, scoring 38 points against the Clippers in a double-overtime win. As recently as last season, Kilpatrick was playing for the Delaware 87ers in the D-League.
McCullough is placed on the Brooklyn Nets’ inactive list several times per week so he can play for Long Island and is then often reactivated the same day. He sat on the bench for the Clippers game but played for the Brooklyn Nets on Nov. 23 and Nov. 27 after Long Island games.
Same floor, two different teams. McCullough seems fine with it.