WASHINGTON — Hillary Clinton held back tears on Wednesday as she asked her supporters not to lose heart after a crushing election loss and to continue working for a better country.
But she came bearing a message of resolve.
Mrs. Clinton has stayed out of the public eye since the day after the election, but in a private call with donors over the weekend, she cast blame for her loss on the announcement by James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director, that he was reviving the inquiry into her use of a private email server as secretary of state. She said that decision, by thrusting the email controversy back into the news 11 days before Election Day, had halted her momentum in the crucial closing days of the race and prevented her from ending her campaign with an optimistic argument to voters.
A second letter from Mr. Comey, clearing her two days before the election, compounded the harm to her chances, Mrs. Clinton told the donors, feeding into a narrative that the contest was “rigged” and causing wavering voters, including white suburban women, to abandon her.
On Wednesday, though, there was no talk of opportunities missed or messages muddled. Instead, Mrs. Clinton was regretful and the slightest bit defiant. She said she wished she could go back in time and tell her mother, abandoned at a young age, not to despair.
“Look at me and listen,” Mrs. Clinton said she would have told her mother, her voice thick with emotion. “You will survive. You will have a family of your own, three children, and as hard as it might be to imagine, your daughter will grow up to be a United States senator, represent our country as secretary of state and win more than 62 million votes” in her campaign for the presidency.
Democrats, stunned and dejected over last week’s electoral losses, are struggling to rebuild their party, re-energize supporters and determine what lessons to draw from their defeat.
President Obama told supporters in a call on Monday afternoon that he expected to be a part of that debate starting in January, when he leaves office. But it is not clear what role, if any, Mrs. Clinton plans to play.
The event on Wednesday, a “Beat the Odds” gala honoring at-risk children who have found success, was in some sense a capstone to Mrs. Clinton’s life in national politics. The same event in 1992 was the first public appearance she and her husband, Bill Clinton, made after he won the presidency.