Hillary Clinton with Gabrielle Green, 11, who sang during a service at Mount Airy Church of God in Christ in Philadelphia on Sunday.
For Donald J. Trump, Sunday was about seeking a path to the presidency not blocked by Latino, black and Asian voters. He went to the Upper Midwest, into long-shot states like Minnesota that have not voted Republican for president in a generation.
The final polls are trickling in and Clinton is retaining a modest lead nationally.
According to a new NBC News/Wall Street Journal national poll, 44 percent of likely voters support Mrs. Clinton and 40 percent back Mr. Trump.
Mrs. Clinton holds big leads with women and minority voters, while men, white voters and senior citizens buttress Mr. Trump’s support.
Mrs. Clinton is also doing better with those who have already cast their ballots, but Mr. Trump holds a lead among voters who plan to do so on Election Day.
Newt Gingrich laments the self-inflicted damage Trump has done to his campaign.
Mr. Gingrich, a staunch ally of Mr. Trump and a finalist to be his running mate, said on NBC’s “Meet the Press” that the Republican nominee would be doing much better if he had shown more discipline.
“I think he has hurt his campaign at times by saying things that were unwise, and I think at times he’s been truly a historic figure,” Mr. Gingrich said.
Mr. Gingrich, a former Republican House speaker, praised Mr. Trump’s big ideas and outreach to African-Americans. However, he suggested that Mr. Trump has often caused distractions from an otherwise strong message.
Talk of rigging the vote rises again.
The chairman of the Nevada Republican Party, Michael McDonald, complained on Saturday night that some polls were being kept open longer than they should have been in Clark County so that “a certain group” could vote.
On Sunday morning, Kellyanne Conway, Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, echoed that concern in an interview with CNN in which she suggested that “special favors” were being done for Democratic voters.
Mr. Trump has for months complained of a rigged system and has said that if he loses the election and there are reports of problems at the polls he might challenge the result.
PolitiFact gave Trump a “Pants on Fire” grade over his claim that Obama abused a Trump supporter.
In the final weekend of the race, Mr. Trump has been clinging to a new myth about President Obama and deriding him for lashing out at a pro-Trump protester at a rally on Friday.
“If I spoke the way Obama spoke to that protester they would say 'he became unhinged,’” Mr. Trump declared.
On Sunday, Politifact, the fact-checking website, analyzed the tape of Mr. Obama at the rally to determine whether Mr. Trump’s criticism was fair.
Mr. Obama expressed exasperation on Sunday at Mr. Trump’s willingness to deceive his supporters so blatantly about the situation.
In the final push, Clinton looked to Khan and LeBron.
Mrs. Clinton has campaigned with a powerhouse lineup of supporters over the past week, and two people joined her on Sunday are among the most potent. In Ohio, she appeared alongside LeBron James, the Cleveland Cavaliers star and a revered figure in the biggest swing state leaning toward Mr. Trump.
In New Hampshire, Mrs. Clinton was joined by an electrifying figure of a different kind: Khizr Khan, whose August clash with Mr. Trump proved disastrous for the Republican nominee. On Sunday, he discussed supportive stories people have shared with him and his wife, Ghazala Khan, after Mr. Trump attacked them following his conventionremarks.