As a child, I thought the Grimm fairy tales were written, whole cloth, by a bunch of creepy brothers with dark imaginations. It seemed likely that they lived deep in a forest, and more than likely that they had long, untidy beards. They were probably hoarders, and what they hoarded was probably bones. With a name like Grimm, and stories like that, what else could you expect?
But I was confusing the Grimms with the tales. Untidy beards? Far from it: In contemporary portraits, these men were clean shaven, with the loose, wavy hair of the Romantic era they embodied. Highly educated (though poor), Jacob and his younger brother Wilhelm had a mission: to define Germany — then fractured into principalities and under Napoleon’s odious rule — to itself. They accomplished this by compiling a German dictionary and collecting a trove of oral-tradition fairy and folk tales, gathered with the help of family friends, many of them young women. (Wilhelm later married one of his story gatherers, the charmingly named Dorothea Wild.) These brothers weren’t hoarders — they were heroes.
Because the Grimms wanted to celebrate German culture, they made changes — over the course of seven editions — to weed out foreign influences and reflect their own moral values. The tales have never ceased evolving, interpreted again and again by writers and artists who saw something — perhaps worrisome, perhaps delightful — that they wanted to explore. Two new books, “The Singing Bones,” by the Australian author and illustrator Shaun Tan (“The Arrival,” “Rules of Summer”), and “Snow White,” by the American graphic novelist Matt Phelan (“Bluffton,” “The Storm in the Barn”), take unexpected approaches to the tales and come up with something new for readers past the age for picture books.
Much of what we know about the Grimms comes from the work of the fairy tale scholar and translator Jack Zipes. In an introduction to “The Singing Bones,” Zipes writes that if it if hadn’t been for illustrations, the tales would never have become popular. When the Grimms first published them without pictures in 1812, sales were sluggish; it was only when they saw a successful English translation with drawings by the satirist George Cruikshank that they realized illustrations would allow them to reach a wider readership.
“The Singing Bones” is recommended for children ages 12 and up, and some children and teenagers, no longer charmed by beautiful picture books, will be intrigued by Tan’s suggestive, shadowy forms. His sculptures can be funny: Rumpelstiltskin looks like a red Mayan sun, dancing sideways with his long tongue pointing in one direction and his long nose in another. They can also be frightening. In “The Boy Who Left Home to Find Out About Fear,” a figure sits reading, oblivious to a row of hanged bodies next to him. In “The Old Man and His Grandson,” a child peers into a monster’s gaping maw, from which huge hands and crooked teeth protrude.
Though terror is a crucial component of fairy tales, Tan’s tableaus are presented in isolation, not within a story structured to come around to a happy ending. Perhaps children who are drawn to the images will be interested enough to seek out the complete stories in some other volume. But the readers who will get the most from “The Singing Bones” are Grimm specialists — like Zipes and Gaiman — who’ve read even the more obscure stories and can focus on Tan’s artistry.
Matt Phelan sets his graphic retelling of “Snow White” in 1920s New York, with both its Ziegfeld Follies glamour and its impoverished Dead End Kids. Arranging the story in wide horizontal panels, Phelan sets aside the pastel colors of his earlier graphic novels and, using what appears to be pencil and ink, adapts his palette to the Grimms’ description of his heroine, “who was as white as snow, as red as blood,” with “hair as black as ebony.” This gives it the look of a black-and-white movie, a genre Phelan loves: “Bluffton” was, in part, about the young Buster Keaton.
Though Phelan does incorporate some dialogue, he has a cinematographer’s gift for telling emotional stories without words. While I admire that skill, it’s hard not to miss the incantatory language of the Grimms’ “Snow White” — one of the best written of the tales — especially when it comes to the stepmother’s conversations with her mirror. It’s fun for children to recite the repeated rhymes of “Mirror, mirror, on the wall. . . .” Here, she gets her information from a ticker tape, which spits out disjointed, monosyllabic messages in between stock prices.
But rather than hoping that every new version of the Grimm tales will contain all that is valuable in the originals, perhaps it’s wise to remember that they were told and retold by the hearth in centuries past because they offered something for everyone gathered there, of varied ages and experience. Bruno Bettelheim called the tales a “magic mirror,” capable of reflecting a range of deep fears and desires: for gingerbread and poison, kisses and cruelty, death and “happily ever after.” Each reader discovers a different story, and each new interpreter borrows what inspires him and leaves the rest for the next to fall under their spell.