Dismissed early on by critics, the first lady has evolved into a powerful presence on the campaign trail.
WASHINGTON — The emails to Michelle Obama began flooding in minutes after she spoke out at an October rally in New Hampshire, her voice shaking, about Donald J. Trump’s treatment of women. Sexual assault victims recounted their trauma, fathers poured out anxieties about unhealthy influences on their sons, and a distraught parent agonized over how to explain rape to a 10-year-old.
The next morning in the East Wing, a first lady who had spent years in the White House staying away from politics sorted through a thick sheaf of printed messages — a selection of the 600 she had already received, an amount that would triple by the end of the day — and realized there was an unlikely finale for her.
Mrs. Obama had become the breakout voice of Campaign 2016.
Dismissed early on by critics as an angry black woman unsuited for the tradition-bound role of first lady, she has emerged this fall as Hillary Clinton’s most popular surrogate, with soaring approval ratings that cut across party lines. Reluctant at first to engage in partisan politics, and conflicted when her husband decided to seek the presidency, Mrs. Obama has, almost in spite of herself, evolved into a powerful presence on the campaign trail.
“She has ended up to be the most effective and reassuring antidote to Trump that we have, and the best at making that contrast,” said Jennifer Palmieri, Mrs. Clinton’s communications director.
Mrs. Obama, 52, is no stranger to speaking her mind. A Princeton- and Harvard-educated lawyer who was forced to give up her career as a hospital executive with a $250,000-plus salary when Mr. Obama won the presidency, she nevertheless set about conforming to the traditional job of first lady. As the first black woman in the role, she was well aware from the start that there would be little margin for error.
She declared herself the “mom in chief.” She took on unassailable causes like healthy eating, exercise and military families. Despite the couture she wore to state dinners and the glamorous White House parties she threw with guests like Beyoncé, Mrs. Obama cultivated an unpretentious image by dispensing hugs rather than handshakes and kicking off her shoes to dance with local children on official trips abroad.
Inside the White House, the image is different: Mrs. Obama has come to be adored but feared in the East Wing as a tough and exacting boss who has little patience for mistakes, improvisation and wasted time. But her discipline and intensity have paid off in her success as first lady, staff members say.
The discipline extends to her daughters, who have been required to play a sport of their mother’s choosing in addition to one of their own and are barred from television or computer entertainment on school nights. Mrs. Obama has worked only two to three days a week to allow her to spend time with them and only participates in activities she regards as “value added.” She rarely grants an interview unless she thinks there is a compelling reason, such as a link to one of her initiatives. She declined to be interviewed for this article.
“We should do things that matter to us and matter to the country, but we don’t have to do everything,” Mrs. Obama told her staff shortly after her husband’s election.
That rarely included campaign politics. Until now.
When in 2003, State Senator Barack Obama of Illinois announced his campaign for the United States Senate at a news conference in a Chicago hotel, Mrs. Obama did not attend. When he weighed a run for the White House four years later, she resisted. Once she finally gave her consent, she was parsimonious in her time on the campaign trail.
Her daughters, Malia, 17, and Sasha, 15, who were in elementary school when their father won the White House, were only part of the reason.
“Michelle once explained to me, ‘I try to organize my life not to have a lot of mess around, and politics is just a big mess,’” Mr. Obama said last month on Jimmy Kimmel’s late-night comedy show.
But this election, aides say, forced a decision by Mrs. Obama to wade into the muck. In September, while Mr. Trump was in a fight with a former Miss Universe he called “Miss Piggy” and an “eating machine,” Mrs. Obama sat down with her staff and began writing a campaign speech focused on Mr. Trump’s treatment of women.
As Mrs. Obama was putting the finishing touches on the speech, an 11-year-old tape surfaced in which Mr. Trump boasted of grabbing women by their genitals without consent.

“Don’t embarrass me, y’all,” she told voters in Charlotte, N.C., in early October, warning them that she demands the statistics after each campaign stop on how many people registered to vote or signed up to volunteer.
Still, Mrs. Obama knows all too well the darker side of putting herself out in the political arena.
Conservatives who had been pushing racially tinged criticism of Mr. Obama, suggesting that he had been born in Kenya and portraying him as a radical liberal, turned their fire on his wife. A worried Mrs. Obama, who was furious about the racist rumors of her husband, told aides that she might be hurting her husband’s chances, and wondered whether she had been wrong to swallow her misgivings and plunge into the campaign.
Mrs. Obama was livid when a New Yorker magazine cover cartoon in July 2008 pictured her wearing fatigues, combat boots and an Afro and toting a machine gun, fist-bumping with her husband, who was dressed in Middle Eastern garb and a head scarf. The couple was in the Oval Office, where an American flag burned in the fire place.
“Before she was well known on the national and international stage, she was caricatured by a few, and that was quite hurtful to her,” said Valerie Jarrett, a longtime confidant of the Obamas who serves as the president’s senior adviser.
The campaign hired Stephanie Cutter, an operative adept at handling political crises, to advise Mrs. Obama on her stump speech, her campaign itinerary and her media appearances.
The change was soon apparent. Mrs. Obama appeared on “The View” and talked about serving her daughters bacon for breakfast and hating to wear pantyhose. She gave an interview to Ladies’ Home Journal about her views on marriage and motherhood. She delivered a speech at the Democratic convention in Denver, where she talked of her working-class roots and called her husband “a great American story,” and — in a subtle attempt to answer her critics — spoke repeatedly of her pride in and love for America.
Her poll numbers shot up more than 10 points, above 50 percent, and by Inauguration Day, they were at 68 percent, according to Gallup’s daily tracking. They have not dipped below 60 percent since.
The fact is, Mrs. Obama has built a comfortable life there. Although family dinner in the residence is seen as sacrosanct, she has often been spotted making low-key escapes with a clique of female friends to the private back room of BLT Steak, an upscale eatery two blocks from the White House, or for martinis and Mediterranean tapas at the restaurant Zaytinya.
She has prowled the sidelines of Sasha’s soccer games, stayed up until the small hours at White House celebrity bashes and ventured to SoulCycle for private lessons with friends and young female aides, sweating in the dark with Secret Service agents on hand to protect her.
Over their time in the White House, Barack and Michelle Obama have adopted their own memes to explain each other to the public, each with a serrated edge that has the ring of truth.
Hers is about a husband who is brilliant but takes himself too seriously and frequently needs an ego-shattering reality check. On “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert” in September, Mrs. Obama lowered her voice several octaves to impersonate the president lecturing his daughters on global warming at the dinner table. In 2007, she told Glamour magazine that her husband was “snore-y and stinky” when he awoke in the morning.
Cindi Leive, the editor in chief of Glamour who has worked with the first lady on the “Let Girls Learn” education initiative, recalled editing that first interview and thinking she wanted to know her better.
Christine Matthews, a Republican pollster who has specialized in studying gender, said Mrs. Obama, by confining herself to popular initiatives as first lady, has built a reservoir of trust and popularity that puts her on the level of a Barbara Bush or Laura Bush, rather than Nancy Reagan or Mrs. Clinton, who were seen as more divisive.
But as voters greet Mrs. Obama rapturously at campaign events this fall and eagerly chant her slogan, “When they go low, we go high,” speculation has started that she may one day seek office herself. Those close to her regard the prospect as absurd.
One other thing is certain: Republicans, who thought nothing of attacking Mrs. Obama in 2008, now shy away from doing so, a testament to her popularity and appeal.
