Donald J. Trump and his supporters hope to overcome sweeping demographic shifts by rallying the support of “missing white voters” — disaffected, conservative populists who sat out the 2012 presidential election.
Millions of these voters could be activated, the theory goes — enough to overcome the demographic changes that favor Hillary Clinton.
Mr. Trump may yet win this election. But if he does, it probably won’t be because of a huge influx of Republican-leaning “missing” voters.
There has been no surge in registration among white voters since 2012, and the white voters who have joined the electorate are younger and likelier to support Mrs. Clinton than those who were already registered.
Perhaps most surprising, the missing white voters who skipped the 2012 election have turned out to be far less supportive of Mr. Trump than those who voted in 2012.
The possibility that the missing white voters were conservative populists, primed to support a candidate like Mr. Trump, was never supported by much evidence. But it was used to justify a strategy that eschewed gains among nonwhite and moderate voters in favor of larger margins with conservative white voters.
This year, Mr. Trump’s gains among missing white voters aren’t likely to be even enough to overcome four years of demographic shifts, let alone form the basis of a lasting political coalition.
These findings are based on an Upshot analysis of voter registration data nationwide, as well as Upshot/Siena College polls of North Carolina, Florida and Pennsylvania.
These polls were linked to voter registration and vote history data: We can tell which respondents voted in 2012, or whether they were registered.
Altogether, the polls include nearly 1,500 respondents who didn’t vote in 2012: 860 voters who have registered since 2012, and 617 “missing” voters who were registered but did not vote. Those subsamples were weighted for party registration, state, age, gender and race.
According to these data, it’s Mrs. Clinton — not Mr. Trump — who stands to gain from a surge of new voters.
Mrs. Clinton has a considerable lead over Mr. Trump among newly registered voters in Pennsylvania, Florida and North Carolina combined, 47 percent to 31 percent.
Her edge among newly registered voters has often been lost in analysis of voter registration trends that focus on changes in party registration since 2012. Newly registered voters increasingly avoid affiliating with a major party, so they don’t have a big effect on voter registration tallies: In the three states we analyzed, Democrats have a modest advantage among voters who registered since 2012, 34 percent to 28 percent, according to data from L2, a nonpartisan voter file vendor.
But the newly registered voters nonetheless solidly lean toward Mrs. Clinton, based on our polling data and voter records. They’re disproportionately young and nonwhite.
Newly registered voters who aren’t affiliated with a major party lean to Mrs. Clinton over Mr. Trump by 42 percent to 21 percent; Gary Johnson runs a close third, with 20 percent. They may not improve the Democratic registration edge in these states, but they could contribute to Mrs. Clinton’s margin on Election Day.
Mrs. Clinton also enjoys a significant edge in party unity among newly registered voters. She leads among registered Democrats by 86 percent to 5 percent, while Mr. Trump has a lead of just 74 percent to 8 percent among newly registered Republicans. Mr. Johnson, the Libertarian candidate, has the support of 15 percent of registered Republicans.
Mr. Trump even struggles among the newly registered voters who are white: He leads by just 40 percent to 34 percent.
Mrs. Clinton’s lead among newly registered voters isn’t simply about an influx of voters who were previously ineligible, either. She leads among every age group of new voters, giving her a similar margin of 45 to 33 among newly registered voters who weren’t eligible in 2012.
A story line of the 2012 presidential election was that one of Mitt Romney’s big problems was missing white voters. Many conservatives argued that these voters could form the core of a successful electoral strategy.
But as The Upshot reported in July, it is not clear that these missing white voters are natural targets for Republicans. They were disproportionately registered Democrats and young. In Florida, Pennsylvania and North Carolina, they’re equally likely to be registered as Democrats or Republicans, even though Republicans have a considerable registration edge among white voters over all.
The Upshot’s Senate election forecast for 2016, updated daily with the latest polls.
Our polling data suggests that the missing whites aren’t exactly conservative populists who support Mr. Trump. They’re just dissatisfied: They don’t like their candidate, and they don’t like the other party’s candidate much either.
The registered white missing Democrats, for instance, support Mrs. Clinton by only 61 percent to 19 percent. The missing registered white Republicans support Mr. Trump by only 69 to 13.
The missing unaffiliated white voters are particularly dissatisfied: Mr. Trump leads by just 35 to 24. Mr. Johnson runs a strong third, with 18 percent.
Over all, Mr. Trump led among missing white voters, 43 to 31, a far smaller margin than his lead among the white voters who turned out in 2012.
The missing white voters might not be an especially promising group for Mr. Trump, but he does seem to be doing a better job of motivating them to vote than Mrs. Clinton. He has a larger lead, 50 to 32, among those who have already voted or say they’re “almost certain” to do so.
Those missing white voters will help Mr. Trump a little, but not by enough to counteract an often-overlooked group: the “missing” nonwhite voters. There are more missing nonwhite voters than white voters, according to voter file data. And they’re just as likely as the missing white voters to say they’ll vote.
Mrs. Clinton has a lead of 61 to 20 among the missing nonwhite voters who say they’re “almost certain” to vote or have already done so. It’s enough to give her a lead of 43 percent to 38 percent among the missing voters who say they’re almost certain to rejoin the electorate.
If Mrs. Clinton could add these “missing” and newly registered voters to the Obama coalition, she would be poised for a decisive victory.
But so far, she isn’t doing so.
She is struggling to reassemble President Obama’s strength among white working-class voters across the northern United States, in states like Iowa, Ohio and even Maine. She’s not quite matching Mr. Obama’s support among black voters, either, and early voting data indicates that she’s also unlikely to match African-American turnout.
In our surveys, Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump are roughly tied in Florida, North Carolina and Pennsylvania among voters who cast ballots in the 2012 election — even though Mr. Obama was plus-1.5 points in an average of the three states in 2012.
Mrs. Clinton leads by more than that because of voters, and especially Hispanic voters, who are poised to enter the electorate. Just how many show up could easily decide her chances.