Opera does not give its singers many chances to grow up. Unlike stage or film actresses, star sopranos don’t necessarily move from playing girls, to women, to mothers, to grandmothers over the course of a career — and certainly not within a single work.
Which makes it remarkable that the Finnish diva Karita Mattila has been a resounding success in her return to the Metropolitan Opera this fall, after a four-year absence, in a revival of Janacek’s powerful “Jenufa.” (The run ends on Thursday.) After years of acclaimed performances of the title role — a heedless young Moravian villager — Ms. Mattila, 56, is now playing Jenufa’s stepmother, the guilt-ridden Kostelnicka, who murders Jenufa’s illegitimate child to save the family from disgrace.
Ms. Mattila appeared to acclaim at the Met in 2012 as the almost literally ageless opera star Emilia Marty in Janacek’s “The Makropulos Case.” But when she failed to appear over the past few seasons, rumors circulated that her career at the company might be over. She and Peter Gelb, the Met’s general manager, now ascribe the gap to scheduling conflicts, as well as the inevitable transition in roles as a singer enters middle age.
The soprano performs an aria from Act II of Janacek’s opera, at the Met through Nov. 17.
The decision to take on the Kostelnicka, whose suffering is so richly depicted (by her and by Janacek) that she is never reducible to a mere villain, has paid off handsomely for both the company and Ms. Mattila, who has been receiving roaring responses at her curtain calls.
Since her Met debut in “Don Giovanni” in 1990, Ms. Mattila has been one of the company’s most treasured artists, beloved over nearly 150 performances for a penetrating voice that seems almost to tremble with emotion and a visceral, volatile stage presence. She had special coups in Wagner’s “Lohengrin” (1998), Beethoven’s “Fidelio” (2000) and, perhaps most notably, as a sensationally sensual Salome in 2004.
For an audience that saw her not quite a decade ago as the youthful Jenufa, the physical transformation is startling when Ms. Mattila enters as the Kostelnicka, her face lined with care, her movements heavy. She imperiously stuffs a dropped handkerchief back into her sleeve, a woman clearly used to being obeyed, to things going her way.
He revealed one: Ms. Mattila will sing Madame de Croissy, the prioress of an order of nuns during the French Revolution, in Poulenc’s “Dialogues des Carmélites.” Ms. Mattila said she was eager to add Ortrud in “Lohengrin” to her repertory, after having huge success earlier in her career playing that opera’s heroine, Elsa.
It seems safe to assume that even the malevolent Ortrud would become, in Ms. Mattila’s hands, less a simple force of evil than a complex, very real woman — much like the tortured Kostelnicka, whom Jenufa forgives in a radiant final scene.
