To grasp the unpredictability of the art market, one need only look to this week of fall auctions.
Despite a tumultuous presidential election and the constant drumbeat of predictions about a softening art market, the sales at Sotheby’s, Christie’s and Phillips set highs for a range of artists, including Wassily Kandinsky, Willem de Kooning, Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, John Currin and Carmen Herrera, not to mention Monet, whose grainstack sold for $81.4 million.
At the same time, several lots had only one bidder, which made for less buoyancy over all. (The Sotheby’s contemporary sale Thursday night had yet to take place at press time.) And many say the shrunken supply of trophies at Christie’s and Sotheby’s represents an expected reining in of a runaway art market and is likely to last for a while.
Indeed, art experts agree that there were some great things for sale this week, namely de Kooning’s “Untitled XXV” (1977) which sold for $66.3 million with fees to an unidentified bidder, and Moholy-Nagy’s “EM 1 (Telephone Picture)” (1923), which sold for $6.1 million to the Museum of Modern Art.
Ann Temkin, MoMA’s chief curator of painting and sculpture, said she was thrilled to be able to acquire Moholy-Nagy’s piece, given that the museum already owns the other two from that series. “It’s completing a story that we had not been able to tell in full,” she said.
Are You Smarter Than a Billionaire?
Art auctions can be unpredictable. See how you match up in this interactive quiz.
At a time when auction houses have struggled to find good Impressionist and Modern material to fill their sales, both Sotheby’s and Christie’s managed to unearth a few masterpieces this season. But even though the Munch represented the second-highest auction price for the artist — selling for $54.5 million — Ms. Newman was unable to attract another bidder besides the guarantor.
While the auctions attracted new buyers — who was that guy at the back of the room who won Adrian Ghenie’s “Bridge” for $3.9 million at Christie’s? — it also made clear how important it is to know what you’re buying.
How else to understand why two de Koonings of the same size in the same sale at Christie’s on Tuesday sold for such disparate amounts: “Untitled VI” (1985) at $5.4 million and “Untitled XXV” (1977) for $66.3 million?
Mr. Stingel was inspired to create four of his own versions of those murals that had been painted by Ludwig Bemelmans, who was best known for his Madeline children’s books. The paintings are now installed at Larry Gagosian’s small gallery on Park Avenue at 75th Street.
Mr. Stingel has collected Bemelmans’ work for some time — he said his young daughter is particularly fond of it. But while he was attracted to Bemelmans’ depictions of animals and the seasons, he mainly wanted to summon the clubby atmosphere of the Carlyle.
