A good measure of a work of history is whether it changes the way we understand its subject. By that measure, David J. Silverman succeeds admirably in THUNDERSTICKS: Firearms and the Violent Transformation of Native America (Belknap/Harvard University, $29.95).
The surprising villains in Silverman’s study are the Dutch of New Amsterdam, who introduced firearms on a large scale to North America by selling them to the Iroquois of today’s New York State in exchange for beaver pelts. By doing so, they kicked off a North American arms race that rages to this day.
Using their newfound military advantage, the Iroquois conducted slaving raids as far west as the Mississippi River. The tribes they attacked were forced to face annihilation or acquire arms themselves. In Silverman’s sober, sprawling account, America is a nation built on slaves and guns — the slaves often Indians taken captive by other Indians in order to obtain the guns.
Yet Silverman, a professor of history at George Washington University, also notes that the tribes frequently held the upper hand over the colonists. For example, by 1776, the Comanches possessed so many firearms that they were trading some of them to the European settlers of Taos, N.M.
As the “gun frontier,” as Silverman calls it, moved westward across America, it destroyed entire populations, partly through slaving and violence, but also through the European diseases that ravaged Indian populations, especially as native peoples sought protection by building fortifications and other concentrated encampments. In just 45 years, he notes, the Indian population of the Southeast declined by two-thirds; the collapse in southern New England was even more catastrophic. This was key to their ultimate defeat: They lost not on the battlefield but demographically, swamped by Europeans.
Ancient history is also getting some helpful new looks. In PAX ROMANA: War, Peace and Conquest in the Roman World (Yale University, $32.50), Adrian Goldsworthy, the author of biographies of Julius Caesar and Augustus, among others, offers two cheers for imperialism, saluting the Romans for bringing peace and stability to the Mediterranean basin on a scale and duration not seen before or since.
Two lessons for today stand out in the book: First, it is hard to make and keep a peace. Second, the greatest threat to the Pax Romana came not from foreigners but from the internal power struggles of the Romans themselves. “Are we Rome?” Cullen Murphy asked in a book of that title several years ago. The answer here seems to be: No, we are not as good at running an empire.
Making a case for the Spartans is harder. Paul A. Rahe tackles the job in THE SPARTAN REGIME: Its Character, Origins, and Grand Strategy (Yale University, $38). He is persuasive in arguing that the Spartans, while exceedingly militaristic, also were extremely egalitarian, with a robust enjoyment of life. They sustained their success with what Rahe, a professor of history at Hillsdale College, calls the first known complex system of governmental checks and balances.
It is even more difficult to mount a defense for the actions of the crusaders. Malcolm Lambert, whose previous books include “Christians and Pagans,” does a workmanlike job of clearly summarizing a vast sweep of history in GOD’S ARMIES: Crusade and Jihad: Origins, History, Aftermath (Pegasus, $27.95). If you don’t know much about the Crusades or the Middle East, and are confused by all the characters, from Baldwin the Leper to Godfrey of Bouillon, plus a host of Raymonds and Reynauds, this book is a good place to start. Lambert’s core argument is that “crusade and jihad were twins and the one reacted on the other.” His sturdy prose and thinking falter only in his concluding chapter, when he strains to show that the Crusades had some beneficial results. Among these, he avers, was that Europe, “a once hemmed-in society, was given a prolonged geography lesson.” One suspects there are better ways to learn geography than sailing to a far region and making war on its people.
What new could there be to say about the afternoon of the third day of the fight of Gettysburg, the most scrutinized battle in American history? Plenty, if it is examined with a microscope, as Phillip Thomas Tucker does impressively in PICKETT’S CHARGE: A New Look at Gettysburg’s Final Attack (Skyhorse, $27.99).
But the book is most interesting for the bright nuggets of information Tucker presents as he unfolds the attack minute by minute, foot by foot. Three of the regimental commanders under Pickett had been roommates at the Virginia Military Institute, and all three died in the charge. (One of them was a granduncle of Gen. George S. Patton.) One of Lee’s division commanders, James J. Pettigrew, was a published author (“Notes on Spain and the Spaniards in the Summer of 1859”), fluent in Latin, Hebrew, Arabic and Greek. Brig. Gen. Richard Garnett rode into battle wearing a splendid gray uniform recently tailored for him in Richmond; he was mounted on Red Eye, which at a price of $675 was the second-most-expensive horse in Gen. James Longstreet’s corps. Gen. A. P. Hill performed badly at the battle in part because he was suffering from “a bad case of gonorrhea” acquired from a prostitute in New York City before the war. At the climax of the battle, the Union captain John Burton happened to comfort a dying Virginian officer of the same name, Lt. John T. Burton, who was shot through both cheeks.
The goat of the book is Longstreet, whom Tucker depicts as lethargic at best. Longstreet, he charges, “failed to properly organize and hurl forward a second wave of larger numbers of troops or adequate support — infantry or artillery — especially on the flanks.” Tucker’s surprising hero is the relatively unsung Gen. Henry Jackson Hunt, chief of Union artillery, who deployed his guns and ammunition with deadly effectiveness, especially in mowing down those unprotected flanks of Pickett’s Charge. One such enfiladed unit, the Ninth Virginia Regiment, lost 185 out of 200 men.
Tucker is occasionally repetitive, and his book sometimes reads like a play-by-play sportscast, as when he writes, “To the right (south) of Brockenbrough’s brigade, Davis’s brigade (especially on its left — on Brockenbrough’s right — on the north) also took a severe pounding from Osborn’s artillery fire from the northeast and Sawyer’s flank fire from the north.” But most of the time, the account is a mosaic of thousands of tiny pieces that, seen whole, amounts to a fascinating picture of what probably was the most important moment of the Civil War.
One particularly bothersome sentence in the book is this: “Peter Cozzens authored the standard history of Stones River for the past 20 years, and he also largely followed the lead established by McWhiney and Connelly.” This seems the worst sort of history. First, it isn’t well written. (I doubt the prolific Cozzens actually has devoted the last two decades to “authoring” that one book.) Worse, it reveals the actual narrative of this book: It isn’t so much about Bragg as it is about academic studies of him. Reading the book feels like listening to five people carry on a trivial, unresolvable argument they have been having for years.
Our two most overstudied conflicts are the Civil War and World War II. It seems as if every episode or personality of those wars has been written up once, twice, even thrice. This may be why we now have triple titles appearing, as in Lloyd Clark’s BLITZKRIEG: Myth, Reality, and Hitler’s Lightning War — France, 1940 (Atlantic Monthly, $27). Picking up such a book, one wonders once more what new there is to say.
Yet again and again, as with Tucker’s account of Pickett’s Charge, historians are able to offer new facts, different perspectives and novel ways of telling their stories that make these volumes about aspects of World War II quite compelling. In “Blitzkrieg,” Clark, who is a senior academic in the department of war studies at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, provides a good battlefield view of a crucial phase of World War II, the German invasion of France in 1940, that Americans often neglect because it preceded by 18 months the United States’ entry into the war. More than earlier studies, like Alistair Horne’s “To Lose a Battle,” Clark focuses not on generals and premiers but on the voices and experiences of the soldiers involved.
In PEARL HARBOR: From Infamy to Greatness (Scribner, $32), Craig Nelson, the author of “Thomas Paine” and other books, also takes a granular approach. But he is less successful, perhaps because he has no particular argument to make, so the small, precise details don’t seem to add up to much. For example: “At 0755, 41-year-old Navy machinist’s mate first class Norman Rapue was working aboard the YT-153, a 65-foot tugboat heading out into Pearl Harbor’s channel with a harbor pilot to man incoming cargo ship U.S.S. Antares.” In this sentence, the time is significant, but not the age of the sailor or the length of the vessel.
The Cold War and its many conflicts, by contrast, are relatively understudied. For example, a good overview of the operational level of the Vietnam War — that is, what happened militarily on a week-by-week basis — has not appeared for several decades, since Dave Richard Palmer’s “Summons of the Trumpet” in 1978.
Yet Carruthers has tackled a challenging subject, because military governance does not usually make fascinating reading. The soldiers themselves knew that their tales were not stirring. One American officer observed that being in Germany in May 1945 was “like remaining in a ballroom after the ball is over.” Carruthers, a professor of history at Rutgers University, Newark, also seems less familiar with the American military and its history than she should be to write such a study. She says that Gen. George C. Marshall was secretary of war in 1942, when of course he was Army chief of staff. She refers to enlisted soldiers as “subalterns,” which generally is used as the British term for junior officers.
In THE GENERAL VS. THE PRESIDENT: MacArthur and Truman at the Brink of Nuclear War (Doubleday, $30), H. W. Brands, who has written several books of American history, does a fine job of covering a major episode that deserves the thorough treatment it receives here. With the passage of time, it becomes clearer that Truman, an accidental president, showed great courage in facing down one of the most prominent military officers of the 20th century, who early in 1951 wanted to risk dragging the United States into a nuclear war against China. It is a good story, and Brands generally tells it well, except late in his tale when he relies too much on lengthy quotations from transcripts of congressional testimony.