Plans to build a Guggenheim museum in Helsinki were defeated on Wednesday night, when lawmakers in the Finnish city voted down a proposal to pay for the $138 million museum with a mixture of private and public money.
After more than five hours of debate, the 85-member City Council rejected the controversial plan, 53 to 32, meaning that the project to construct an art museum on the banks of the South Harbor of Helsinki will be abandoned, at least for now.
“The main objections to the project presented by Council members included the project’s excessive cost for the Finnish taxpayer; inadequate private funding; and the proposed site, which was considered too valuable for the project,” the Helsinki Council communications department said in a statement issued after the vote.
Plans for the museum hit a major roadblock in September, when one of Finland’s three governing parties, the populist Finns, vetoed a request to put forward $53 million for the project.
Supporters had developed a new financing strategy, with a plan for the city to pick up a major portion of the cost, with the rest to be paid by private fund-raising and a loan. That concept was narrowly approved by a Helsinki city board in November, before being rejected by the wider City Council.
The Helsinki museum would have been the fourth satellite museum of the New York Guggenheim in the world, with other locations in Venice; Bilbao, Spain; and another planned for Abu Dhabi.
Richard Armstrong, director of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum and Foundation in New York, said in a telephone interview on Tuesday that he had believed the museum could substantially raise the cultural profile of Helsinki and that, as in Bilbao, it would lift attendance at other cultural institutions.
After the vote, Mr. Armstrong said he was disappointed.
Mr. Armstrong said that he was surprised by the depth of the resistance and that he and the Guggenheim would now speak to the Finnish supporters of the project to see if there was any interest in pursuing it further.
“But I think it’s unlikely that there would be any further activity,” he said.
The Guggenheim Helsinki project has been the subject of intense scrutiny since plans were unveiled in 2011. Opposition has come from both the populist far right and members of the left and Social Democrats, for different reasons. All seemed to agree that public funding should not be spent on a private institution, especially when the government is enforcing austerity measures to help the economy rebound from an economic downturn.
Also voiced was a sense that the proposed museum represented an outside cultural influence, not a homegrown product of Finnish cultural sensibilities.
Support for the project had come from conservative and center parties, with significant interest from Finnish business groups, said Ari Lahti, an investment banker and chairman of the Guggenheim Helsinki Supporting Foundation.
The foundation had raised $36 million from private and corporate donors for the plan, Mr. Lahti said. Of that total, $16 million was to have gone toward building the museum and $20 million to pay the license fee to the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation in New York for use of the Guggenheim name and “access to the Guggenheim’s knowledge and expertise, collections, international network of museums and communications channels,” according to the New York museum.
The museum was to have been built according to a design by the Paris-based architectural firm Moreau Kusunoki, which had won an international design competition. Its horizontal campus of ascending linked pavilions, said Nicolas Moreau, a partner in the firm, “is based on a design concept of openness, flexibility,” allowing curators to configure exhibition space in a variety of ways.
Along with exhibitions of artworks on loan from the Guggenheim Museum in New York, the museum was to have included work by local artists.