The Upshot|How Did Donald Trump Win Over So Many Obama Voters?
How Did Donald Trump Win Over So Many Obama Voters?
Nate Cohn, The Upshot’s elections analyst, and Toni Monkovic, an Upshot editor, looked back at the election and posted a lightly edited transcript of their written exchange.
Toni With the perfect clarity of hindsight, Clinton team members could have written off Iowa, Ohio, Arizona, Georgia early — and focused most of their campaign resources on the Rust Belt. Who knew. Or maybe they should have known?
Nate I think there’s some truth to that, though I’d note that Arizona was only a four-point race and is now getting a little closer with the late vote.
I think the bigger issue is that Democrats have either assumed they didn’t need white working-class voters or took their support for granted.
What part of Hillary Clinton’s message was aimed at less educated white voters? It just wasn’t at the core of her appeal this year. It was nothing like 2012, when President Obama relentlessly focused on the middle class, Bain Capital, the auto bailout, etc.
Both Obama and Trump ran as change agents, against the establishment and corporate interests; that’s what you were trying to get at.
And this was definitely not an establishment-friendly year.
Nate Yeah, I think the comparison just doesn’t compute for ideologically consistent voters on a left-right scale. But that’s not how many voters think about elections. And Trump had the same pitch to white working-class voters in Iowa, Wisconsin, New Hampshire, Ohio, wherever, as Obama: He would fight for the working class over special interests, and his opponent is bought by Wall Street and would advance the forces of globalization.
Democrats have to grapple with the fact that they lost this election because millions of white working-class voters across the United States voted for Obama and then switched to Trump.
Toni The fact that they voted for Obama, you wrote, suggested that racism wasn’t the primary reason that so many of these voters chose Trump. But there’s a counterargument that Trump made an explicit appeal to racial/ethnic resentment (which John McCain and Mitt Romney did not). And white nationalism has been a rising force in recent years, not just in the United States.
Nate Well, I think I’d make two points. One is that racism might be the animating feature of Trump’s base, but may not be the way that he expanded his appeal to the voters who often support Democrats on economics.
The other thing I’d say is that I think it’s possible for racism to play a role, even for Obama voters: You could imagine, for instance, that these voters may have liked Obama but may have real reservations about demographic changes, or they may have perceived Trump as “on their side” in part because of racial appeals. I think, though, that making racism the core of the reason Trump won the election is probably oversimplifying things. As I said, I think Democrats have to grapple with the importance of the Obama-Trump voter, and I think that applies on race as well.
One other thing: Both Trump and Obama made white working-class voters feel a little better about racial anxiety.
They obviously did it in very different ways.
But I’d say that Obama made a lot of voters feel good, even proud, about supporting an African-American.
Trump made them feel O.K. about their “politically incorrect” reservations about diversity, crime and immigration.
Clinton did something very bold that I don’t think she got very much credit for: She challenged many white Americans to question implicit bias, and revived criminal justice as an issue. That may have been a bridge too far.
Toni The Clinton team essentially left Wisconsin alone, believing it was locked in as blue, and made campaign stops in Michigan only in the final days. Do we know what happened?
Nate My sense is that they thought the race got close in the Upper Midwest after the third debate and after the James Comey letter. They were weak among white working-class voters the whole time. They knew they were losing a lot of Obama voters — which is something they can check very easily with old polling data. But there was tightening at the end. They still thought they were ahead; I don’t think they had a vastly different picture than, say, The Upshot model or FiveThirtyEight’s.
But they really did know they could lose.
And I know we don’t get any credit for saying there’s a 15 percent chance, but we knew that was a real possibility.
Nate I do think that this election was close and that it hinged on something very extreme happening among white working-class voters. I can be convinced that something so extreme needed something like a Comey letter at the end. But I don’t think we’ll ever know.
Toni Jill Stein is not responsible for the Clinton defeat. People who are suggesting that are wrong, correct?
Nate Yeah, not on its own. Stein’s support did cover the Trump-Clinton margin in Michigan and Wisconsin, but I don’t think it’s reasonable to say Clinton would have gotten 100 percent of that vote. It wouldn’t have been enough anyway: Clinton still would have lost Pennsylvania.
There’s a chance that Gary Johnson/Stein combined could have done it, but I don’t know about that. I think the Johnson vote could easily be more of a Trump vote.
Toni You’ve tried to warn about the reliability of exit polls. But of course, readers and journalists are devouring the information and drawing conclusions, which is understandable. But explain why it’s important to hold off for a while on some verdicts.
Nate Well, the exit polls simply aren’t designed to measure the composition of the electorate and the attitudes of specific subgroups. There are a lot of reasons for that, which you can read more about in this piece. But in general, the exit polls portray the electorate as too young, too educated and too diverse. And that means that all of the estimates for each subgroup are distorted as well, since the exit polls have to add up to the right result. In other words, the exit polls usually have a “two wrongs make a right” approach to measuring the electorate, and that just doesn’t work for the sort of demographic and turnout analysis that people want to use them for. That requires a precision that they just can’t provide.
Toni What’s a specific instance in which you think the exit polls are sending the public and journalists in the wrong direction? What about the Hispanic vote, for example?
Nate I think the exit polls are probably off on education, age and the white vote. The exits say that the electorate was half college-educated (too high) and just 15 percent over age 65, and you just can’t reconcile those numbers with what we know about the country.
The exit polls are probably on to something about the Hispanic vote. I think it’s hard to defend that Clinton did as well among Hispanic voters as President Obama, when you look at the results in heavily Hispanic areas. She ran only somewhat ahead of Obama in Miami and Orlando-Kissimmee, despite a big surge in Hispanic turnout. She ran behind Obama in a lot of heavily Hispanic South Texas, New Mexico, Southern Colorado, and the most Hispanic suburban county around Denver.
I don’t know whether Clinton got 65 or 70 or 75 percent of the Hispanic vote, but I would bet that it’s less than whatever Obama received.
Toni That seems surprising, given Trump’s harsh approach toward Hispanic immigrants. Any theories?
Nate I don’t have a great answer. One possibility is that the Hispanic population is very young, and Clinton’s broader weakness with young voters relative to Obama hurt her here as well. Another is that the native-born Hispanic population might have been somewhat more receptive to Trump than Mitt Romney for some of the same populist reasons that white working-class voters broke his way.
Toni What about the exit polls’ indications on turnout?
Nate I think people need to wait for the final vote count and the individual voter file data before they start jumping to conclusions about turnout.
There are still millions of votes left to be counted in Washington, California and other states out West. The provisional ballots lean Democratic. In the end, the final vote count is going to exceed 2012 by a considerable amount.
I don’t think it will be fair to blame turnout for Clinton’s loss. Yes, I’m sure that it could have been better for her. It always can be. In particular, black turnout was plainly below 2012 levels. But she lost this election because millions of white voters without a college degree decided to vote for Trump. This was an electorate that she could have and should have won, based on pre-election polls and probably her team’s own data.
Toni It was probably unrealistic for anyone to expect that black turnout could match 2012, when President Obama was on the ballot.
Nate I tend to agree. We’ll see how low it was, though.
The early voting data suggested to me that black turnout was going to be about a point lower than 2012. That’s what the exit polls have, too. That’s well above 2004 levels. I don’t think it’s reasonable to expect black turnout to eclipse white turnout without Obama on the ticket.
Toni What’s one fact — about a county or a particular demographic — that really turned your head?
Nate Clinton swept all of the wealthy and white Protestant enclaves in Connecticut that always vote Republican. Clinton won Darien by 12 points — a 43-point improvement over 2012. She won New Canaan by 10 points, a 39-point gain.
Toni Wait, so this happened in Connecticut, but it didn’t happen in the suburbs of Philadelphia or Milwaukee, or in Michigan suburbs — where it would have mattered?
Nate Clinton made huge gains in the enclaves of the liberal elite, places like Boston, Seattle, Washington, D.C., where there’s a large professional class of lawyers or scientists or professors. But she just did not make similar gains in middle-class suburbs, like Long Island or around Tampa, Fla.
I think that people are broadly aware of the split between the white middle class and the professional class/wealthier suburbs. Say, the difference between Philadelphia’s Main Line and Levittown in Bucks County. Or between Westchester County and Staten Island. Or Oakland County/Bloomfield Hills, Mich., and Macomb County, Mich.
But this gap was a lot more salient in this presidential election than in a lot of recent contests.
It’s been trending this way for a while, but this was a pretty stark split. And that’s a big part of why Clinton’s gains among well-educated whites didn’t pay off as much in the battleground states, even as she ran up the score in coastal states like Washington State, California and Massachusetts.
In a way, I think we were limited a bit by the data here. We can break white voters in a national poll down by whether they have a college degree, but it’s harder to get at this gap without a lot more data. I think there were a lot of people — myself included — who expected Clinton to make larger gains in, say, the Philadelphia suburbs because we couldn’t see this distinction.
Toni About 125 miles north of Philadelphia is Scranton, a city that came up frequently in our chats earlier this year, as a symbol of the kind of place that Democrats were in danger of losing to Trump. In the end, it was all about Scranton, wasn’t it?
Nate Yeah, absolutely. Obama was great in Scranton and Wilkes-Barre; he won the two counties there by 27 and 5 points, respectively. Clinton won one by 3 and lost the other by 20 points. It was counties like these — where Obama was strong among white working-class voters — that decided this election.