In a studio at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on a recent afternoon, a few dancers stood around chatting, as if catching up before rehearsal. Yet the conversation, upon closer listening, sounded warped, like a script chopped up and scrambled. Gestures, words and facial expressions didn’t quite match up, tricking the mind into seeking a clear, coherent message that never arrived.
The choreographer Faye Driscoll interjected every so often, asking the performers to slow down or to gesticulate more sharply. Was this part of the rehearsal, or part of the piece itself? A spontaneous interaction or a calculated exposure of her process?
Ms. Driscoll, it turned out, was just giving notes for her latest production, “Thank You for Coming: Play,” in preparation for its New York premiere at BAM Fisher on Wednesday. But the ambiguity of that moment spoke to a certain capriciousness in her work, a sense that any preconceived contract between audience and performers could be rewritten at any moment, in any way.
“Play” is the second chapter of Ms. Driscoll’s “Thank You for Coming” trilogy, which explores that “third space” between spectators and performers. In the first part, “Attendance” (2014), the dancers engage the audience in ways from sustained eye contact to a communal maypole dance. In “Play,” she turns her attention to the social experience of creating, telling and making meaning through stories. The dancers, who also act and sing, are often called on to tell different stories, simultaneously, through the body, face and voice.
“She’s always trying to give herself — and us — impossible tasks,” said the dancer Sean Donovan.
Ms. Driscoll, a Los Angeles native, grew up being encouraged to pursue her dream of dancing professionally. (Her parents were both performers.) She attended the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University before joining the Doug Varone Dance Company. But she found herself questioning that path (“it felt choiceless in some ways”) and took time off.
She moved to the Bay Area and got a job at a movie theater. Within a few years, though, a residency at Brooklyn Arts Exchange drew her back to New York, where she quickly established herself on the contemporary-dance scene.
That might explain how, in the decade since she started making dances in earnest, Ms. Driscoll, 40, has received many of the most prestigious grants and honors available to New York choreographers. Her second major work, “837 Venice Boulevard,” won a 2009 Bessie Award. This year she received a coveted Doris Duke Award, which included more than $200,000 in unrestricted funds.
Ms. Driscoll is refreshingly frank in discussing how money influences artistic choices. She explained that “Thank You” came about after she received a Guggenheim fellowship and a Creative Capital grant the same year (2013).
Ms. Driscoll has also used her work to comment on that funding system. In 2012, she made a movement manifesto for the Prelude Festival — a “begging dance,” she calls it — that she performed along a stretch of Fifth Avenue in Midtown Manhattan.
The manifesto, titled “helppleasethankyou,” gave a literal shape to the position in which dance artists often find themselves: of begging not just for money but also for “a place in the world as an artist,” Ms. Driscoll said.
