It was a night in for Ms. Badu, 45, a singer who also assumes any of the following names or in some cases personas: She Ill, Badoula Oblongata, Sara Bellum, Manuela Maria Mexico, Annie the EL, Mary Magnum, Automatic Slim, Butchy Knife Betty, Analog Girl in a Digital World, Lowdown Loretta Brown.
When asked, she can rattle off all of these melodically, without missing a beat. “You will come to realize my sense of humor is morbid and dry,” she said, laughing. Before her first album, when she was about 24, Ms. Badu worked at Steve Harvey’s comedy club, starting as a waitress, making it to the writer’s room where she wrote a few jokes that he used.
“This is my typical night,” she said from a Midtown Manhattan hotel room that seemed meditation-ready with strawberry and sandalwood incense burning and “Feel Better, World! ... Love, Ms. Badu,” a mixtape that she uploaded to Mixcloud about a year ago, playing from her laptop.
She had hung nine hats of various colors and shapes in the bedroom, a signature of the singular style for which she is known.
Ms. Badu hosted the Soul Train Awards, which will be shown on BET this Sunday. She was executive producer and helped choose some of the show’s performers.
It has been 19 years since her debut album, “Baduizm,” received great acclaim and two Grammys, yet songs like “On and On” continue to resonate with a new audience. Her latest mixtape, “But You Caint Use My Phone,” a line taken from her 1997 song “Tyrone,” infuses Drake’s “Hotline Bling” into her soul sound, something she said her son suggested.
Around 11 p.m., Yasmin Amira Davis, a hairstylist who has also worked with Sean Paul and Janet Jackson, arrived to tend to Ms. Badu’s nearly floor-length braids, a process Ms. Badu does every two to four weeks to touch up pieces that have grown out. (The session, which Ms. Davis completed with an assistant, lasted until about 5 a.m.) “I wanted [the braids] to be as thin as the lines on your hand,” Ms. Badu said. Ms. Badu estimates that she has thousands of braids, each taking about 8 to 15 minutes to do by hand.
Ms. Badu first wanted to wear her hair in braids when she was 7 or 8 years old because she saw a drawing in a South Dallas shop of two women with very long braids that were wavy at the end. “I said, ‘I think that’s me, I feel that energy,’ ” she remembered. The shop was that of Isis Brantley, who nearly 30 years later still reguarly braids Ms. Badu’s hair.
