At a time when New York City can seem unbearably expensive, advocates for the poor are targeting a rising cost that many people struggle to afford: a MetroCard.
And with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority poised to approve its latest fare increase in January, they are pressing Mayor Bill de Blasio to finance a program that would offer half-price subway and bus fares to New Yorkers living in poverty.
One of the authority board’s newest members, David R. Jones, is challenging Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, to support the proposal as part of his re-election campaign. Mr. Jones, who was nominated to the board by the mayor, said Mr. de Blasio’s transportation priorities, from new ferry boats to a planned streetcar line, though fine ideas, did not address income inequality.
“This could have the most immediate impact to help the working poor right now rather than years in the future,” said Mr. Jones, the president of the Community Service Society of New York, an antipoverty nonprofit.
The de Blasio administration said it was examining the proposal, but city officials were reluctant to commit to paying for it without the help of the state and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who controls the authority. Given the tension between the mayor and Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, Mr. Jones said he hoped the city would act quickly to finance the program itself.
The local push to establish discounted fares for the poor is part of a broader national effort: The Seattle area embraced the idea of charging residents with low incomes less to ride public transportation last year; Boston is examining the concept; and transit systems in cities like Charlotte and Denver offer discount passes through nonprofit groups.
But the idea of offering income-based fares in New York would be the biggest experiment of its kind yet. The city’s subway and bus system is vast, with more than 7.5 million daily riders, and the plan would be expensive, especially at a time when the authority is financially strapped and struggling to cope with record ridership.
The Community Service Society of New York and Riders Alliance, an advocacy group for subway and bus riders, released a report this year calling for half-price MetroCards for New Yorkers with household incomes below the federal poverty level, about $24,000 for a family of four. If frequent riders applied for discounted fare cards at rates similar to those at which they seek public benefits like food stamps, the report found, about 360,000 people might participate at a cost to the authority of about $194 million a year in lost revenue.
In a letter to the mayor last month, supporters of the program urged Mr. de Blasio to include money for the program in his proposal for the next executive budget in January. The letter was signed by more than two dozen City Council members, as well as Letitia James, the public advocate, and Scott M. Stringer, the comptroller.
Next week, the authority is expected to release a proposal for a 4 percent increase on fares and tolls across the agency’s network of subways, buses, tunnels and bridges. The new base fare, which may rise to $3 from $2.75, is expected to take effect in March as part of regularly scheduled increases every two years.
But the current fares are already too expensive for many New Yorkers. Leslie Wells, a substitute teacher who lives in Harlem, often worries about finding enough change to pay the cost of a ride. After paying for housing and food, there is little left over. She said she certainly could not afford to spend $116.50, the current price of a monthly pass.
Ms. Wells said she had sometimes asked her son to duck under turnstiles to avoid paying his fare, even though she knew that doing so was against the rules.
The city’s transportation commissioner, Polly Trottenberg, said the city and the authority had discussed discounts for low-income riders, but that the expense of such a program should not be borne by the city alone because the authority is a state agency.
“I do think we’re ready to sit down with the M.T.A. and look at, potentially, are there creative revenue sources we can come up with here, if we all collectively agree that this is an important priority?” she said.
Ms. Trottenberg, who serves on the authority board, said the city also wanted to examine a potential expansion of the City Ticket program, which provides discounts to riders traveling on commuter railroads within New York City on weekends, and whether it was fair to be offering discounts only when riders put at least $5.50 on their MetroCards.
The authority has been a source of tension between Mr. de Blasio and Mr. Cuomo, who feuded last year over whether the city should pay more for the transit system’s long-term projects. A spokeswoman for the mayor, Freddi Goldstein, said the city already paid a hefty sum toward the authority’s operations and capital budget.
“This proposal will be evaluated as part of the fare-setting process for the M.T.A., as well as the state and city budgets,” Ms. Goldstein said in a statement about the idea of half-price fares.
A spokeswoman for the authority, Beth DeFalco, said the agency helped low-income riders in New York City by subsidizing fares for students and people 65 or older.
“The M.T.A. keeps fares as low as possible while providing safe, reliable service,” she said.
Though riders have been frustrated by regular fare increases, officials at the authority said its policy was better than those used by other systems, like New Jersey Transit, which has less predictable increases and imposed one of 9 percent last year. The authority has said it plans to stick to a 4 percent increase across its network every two years.
In the Seattle area, more than 35,600 people have enrolled in a discount fare program for low income riders that began in March 2015. Riders can qualify for what is known as an Orca Lift card if their household incomes are less than double the federal poverty level.
The program addresses inequality in the Seattle area, where residents who work for companies like Microsoft and Amazon can afford to pay full fare, but others with limited education cannot, said Dow Constantine, the King County executive and chairman of Sound Transit, a transportation agency that serves multiple counties in the region.
“The results we’re seeing are that people are actually using transit more frequently now that they have the Orca Lift card, and that is a good thing, because mobility translates to opportunity and productivity,” he said.
The costs of the Seattle-area program have been relatively small compared with the projected expense in New York City: $3.4 million for operating and capital costs to start offering discounts, and about $3.9 million in lost revenue in the first year, officials said.
When Jonathan Kumar moved to Seattle from Michigan recently, his rent nearly tripled. While trying to establish a start-up to help homeless people, he had little income and qualified for a discount card to ride the bus.
“The savings allow me to better afford rent, to better afford utilities and groceries,” he said.
Now that his start-up is doing well, Mr. Kumar said he would no longer need the discount.
“Now I’ll be able to better afford to pay a regular fare,” he said.