It was January. The place was Boston. And when 2.3 million gallons of molasses burst from a gigantic holding tank in the city’s North End, 21 people were killed and about 150 more were left injured. The wave of syrup — some reports said it was up to 40 feet tall — rushed through the waterfront, destroying buildings, overturning vehicles and pushing a firehouse off its foundation.
For nearly 100 years, no one really knew why the spill was so deadly.
But at a meeting of the American Physical Society this month, a team of scientists and students presented what may be an important piece of the century-old puzzle. They concluded that when a shipment of molasses newly arrived from the Caribbean met the cold winter air of Massachusetts, the conditions were ripe for a calamity to descend upon the city.
By studying the effects of cold weather on molasses, the researchers determined that the disaster was more fatal in the winter than it would have been during a warmer season. The syrup moved quickly enough to cover several blocks within seconds and thickened into a harder goo as it cooled, slowing down the wave but also hindering rescue efforts.
“It’s a ridiculous thing to imagine, a tsunami of molasses drowning the North End of Boston, but then you look at the pictures,” said Shmuel M. Rubinstein, a Harvard professor whose students investigated the disaster.
When the molasses arrived in Boston’s harbor, it was heated by just a few degrees. The warmer temperature made it less viscous and therefore easier to transport to a storage tank near the waterfront.
Harvard students performed experiments about how molasses would behave in cold temperatures to understand the deadly 1919 molasses spill in Boston.
The students performed experiments in a walk-in refrigerator to model how corn syrup, standing in for the molasses, would behave in cold temperatures. With that data in hand, they applied the results to a full-scale flood, projecting it over a map of the North End. Their results, Ms. Sharp said, generally matched the accounts from the time.
“At the time people thought there must have been an explosion in the tank, initially, to cause the molasses to move that fast,” she added. But after the team ran the experiments, she said, it discovered that the molasses could, indeed, move at that speed.
If the tank had burst in warmer weather, it would have “flowed farther, but also thinner,” Mr. Rubinstein said.
In the winter, however, after the initial burst — which lasted between 30 seconds and a few minutes, Ms. Sharp said — the cooler temperature of the outside air raised the viscosity of the molasses, essentially trapping people who had not been able to escape the wave.
About half the people who were killed “died basically because they were stuck,” Mr. Rubinstein said.
A firefighter who survived the initial wave managed to stay alive for nearly two hours while he waited to be rescued, they said, but he drowned.
The exact cause of the tank’s failure has never been known. Last year, a team of engineers using modern methods to analyze the century-old disaster blamed poorly designed steel tanks.
Ronald Mayville, a structural engineer who worked on that study, told The Boston Globe that the tank’s walls were at least 50 percent too thin and were made of a type of steel that was too brittle.
The project at Harvard grew out of Mr. Rubinstein’s Introduction to Fluid Dynamics class, which asks students to create a final project. “Choose an interesting project and make an appealing video,” he said.
Mr. Rubinstein and Ms. Sharp said they would like to eventually build an entire course around the disaster. Students could apply what they learn in other classes to understanding not just why the molasses behaved the way it did, but also what other forces shaped the events of that day in 1919.
