Ninja, one half of the influential rave-rap act Die Antwoord, is none too pleased that from across the restaurant at the Chateau Marmont in Los Angeles, Quentin Tarantino has cranked up the stereo, blasting Sarah Vaughan’s voice. “Can you not listen to that man and turn the music down,” he says to the waiter in a snarling, Afrikaans-inflected stage whisper. “Oh, yeah,” says Yolandi Visser, the shyer of the two. “Thank you,” she adds, as the waiter shuffles over to the stereo.
A few moments later, Tarantino stands, unsheathes an LP and drops the needle on side two of Rod Stewart’s “Every Picture Tells a Story,” then raises his glass to Ninja and Visser in a facetious toast — but they already have their backs to him and, tellingly, the volume is significantly lower.
Engaging in this sort of D.J. battle with an Oscar winner requires either the confidence of an L.A. insider or the carelessness of an interloper. Ninja, 42, and Visser, 32, the duo that pioneered Zef culture — South Africa’s response to America’s so-called white trash — are a bit of both. With matching mullets and meth-chic attire, the seemingly out-of-place pair is also oddly at home.
The group backed out of the deal, started their own label, Zef Recordz, and went on to release two more albums. They’ve since seized every opportunity to raise a middle finger to the mainstream, in the process cultivating — and perhaps caricaturing — a persona of petulance. Offered the opportunity to open for Gaga, they responded with a video sendup of the singer (an impersonator gives birth to a cockroach, then gets mauled by a lion). They responded to an invite to Kanye West’s house by trash-talking him in a video they made in a bathroom. At their Austin City Limits performance in early October, Ninja dropped his pants and mooned the crowd.
“It’s so organized,” Ninja interjects with clear distaste.
“Like, what would we write about?” Visser continues.
It was the first time Die Antwoord had ever used an outside producer and the resulting album, the new “Mount Ninji and da Nice Time Kid,” is unlike anything the group has done before. A dizzying tour de force, it veers between rave numbers, raw humor (including a cameo by Jack Black), moody gloom and melancholia — which might have something to do with their recent (and very L.A.) study of chaos magick, an occult offshoot that involves spells, sigils and hypnotic music.
You could say the same about the garrulous Ninja and the reticent Visser. Their intensely codependent dynamic has long baffled observers, leading some to wonder if their behavior is an elaborate form of performance art. “When we laid down our verses on this album, Yolandi burned me nearly every single time,” Ninja says. “I remember thinking, ‘How can I compete?’ I’m in love with the cut of her voice. It’s just the most delicious frequency.” Hearing this, Visser pulls her knees up under her tank-top hoodie, then pulls the hood over her head and cinches it tight.
“How do you open up? I didn’t know how to,” Visser says.
“The one line we had was, ‘Mommy didn’t want me,’” Ninja says, and, in a rare moment of tenderness, locks eyes with Visser, who was adopted at a young age.
The two have given Die Antwoord a finite life span — five albums — making it “a limited-edition sort of experience,” Ninja says. They want to focus on other projects in fine art and film. (They’re working on a feature with the South African photographer Roger Ballen.) Critics and fans have speculated it’s because making music together is too emotionally taxing.
Thinking back on the making of “Mount Ninji and Da Nice Time Kid,” Ninja just shakes his head. “A whole bunch of really big stuff happened in those two years — the most epic things me and Yolandi have ever gone through,” he says. Neither he nor Visser will elaborate, but it’s safe to say their personal lives became intertwined with the process of producing this album. It started with uprooting their lives and ended with a work that, sonically and thematically, is a kind of return of the repressed, the deepest music they’ve ever made. Aside from Visser coming to terms with her adoption, among the memories the duo dealt with during the recording was the harrowing night they were robbed at gunpoint, not once but twice, as they tried to walk to a club in Johannesburg — an event that came to the surface as they wrote lyrics for the track “Streetlight.” These dark memories slowed them down at times, but also heightened the urgency they felt to finish.
It’s unclear exactly where that is, but it seems certain they need one another to get moving. A short while later, as they stand and begin walking out, Visser, wearing mismatched pink and blue sneakers, turns back to reach for the gold leather handbag she’s left on the chair. Ninja has already picked it up and hands it to her.
