There may be no such thing as an ideal neighborhood for single people, but even in this age of dating apps and websites, neighborhood continues to play a huge role in how, and whom, people choose to date.
Whether one is striking up a conversation at a coffee shop or tallying up proximity points with a potential love interest, geography matters in large ways and small. Not fretting about an hourlong postdate commute allows drinks to turn into dinner, for instance. A bar filled with friends may bestow the confidence to initiate a conversation with a stranger, which in turn may lead to the confidence to approach some other stranger, at some other bar, on some other night.
In a city as diverse as New York, a neighborhood where dating happens naturally can be difficult to find. And statistics may, like a pickup line, mislead.
Dorothy Castillo found the prospect of moving to Manhattan enticing for any number of reasons. Not least of all because she assumed the city’s dating scene would be far superior to that of suburban Rockland County, N.Y., where she’d spent most of her life.
“I thought, ‘This is going to be my golden ticket! I’m going to date all the time!’ ” recalled Ms. Castillo, 27, a special-education teacher who bought a studio apartment in Washington Heights two and a half years ago.
Though not opposed to online dating, she felt out of place in family-friendly Washington Heights and found her forays to Midtown and Lower East Side bars disappointing, the men standoffish.
Last May, she did indeed move there, to a one-bedroom co-op she bought. And Woodlawn, a neighborhood filled with one- and two-family houses as well as some brick apartment buildings, has proved unexpectedly welcoming to Ms. Castillo.
In a similarly surprising corollary, a neighborhood with a high percentage of single people doesn’t necessarily translate into a good singles neighborhood.
Between 2010 and 2014, Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, had a 36 percent increase in the number of single men (single being defined as a person aged 20 to 34 who has never been married) to 15,121 from 11,127, and a 31 percent increase in single women, to 12,272 from 9,361 — one of the largest increases in the city, according to the census bureau’s American Community Survey. Based on that data, the New York City Economic Development Corporation declared the neighborhood “an attractive spot for all young singles” in 2014.
Not everyone agrees. The area “is not such a good spot for single people,” said Mirsad Kadribasic, 41, an owner of La Bohème Lounge on Stillwell Avenue in Bensonhurst, which on a recent Friday night was half-filled with couples smoking hookahs at velvet banquettes. “I’m a single person myself and I can’t meet anyone here.
Though it may be the envy of Bensonhurst, the Park Slope dating scene did not impress Robert DiBiase when he moved there from Washington, D.C., several years ago.
The neighborhood had plenty of bars, conceded Mr. DiBiase, 42, an associate broker at Halstead Property, “but they were small and filled with locals, not people coming from Manhattan to hang out.” The local bars were places where neighbors went to grab a beer and catch up, he said, not places to meet a potential mate.
When his aging bulldog compelled him to trade his walk-up for an elevator building, he seized on the opportunity and rented a one-bedroom on the Lower East Side, a quick walk to local favorites like Stanton Social or Mr. Purple, the rooftop bar at the Hotel Indigo.
Nancy Slotnick, a dating coach, said that proximity was crucial for many single New Yorkers. “The first date is going to happen so much more easily if you’re in the same neighborhood,” she said.
And for those hoping to meet in what her clients often refer to as “the natural way,” neighborhood can make all the difference, she said. Certainly, it did for her.
One evening, she saw an attractive man at an event on the Upper West Side, where she lived, but she was too shy to approach. Afterward, she was standing on the sidewalk and he walked by again. Loath to let another opportunity pass, she caught his eye, smiled and struck up a conversation. She later found out that he had come into the cafe where she was an owner just the day before. He is now her husband. “Fate gave us another chance!” she said.
She and friends from the building have traveled to Tulum, Mexico, participated in a coed fantasy football league, gone on daylong bike trips and sweated through SoulCycle classes together.
In Manhattan, she said, the men she met through apps would boast about being a top person at a place like Oracle, the high-tech company.
“Now I’m into the kind of guy with facial hair who wears a leather bracelet and goes salsa dancing,” she said.
While finding one’s tribe may be the underpinning of dating success, certain factors make it more likely to happen in some places than others. Neighborhoods popular with singles tend to have comparatively affordable housing, convenience to transportation and a good assortment of bars and restaurants — think Astoria in Queens and Murray Hill and the East Village in Manhattan.
Elie Seidman, the chief executive of OkCupid, an online dating site, said that while he believes that moving to New York might improve a person’s romantic odds, he didn’t believe there was “a magic neighborhood cure.” Census data shows that neighborhoods with high concentrations of single women don’t often match up with those that have a lot of single men.
Neighborhoods with the highest percentages of single men tend to be immigrant communities, according to a researcher at the development corporation — Elmhurst/South Corona, Queens has the best odds for women in the city, with 1.57 men to every woman; Jackson Heights/North Corona is a close second at 1.54 men to every woman. Not all of those men are looking for women — Jackson Heights has grown increasingly popular with gay men.
The Upper West Side, some say, is the place to be if you’re a single Modern Orthodox Jew. “Really the only other place in the world as good for dating is Jerusalem,” said Curtis Goldstein, a salesman at Halstead.
Newcomers quickly find themselves overwhelmed with invitations for Friday night Shabbat dinners, and synagogues vie to be the center of the scene, luring singles with snacks like kosher sushi and meatballs.
“I’m a social butterfly, so I love it,” said Jessica Schechter, 29, an actress, director, producer and teacher who moved to the neighborhood in 2011. When she’s not dating someone, she said, she attends at least one neighborhood singles event a week.
The dating scene is so frenetic, some people weary of it, including those who fail to meet someone despite what would appear to be every conceivable opportunity.
“It can be hard, it can be draining. My roommate jokes about JOMO — the joy of missing out,” Ms. Schechter said. But the ceaseless courtship ritual has provided fodder for “Soon by You,” a web series she produces and acts in about dating in the community. For those who tire of the West Side, she added, there’s the smaller dating scene on the East Side.
For some singles, less may be more.
Dr. Carlos J. Huerta, 40, a dentist, moved to Hell’s Kitchen recently after nine years in the East Village. He left an apartment share to be closer to his then-boyfriend, his friends and the practice he had just started.
