SYDNEY, Australia — Extensive tracking of debris from Malaysia Airlines Flight 370, which disappeared more than two years ago in the southern Indian Ocean with 239 people onboard, has further narrowed the search area in a remote swath of ocean off the coast of Western Australia.
The tracking was detailed in a report from the Australian Transport Safety Bureau that was released in Canberra on Wednesday.
The report said it was likely that debris drifted from an area around the midpoint of the current search site, due west of Australia’s southwestern corner. Modeling and ocean tests showed it was unlikely the debris began to drift from farther north or south.
The report also said that the plane’s pilot had not manipulated a wing in readiness for a controlled landing or ditching into the water. But it failed to draw any conclusions as to why the Boeing 777 had deviated from its route or whether the pilot was flying the plane or it was on autopilot when it plunged into the sea.
The report was released by Australia’s infrastructure and transport minister, Darren Chester, before a three-day conference of aviation experts from the United States, Australia, Britain China and Malaysia. The experts will review more than two and a half years of data gathered since the jetliner disappeared on a scheduled flight from Malaysia to China on March 8, 2014.
The plane took off from Kuala Lumpur, the capital, and headed for Beijing around midnight, but instead, it mysteriously turned south.
“This report contains important new information on what we believe happened at the end of MH 370’s flight,” Mr. Chester said at a news conference on Wednesday in Canberra.
More than 20 pieces of debris have been found from the coasts of the African mainland and from the islands of Madagascar, Mauritius, Réunion and Rodrigues, he said. Satellite data, end-of-flight simulations, drift modeling and a review of a recovered section of the plane’s wing flap will help the authorities review and decide the future of the search.
The bureau, which is coordinating the search of around 46,000 square miles of seabed, has said it would end in February.
The report draws no conclusions as to why the plane disappeared or whether the pilot or co-pilot steered the plane off course. But examination of two parts of a wing showed that at the point of impact, the aircraft was not configured for a landing or for ditching into the sea, said a bureau spokesman, Dan O’Malley.
Damage to the right outboard flap showed it was probably retracted when the plane hit the water. Another wing part, the right flaperon, was in a neutral position at the time it separated from the wing, the report said. The positions of the wing parts indicate that the plane was cruising and not being readied to land, even on the ocean’s surface.
“During a normal, or even an abnormal, landing, a pilot would deploy those flaps to slow the plane down as it came in to land,” said Jason Middleton, the head of the School of Aviation at the University of New South Wales.
Malaysia Airlines agreed in a Sydney court this week to hand over detailed records that include the medical certificates of the flight crew, including the pilot and co-pilot, and operational notes and logs related to the flight.
John Dawson, a lawyer in Sydney, had been petitioning Malaysia Airlines for the records for more than a year. He is working for the adult children of Rodney and Mary Burrows and Robert and Catherine Lawton, who were traveling on the plane when it disappeared.