KILLINGTON, Vt. — The World Cup of skiing returned to the Eastern United States for the first time in 25 years Saturday and was greeted by a clambering sea of fans who had hiked a quarter of a mile up the hill next to the racecourse to glimpse the world’s fastest female skiers.
With more than 16,000 fans in attendance, yielding two sold-out grandstands, Saturday’s crowd was one of the largest for a ski race in the United States. A parade of more than 1,000 junior ski racers began the event and set in motion several hours of cowbell clanging and cheering despite unsettled weather that shifted from bright sunlight to dense fog to snow.
In the end, Tessa Worley of France won her ninth World Cup giant slalom and her first since a serious knee injury in 2013. Worley finished the two runs of the race in 1 minute 59.26 seconds, which was 0.80 of a second faster than Nina Loseth of Norway. Sofia Goggia of Italy was third.
The hometown favorite, Mikaela Shiffrin, who spent much of her childhood in New England, finished fifth. Shiffrin was the runner-up in the first giant slalom of the season, last month in Sölden, Austria. The Sölden winner and prerace favorite, Lara Gut of Switzerland, caught a ski edge not long after leaving the starting gate during her first run Saturday and was forced to ski off the course.
Nearly two months of snow-making operations blanketed the 3,200-foot Killington resort race trail with ample snow cover, but a morning temperature just above freezing left the racing surface soft by World Cup standards.
The conditions led to a bumpy, irregular ride down the mountain for all but the earliest racers, like Loseth, who was the first competitor out of the gate and the first-run leader.
By Saturday afternoon, when the second run of the race was staged, a dense fog had descended over the mountain. For a while, it appeared that the racers would be all but invisible from the finish area. But just before the race resumed, the skies cleared. Then snow began to fall.
The change in the temperature led to harder, more favorable snow, and the leaders charged down the racecourse with a kind of aggressiveness that had been difficult to muster on the softer, more rutted morning snow.
For Worley, who was second after the first run, finding the resolve to attack during her second run was a milestone in her comeback from her injury.
It was the first World Cup race in Vermont since 1978 and the first in the Eastern United States since an event at Waterville Valley, N.H., in 1991.
Most of the competitors Saturday seemed shocked by the size of the crowd.
On Sunday, a slalom — Shiffrin’s specialty — will be contested.
