Dacie Love Callon, 70, a math tutor living in Rancho Palos Verdes, Calif., who recently used software to help with her insomnia.
Previous studies have found that online sleep therapy can be effective, but most have been smaller, or focused on a particular sleep-related problem, like depression. The new trial tested the digital therapy in a broad, diverse group of longtime insomniacs whose main complaint was lack of sleep. Most had used medication or supplements over the years, and some still did.
Some of the researchers, as well as the university, have a stake in this product, which costs $135 for 16 weeks of access. None of those connected to the company analyzed the data or had access to it, or participated in the data analysis, said Lee Ritterband, the lead author and a developer of the online therapy.
Both incorporate the techniques of cognitive behavior therapy for insomnia, an approach therapists have been using successfully for years. Some of those techniques date back decades. One is called sleep restriction, in which people set a regular “sleep window” and work to stick to it. Another is called stimulus control, an attempt to break the association between lying in bed and activities like streaming video and eating.
Finally, the therapy aims to undermine self-defeating assumptions about sleep, like “Without a good night’s sleep, I can’t function the next day” or “Medication is probably the only solution to sleeplessness.” The program prompts people to log in daily and record each night’s sleep in some detail; it then tailors weekly sessions based on those entries.
According to Dr. John Torous, co-director of the digital psychiatry program at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, there are about a dozen online programs on the market using cognitive behavior therapy techniques — for a variety of conditions, including depression — which also have rigorous evidence behind them.
Nonetheless, the potential of online therapies to reach huge numbers of people makes it likely that they will become first-line therapy in many cases, some experts say.
