Dance|Review: ‘Anastasia,’ a Grand Duchess or a Great Pretender?
Review: ‘Anastasia,’ a Grand Duchess or a Great Pretender?
LONDON — Royalty, revolution, madness, memory. These are the potentially explosive ingredients of the choreographer Kenneth MacMillan’s “Anastasia,” his 1971 full-length ballet currently being performed by the Royal Ballet here for the first time since 2004, and offering the enticing prospect of the Russian ballerina Natalia Osipova making her debut in the title role.
The ballet circles around the identity of Anna Anderson, the Polish woman who claimed to be the Grand Duchess Anastasia, the youngest of Czar Nicholas II’s daughters, who had survived the royal family’s execution during the Russian Revolution.
The first two acts show Anastasia at 13 and 16; the last as an asylum inmate confronting an onslaught of memories, fantasies and imaginary presences. As a subject for ballet — better suited to the evocation of fluid emotional states than historical fact — it sounds promising. And in part, the promise is fulfilled.
Unfortunately that fulfillment arrives only with the final act, after almost two hours of ballet tedium that explains the long gap between performances of this production. What’s hard to understand is why the Royal Ballet hasn’t more recently staged the third act as the stand-alone ballet it was when MacMillan (who died in 1992) first created it at the Deutsche Oper Ballet in 1967.
Set to to Bohuslav Martinu’s Symphony No. 6 (“Fantaisies Symphoniques”) and a smidgen of electronic sound, the one-act version was made for the great dramatic ballerina Lynn Seymour. It offers a satisfyingly expressionist vision of trauma and mental derangement, in which everything onstage seems to emanate from the mind of the central character. On Saturday night, at the Royal Opera House, Ms. Osipova gave a riveting account of a tortured soul in this section, her body wrenched into strange shapes, her eyes blank and wide as figures from the past filtered by.
Ms. Osipova has frustratingly little, however, to do in the full-length ballet’s first two acts, added by MacMillan after he returned to the Royal Ballet in 1970 as its director. These acts offer a vision of Imperial Russia in the form of the character’s memories (or “memories”) of her youth — a party on the imperial yacht on the eve of World War I; her coming-out ball three years later.
The overarching idea is that the events of these acts are unreliable products of, or imprints upon, Anna/Anastasia’s memory, rather than realistic accounts. This is supported by Bob Crowley’s nonrealist, off-kilter sails and chandeliers. But MacMillan treats the material with such dull conformity to 19th-century ballet tradition — the ensemble dances, the solos, the pas de deux arrive with dutiful regularity — that it’s hard not to read these first two acts as straightforward presentations of life at court.
Part of the problem is the score, too slow, evenly paced and folk-inflected to sustain the kind of aristocratic merriment that MacMillan seems to want in the opening act, with its naval officers (good work from Luca Acri, Tristan Dyer, Marcelino Sambé), in uniform and stripy bathing suits, entertaining the royal family. “Why would they be dancing?” I kept wondering; a clear sign that suspension of disbelief wasn’t going well.
Even more problematic is the lack of narrative drama at a personal level — Anastasia is unimportant in the story of the royal family’s demise — and the surplus of narrative drama on a political level. Let’s just say that portraying the Russian Revolution in ballet terms would probably be better left unattempted.
Despite these reservations, it’s worth seeing “Anastasia” for Ms. Osipova’s committed performance, and for MacMillan’s late, brilliant evocation of a confused and tortured mind. Anna Anderson may or may not be an impostor, but in Ms. Osipova’s account, there is little doubt of her suffering.