Yes, a new movie in the “Star Wars” universe is coming to theaters Dec. 16. Yes, that movie, “Rogue One: A Star Wars Story,” will have rebels and droids and Stormtroopers. And yes, the Death Star factors in heavily. But it is the first stand-alone story for the big screen, meaning that it doesn’t directly continue the saga unfolding in the previous films. Here’s what else we know, culled from a variety of sources.
PLOT Firm details are still spotty, but it does fit within the timeline of the other films, with events taking place in the time between “Episode III: Revenge of the Sith” and “Episode IV: A New Hope” (the first released film). And it involves the Rebel Alliance’s mission to steal plans for the Empire’s Death Star (an incident noted in the opening scroll of “Episode IV”).
Leia, Rey and now Jyn Erso are the best known, but they’re hardly alone. And they all can match lightsabers with Darth Vader.
CAST Felicity Jones stars as Jyn Erso, a defiant fighter with a checkered past who is recruited by Cassian Andor (Diego Luna), a Rebel Alliance captain putting a team together for the mission. It also includes Forest Whitaker as a leader of Rebel extremists; Alan Tudyk as the droid K-2SO; Riz Ahmed as a Rebel pilot with ties to the Empire; Ben Mendelsohn as the villain, a military director for the Empire; and Mads Mikkelsen as Galen Erso, a scientist and Jyn’s father. In the most recent trailer, Darth Vader also makes an appearance, and James Earl Jones returns to lend his voice to that character.
DIRECTOR The British filmmaker Gareth Edwards brings his sci-fi experience to one of the biggest sci-fi experiences. He created visual effects on his laptop for his first feature, “Monsters” (2010), then graduated to much larger effects (and a much larger budget) for his 2014 revival of “Godzilla.” He has said he wanted to be reverent to the tale but also to bring something new in his approach.
SCORE We’ll hear hints of the familiar “Star Wars” work of John Williams, but this film is the first in the franchise that he didn’t score. Instead, Michael Giacchino did the honors.
LOCATIONS While many scenes were shot at Elstree Studios in England, some were filmed in the Maldives. That’s because the film introduces a tropical planet, Scarif, where the Death Star is being built. That setting involves beach scenes and battles with Death Troopers, whose all-black look is a striking contrast to the white Stormtroopers so etched in pop-culture consciousness. Other sequences were shot in Iceland and Jordan. And one scene that appears in the first “Rogue One” trailer, with the Rebel team running from Stormtroopers, was shot in the London Underground at the Canary Wharf station.