Those words from “Hope,” an anguished ballad by Jason Robert Brown, led off Tuesday’s opening-night performance of John Pizzarelli and his wife, Jessica Molaskey, in their compelling new show, “The Arc of a Love Affair,” at Café Carlyle.
“In spite of everything ridiculous and sad/Though I’m beyond belief depressed, confused and mad/Well — I got dressed,” the song continues.
Ms. Molaskey, a gifted theater performer, has followed Mr. Pizzarelli into jazz and specializes in devising witty lyrics for instrumentals; “Hope” was ideally suited to her happy-sad voice. The songs in “The Arc of a Love Affair” evoke a double-vision that parallels the couple’s shock and dismay over the outcome of the presidential election with the ups and downs of their marriage.
Behind the innate cheer and resilience of Ms. Molaskey’s voice there is always a suggestion of barely withheld tears. Mr. Pizzarelli is a suave, gregarious entertainer and guitar virtuoso with a remarkable facility for cool scat singing in tune with his own guitar. But in collaboration with his wife, he balances the instrumental fireworks with a quiet introspection and a greater emphasis on lyrical content.
When he murmured that musty old Rodgers and Hammerstein protest song “You’ve Got to Be Carefully Taught” from “South Pacific,” it didn’t seem at all quaint, but a sad reminder of how easily buried hatred and bigotry can be rekindled and the flames fanned into a brush fire.
Still the show had plenty of exuberantly playful moments, including a rendition of “Perdido” with a vocalese lyric by Ms. Molaskey. In her hands, Leonard Cohen’s ominous, sarcastic “Everybody Knows” sounded bitterly prophetic.
The lineup of musicians has changed since the Pizzarellis’ last appearance at Café Carlyle. The singers’ longtime bassist Martin Pizzarelli (John’s younger brother) was replaced by Jay Leonhart, who gave the arrangements a lighter touch, and the pianist Konrad Paszkudzki has been smoothly integrated into the ensemble.
The show ended where it began, with a more upbeat song about hope in which the couple saluted two of their idols, Les Paul and Mary Ford, with their version of that team’s 1951 hit “The World Is Waiting for the Sunrise.” You could almost see the morning sun peeking over the horizon.