Rescuers searched for survivors after a platform collapsed on Thursday in the unfinished cooling tower of a coal power plant near Fengcheng, in the southeastern Chinese province of Jiangxi, killing 67 workers, according to the China News Service.
BEIJING — Dozens of workers were crushed to death under an avalanche of scaffolding, cement and steel rods in southeast China on Thursday after a platform in an unfinished tower of a coal power plant collapsed.
The platform, part of a power plant project near Fengcheng, a city in Jiangxi Province, crumpled around 7 a.m. when more than 70 workers were on the site, safety inspectors at the scene said. By early Friday, rescuers had found 74 dead, according to Xinhua, a state-run news agency. Two other people were injured.
As is typical after big industrial accidents in China, government officials promised to find the cause of the disaster and prevent a recurrence. Yang Huanning, the director of the State Administration of Work Safety, was rushing to the power plant, about 750 miles south of Beijing, to oversee the rescue efforts, his office said.
Photographs from the scene showed firefighters and other rescuers standing on piles of twisted metal rods and shattered concrete. The initial reports did not give a precise reason for the collapse but said that a platform more than 200 feet high being used by workers inside the unfinished tower had fallen after a crane collapsed.
In recent years, the government has become more serious about work safety, and fatalities have fallen. But tens of thousands of work-related deaths still occur in mines and factories, at building sites and on the roads every year.
In the first half of this year, 14,136 people died in work-related accidents, according to official statistics. That death toll fell 5.3 percent from the same period a year earlier.
In August last year, explosions at a laxly managed chemical warehouse in Tianjin, a northern port city, killed 173 people, including 104 firefighters at the scene. In December, a landslide on a dump site for dirt from construction projects in Shenzhen, in far southern China, killed at least 73 people after its operators ignored warnings of instability.
Before those accidents and others, lax enforcement of safety rules was lubricated by corruption. On Thursday, Yang Dongliang, a former director of the State Administration of Work Safety, faced trial in Beijing on charges of taking the equivalent of $4.1 million in bribes in that post and previous jobs, state media reported. Mr. Yang pleaded guilty, the reports said.
Jiangxi Province lies inland and has long stayed a rural backwater as neighboring coastal regions boomed from trade and industry. But it has grown quickly in recent decades, drawing in factories.
The cooling tower near Fengcheng was part of an expansion of a power plant run by a state-owned company. In 2015, it won approval to add two 1,000-megawatt “ultra super critical” power-generation units, which can burn coal much more efficiently than traditional ones.
At the time of the collapse, workers had built 230 feet of the planned 541-foot tower, officials said, according to the China News Service.
After the two units were approved, a deputy governor of the province, Mo Jiancheng, told city officials to “do everything to create a good setting for building the project,” the Jiangxi Daily newspaper reported at the time.
