CLEVELAND — Anthony Rizzo was 3 years old when his father, John, first knew he might be a baseball player.
The steady right hand that snagged golf balls as a boy would one day catch The Ball, the one that delivered the Chicago Cubs their first championship since 1908. With two outs in the bottom of the 10th inning in Game 7 of the World Series, Anthony Rizzo raised his glove and caught a throw from third baseman Kris Bryant, who had gathered a slow chopper from the Cleveland Indians’ Michael Martinez. The Cubs had triumphed, 8-7, for a moment 108 years in the making.
It means that baseball is different, forever. The franchise most famous for failure now sits on top. The holy grail of sports — as David Ross, the beloved retiring catcher, put it — has been found.
The Chicago Cubs ended a 108-year drought on Thursday when they won the World Series. The Cubs topped the Cleveland Indians, 8-7.
The group that did it will be Chicago legends for life. The Curse of the Billy Goat — the ludicrous notion that an aggrieved tavern owner hexed the team for denying his goat entry to Wrigley Field for the 1945 World Series — is no more.
The Cubs played extraordinary baseball, winning 103 games in the regular season and taking this World Series after falling behind, three games to one, at home last weekend. Rizzo — “Our own Italian Stallion,” as Ben Zobrist, the Series’ most valuable player, called him — played the “Rocky” theme in the clubhouse after that, and the Cubs never lost again.
It was fitting the final out would find Rizzo’s glove. He was one of the first acquisitions by Theo Epstein, the Cubs’ president of baseball operations, who arrived in late 2011 after building two championship teams in Boston, where the Red Sox had not won in 86 years.
The Boston Red Sox had drafted Rizzo when Epstein was general manager, and helped him through his Hodgkin’s lymphoma at age 18. When Epstein traded Rizzo to San Diego for Adrian Gonzalez, in 2010, he told him he would try to get him back someday. In January 2012, he did, in a trade with the Padres for pitcher Andrew Cashner.
Before the 2015 season, with Rizzo an established star and players like Bryant, Javier Baez, Addison Russell and Kyle Schwarber rising quickly, the Cubs recruited Joe Maddon as manager, signed Lester as a free agent and reached the playoffs. Before this season, they signed Zobrist, pitcher John Lackey and right fielder Jason Heyward.
Zobrist and Lackey performed as expected, but Heyward, who signed for eight years and $184 million, hit just .230 with seven home runs. Yet he starred on defense and formed a critical part of the Cubs’ leadership. While Rizzo’s “Rocky” theme might have set the mood, it was Heyward who spoke up during a 17-minute rain delay before the top of the 10th inning of Game 7.
The Cubs had been four outs from the title when Aroldis Chapman allowed a game-tying, two-run homer to Rajai Davis in the eighth. Then, in the ninth, the Cubs had Heyward on third with one out. But Baez struck out while trying a safety squeeze and Dexter Fowler bounced a ball up the middle — right to shortstop Francisco Lindor, who was shifted there and made the play.
When the rain came, Heyward called the players into the weight room, in an alcove just off the dugout at the bottom of the clubhouse steps.
Heyward said he talked about everything the Cubs had overcome, urging them to use the delay to reset after the blown lead and the botched chance to score. Russell said the impact was profound.
“There were numerous people crying,” Russell said. “I was one of the ones crying. We worked so hard, and for them just to come back — I know they’re a great ball club, you tip your hat to them, but what we worked so hard for, you just feel like it was slipping from our grasp.
The rally that followed will be etched in baseball lore: a single by Schwarber, a fly ball by Bryant, an intentional walk to Rizzo, a go-ahead double by Zobrist, another intentional walk to Russell and a run-scoring single by Miguel Montero.
The Indians scored on a single by Davis with two outs in the 10th. But with nobody left on their bench, they were forced to let the light-hitting Martinez, a defensive replacement, come to bat with the season on the line.
Maddon called for the left-hander Mike Montgomery, believing his curveball would work well on Martinez. Montgomery threw one for a called strike, and Martinez chopped another on the grass between third and the mound. Bryant smiled in pursuit.
A week ago, Bryant said, Rizzo had told him he wanted the final out to rest in his glove — and that when it did, it would be so valuable he would never let it go. Sure enough, after Rizzo caught the throw and thrust his arms to the sky, he stuffed the ball in his back pocket before bouncing off to start the party.
As the Cleveland fans filed out and Cubs fans swarmed the lower bowl behind the visitors’ dugout, Rizzo strode triumphantly to the first-base line. He reached into his pocket, held up the ball they had all been waiting for, and kissed it. The owner will not take it from him.
Some fans found their way to the clubhouse for the celebration; one of them, the actor Bill Murray, cradled a Champagne bottle and embraced Rizzo, telling him he was the most valuable Cub. Then Ryne Sandberg, the Hall of Fame Cubs second baseman, came by. Rizzo wrapped him in a hug.
Ernie Banks wore it, too, and never won the World Series. Neither did Andre Dawson, Fergie Jenkins, Ron Santo, Sammy Sosa, Billy Williams or Hack Wilson. Neither did any other Cub, for more than a century of glorious torture.
These Cubs did it. And the fans Rizzo saluted, with that priceless baseball on a rainy morning in Cleveland, can finally feel like champions.
