Politics|What Will President Trump Do on Birth Control, Climate and Immigration?
What Will President Trump Do on Birth Control, Climate and Immigration?
That was Evan Osnos, a correspondent for The New Yorker, describing how difficult it is to anticipate what Mr. Trump’s presidency might look like, given how unconventional his campaign was.
For a recent article, published before the election, Mr. Osnos spoke to more than 50 experts in an attempt to understand the actions that Mr. Trump could take in his first term.
In a phone interview on Wednesday, Mr. Osnos detailed some of his conclusions. We supplemented his reporting with our own to try to anticipate what Mr. Trump is likely to do once he takes office.
Mr. Osnos said that taking Mr. Trump’s campaign promises seriously makes more sense than the alternative.
Are U.S. military alliances in trouble?
In July, the night before he accepted the Republican nomination for president, Mr. Trump spoke about America’s commitment to its NATO allies.
If the Baltic States — Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania — were to be attacked by Russia, Mr. Trump said, he would review whether those nations had “fulfilled their obligations to us” before deciding whether to come to their aid.
Will women have to pay for birth control again?
With a Republican-controlled Congress, Mr. Trump will be empowered to do what he and his party have long promised: repeal the Affordable Care Act, President Obama’s signature domestic legislation.
The health care law gave 47 million women access to preventive health services. It also required insurers to make birth control available at no cost to women, eliminating costly co-payments that in many cases ran to hundreds of dollars a year or more. After Mr. Trump’s win on Tuesday, women on social media announced plans to obtain intrauterine devices, a form of contraception that can last as long as 12 years but that was prohibitively expensive for many before Obamacare.
However, on Friday, Mr. Trump said that he might be willing to leave parts of the law in place.
Will he deport more undocumented immigrants?
Will the Paris climate agreement stand?
Mr. Trump has called human-caused climate change a “hoax” and has said he will “cancel” the Paris climate agreement, the landmark 2015 deal under which 195 nations agreed to take steps to lower their greenhouse gas emissions.
What will happen to U.S. trade agreements?
In the first presidential debate, Mr. Trump criticized Hillary Clinton for changing her stance on the Trans-Pacific Partnership, an accord between the United States and 11 Pacific Rim nations that, in the end, both candidates opposed.
Mr. Osnos said that the future looked bleak for both of those deals.
He also said he thought that Mr. Trump might seriously consider withdrawing the United States from the World Trade Organization, and that Mr. Trump might threaten sanctions against China, citing conversations with the president-elect’s advisers.
“They have said to me in multiple moments that an earnest threat delivered with the kind of credibility that a President Trump would carry would, in their view, force the Chinese to change their nature,” Mr. Osnos said.