Shortly after the curtain fell on the 1976 election, Hubert H. Humphrey took his dejected friend Bob Dole, the Republican vice-presidential nominee, out for ice cream to try to improve his mood.
Mr. Humphrey, who had lost a presidential race eight years earlier, told him it would get worse before it got better.
Mr. Humphrey was speaking to Mr. Dole as a new inductee into an elite but hardly sought-after fraternity: candidates who have endured a failed national political campaign, an experience of loss that some have compared to a death in the family.
After Tuesday’s election, Donald J. Trump or Hillary Clinton will join those ranks.
For most failed presidential candidates, it is not their first exposure to the intense emotions that come with such a public defeat.
Having lost the 2000 presidential race after the legal battle over the Florida recount, Al Gore effectively disappeared from public life for several years.
Mrs. Clinton knows a similar feeling, having lost a drawn-out and contentious primary battle to Barack Obama in 2008. “This was not going to be easy for me,” she wrote in her memoir “Hard Choices.” Yet she took little time to nurse her wounds before becoming Mr. Obama’s secretary of state.
In contrast, Mr. Trump is a first-time candidate — and someone who has built his public persona on the idea that no matter the contest, he always comes out a winner.
He was plainly rattled and off-kilter the night of the Iowa caucuses, when, despite aides’ assurances that he was coasting to victory, he lost the Republican contest to Senator Ted Cruz of Texas.
And Mr. Trump’s behavior on the campaign trail — exulting in his large crowds, maintaining that he holds a lead even when the polls say otherwise — suggests he could have an unusually difficult time handling an undesired result Tuesday night.
Whether Mr. Trump has allowed for the possibility is unclear.
Advisers said he had spoken of nothing but victory.
The psychological dimensions of a loss can take a few days to sink in.
“It’s shrouded a bit in the first 24 to 48 hours because you’re recovering from the campaign,” said Rick A. Lazio, the former Republican congressman from Long Island who was the first person to lose to Mrs. Clinton, in the 2000 Senate race in New York.
“Pretty soon after that, you’re faced with the reality that your status has changed and your life has changed,” said Mr. Lazio, whose dazed mind-set seemed to have been captured by a memorable photograph of him gazing out the window of his campaign plane after his final Election Day event that year, his eyes fixed on the clouds.
Mr. Dole’s loss to Mr. Clinton in 1996 was less painful than his 1976 defeat, he said, primarily because he considered Mr. Clinton his friend. They “still are friends as far as I know,” said Mr. Dole, the only former Republican presidential nominee to endorse Mr. Trump.
Mitt Romney said his defeat by Mr. Obama in 2012 was less painful than his loss in a 1994 bid to replace Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts.
Mr. Allen, the former Virginia senator (he also served as governor), recalled an acute sadness that also overtook his family. He recalled that after an earlier race, a legislative contest that was close, he had contemplated hundreds of things that could have been done differently.
Mr. Lazio’s first loss was compounded by millions of dollars in campaign debt, which consumed him and made it difficult for him to move on.
Gray Davis, who was abruptly forced out of the California governor’s mansion in a recall election in 2003, tried to ignore the sting of defeat by plunging himself into working with his successor, Arnold Schwarzenegger, on the transition. “It hurts,” Mr. Davis said.
Mr. Trump has referred to his campaign as a movement, but he has also moaned to his supporters at various points that it would be a “big, beautiful and, yes, very expensive waste of time” were he to lose.
Mr. Lazio said the sudden lack of attention could be most jarring.
