Thirty years after “Live Aid” changed the face of charity fundraising, clicktivism has taken center stage. If you share, re-tweet and like, are you making the world a better place?
Americans who were around for the dawning of the “Age of Aquarius” will probably remember the Concert for Bangladesh, held on Aug. 1, 1971, at Madison Square Garden. Pop music royalty reigned in New York that day.
Despite the name, there were two concerts, one in the afternoon and one in the evening. They were crowd-stirring components of a campaign to aid the nascent nation of Bangladesh, still called East Pakistan and ravaged by disasters both natural and man-made. The performances were organized by the former Beatle George Harrison and the sitar master Ravi Shankar, who enlisted top-rung musicians like Bob Dylan, Leon Russell, Eric Clapton, Billy Preston and another former Beatle, Ringo Starr.
The Garden rocked. And the money flowed, a lot of it for those days: roughly $250,000 in ticket sales and, eventually, about $12 million from a resulting record album and film.
Those concerts constituted the first notable merger of pop culture and philanthropy, and they inspired similar ventures. The biggest of them all, the Live Aid extravaganza on July 13, 1985, holds center stage in this offering from Retro Report, a series of video documentaries exploring major news stories of the past and their continued significance.
Live Aid — simultaneous outdoor concerts held in London and Philadelphia — made the Bangladesh production look like a backyard jam session. For sure, there were similarities: Live Aid, too, was a mission of mercy, to generate relief funds for famine-plagued Ethiopia. It, too, had a rock-and-roller for a principal organizer: Bob Geldof, the lead singer for the Irish band the Boomtown Rats. Megastars took the stage on both sides of the Atlantic, among them Bob Dylan again, Mick Jagger, Tina Turner, U2, Queen, the Who, Joan Baez, Elvis Costello and Madonna. And a ton of money was raised, at least $80 million; by some estimates, it was far more than that.
But Live Aid relied on innovations that far surpassed anything available in 1971. The performances were broadcast via satellite linkups to a huge international audience, in some 150 nations.
A nexus between technology and charity was thus established. It has endured, though in our hashtag world, social media tends now to be favored over rock concerts. Facebook, Twitter and their brethren are pressed into service for matters as varied as the search for medical breakthroughs, the hunt for a monstrous guerrilla leader, the rescue of girls abducted by Boko Haram terrorists and the elusive pursuit of democracy in the Arab world.
With that question looming, the Retro Report video studies two high-wattage causes of recent vintage: “Kony 2012” and the Ice Bucket Challenge of 2014.
The first was a video at the heart of a campaign to (1) make people aware of the predatory Joseph Kony, whose Lord’s Resistance Army in Uganda turned tens of thousands of girls into sex slaves and boys into soldiers, and (2) raise cash to assist Ugandans devastated by his terror.
His online notoriety notwithstanding, Mr. Kony remains at large. Critics have also complained that the video was too simplistic and that much of the money went to cover production and promotion costs and not to help needy Ugandans. Indeed, financial squabbles are familiar in the world of philanthropy. They also dogged organizers of the Concert for Bangladesh and Live Aid.
In the Ice Bucket Challenge, the famous and the not-so-famous poured frigid water over their heads, and posted videos of their antics. The purpose was to promote awareness of — and to encourage donations for research in — amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or A.L.S., the incurable neurodegenerative malady often referred to as Lou Gehrig’s disease. The campaign was astonishingly successful. In a matter of weeks, more than $200 million was raised.
But, perhaps inevitably, questions arose.
For one thing, to what extent was anti-Kony fervor or the challenge a mere passing fancy? A measure of faddishness has long accompanied certain causes. A few decades ago, for instance, considerable attention was focused on sickle-cell anemia, a genetic disorder affecting African-Americans, and on Tay-Sachs disease, an affliction notable among Ashkenazi Jews. Both illnesses are still with us; they just do not get nearly as much attention as they once did.
In today’s digital age, when Twitter hashtags come and go, the very nature of social consciousness has come under scrutiny. Raising broad awareness of an issue is surely important. But is retweeting #bringourgirlsback (to show solidarity with Boko Haram victims) or #NotOneMore (to deplore gun violence) really changing the world? The same might be said about shading one’s Facebook photo in rainbow colors after terrorism at a gay nightclub in Florida or in the French tricolor after attacks in Paris. Skeptics have asked if the real motivation behind some of this is to feel good about oneself and impress one’s cyberbuddies.
The best-selling author Malcolm Gladwell seems less than bowled over by online activism. In a 2010 New Yorker article, he invoked the lunch counter sit-ins of the 1960s civil rights movement, when committed young men and women risked life and limb to fight enforced racial segregation. “Fifty years after one of the most extraordinary episodes of social upheaval in American history,” Mr. Gladwell said, “we seem to have forgotten what activism is.” He argued that, to be effective, movements require strict planning, strong personal connections and firm discipline; mouse clicks do not get the job done. Putting boots on the ground counts enormously, whether in the Arab Spring revolts or the Black Lives Matter protests.
There is, too, a crapshoot quality to online involvement. The Ice Bucket Challenge is an example. Why A.L.S.? With 6,000 new cases a year in this country, it is far less common than, say, lung cancer, with 224,000 new cases a year, or H.I.V. infection, with 44,000 new cases. “One charity sort of won the lottery,” Mr. Salmon said.
Still, he said, “giving is a good thing and an ethical imperative in and of itself.” And a reasonable answer to the question of “Why A.L.S.” could be: Why not? Should that windfall lead to a cure, would anyone seriously argue that the sloshing in freezing water was a silly waste of time? In July, researchers announced progress in studying one of the most common genes contributing to the disease.
But if the past is a guide, anything can happen. Even blowout concerts may not be finished. That was shown four years ago when some of the biggest names in entertainment, including the seemingly eternal Rolling Stones, gathered at Madison Square Garden, performing for nearly six hours to help victims of superstorm Sandy. They raised millions.