SEOUL, South Korea — The South Korean government indicated on Monday that it was rolling back its plan to require schools to use only state-issued history textbooks, an apparent shift for a signature project of President Park Geun-hye as she faces a corruption scandal and an escalating public backlash.
The Education Ministry unveiled the drafts of the new textbooks on Monday, asking for feedback from the public. But it wavered over its earlier decision to require all middle and high schools to use only the government-issued textbooks, starting next year.
That decision prompted criticism that Ms. Park’s conservative government was returning education to the country’s authoritarian past. Under the dictatorship of her father, President Park Chung-hee, the government wrote history textbooks and used them to justify his 1961 military coup and his 18-year rule.
Now, as huge crowds take to the streets demanding Ms. Park’s resignation over a corruption scandal and as her approval ratings have fallen to the low single-digits, the government has found it increasingly difficult to carry out that decision.
The education minister, Lee Joon-sik, confirmed on Monday that his ministry was considering other options that have been reported in the domestic news media, including allowing schools to choose between the new government-written textbooks and the current, privately published books. But he also said his ministry had no plan to scrap the government-prepared textbooks entirely, as the political opposition and other critics have demanded.
“We must resolve the conflict and achieve national unity,” he said during a nationally televised news conference, referring to the prolonged debate over how children should be taught history.
Some of the current books delve into long-hidden aspects of Korea’s tumultuous modern history, which has been marked by colonial rule, war and dictatorship, as well as pro-democracy uprisings and rapid economic growth. The books taught students about Koreans who collaborated with Japanese colonialists, mass killings of civilians during the Korean War from 1950 to ’53, and the abuse of political dissidents under dictators.
Mr. Lee said the new textbooks were fact-based, balanced and aimed at making students “proud” of their national history. But opposition parties and many local education offices criticized the drafts, unveiled on Monday, saying they highlighted the achievements of Ms. Park’s father while giving cursory descriptions of his brutal dictatorship. The draft of the high school textbook made no mention of wartime mass executions of civilians, while the middle-school version noted it in a single sentence.
The textbooks have been contentious from the start. Prominent historians refused to participate in their writing.
Opponents of Ms. Park said they feared that she would use the textbooks to try to inculcate younger generations with a more favorable view of the legacy of the conservative elites, many of whom, like her father, collaborated during Japan’s colonial rule of Korea in the early 20th century before overseeing the South’s rapid economic growth.
Mr. Park is still revered among conservatives for leading the country out of poverty. But others remember him for ruling the country with martial law and arresting, torturing and even executing dissidents by branding them as Communists. He also helped a number of businesses, like Hyundai and Samsung, accumulate vast fortunes while keeping workers in sweatshops.