The billionaire investor Cliff Asness is a staunch libertarian who has railed against government intervention in health care and finance.
Yet his AQR Capital Management is set to receive $35 million in financial aid as part of a broader move by the Connecticut government to persuade companies not to leave the state.
The aid package, which was approved by the State Bond Commission this month, includes loans and grants tied to conditions for jobs to be created, and follows a similar $22 million offer made this year to Bridgewater Associates, the world’s biggest hedge fund.
But the assistance for Bridgewater Associates, which manages $150 billion, and AQR, which has $172 billion in assets under management, has been questioned by some, including the state comptroller, over whether the initiative actually benefits jobs in the state.
The state comptroller, Kevin Lembo, has argued that financial aid would be better spent on companies that could create more stable jobs for the middle class rather than financial firms that often employ only graduates from top-tier universities.
A spokesman for AQR said, “This is a win-win job incentive program for both AQR and Connecticut that builds on our strong record of job growth in the state.” A spokesman from Bridgewater declined to comment.
Financial firms have been assisted in Connecticut in the past. Before the financial crisis, cities like Stamford, Conn., thrived as the banking industry, lured by tax credits and other government incentives, set up operations there. But firms like UBS of Switzerland and the Royal Bank of Scotland retreated sharply after the crisis, and the number of employees in Connecticut plunged. In Stamford, UBS was said to have the largest trading floor in the world before the crisis. Now, the floor is largely empty and parts of the city feel abandoned.
Connecticut is fighting to keep businesses from leaving after a tax increase last year. The loans to Bridgewater and AQR are part of an initiative by Gov. Dannel P. Malloy to encourage big companies to move their headquarters to Connecticut and to provide incentives to expand for companies already there. In January, General Electric announced it would move its headquarters to Boston from Fairfield, Conn., after four decades in the state.
“Let me put it this way — usually companies don’t call up and say ‘We’re going to leave if you don’t pay us,’” Catherine Smith, the commissioner of the Connecticut Department of Economic and Community Development, said in an interview.
“Between the lines, we understand that these companies are looking elsewhere. In this case, it was not overt but we wanted to provide something that would be competitive,” Ms. Smith said of the AQR deal. “There is competition out there for these companies — other states approach them or they approach other states, and in a number of cases we have had to play defense.” Bridgewater, she said, was looking at a site in New York when Connecticut began talks with the investment firm.
The financial aid effort has been roundly criticized by organized labor.
As part of the AQR deal, the company will be eligible for $28 million in loans that will be forgiven if the company keeps 540 jobs within Connecticut and creates up to 600 new jobs over the next 10 years.
AQR will also receive $7 million in grants, disbursed in phases, to help pay for an expansion. The company moved its operations to Connecticut in 2004 and is based in Greenwich.
Mr. Asness co-founded AQR as a hedge fund in 1998. Today the investment firm also offers mutual fund products.