Even had there been no news in Megyn Kelly’s new memoir, “Settle for More,” the book would have drawn a considerable audience. Ms. Kelly, the 45-year-old anchor on Fox News, has emerged as this presidential election’s unlikely feminist heroine and Hildy Johnson, the intrepid gal reporter who made herself indispensable to the brass and resisted the herd mentality of the men around her. She was the hen in the Fox house, taking it upon herself to ask at nearly every turn: Shouldn’t we be concerned that the Republican nominee for president is profoundly disrespectful of women in his public discourse? And accused of being a sexual predator at that?
That man, Donald J. Trump, is now America’s president-elect. After reading Ms. Kelly’s book, scheduled to be published on Tuesday but obtained early by The New York Times, I must say I feel nervous for her. According to her book, Mr. Trump did not take kindly to Ms. Kelly’s questions, and he appeared to retaliate in creepy, personal ways. Many journalists are already concerned that he has little regard for their professional responsibilities or First Amendment rights. “Settle for More” won’t allay their fears.
Ms. Kelly writes that her problems started in August, the Monday before the first Republican presidential primary debate. She had just done a segment on her show, “The Kelly File,” that infuriated Mr. Trump. He refused to make his own scheduled appearance on her show unless she phoned him personally.
Then, the day before the first presidential debate, Mr. Trump was in a lather again, Ms. Kelly writes. He called Fox executives, saying he’d heard that her first question “was a very pointed question directed at him.” This disconcerted her, because it was true: It was about his history of using disparaging language about women.
She doesn’t speculate where the leak came from. (She reports. You decide.) But that’s another unambiguous takeaway from this book: Parts of Fox — or, at the very least, Roger Ailes, the network’s chairman until July, when he was given the boot after several allegations of sexual harassment were made against him — seemed to be nakedly colluding with the Republican presidential nominee.
Her story becomes more byzantine. On the day of the debate, Ms. Kelly writes, she woke up feeling great. Then an overzealous, suspiciously enthusiastic driver picked her up to take her to the convention center. He insisted on getting her coffee, though she’d repeatedly declined his offer. Once it was in her hand, she drank it. And within 15 minutes, she was violently ill, vomiting so uncontrollably that it was unclear if she’d be able to help moderate that evening. It was so bad that she kept a trash pail beneath her desk throughout the debate, just in case.
The hectoring went on for weeks. “Every time Trump acted up,” Ms. Kelly writes, “it was like he flipped a switch, instantly causing a flood of intense nastiness.” Ms. Kelly’s voice mail box filled with invective and obscenities. People phoned in death threats. Ms. Kelly’s young daughter asked her what a bimbo was; a suspicious man showed up in the lobby of her apartment building; her family took an armed guard to Disney World.
Part of Mr. Trump’s response seemed like that of a man betrayed: Months before announcing his candidacy, he had tried hard to curry Ms. Kelly’s favor. He sent her notes, including a laudatory comment scrawled across her picture in The New York Times Magazine. (When Vanity Fair reported this, Mr. Trump denied it; Ms. Kelly includes proof, a picture.) Ms. Kelly and her husband declined an invitation to Mar-a-Lago, Mr. Trump’s fabled estate in Palm Beach, Fla. Then Mr. Trump tried, repeatedly and unsuccessfully, to persuade her to let him pick up the tab for the weekend she spent with two girlfriends at the Trump SoHo hotel.
It turns out that Mr. Trump and Mr. Ailes have a number of things in common, besides their politics. Both are 70-something tycoons. Both are obsessed with loyalty, thin-skinned and fragile. And both face accusations of sexual harassment from a number of women. The anchor Gretchen Carlson was the first to make this claim in public against Mr. Ailes. But she was by no means the only one. As Radar Online has already reported, Ms. Kelly confirms in her memoir that about a decade ago, she, too, was on the receiving end of Mr. Ailes’s advances.
She declines to get into many specifics, apart from his conjecture about the “very sexy bras” she must own and how he’d like to see her in them. “But suffice it to say, he made sexual comments to me, offers of professional advancement in exchange for sexual favors.” In 2006, she writes, Mr. Ailes tried to grab her and kiss her on the lips. Ms. Kelly dodged him twice and made a beeline for the door — at which point, she writes, he asked her an ominous question: “When is your contract up?” Then he lunged for the third time.
Years later, when Ms. Carlson made her allegations against Mr. Ailes, Ms. Kelly was asked to speak in support of him. When she refused, Mr. Ailes “engineered hit pieces about me online,” she writes.
She chose to call Lachlan Murdoch, executive co-chairman of News Corporation and 21st Century Fox.
Throughout the 2016 election, Ms. Kelly questioned Mr. Trump and his surrogates about the sexual harassment and assault accusations rapidly accumulating against him. But her memoir is a reminder that she is a complicated feminist figure — starting with the fact that she rejects the label “feminist.” The needle she threads has an almost microscopic eye. She is trying simultaneously to appeal to both her new “Lean-In” fan base and the regular Fox news watchers who abhor identity politics.
This book will doubtless have sex appeal among gossips and Kelly obsessives. But the author wants to do more than tell a juicy story. She’s positioned this book as a self-help guide — please see the title — and I was, I’ll confess, quite curious about this aspect of it, reading “Settle for More” in the way a springer spaniel might read the memoir of a Siamese cat.
How does one become so fabulous, shrewd and self-possessed? And what’s it like?
I will admit I was hoping to find a bit of springer spaniel in her. 
And she is, on occasion. But she’s also a celebrity with an image to manage. Ultimately, we’re supposed to aspire to her life. Her husband? Dreamy. Her kids? Phenomenal. Her job? Flexible! Even if it’s on TV. Her message is that with hard work, and an attentiveness to our true needs, we can achieve such things.
Me, I’m not feeling it. Like most superstars, Ms. Kelly is a metabolic anomaly. She’s willed herself into her own spectacular existence. Along the way, she got the best of the next president of the United States. And the worst.