Updated, 11:16 a.m.
Good morning on this chilly-cheery Wednesday.
We’ve been so consumed by the presidential election that we almost didn’t notice the holiday season had arrived.
The “Radio City Christmas Spectacular” with the Rockettes kicked off on Friday; the Grand Central Terminal’s holiday fair and train show opened on Monday; and the Union Square Holiday Market (Thursday) and New York Botanical Garden’s train show (Saturday) add to the festivities this week.
We visited the Winter Village in Bryant Park, which opened more than two weeks ago, to see if we could get into the holiday spirit — even though it isn’t even Thanksgiving yet.
Among the stalls selling wooden puzzles, French chocolate and aged maple syrup from Vermont was Christina’s World, a booth stocked with ornaments designed in Brooklyn but made by hand in Poland.
Craig Roberts, 60, of Rhode Island, who has worked at the stall for three holiday seasons, says the shopping rules at holiday markets are a little different.
• Don’t expect to be able to return items, but exchanges may be possible.
• Haggle. It’s possible at some stalls.
But he did proudly show off the season’s characters.
The (torrential) rain is behind us.
We should have impeccable, sunny weather with highs around 60 through the weekend.
Out:umbrellas, bad hair and winter coats.
In: mid-weight leather jackets, sunglasses and pumpkin-scented anything.
• Scoreboard: Devils shoot Stars, 2-1 (in overtime). Rangers wrangle Canucks, 7-2. Lakers splash Nets, 125-118.
• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Wednesday Briefing.
• Knicks host Pistons, 7:30 p.m. (MSG).
• Alternate-side parking: in effect until Nov. 24.
The Astor Place Cube will be spinning again this morning.
This month, the beloved art installation in the East Village, known as “Alamo,” was reinstalled after a nearly two-year absence. But barriers have blocked access to the artwork with a sign promising that it will open soon.
That day has arrived with a ribbon-cutting ceremony at 8:30 this morning.
“After that, the cube is officially back; you can spin it,” said Shavone Williams, the public information officer at the city’s Design and Construction Department.
The artist Tony Rosenthal created “Alamo” in 1967 as a temporary installation commissioned by the city’s Cultural Affairs Department, but it became a permanent outdoor sculpture at Lafayette and Eighth Streets after local residents petitioned the city.
Turning it on its vertical axis with a group of friends or strangers or kissing it with your partner is said to bring good luck.
So go ahead, give it a smooch or a swirl.
