FRIDAY PUZZLE — Ah, our young constructors ... they grow up so quickly, don’t they?
Not that long ago, David Steinberg was making his very impressive debut at the age of 14, making him the second youngest constructor to be published while Will Shortz has been editor. His puzzles, while always intelligent and well made, hinted at his longing to be older in the form of at least one clue in each puzzle advertising the fact that he didn’t have a girlfriend.
But that’s not what I’m here to talk to you about today. It’s Friday, so we get to throw away the theme convention and enjoy a more open grid, with longer, more exciting entries and devilish cluing. I really enjoyed the triple stacks and longer entries in Mr. Steinberg’s puzzle, particularly WOW JUST WOW. Other very lively entries that caught my eye include ABOVE WATER, DRY ROAST, CHEAP DATE, HOT STONE MASSAGE (Yes, please!), ASK ANYONE, SLOW DANCE, SNOW CRAB (the “bright orange” in the clue is a red herring) and BLACK WIDOW.
■ 17A: #TodayILearned that the word IRONY comes from the Greek word eirōneía, based on the comic character Eiron.
■ 19A: What other kind of “boxers” do you know besides those who spar in a boxing ring? Well, yes, but you could hardly call underwear professional. Today we’re supposed to be thinking of MOVERS, who, if you are very lucky, box things up for you and don’t mark every single one of those boxes “Miscellaneous.” Not that I am still bitter about that.
■ 24A: As someone who represents the shorter end of the average height spectrum (full disclosure: on a good day, I’m 5’2”), a clue like “Things short people have?” makes me think that the answer has to be “MORE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS THAN TALL PEOPLE.” That, of course, is not only silly, but it has way more than the allotted four letters. The answer, which relies on a pun about being short on money, is DEBTS.
■ 38A: Wordplay alert! Look closely at this clue. On first reading, you might assume that “Something no one can sing” is about the song itself, but it really isn’t; it’s about how many people are singing. No one person can sing a DUET.
■ 41A: More wordplay! A “cutting edge producer” is not necessarily about a producer who makes au courant films or plays; it could also be something that produces a sharp edge, like a STROP.
■ 3D: Here’s another case where you need to think about the different meanings of a word. “Solvent” can be something that dissolves things, or it can mean that you are not short/in debt (I’m pretty sure that was done deliberately by the editors). Another phrase for “solvent” is ABOVE WATER.
■ 25D: There are a lot of recipes for a vodka BLACK WIDOW cocktail, but I’m guessing that this is tied to the character in “The Avengers” series. Here’s a recipe for one that looks yummy.
■ 26D: Please tell me you got this one. It’s so hokey and funny that I think it’s pretty obvious that we’re not supposed to be thinking of salad dressing. The answer is TOGAS.
This puzzle dates to January 2015. If memory serves, Matt Ginsberg had just sent out the final version of a crowdsourced word list that numerous other constructors and I had been working on, so I was excited to put it to the test! After receiving the word list, I sifted through it a bit to see which entries really stood out to me. One of the tricky things about crowdsourcing anything, especially something as subjective as a word list, is that everyone has slightly different tastes. So it took me a while to find three highly scored entries for the bottom left stack that I genuinely liked.
Once I had the bottom left in place, I plunked down WOW JUST WOW and moved on to the upper right. I can’t say I was quite as happy with the upper right — the “never heard of it outside of crosswords” EILAT bothered me — but I was still pleased to work in a handful of entries I thought were interesting. My next task was to find a 15-letter entry for the center slot to tie everything together. I was thrilled to discover that HOT STONE MASSAGE fit nicely, and everything else fell into place from there.
I hope you enjoy the puzzle! In the meantime, I’ll be busy working on my word list ...