SUNDAY PUZZLE — In a crossword puzzle, a crossed reference refers to a pair of clues that are tied together in some way, either because each of the entries is part of a common phrase, or because one entry describes the other.
The clues for these entries typically read “See X-Across” or “Like Y-Down,” and frankly, they are almost always a pain. Solvers love getting into a “zone,” so to speak, and having to stop, look around for the matching clue and entry and respond to it can sometimes put a damper on an otherwise smooth solving experience.
Today, however, those crossed references are actually an important part of the theme. Ed Sessa is back and he has a history lesson for us.
Mr. Sessa has constructed a grid where the crossed references are quite literal. There are six instances where a person of note who is famous for crossing a body of water actually crosses that body of water. So, for example, the clue for 109A says “Famous crosser of the 90-Down” and 90D, of course, refers us right back to 109A (“See 109-Across”). 109A is George WASHINGTON, and 90D is the DELAWARE.
If you are having difficulty finding the rest of the “crossers,” you can see the entire list here.
Instead of talking about tricky clues today, let’s remember that getting started is more important than wrestling even the trickiest clue. If you are new to solving, here’s a tip: Go for the fill-in-the-blanks clues first. They tend to be the easiest because your brain is excellent at filling in information that is missing.
Similar to the fill-in-the-blanks clues are clues which call for you to supply information that is missing, but doesn’t have a visible blank. Let’s look at 121A: “Civil rights leader Medgar”: Your brain should supply you with his last name when you read “Medgar,” so you know that the answer is EVERS. Similarly, “Late actor Bill who played Radio Raheem” (in Spike Lee’s “Do the Right Thing”) is NUNN. Mr. Nunn was an excellent actor, but even if you never saw the movie, his death in September of this year was in the news, so the answer should be rattling around your brain somewhere.
So now you have quite a few answers in your grid. Look at you, solving a Sunday New York Times crossword puzzle! Now keep going. You’ve got this. And we’ve got your back.
I was surprised to find six theme pairs that shared a common interior letter (couldn’t use Caesar-Rubicon, e.g.). Although the paired entries were all pretty short, the asymmetric fixed crossings made the puzzle a bit of a challenge to design, much like a rebus with no flexibility, or a jigsaw puzzle. A black square in the NE would black out a theme letter in the SW. Will asked for enough fill changes to require some major reworking, which in turn meant changing the central element STALAGMITES, replaced with BEAUX GESTES, a nice sounding bit of French and at least a close cousin to the title of a familiar classic movie. I could not get rid of ULE in the NW — if someone figures a way to do it, please let me know. I wish I could take credit for the neat repeat clue for 80 and 82-Down, but that’s another example of the editor’s ingenuity.