The anchorman to whom Mr. Carell was reporting was Mr. Stewart, who pretended to embody the voice of reason and the audience’s point of view. As “The Daily Show (The Book): An Oral History” reports, this was a role Mr. Stewart had carefully conceived and hammered out for himself in the face of scattered staff writers’ opposition.
It was 1998 when he was named the replacement for Craig Kilborn on a very different “Daily Show,” which already had Mr. Carell and Stephen Colbert on board. They made a good team. Mr. Stewart was a guy in a leather jacket who had a good but not stellar résumé. And “The Daily Show” bore no resemblance to what it would become under his unyielding command.
The book attests to how well loved Mr. Stewart is by most of those who’ve worked for him — although there have been angry exceptions, and the grousing is included here. (Is it underplayed? Hard to tell when a writer has been given an all-access pass.) It also features some of the show’s breakout stars in candid mode, with the bulk of the funny stories swirling around Mr. Colbert in his early years. Mr. Colbert sounds like the most fearless of the correspondents when it came to getting interviewees to answer outrageous questions — and he was the first of them to be sued. His classic advice, which has been passed down among fellow correspondents: Check your soul at the door. Spend your per diem, preferably by drinking it. You can always eat free cereal in the break room when you get back to New York.
Mr. Smith carefully follows the show’s arc to the start of the war in Iraq (which earned the “Daily Show” moniker “Mess O’Potamia” — though no one can remember who came up with it) and the video-clip milestone that had the show staging Bush vs. Bush debates comparing Gov. George W. Bush’s statements about Iraq with those of President George W. Bush. This tactic was “a Rosetta Stone piece,” says Steve Bodow, who would become head writer in 2007. It would pave the way to the “show, don’t tell” use of news clips that made the program so powerful.
“Daily Show” political convention coverage also gets its due here, since the troupe really expanded its range with each new outing. Among the best sports Mr. Smith interviews are Senator John McCain and his wife, Cindy, who says she found the “Daily Show” guys “a hoot” in 2000 and kept one of their team jackets as a souvenir. For all his bitter feuding with Mr. Stewart, Senator McCain speaks of the show with affection.
A bleaker phase begins after Mr. Colbert’s departure, Mr. Stewart’s decision to direct his 2014 film, “Rosewater,” and John Oliver’s move to HBO after his wildly successful stint as Mr. Stewart’s temporary replacement. The show had by then awoken to the idea of diversity, made terrific new hires (among them Aasif Mandvi, Hasan Minhaj and Jessica Williams, only 22 when she began) and accepted the end of Mr. Stewart’s tenure.
The book concludes on his last night, with Trevor Noah, his promising replacement, as part of the crowd staging an all-star send-off. An era ends. Bruce Springsteen fights the gloom with “Born to Run.” And Mr. Smith’s book feels like a visit to a distant time.