Novak Djokovic, a three-time defending champion, lost in the Paris Masters quarterfinals on Friday, leaving his No. 1 ranking open to being snatched by Andy Murray. Murray can rise from No. 2 to No. 1 in the ATP list for the first time if he reaches the final. He beat No. 11 Tomas Berdych, 7-6 (9), 7-5, to reach the semifinal, where his opponent will be Milos Raonic.
Murray was sometimes hesitant against Berdych. He rallied from 6-1 down in the tiebreaker and needed four match points to overcome the Czech.
Djokovic, so dominant on the Parisian red clay last June in winning his first French Open to complete a career grand slam, was far from his best on the superfast carpet at the Masters and was beaten by Marin Cilic, 6-4, 7-6 (2), his first loss in 15 matches against Cilic. Hampered by a lingering injury to his right hand, Djokovic made uncharacteristic mistakes from the baseline, called the tournament doctor during the first set, struggled with consistency on his serve and destroyed his hopes of a comeback when he served for the second set at 5-4, hit two double faults and was broken. Cilic, who struck nine aces over all, served extremely well to prevail in the tiebreaker and end Djokovic’s 17-match winning streak in Paris.
Djokovic has held the top spot for 122 consecutive weeks. But his form has been erratic over the past few months, and he did not play in Paris with the confidence he showed here last year, when he crushed Murray, 6-2, 6-4, in the final.
If he wins the title, Murray, who has spent 76 weeks at No. 2, would become the 26th player to reach No. 1 since the rankings started in 1973.
In a semifinal on Saturday, Murray will face the fourth-seeded Raonic, who defeated Tsonga, 6-2, 7-6 (4).
Cilic will take on John Isner in the other semifinal. Isner won a hard-fought, all-American contest against Jack Sock, 7-6 (6), 4-6, 6-4, after throwing a tantrum over a foot-fault call in the second set.
The N.F.L. said it was fining Green Bay linebacker Datone Jones $36,464 for his roughing-the-passer penalty against Atlanta.
Jones is a repeat offender, resulting in the large fine imposed by the league. On Sunday, Jones hit Falcons quarterback Matt Ryan in the first half of Atlanta’s 33-32 victory.
Cincinnati’s Shawn Williams was docked $24,309 for spearing, a result of a hit on Washington’s DeSean Jackson during the teams’ 27-27 tie in London on Sunday.
Also fined $24,309 for unnecessary-roughness penalties last weekend were Detroit’s Tavon Wilson and Oakland’s Karl Joseph. The Raiders’ Donald Penn was also hit with an $18,231 fine for unnecessary roughness, while Michael Crabtree was fined $9,115 for taunting.
The Boston Red Sox bench coach Torey Lovullo has been hired as manager of the Arizona Diamondbacks and will be introduced at a news conference on Monday.
Lovullo had been considered a leading candidate for the job after the team hired the Red Sox’ assistant general manager, Mike Hazen, as general manager.
Lovullo replaces Chip Hale, who was fired after two seasons. Hazen took over from Dave Stewart, who was also dismissed after two years.