DES MOINES — For law enforcement officers here, it feels like a still-raw wound being torn open anew. Less than eight months after a drunken driver killed two police officers in a fiery crash, two other officers were shot to death in separate episodes on Wednesday.
Scott M. Greene, 46, an Iowa man with a history of personal problems and clashes with the police, was charged on Thursday with two counts of first-degree murder in the fatal shootings of Anthony Beminio, a Des Moines police sergeant, and Justin Martin, an officer in an adjacent city, Urbandale. On Wednesday, officers searching a rural area west of Des Moines found Mr. Greene’s abandoned truck, and the rifle they believe was used in the shootings.
Sergeant Beminio, who was married and had three children, was a state champion wrestler and football lineman at West High School in Iowa City. Dan Dvorak, who was an assistant football coach there, remembered him as the kind of positive influence that coaches treasure.
Officer Martin, 24, attended high school in Rockwell City, and had joined the Urbandale police department just last year. He and Sergeant Beminio had graduated from Simpson College in Indianola, near Des Moines.
Fred Jones, a sociology and criminal justice professor at Simpson, taught them both, and knew Officer Martin especially well.
“Always, from Day 1 the day he walked in the door here at Simpson, he wanted to be a police officer,” Dr. Jones said.
The fatal shootings struck a law enforcement community still recovering from the deaths in March of Officers Carlos Puente-Morales and Susan Farrell. A drunken driver going the wrong way on Interstate 80 struck them head-on, killing himself, the two officers, and the prisoner they were transporting.
Until that crash, it had been eight years since a Des Moines officer had died in the line of duty, and nearly 39 years since one had been killed by another person. The department had never lost two officers in a single day. The Urbandale police department said that, before Wednesday, they had never had an officer killed on duty.
Des Moines officials said the police department had a robust peer-to-peer counseling program, which would be tested again.
Residents have responded, as they did after the crash in March, leaving flowers and gifts outside the cities’ police stations, making food deliveries, and raising money for the officers’ families.
The officers were killed between 1 and 1:30 a.m. Wednesday, about two miles apart, while sitting in their patrol cars. Officials said they believed the gunman had no interaction with either of the officers before opening fire.
Mr. Greene, the accused gunman, who lives in Urbandale, surrendered later Wednesday morning in rural Dallas County, and it was there that investigators found his truck, bogged down in brush and mud, and, separately, a .223-caliber rifle.
No permit is required to own a rifle in Iowa, but under state law, carrying a loaded gun in any city generally does require a permit. Polk County, which includes Des Moines and Urbandale, said it had not issued a carry permit to Mr. Greene, but another Iowa county might have done so.
When he turned himself in, Mr. Greene complained of a medical problem and was taken to a hospital, where he remained until being taken to jail on Thursday. Until then, detectives had not questioned him, and it was unclear if they were able to speak with him after he left the hospital. Sergeant Parizek said that no motive for the shootings was known.
“I guarantee whatever it is, it’s not going to make any damn sense to any of us,” he said.