PRINCETON, N.J. — Journalism may be the first draft of history. But on Friday, a group of scholars gathered here for what might be an editing session on the second.
“After election night, I instantly got emails from the participants, asking if we were going to have the same discussion,” Julian E. Zelizer, the Princeton historian who organized the gathering, said before the proceedings.
The mood among the overwhelmingly liberal group — in contrast to how some participants recalled a similar gathering in 2008 to assess the presidency of George W. Bush, in the giddy days after President Obama’s election — was decidedly grim.
The conference turned out to be “good practice for saying ‘the Trump presidency’ without the words getting stuck in your throat,” Meg Jacobs, a research scholar at Princeton, said wryly.
Ms. Jacobs, whose paper discussed President Obama’s energy policies, noted the degree to which many policy achievements described in the papers relied on executive action, which can be easily reversed by a subsequent president, and waved her hand: gone.
During the formal discussion, the nearly two dozen scholars gathered around a square table in a sunny conference room mostly stuck to the dispassionate long view, putting President Obama in the context of broad political and social forces.
But occasional bulletins from the outside world underscored the feeling of being bunkered in a scholarly equivalent of the Situation Room, tracking the loss of more and more territory.
The nearly seven hours of discussion on Friday included debate on many big-picture questions: Did the Obama presidency represent as much of a sharp break with that of George W. Bush as people might assume? Are the American people as divided as the extreme polarization of the political system suggests? What was more important to Republican political dominance: gerrymandering or conservative media?
Several participants said that reading all the papers made them realize that President Obama had gotten more done, policy-wise, in the face of relentless opposition than they had thought. But at the same time, many noted, his policies had often been designed in ways that failed — fatally, it seemed in retrospect — to generate political credit.
One of the most ringing cases came from the sociologist Paul Starr, whose paper argued that President Obama, contrary to widespread belief, made significant progress in reducing income inequality, once benefits like food stamps and health care were factored in.
He also offered a progressive defense of the 2009 stimulus package, citing what he called “a stunning piece of data”: In the absence of the stimulus and related measures, he said, the poverty rate would have gone up by 4.5 percentage points. Instead it only went up 0.5 percentage points.
If his paper was guardedly optimistic, his postelection verdict was not. “I’m afraid all of what he did relating to reducing inequality is going to be wiped out,” he said.
The theme of a “stealth state” — which allowed President Obama to push policies in ways that avoided triggering opposition, but also prevented building support for government action — also came up in the discussions of education and environmental policy.
And there was debate about President Obama’s efforts, or lack thereof, to strengthen the Democratic Party itself, and about how much personality — the X factor that academic historians, unlike journalists and most popular historians of the presidency, tend to play down — mattered to events of the last eight years.
After the formal discussion wrapped, Mr. Zelizer, the author of “The Fierce Urgency of Now: Lyndon Johnson, Congress and the Battle for the Great Society,” said he found himself puzzling over the paradox of President Obama’s astute political intelligence on the one hand, and his lack of attention to the partisan side of politics on the other.
At a group dinner on Friday night at a nearby Italian restaurant, there was plenty of wine and gallows humor. Gary Gerstle, a professor at the University of Cambridge, in a toast, jokingly proposed a theme for the group’s next gathering: secession.
“Germany!” someone shouted.
Mr. Gerstle said he hoped the first draft of the historians’ papers, all written under the shadow of a presumed Clinton victory, would be saved, to provide a lesson for future scholars about the contingency of history.
