Some pantsuits were white, in tribute to the dresses of the suffragists. Others were mismatched or borrowed. Many were fished out of the back of a closet, along with a memory of a long-lost job or a somber occasion.
These suits were redeployed by thousands of American women on Election Day, when taking a photo of yourself in a pantsuit and posting it to the “secret” Facebook group Pantsuit Nation became the digital equivalent of slapping an “I Voted” sticker on a lapel.
“It’s intense,” she added.
Ms. Chamberlain, 33, created Pantsuit Nation to support Hillary Clinton, the Democratic presidential nominee, less than three weeks ago. Since then, more than 2.5 million people have joined the group — which is invitation only — and have reported donating more than $216,000 through the Pantsuit Nation fund-raising drive. But even that growth didn’t prepare the group’s organizers for the explosive activity on Tuesday.
A member of Pantsuit Nation, who says she runs the digital operations for Hillary for America, shared a message from Mrs. Clinton to the group: “I wanted to take a moment to thank you for your support from the bottom of my heart. This election hasn’t been easy: It’s been long, hard-fought, and at times it made us question who we are as Americans.
Ms. Chamberlain is a mother of two young children who has two part-time jobs in school administration in rural Maine. She said she had formed the Facebook group to create a space to celebrate the historic possibility of the first female president. The response, she said, reflected a need for positivity during a cynical, often dispiriting, campaign.
Ms. Chamberlain said that she didn’t have any data on the demographics of the group members, but added that the posts revealed a broad range in age, ethnicity and even political leanings.
The group has spawned unofficial splinter groups, including Pantsuit Nation Canada, that Ms. Chamberlain said revealed future possibilities.
In the meantime, she has her hands full just trying to get the Election Day posts up, she said. Often, despite the quantity of them, she said, one would make her stop and stare.
Many women who posted were not in stereotypical pantsuits. “Does this count as a pantsuit?” asked a member in New Jersey.
She was wearing military fatigues.