Brexit, Erdogan, Putin and now Trump. Something is rotten in the state of democracy.
Writing after its explosion in 20th-century Europe, Karl Polanyi described in his 1944 book “The Great Transformation” how civil society and individual liberty are threatened as never before when a society has to reconfigure itself to serve the “utopian experiment of a self-regulating market.” Social and political life in India, America and Europe was drastically remade by neoliberal economism in recent decades, under, as the legal scholar David Kennedy has argued, the administration of a professional global class of hidden persuaders and status-seekers.
One of the first signs of this change in India was a proliferation of American-style think-tanks, sponsored by big business as eager as ever to influence political decision-making and military spending. In recent years, smooth-tongued “policy entrepreneurs” (Paul Krugman’s term) advocating free-market reforms and a heavily armed security-state have dominated India’s public sphere.
Many foreign journalists reporting on globalizing India had a knack for parachuting only into islands like tech-y Bangalore, from where the world perhaps does look flat. Their delusion was deepened by India’s own, chauvinistic, media: The country’s leading business daily, The Economic Times, even had a regular feature called “Global Indian Takeover.” Described with enough Ayn Randian clichés about ambition and striving, every slumdog looks like a budding millionaire.
Indifferent to poverty and inequality, and immune to evidence or irony, India’s largely corporate-owned press and television reveled in the fame and wealth of corporate magnates and of cricket and Bollywood stars. All the while they stoked hatred against such enemies of rising India as Kashmiri separatists and their Pakistani supporters.
More important, Mr. Modi grasped then, as astutely as Mr. Trump does now, the terrible political potency of ressentiment. Positioning himself in the gap between the self-righteous beneficiaries of globalization and irascible masses, he claimed to be the son of a modest tea-vendor who had dared to challenge the corrupt old dynasties of quasi-foreign liberals.
Long before Peter Thiel plumped for Mr. Trump and Mark Zuckerberg defended Mr. Thiel, Silicon Valley lined up to hail Mr. Modi’s vision of “Digital India.” Sheryl Sandberg declared that she was changing her Facebook profile in “his honor.” These data-monetizing fans of Hindu may not have known that Mr. Modi, supervising a radical ideological purge at home, had launched Digital India at his residence in New Delhi with a private reception for some of India’s most vicious trolls.
Following authoritarian ruling parties in Hungary and Poland, and a brazenly despotic one in Turkey, India’s Hindu nationalists, a fringe outfit for much of the country’s existence, have swiftly occupied the state, staffing chief institutions with loyalists while intimidating nonstate actors like NGOs, journalists, writers and artists.
B.R. Ambedkar, the main framer of India’s constitution, warned in the 1950s that democracy in India was “only a top dressing on an Indian soil, which is essentially undemocratic.” Now the top dressing is being hosed away.
Synergies between Indian and American technocrats continue to develop: The son of Mr. Modi’s foreign secretary writes on Mr. Modi’s foreign policy, approvingly, for Brookings India. At the same time, India’s press, fearfully self-censoring, if not barefacedly mendacious, has become, as The Economist reported last month, “more craven than Pakistan’s.” Since July Indian security forces have conducted a brutal campaign in Kashmir; they have killed nearly a hundred people and injured thousands, including many children. Bellicose television anchors and op-ed writers, who acclaimed the savagery, are now calling for the war on “anti-nationals” to be extended to nuclear-armed Pakistan.
The blood-thirstiness against internal enemies and evil foreigners won’t subside anytime soon. Fewer jobs are being created on Mr. Modi’s watch than under the previous government of quasi-foreign liberals. India’s supposed “demographic dividend” — an overwhelmingly youthful population — seems like so much more boosterish talk by those policy entrepreneurs. Even the country’s comparative advantage in software technology is shrinking. And last week, Mr. Modi abruptly withdrew two currency bills that account for the vast majority of cash in circulation, unleashing chaos across India.
Two years after he became India’s most powerful leader, Mr. Modi appears to be an opportunistic manipulator of disaffection with little to offer apart from the pornography of power and a bogus fantasy of machismo. Mr. Trump looks set to follow his lead.
Such firebrands emerged out of economic and political crises in almost every major European country in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, distracting angry citizens with the demonization of minorities, cosmopolitans and liberals. Drawing a cautionary tale from this blood-stained history, Polanyi assumed that the catastrophic triumph of economism over social and political necessities would be reversed. The three decades after World War II proved him right. Social-welfare policies underpinned national reconstruction in war-ravaged Europe, as well as in postcolonial Asia and Africa after decades of imperialism.
In our own time, a global network of elites has tried to restart the discredited utopian experiment of a self-regulating market. The experiment failed, and again the rage of cheated masses has spawned demagogues who simultaneously promise to avenge the left-behinds and to rewire their alliances with the elites. Any attempt to rebuild democracy must reckon with the deeper reasons for its great and drastic transformation — above all in India, where Hindu supremacism, in its cruelty and callousness, anticipated the big, big American fan of Hindu.