• Trump’s team.
President-elect Donald J. Trump’s choice of Stephen K. Bannon as his chief strategist is facing criticism from Democrats and Republicans who say he will bring anti-Semitic, nationalist and racist views to the West Wing.
We look at some of the public statements about the country made by Mr. Bannon, the former chairman of Breitbart News, a right-wing news and opinion site.
Somewhat overshadowed by the furor over Mr. Bannon’s appointment was the emergence of Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former New York City mayor, as a top contender for Secretary of State.
• Shake-up slows transition.
The abrupt resignation today of Mike Rogers, a former congressman and a national security adviser to Mr. Trump, has threatened to freeze the process of taking over the government from the Obama administration.
Last week, another member of Mr. Trump’s transition team left after the president-elect removed Gov. Chris Christie from the operation.
• What will Trump eliminate?
Mr. Trump promised to dismantle parts of the government and certain legislation if elected. Here is a list of things he mentioned during the campaign, which includes the Education Department and the Environmental Protection Agency.
• The Supreme Court.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg called on the Senate to act quickly on whoever the president-elect nominates to the court. “Eight is not a good number,” she said on Monday.
Our reporter reviews the names of 21 potential nominees that Mr. Trump submitted in September. While they are all committed judicial conservatives, not all of them went to Ivy League law schools, which diverges from the educational backgrounds of the justices currently serving on the court.
• Gender in America.
There will be no female president come January. But a week ago, there was a distinct possibility that the gender barrier would be breached.
So we asked women to tell us about their own vividly recalled barriers. Almost 1,200 responded. Here are some of their stories.
• Hong Kong-China tensions.
A Hong Kong court ruled today that two pro-independence politicians who were elected to the city’s legislature cannot take their seats. Beijing took an extraordinary step to influence the territory last week by issuing a new interpretation of its charter that effectively barred the lawmakers from the council.
They set off the conflict by using a derogatory term for China when they took their oaths of office.
• Inside Gitmo.
Interviews with more than two dozen medical personnel who served or consulted at the U.S. prison at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, reveal how secrecy, mistrust and the shadow of harsh interrogation tactics limited their ability to treat detainees who developed mental illnesses.
“Every day was an ethical challenge,” one doctor told us.
• Google announced that it would ban websites that peddle fake news from using its online advertising service. Facebook said it would not display ads on sites with misleading content.
Their decisions are a response to the growing outcry over their power in distributing information to the American electorate.
• Adena T. Friedman was named the new chief executive of Nasdaq, the first changeover at the stock market operator in nearly 14 years.
The promotion makes Ms. Friedman one of the highest-ranking women executives in finance.
• Apple’s new MacBook Pro is the latest generation of a laptop beloved by creative professionals and coders.
It’s light and fast, but there’s no need to rush to buy one, our critic writes, noting the computer’s price tag, which ranges from $1,500 to $2,800.
• U.S. stocks finished slightly down on Monday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.
• Life after a natural disaster.
More than a month after Hurricane Matthew ripped through parts of Haiti, some residents in the coastal town of Jérémie are still in their broken houses and waiting for aid. Visit the home of a survivor.CreditCredit...Steve Maing for The New York Times. Technology by Samsung.
More than a month after Hurricane Matthew ripped through parts of Haiti, residents of one coastal town are still waiting for aid. Visit the home of a survivor.
Gwen Ifill, 61, the award-winning PBS journalist and debate moderator, has died of cancer in Washington.
Gwen Ifill as the moderator of the 2008 vice-presidential debate between Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Gov. Sarah Palin of Alaska.
A new sleep study looks at children who are “night owls,” noting that the condition is partly genetic.
Greater daytime sleepiness was one of two factors identified by researchers that put teenagers at risk for academic, emotional and behavioral problems.
Try this one-pot chicken and rice dish that’s fancy yet takes less than an hour to make. While it cooks, read our comparison of the nutritional values for almond, soy, cashew and coconut milks.
Two Chinese astronauts expect to leave their space lab this week, after a monthlong stay that is a first for their nation.
China has poured billions of dollars into its space program, aiming to rival the United States and Russia in reaching Mars.
Such programs are enormous drivers of technological innovation. So it might come as a surprise to know that space communications rely on an old standby: radio waves.
Speech from an astronaut, video from cameras and data from sensors flow into a transmitter, which emits radio waves picked up by a terrestrial receiver. Terrestrial transmitters reverse the favor. The same basic technology sends music to your radio, YouTube videos to your cellphone and photos from Pluto.
There really isn’t an alternative until we figure out how to use lasers to convey data.
There has been a lot of fine-tuning of radio capabilities over the 125 years or so that scientists have been playing with electromagnetic radiation. We now have great antennas and efficient, secure encoding.
But the technology is also good for a simple call from home. Last week, China’s president, Xi Jinping, called the space lab.
