Canada|A New Payroll System Misfires, and Canadians Ask: Where’s My Pay?
A New Payroll System Misfires, and Canadians Ask: Where’s My Pay?
OTTAWA — The government of Canada has a credit rating of AAA and a budget of over $200 billion. You would think it could meet its payroll.
But for most of this year, getting paid has been an exercise in frustration for more than 80,000 Canadian public servants — not for lack of money, but because of a new payroll system that has repeatedly gone haywire.
One of the 80,000 is Bill Ryan, a leading seaman in the coast guard, a civilian agency. His overtime and supplementary pay for duty as an air-sea rescue worker stopped coming in July, and then in August, when he was out in the North Atlantic aboard the patrol ship Leonard J. Cowley, he discovered that he was no longer being paid at all.
He tried to address the problem online, but the satellite link available to him on the ship was so slow that downloading an email attachment could take a whole day. He tried to deal with it by ship-to-shore telephone, but the government employee hotline kept putting him on perpetual hold. He finally had to tell his wife back in Newfoundland to put off buying back-to-school clothes and supplies for their three children.
Unwelcome payday surprises like Mr. Ryan’s have troubled the Canadian public service since February, when the government switched to the new payroll system, known as Phoenix, and laid off about 2,700 payroll clerks who were no longer supposed to be needed. The government manages a payroll of 20 billion Canadian dollars a year, about $15 billion.
Government leaders have promised that Phoenix, which covers about 300,000 civilian government workers, will be “stabilized” soon. But workers and their unions are skeptical, and the government has put off extending Phoenix to cover the military and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, a change that was supposed to happen on Nov. 1.
Every imaginable kind of pay problem appears to have cropped up, affecting every kind of employee, even some political aides to cabinet ministers. Some workers have been underpaid and others overpaid. Miscalculated deductions have left some workers with pay deposits that were not much more than pocket change. And some, like Mr. Ryan, were simply dropped from the payroll in error.
Managers in some government departments found themselves lending their own money to subordinates to cover basic needs like groceries. Merchants in small cities where the government is a major employer have seen sales slump. When a temporary system was set up to give emergency pay to affected workers, Phoenix sometimes immediately took back what the system gave. A number of people with skills in high demand, like nurses, have quit the government to work for employers with functioning payroll systems.
Many of the employees who were hired to operate the Phoenix system became so stressed by the flood of complaints that they took sick leave, leaving their office in Miramichi, New Brunswick, even harder pressed to cope.
Still, Mr. Aylward acknowledged that the previous payroll system, a 40-year-old patchwork of software, needed replacing. In 2009, Prime Minister Stephen Harper, a Conservative, hired IBM Canada to create a replacement based on PeopleSoft, a software system made by Oracle that is widely used by corporations and institutions to manage operations, finances and employees.
What went wrong after that is a matter of debate, but probably involved a combination of blunders, poor planning and some wishful thinking. Judy M. Foote, who inherited Phoenix when she was named minister of public services and procurement by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau last year, has asked the country’s auditor general for a post-mortem.
Everyone agrees that the job was not easy. Though many government employees work in 9-to-5 office jobs, the public payroll also includes a wide array of people like Mr. Ryan with complicated work schedules and pay rules. The government estimates that its 27 collective agreements with 15 unions, as well as its own policies, have led to more than 80,000 rules governing wages and salaries.
Debi Daviau, the president of another union, the Professional Institute of the Public Service of Canada, is also a computer systems analyst who had private-sector experience before going to work for the government. She faults the government for turning to an outside contractor, IBM, to create the new payroll system, rather than relying on its own software developers.
Once that choice was made, she said, the Harper government put so much emphasis on saving money that it undermined efforts to ensure that the system would function well.
While the Conservatives have avoided answering direct questions about their role in the system, they have repeatedly accused the Liberal government of bungling what they started.
“Blaming the previous government is like taking home a nice steak from the butcher and then burning it and blaming the butcher,” Kelly McCauley, the member of Parliament who is the Conservative spokesman on the issue, said at the September hearing.
The potential for trouble was apparent early on. In May 2015, when the Conservatives still held power, IBM recommended pushing back the planned start-up of Phoenix at the end of that year. It was postponed until February, but the government went ahead with layoffs of the payroll clerks anyway, making it impossible to keep the old system operating as a backup in case of teething trouble with Phoenix.
Phoenix’s problems are far from being untangled, and new issues keep appearing. But the government has managed to reduce the number of employees who have pay problems to about 18,000, in part by rehiring some of the laid-off payroll clerks to help out. After a fitful start, an emergency pay system appears to have ended the need for managers to dip into their own bank accounts to help employees.
But instead of saving the government 70 million Canadian dollars this year, as promised, Phoenix has cost the government an extra $50 million (about $37 million in United States currency), including $6 million in additional fees paid to IBM to fix it.
Still, Phoenix continues to baffle some of those it was supposed to pay. Neil Colbourne is an example.
He worked at government nursing stations in remote indigenous reserves in northern Ontario until April, when he quit to take a hospital job in his native Newfoundland. At the time he left, he was owed about 4,000 Canadian dollars in back pay because of Phoenix problems.
In September, it appeared that the government would finally pay up. But it deposited just a fraction of what it owed Mr. Colbourne into his bank account: 306 Canadian dollars. Then, the government went back into his bank account and withdrew 346 Canadian dollars, claiming that he had been overpaid.
Since then Mr. Colbourne says, he has been unable to get any answers from the call center. But even though its call center is not responsive, the Phoenix system hasn’t forgotten Mr. Colbourne.
“I’m still getting a biweekly pay stub,” he said.