PITTS, Ga. — There may be more improbable culinary trails than the one that leads from a red clay road here in the country’s most prolific peanut-growing state to Beyoncé’s plate at the Hotel Bel-Air in Los Angeles. But as zero-to-hero food tales go, this is a good one.
The star of the story is cold-pressed green peanut oil, which some of the best cooks in the South have come to think of as their local answer to extra-virgin olive oil.
The nuts are pressed at low temperatures in a machine smaller than a golf bag in the back of a building that isn’t much more than a shack, on Clay Oliver’s farm. He lives about 150 miles south of Atlanta, and makes some 400 gallons a year. Chefs turn poetic when they describe it.
He and other fans say that the oil may be the most exciting new culinary concept to come from the South’s peanut culture since George Washington Carver’s agricultural research a century ago.
Most peanut oil is processed with heat and chemicals to create a cooking medium that is relatively inexpensive, doesn’t taste like much and can stand up to long bouts of high heat. There are some boutique cold-pressed roasted peanut oils, but they have a more distinct peanuty flavor.
Few have tried making cooking oil from fresh green peanuts, which, when first pulled from the ground, can be as perishable as tomatoes. Mr. Oliver, 40, pressed his first batch in 2012, and now he has a tiny culinary hit on his hands. He is already so wary of competitors that he won’t let his process be photographed.
The idea came to him out of desperation. His father died in 2008, when the Great Recession hit the hardest. Mr. Oliver and his brother, Clint, were left to figure out how to cover the cost of running their century-old family farm.
He started looking for new ways to make money. One idea was producing biofuel. Another was making cold-pressed canola oil.
An extension agent showed him a jar of peanut oil someone was using for tractor fuel, and the two ideas came together: What if he cold-pressed the nuts and seeds that grew around him? He bought a heavy tabletop press but was such a novice that he had to call the manufacturer to figure out how to turn it on.
He pressed sunflower seeds, then pecans. It was nothing but kitchen-table trial and error. At first, he wasted more oil than he poured into the Mason jars that his wife, Valerie, was labeling by hand.
One of the region’s biggest peanut-processing plants is nearby, so Mr. Oliver started pressing raw green runner peanuts, the kind that are harvested on about 700,000 acres in Georgia each fall. He tried selling it locally, but at $12 for 16 ounces, it wasn’t a big hit.
“People are like, ‘I can get peanut oil for $15 a gallon,’” he said.
Then came the big break. Someone from the nonprofit organization Georgia Organics recognized that the oil might fit the growing interest in both Southern food and handmade farm products. He suggested that Mr. Oliver visit the chef Steven Satterfield, whose Atlanta restaurant, Miller Union, is a regular on the short list of best Southern restaurants.
Mr. Satterfield, who considers himself a student of the goober, was about to go to Charleston to shoot an episode of “The Mind of a Chef,” the PBS show that starred Mr. Brock in its second season. Mr. Satterfield threw some of the oil into his bag. On the show, Mr. Satterfield and Mr. Brock went crazy over it.
It was Mr. Satterfield who gave what Mr. Oliver had simply been calling peanut oil a more marketable name: green peanut oil.
“It has this great green-bean kind of greenness to it,” Mr. Satterfield said of the taste.
Soon, Mr. Oliver was printing labels and selling his oil at farmers’ markets in Atlanta and through a website, oliverfarm.com. He could barely keep up. He won accolades from two stalwarts of Southern kitchen culture, the magazines Southern Living and Garden & Gun. Then came a 2016 Good Food Award, bestowed by a group from the Bay Area that drills deeply into the flavor and environmental practices behind small-batch foods like chocolate, coffee, cheese and jam.
“He nailed it in his category,” said Sarah Weiner, the director of the awards.
She remembers Mr. Oliver well, because he drove his wife and their two children to San Francisco to accept the award. The family had never been west of the Mississippi before, and they certainly weren’t used to mixing it up with the city’s elite chocolatiers and charcutiers.
“It was like ‘Meet the Clampetts,’” Mr. Oliver said.
Sunflower oil from New Hampshire did well in the competition, too, Ms. Weiner said. Regionally produced cooking oils are becoming increasingly important to those who want to eat locally grown food and don’t live near oil-producing olive trees, she said.
To get even more terroir into his oil, Mr. Oliver plans to start pressing the ancestral peanut of the South: the Carolina African runner peanut. Originally brought to North America by enslaved West Africans, the peanut was thought to be all but extinct.
David Shields, a professor at the University of South Carolina and the author of the culinary history “Southern Provisions,” has been working with growers at Clemson University to revive them. They are commercially available this fall for the first time since the Great Depression.
Oil from the Carolina African runner was once highly prized, Professor Shields said. In 1769, a flask of it was sent to the Royal Society of London. Members rhapsodized that it rivaled Tuscan olive oil, he said.
Bob Parker, the president of the National Peanut Board, is all for anyone who rhapsodizes about peanuts. He spends much of his time studying potential causes and treatments for peanut allergies and worrying about the current drought. He hasn’t heard of anyone else pressing green peanuts for oil, a practice he said is quite popular in China.
The largest peanut growers in the South (the ones whose crop ends up inside M & Ms and jars of peanut butter) think green peanut oil is good idea, albeit a niche product.
“Those boys are not going to make a dent in 25 tons of green peanuts, but they’re headed down the right road,” said Dan King of Tri-County Ag, a farming operation in Ashburn, Ga.
Chefs, meanwhile, love the oil. Hugh Acheson uses it to enliven kampachi crudo at Empire State South in Atlanta. Mr. Satterfield uses it like the best extra-virgin olive oil, dressing a salad of field peas and boiled peanuts and enhancing roasted squash, which he tops with a Southern version of the Egyptian seed-and-oil condiment called dukkah.
The oil is also a supporting character in a coming book about peanuts that he wrote, to be published by Short Stack Editions.
“Peanuts are pretty fascinating when you think about them,” he said.
Mr. Brock uses green peanut oil liberally at his new, 18-seat revamp of McCrady’s in Charleston. One dish from the restaurant ended up as part of a $225 dinner he helped prepare last month as a guest chef at Wolfgang Puck’s restaurant in the Hotel Bel-Air.
Mr. Brock mixed the earthy juice of green peanuts with green peanut oil, then spooned it onto a plate with puréed lovage. The effect was a little like celery and peanut butter. Then he slid a piece of poached cobia and some sliced matsutake mushrooms onto the plate, garnishing it all with chopped green peanuts seasoned with green peanut oil and homemade koji black vinegar.
The dish moved Beyoncé to summon him from the kitchen, he said. She’s from the South, so they hung out and talked Southern food. He forgot to mention the green peanut oil. He wishes he had.
