ANN ARBOR, Mich. — A patch of sidewalk on the south side of East Liberty Street, four blocks from the main University of Michigan campus, has returned from the dead with remarkable speed.
At almost any hour of day, and especially at mealtimes, a mix of bargain-seeking undergraduates, white-collar tech workers and middle-class townies weave in and out of the restaurants, coffee shop and bank that now line the corridor.
The foot traffic is almost enough to make many in this city feel lucky that the single previous occupant of this red brick low-rise building on the 600 block went bankrupt five years ago. Almost, that is, because that previous tenant was the flagship Borders store.
Such talk is probably still sacrilege for some local nostalgics, who remember that the store was started by a pair of brothers and Michigan graduates before it turned into an international book chain, but it is difficult to argue on a dollars-and-cents basis with the transformation.
For more than 70 years, the site in this pivotal city block was occupied by a single-business anchor, first a regional department store, Jacobson’s, and then, for decades, Borders.
The chain’s bankruptcy — which, by 2011, was almost overdue as customers had long since turned en masse to the internet to buy books — created a once-in-a-generation release of a large piece of real estate. Suddenly available: a 50,000-square-foot former bookstore that fronts a full block of busy Liberty Street and a 45,000-square-foot adjacent building that previously housed Borders’ corporate headquarters.
There were many ideas about how to use all that space, but one option was immediately taken off the table: installing another anchor tenant.
In early 2012, Hughes Properties acquired the long-term lease rights to the bookstore building that fronts Liberty Street and engaged the commercial broker Jim Chaconas of Colliers International to populate it.
Today, commercial office space inventory in Ann Arbor is at a low. Google’s decision to leave a high-rise three blocks from the former Borders and move its 400-person, four-floor customer service operations to a suburban office park by next year is seen as an opportunity, rather than worrisome.
Even before Mr. Hughes and Mr. Chaconas began deciding the fate of the main Borders building, the three-story former corporate office building was fully leased by Barracuda Networks.
Barracuda, a computer storage and security company based in Campbell, Calif., had been expanding its presence in Ann Arbor since 2007 to tap fresh engineering recruits. The company moved in with 230 employees, making it the largest private employer in downtown behind Google.
Mr. Hughes and Mr. Chaconas figured they would populate the second floor of the old bookstore with multiple office tenants after leasing the ground floor to a retail mix. Yet before Mr. Chaconas got far, the business and media analytics firm Prime Research made an aggressive play to secure 16,000 square feet at $24 a square foot with a call from a vice president, Julie Myers-Beach.
With Prime and Barracuda side by side, the Borders spaces suddenly became the workplace for more than 300 young computer programmers with disposable incomes, Ms. Pollay said. Combined with the Google employees two blocks away, the area suddenly took on a tech-hub vibe, whereas for decades it had primarily focused on serving the university community.
Since then, other start-ups and branches of tech companies have alighted in Ann Arbor’s downtown core. More than 60 companies took part in a recent job fair put on by the city’s small-business incubator, Spark.
“A larger tech company can be a real asset in the sense that it creates a talent pool that is now spawning a continuous labor pool for the entire market,” said Spark’s chief executive, Paul Krutko. He noted that Barracuda had not set up an internal food service, which encouraged employees to venture into downtown.
That is the clientele Mr. Chaconas aimed to cater to while keeping the offerings local. Just as Borders was deeply rooted in the community, so are two current tenants, Knight’s Steakhouse and Sweetwaters Coffee and Tea, both locally owned chains. A third, the HopCat brew pub, is part of a small chain that started in Grand Rapids.
There is also Slurping Turtle, a noodle restaurant, and Pieology, a fast-casual pizza place that chose a corner of the building for its first Michigan location.
Mr. Hughes and Mr. Chaconas expected they would be able to get $35 to $40 a square foot. In the end, they got $45 a square foot on average and helped push the area’s retail rental prices up, Ms. Pollay said. Within two years of Borders’ closing, the entire place was leased, and everything had opened by mid-2015.
“All downtown now is restaurants because people will go to restaurants, but people will not shop,” Mr. Chaconas said.
An early success, Mr. Chaconas said, was persuading the proprietors of Knight’s, Don and Angela Knight, to move in. They already had two popular steakhouses, including one nearby.
As a longtime Ann Arbor family — their children are seventh-generation, they say — they had an affinity for the location and its previous tenants. They spent more than $2 million to build out some 3,500 square feet at the southwestern corner of the building into a more modern concept than their other locations. Since opening in 2014, the 200-seat restaurant has exceeded their targets.
Mr. Chaconas and Mr. Hughes assert that their approach is far healthier for both their bottom line and the city’s welfare than reliance on one tenant, as one early notion to lease the whole former bookstore space to something like a Dave & Buster’s would have.
The subdivision of the Borders space is likely to become an example for future turnover, Mr. Chaconas said. The Urban Outfitters store across the street is, at about 10,000 square feet, one of the largest nonfood retailers in the area, which is worrisome.
