“If there’s anything good about a major illness,” the Japanese conductor Seiji Ozawa writes in an afterword to the oddly titled “Absolutely on Music,” “it’s that it gives you more time than you know what to do with.” He is referring to physical ailments that have plagued him since 2010, when he underwent surgery for esophageal cancer.
He has continued to fight on bravely, but his podium appearances and his travels outside Japan have been severely circumscribed. Now 81, Mr. Ozawa, a dynamo of musical activity until he was 75, has been forced to submit to long periods of rest and recuperation.
Seeing this, Mr. Ozawa’s friend Haruki Murakami, the novelist and perennial popular favorite for a Nobel Prize in Literature, hatched the notion of engaging him in a series of conversations about music, with a view to publication. “He liked the idea immediately,” Mr. Murakami writes in an introduction.
The two talked from November 2010 to July 2011, generally while listening to recordings, including several by Mr. Ozawa with the Boston Symphony Orchestra, of which he was music director from 1973 to 2002, and the Saito Kinen Orchestra, which he founded in 1984.
The meeting of minds is not always complete. Mr. Murakami’s knowledge of Western classical music is neither as deficient as he allows nor as complete as Mr. Ozawa suggests. And Mr. Ozawa finds himself having to think and speak about music in unaccustomed ways.
Since Mr. Murakami asks most of the questions, which are generally pitched at an elementary level and often repetitive, the musical novice should have no great difficulty with the concepts addressed here. But since various pieces are discussed in considerable detail, anyone not intimately familiar with Beethoven’s Third Piano Concerto, Berlioz’s “Symphonie Fantastique” and Brahms’s and Mahler’s First Symphonies may want to have recordings at hand.
Mr. Ozawa’s command of spoken English has always been tenuous, to his regret, as he notes on several occasions. If only, for example, he could have taken in more of the wisdom Leonard Bernstein tried to share during Mr. Ozawa’s years as an assistant conductor to the New York Philharmonic (1961-63).
There is much good, solid musical discussion and information here. But there are also too many muddled volleys off the top of the head, lacking the needed factual follow-up and correction.
Mr. Ozawa led the Vienna Philharmonic in three concerts at Carnegie in 2004. “I remember then thinking that the sound had improved,” he says. “It certainly hadn’t when I was there with the Boston Symphony” some eight years before.
But this is all balderdash. The wholesale renovation of Carnegie took place in 1986, and the concrete left under the stage floor was removed in 1995. No changes significantly affecting the acoustics have been made since.
But the larger reason is surely that Mahler’s music was suppressed by the Nazis in Austria, if not entirely banned, as it was in Germany (a fact that Mr. Murakami acknowledges some 40 pages later).
