Sharon Jones, a powerhouse soul singer with a gritty voice, fast feet and indomitable energy, died Friday of pancreatic cancer. She was 60.
Her death was confirmed by Judy Miller Silverman, her publicist. She said Ms. Jones died at Bassett Medical Center in Cooperstown, N.Y., and was surrounded by members of her band, the Dap-Kings, and other loved ones when she died.
Ms. Jones sang and shouted the kind of gospel-charged soul and funk she had grown up on. Her voice had bite, bluesiness, rhythmic savvy and a lifetime of conviction. She was backed by the Dap-Kings, the revivalist New York City R&B band that supplied her songs as she sparked their career.
But with the Dap-Kings — who sometimes introduced her as “110 pounds of soul excitement” — she became an unstoppable frontwoman. As she sang about love troubles, hard times and a woman’s strength, she would race across the stage in high heels — and sooner or later kick them off — while shouting and shimmying in fringed, sequined dresses.
Ms. Jones and the Dap-Kings worked their way up from clubs to theaters and festivals, and drew growing recognition from fellow musicians. At a 2011 concert in Paris, Prince showed up to play some guitar. In 2014, after chemotherapy sent her cancer into remission, Ms. Jones returned to performing with a show of undiminished energy as long as she could.
Sharon Lafaye Jones was born on May 4, 1956, in Augusta, Ga., and spent her first years living across the state line in North Augusta, S.C. (Augusta, Ga., also nurtured one of her lifelong influences, James Brown.) She was the youngest of six children, and she is survived by four of them: Dora Jones, Isiah Jones, Henry Jones and Willian Stringer.
In 1960, she moved with her family to Brooklyn, growing up in Bedford-Stuyvesant; later, she would write a song for a Christmas album called “Ain’t No Chimneys in the Projects.” She sang gospel music in church and soaked up James Brown, Tina Turner, Aretha Franklin, Stax and Motown from the radio. From the 1970s on, she sang with funk bands and wedding bands, sang backup at recording sessions and led church choirs.
Mr. Roth heard her at a 1996 session backing the soul singer Lee Fields, and quickly began recording her through various labels he was associated with: Pure Records, Desco and then Daptone. The 2002 album “Dap Dippin’ with Sharon Jones and the Dap-Kings” was Ms. Jones’s debut album and Daptone’s first album release.
But Ms. Jones was gaining notice, too. She played a juke joint singer in “The Great Debaters,” a 2007 film by Denzel Washington. When she and the Dap-Kings released their 2007 album, “100 Days, 100 Nights,” they performed at the Apollo Theater. Album by album and tour by tour, Ms. Jones’s audience and reputation grew. She toured with Lou Reed and sang with Phish and Michael Bublé.
When Ms. Jones first returned to performing in 2014, she was bald. Her dancing would have sent any wig flying. “Give The People What They Want” was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best R&B Album.
