U.S.|‘Is It Safe?’ Foreign Students Consider College in Donald Trump’s U.S.
‘Is It Safe?’ Foreign Students Consider College in Donald Trump’s U.S.
NEW DELHI — At a college fair on Wednesday at the Le Méridien hotel here, 20 American universities made their pitches to aspiring students, many of whom had long hoped to study in the United States. But as the students checked out presentations from colleges ranging from the State University of New York at Binghamton to Abilene Christian University in Texas, several expressed concerns about going to America under a Donald J. Trump administration.
This year, the number of international students in United States colleges surpassed one million for the first time, bringing more than $32 billion a year into the economy and infusions of money to financially struggling colleges.
College admissions officials in the United States caution that it is too early to draw firm conclusions about overseas applications, because deadlines for applications are generally in January and February. But they are worried that Mr. Trump’s election as president could portend a drop in international candidates.
Canadian universities have already detected a postelection surge in interest from overseas.
On the same day, there was an increase in visitors from Britain and India, Mr. Sargent said. “Our positive message as a university, but also as a city and a country, definitely is about openness to people from around the world and a real inclusiveness,” he said.
A disruption in the flow of international students could be particularly worrisome for universities that balance their books with income from international students, who generally pay higher tuition.
At Indiana State University, 1,000 of the 13,500 students are foreign, including many Saudis who transferred this year from Idaho State, and officials are concerned, said Santhana Naidu, an associate vice president for communications and marketing.
“We have already received inquiries from prospective students who are in the applicant pool,” Mr. Naidu said. “They’re asking, ‘Is it safe for me to come there?’ and generally getting the lay of the land.” Mr. Naidu will be among officials meeting this week at the university, in Terre Haute, to determine what they can do to assuage fears.
Scott Manning, the director of global programs at Susquehanna University, a liberal arts college in Selinsgrove, Pa., said he had heard before the election that two prospective students from China were waiting until after the vote to submit visa documents necessary to attend Susquehanna.
“They were kind of spooked about threats Trump made about the South China Sea, back and forth with Japan about some uninhabited islands, and trade issues in general,” Mr. Manning said. The students, who were considering an English-language program beginning in January as a precursor to fall enrollment, have still not submitted their documents, he said.
Officials at Ohio State University said it was too early to tell whether the election result would affect international applications, adding that there had been an increase so far this year, although most were received before Election Day.
International study has historically been affected by social forces. Attacks on Indian students in Australia in 2009 and 2010 were believed to be part of the reason for a sharp drop-off in applications from India.
International education experts first raised concerns in May about the election of Mr. Trump, when a study was presented at a meeting of Nafsa: Association of International Educators indicating that a Trump presidency could dissuade international students from coming to the United States.
The study, by Intead and FPP EDU Media, two companies specializing in international student recruitment for colleges, found that 60 percent of international prospective students would be less likely to attend a college in the United States if Mr. Trump were elected. “We were really surprised, if not shocked, by the results,” said Benjamin Waxman, the chief executive of Intead.
More recently, international education experts who have been in China and India — the two biggest feeder countries to American colleges — also said they were seeing postelection jitters.
Andrew Chen, the chief development officer at WholeRen, an international education consulting company in Pittsburgh, returned to the United States this week from China, where, he said, colleges in other countries were trying to capitalize on fears over Mr. Trump.
Rahul Choudaha, an international education consultant in New Jersey, has been traveling for the past week in India, where he said there was a palpable worry among students and their parents.
As she prepared her applications to prestigious American universities, Naina Lavakare, a senior at the British School in New Delhi, developed a Plan B.
Ms. Lavakare, 17, has adjusted her college aspirations. While she still has several American colleges on her list — in New York, California and Rhode Island — she dropped universities in “red states” to focus on colleges in Britain and Canada, her mother said, because she was concerned about Mr. Trump’s anti-immigrant talk.
