SENECA FALLS, N.Y. — As Election Day approached, a new plaque was prepared at the National Women’s Hall of Fame here, for Hillary Clinton.
The polls were suggesting that Mrs. Clinton would be the first woman elected president. She was already among the 266 women enshrined in the hall, a former bank building with pillars. Staff members suggested to Jeanne Giovannini, the president, that a new plaque should be available to a potential flood of jubilant visitors.
“We wanted to be ready,” said Ms. Giovannini, who said she makes a point of maintaining political neutrality.
They put the plaque in a second-floor office. It never came downstairs.
Seneca Falls, cradle of the national movement for women’s rights, was swept up by the same electoral cyclone that lifted Donald J. Trump, the Republican candidate, to the presidency. The town supported Mrs. Clinton, but barely. As of this week, she had tallied 1,740 votes here, giving her an edge of 74 votes over Mr. Trump, with absentee ballots still to be counted.
In the county surrounding the town, also called Seneca, Mr. Trump was the decisive victor. The county election commissioners, Ruth Same, a Democrat, and Tiffany Folk, a Republican, said Mr. Trump had 6,719 votes as of Tuesday, about 52 percent of the vote, compared with 40 percent for Mrs. Clinton.
Seneca Falls was swept up by the same electoral cyclone that lifted Donald J. Trump to the presidency. The town supported Hillary Clinton, but barely.
Ms. Same, 72, has been a commissioner for 30 years. She and Ms. Folk, 45, consider themselves friends. Yet their reaction typifies the breach across America.
“I was shocked,” Ms. Same said of Mrs. Clinton’s defeat.
Ms. Folk, for her part, said she has a deep appreciation for the region’s role in the emergence of women’s rights.
Seneca Falls, about midway between Syracuse and Rochester, is faced with some of the core struggles Mr. Trump targeted in the campaign. Companies such as Sylvania, which once produced television parts here, left years ago. Now Seneca Falls is recasting itself as a tourist destination, an effort involving two themes that collided for some voters in the election.
Historically, this is where Elizabeth Cady Stanton and other giants of the women’s rights movements gathered in 1848 to sign a “Declaration of Sentiments,” asserting that American women deserved equal status under the law.
Stanton did not live to see the payoff: It would be another 72 years before women achieved the right to vote. A national park in Seneca Falls is intended to honor the 1848 convention. Plans for a centennial celebration of the ratification of the 19th Amendment in 1920 had been intensified by the hope that a female president might take part.
Attendance at the national park has reached nearly 45,000 this year, the highest number since 1998, according to Jeffrey Olson, a spokesman for the National Park Service. Ms. Giovannini said those numbers correspond to a surge at the Hall of Fame, an increase she attributes primarily to excitement surrounding Mrs. Clinton’s candidacy.
Seneca Falls also lays claim to another title, contending that it was the model for “It’s a Wonderful Life,” Frank Capra’s holiday movie classic. Every December, the town holds a festival built on that idea.
The film is a capsule view of typical upstate New York aspirations. It offers the tale of a small community — Bedford Falls — that at the last moment manages to extricate itself from a downward spiral.
Josh and Ashley Sanford, a Seneca Falls couple with 4-year-old twin sons, Nicholas and Gavyn, said they had put that kind of hope in their support for Mr. Trump.
Mr. Sanford works as a mechanic and fabricator. “Our vets, our elderly, they’ve got nothing,” Ms. Sanford said.
Some of Mr. Trump’s statements might seem particularly discordant in Seneca Falls, such as his recorded comments about groping women. Bill Lewis and Donna Phillips Lewis explained it this way: Mr. Trump, they said, hides nothing about who he is or how he feels, even when it is ugly, which makes him the opposite of Mrs. Clinton and many other politicians.
“He can be redeemed,” said Mr. Lewis, 67, a retired minister for the Church of the Nazarene.
He and Ms. Lewis returned here eight years ago to care for older parents. They said gender had played no role in their vote: They are opposed to abortion rights and said Mrs. Clinton’s opportunity to appoint at least one Supreme Court justice would have created a reckless, “wide open” American society.
“She wasn’t acceptable to God,” Ms. Lewis said.
Pam Bryan, who runs the Copy Shop in downtown Seneca Falls, said Mrs. Clinton’s defeat was shattering. She said she was frightened by Mr. Trump. “At least now we can stop lying to our daughters and nieces and granddaughters when we tell them they can be anything they want to be,” Ms. Bryan said.
Becky Bly, another downtown merchant, moved here from Long Island to run WomanMade Products, whose inventory honors the town’s heritage.
This week Ms. Bly paused while hanging a painting of the fictional Bedford Falls in her storefront window to warn that Mr. Trump is more apt to create a “Pottersville,” referring to the ruthless tycoon in Mr. Capra’s film.
On that point, Seneca Falls seems to be in agreement.
At the Hall of Fame, Ms. Giovannini said the wording would be changed — again — on Mrs. Clinton’s new plaque, this time to reflect the fact that she won the popular vote, even while losing the election.
Pat Alnes and Dorothy Lind, staff members at the hall, said that after the election a young Clinton campaign worker had pulled off the New York State Thruway to pay an impromptu visit. The worker began weeping, revealing a grief shared by many visitors who have made the pilgrimage since Mr. Trump’s victory.
Ms. Giovannini said resilience amid disappointment is at the core of the women’s rights movement, and this is a reminder the staff gently shares with guests.
