The spare simplicity of the introductory galleries of the Jewish Museum’s new exhibition on the interior designer Pierre Chareau — even the inventive moving silhouettes on scrims there — do not prepare you for the fully immersive virtual reality experiences in the show’s second-to-last gallery.
The exhibition’s design team, Diller Scofidio & Renfro, has been exploring for decades what Elizabeth Diller, a founding partner, calls “real” and “mediated” experiences: actual views juxtaposed with slightly displaced ones. Here, they have created four V.R. environments that can be viewed alongside actual objects. The idea is to put on the goggles and toggle between the two types of experiences.
The settings are based on archival photographs of Chareau’s furniture, interiors and architecture, and on contemporary research done in Paris, the original location of all four settings.
The most vivid are the 360-degree panoramic view of the verdant garden and the interior of the Maison de Verre, Chareau’s 1932 House of Glass in the Seventh Arrondissement.
The goggles take you directly into the house’s striking grand salon, one wall lined with the glass blocks that gave the house its name, the floor covered with Pirelli rubber tiles. The immersive technology lets you appreciate how Chareau’s telephone fan table and fireside chairs must have jumped out of their neutral environment. The panoramic view also lets you see the practical beauty of Chareau’s system of wrought-iron shelves, some almost reaching the ceiling.
The other V.R. settings are more low key but still intimate. One recreates the study from the 1927 residence, on Rue Nollet, of Chareau and his wife, Dollie, also a designer, with its Hosiasson rug, adorned with an abstract, Miró-like design, and sunlit casement windows, which cast shadows on the furniture. Look for the 1927 desk and stool made for the French architect Robert Mallet-Stevens, as well as two bronze sculptures by Lipchitz and Braque’s 1911-12 painting, “Homage to J. S. Bach,” now at the Museum of Modern Art.
The final installation depicts the living room and adjacent spaces of the Paris apartment Chareau designed for the Farhi family around 1930. The V.R. here takes you into every nook and cranny, showing how the curved rail suspended from the ceiling accommodates a plaid accordion screen. There is even smoke wafting from a lighted cigarette, a very Gallic touch.
Ms. Diller, in an interview, pointed to the conceptual grounding for the Chareau installations in her firm’s 1991 Slow House project, a design for a waterfront site in North Haven, on Long Island, that was never built. She described it as a “passage from physical entry to optical departure, or, simply, a door to a window.” She also cited “Moving Target,” a 1996 multimedia theater work, based on Nijinsky’s diaries, which featured live performers juxtaposed with performers who were filmed and projected, as another precedent for the Chareau work.
Caveats: Take in the panoramic views sitting; standing can be disorienting. And be prepared to wait for your V.R. turn.