“You can hear a whoosh of air as the train approaches,” Deke Sharon said, breaking down the cacophony on a subway platform into its component parts. “There’s the high screech of the tires, and underneath it all there’s a low rumble.” For good measure, he emulated each sound.
Mr. Sharon may be as perky as you might imagine the so-called “guru of a cappella” to be, but little can prepare you for his infectious good cheer.
“This is me mellow!” he exclaimed with boundless enthusiasm — a mood even more striking considering he was waiting for a C train in the chaotically busy 42nd Street station. Looking fetchingly dapper-casual in a blazer and jeans, he showed no sign of the stress that comes with opening a rather unconventional Broadway show.
The short commute from his temporary Manhattan apartment to the Circle in the Square Theater, where “In Transit” is in previews, constituted field research for Mr. Sharon, as the show’s characters all cross paths on the subway.
This last point is the crux of what Mr. Sharon, 48, calls his lifelong mission of creating harmony through harmony. To that end he leaves no outlet unturned. His high-profile jobs have included serving as executive producer, coach and arranger on the NBC reality show “The Sing-Off” (which spawned the hugely successful vocal group Pentatonix), and writing the arrangements for both “Pitch Perfect” movies. In the second film, he also sang many of the backup harmonies for the villainous world-champion team Das Sound Machine and had a cameo as a German judge.
Mr. Sharon has created a cappella arrangements for about 2,000 songs and has written several books, including the new “The Heart of Vocal Harmony.” So when time came to retool “In Transit” for a bigger stage after an Off Broadway run in 2010, Ms. Anderson-Lopez and her co-writers immediately thought of him.
“We were really into ‘The Sing-Off,’ and of course we knew Deke was in the House Jacks, which was the first big professional, gigging-around a cappella group,” Ms. Anderson-Lopez, who sang in a vocal group at Williams College, said in a phone interview.
A few years later, Mr. Sharon enrolled at Tufts University just so he could join that school’s Beelzebubs, an a cappella group. The love wasn’t immediately returned: He got in only on his third audition.
The same year he helped found the House Jacks, Mr. Sharon also created the Contemporary A Cappella Society as part of his effort to cement the vocal-harmony community and improve its outreach.
But it’s one-on-one, where his temperament — earnestly upbeat, but with a self-deprecating humor and a subtly forceful undertone blocking any threat of saccharine — is most effective.
Mr. Sharon’s interpersonal and technical skills were critical for a show like “In Transit,” which presented several challenges for the cast and crew — starting with the fact that the actors double up as the orchestra and almost never stop singing.
To sync with each other, the actors wear in-ear monitors so they can best hear all the vocal layers as well as the musical supervisor, Rick Hip-Flores, who voices his cues from backstage. Getting used to the earbuds was a steep learning curve. Margo Seibert, one of the stars, said it was like trying to sing while putting your head under water in a bathtub — a “cry-worthy moment” for her.
