SEOUL, South Korea — A popular South Korean singer, Lee Seung-chul, recently posted on Twitter what he called a sad joke that reflected public outrage over a scandal involving the country’s president, Park Geun-hye.
Ms. Park’s 2012 victory was hailed as a milestone for South Korea’s deeply patriarchal society. But four years later, pressure is mounting across the country and even from within her party for Ms. Park to step down or face impeachment. This week, she became South Korea’s first sitting president to be accused by prosecutors of a criminal conspiracy.
The scandal surrounding Ms. Park has left many South Korean women infuriated with the president and fearful that it could be used to argue that women are unfit to lead. They worry that the country, already among the lowest in global gender-equality rankings, could become even more resistant to elevating women to positions of power.
Ms. Park’s troubles stem from her decades of ties to Choi Soon-sil, a daughter of Choi Tae-min, the founder of a fringe religious sect who befriended Ms. Park in the 1970s. Ms. Choi was indicted Sunday on charges of using her influence with Ms. Park to extort millions from businesses. Prosecutors said Ms. Park was an accomplice of Ms. Choi, but she is protected by the Constitution from criminal indictment.
Ms. Park has agreed to submit to an inquiry. But on Tuesday, her lawyer, Yoo Yeong-ha, tried to use Ms. Park’s gender as a shield, saying that she was “a woman before being president” and that her “privacy as a woman” should be protected from prosecutors who sought to question her.
Women’s groups were having none of it.
South Korea’s women have been just as loud as its men in denouncing Ms. Park. Recent polls have found her to be deeply unpopular among both men and women.
And in the huge protests that have filled central Seoul over the past four weekends, women have often led peaceful marches — an unusual sight in South Korea, where anti-government demonstrations often feature men clashing with riot police officers.
Although Ms. Park is often called South Korea’s first female president, that label fails to capture the complicated ways in which people here regard her presidency.
Ms. Park has never been considered a champion of women’s rights, either as the president or as a legislator before that. According to Kim Young-soon, a leader at the Korean Women’s Associations United, gender inequality has actually worsened under Ms. Park, with sex crimes on the rise and a growing wealth gap taking a harder toll on women.
Her presidential campaign was aimed at securing the support of older conservatives who still revered her father, the military dictator Park Chung-hee, for leading the country out of poverty in the 1960s and ’70s. Many saw in Ms. Park a modern version of her charismatic father.
South Koreans like to say that they see Ms. Park not as a female president but as Park Chung-hee’s daughter. That places her in a peculiar and precarious position in South Korea, where patriarchy rules the political and corporate worlds.
In the local news media, photographs have emerged that show urinals painted with images of Ms. Park and Ms. Choi. People have derided Ms. Choi, who has no background in government or policy making, as an “ajumma,” or homemaker, “from Gangnam,” a Seoul district often associated with affluence and moral weakness.
“President Park is taken as evidence that women are not qualified for politics,” a feminist group said last week, protesting what it called gender prejudices tainting the campaign against Ms. Park.
Ms. Park has seldom spoken of her gender. But she has styled herself after her mother, Yuk Young-soo, who is seen as a symbol of feminine sacrifice among older Koreans. The former first lady was fatally shot in 1974 by a pro-North Korean assassin who had targeted her husband. For decades, Ms. Park’s hairstyle has reminded people of her mother.
Her upbringing and manners have led critics to accuse her of acting with a sense of entitlement. Those accusations have carried a powerful punch in South Korea, where many have grown disillusioned with so-called imperial male leaders in politics and in the corporate world, and expected a less rigid style from the first female president. Many of the most bitter criticisms have come from other women.
Ms. Park once sat motionless in the rain, waiting for an aide to step forward and pull her hood over her head, according to the aide, Jeon Yeo-ok, who later parted ways with Ms. Park and caused a sensation when she recounted the tale. “She is the kind of woman who would wear her crown to a nightclub,” Ms. Jeon said in 2012.
It is not the only time that Ms. Park, who once named Queen Elizabeth I of Britain as her role model, has been accused of behaving like royalty.
After Ms. Park came to power in early 2013, her government disbanded Ms. Lee’s party on charges of being pro-North Korea.
Many, including members of Ms. Park’s Saenuri Party, now find Ms. Lee’s criticism to have been prescient.
