On Tuesday, the National Association of Realtors reported existing home sales rose 2 percent at a seasonally adjusted annualized rate in October, its strongest pace since February 2007, before the recession started.
Back then, the average 30-year fixed rate mortgage topped 6 percent, a reminder that even with the recent rate jump, mortgages remain a bargain by historical standards. Thirty years ago, the average rate was about 10 percent.
Still, for buyers who had been counting on paying less than 3.5 percent, the postelection bump represents an unwelcome added cost.
In the last couple of weeks, requests for refinancing have dropped, according to Gregory Gwizdz, national sales manager of Wells Fargo Home Lending, one of the nation’s largest home loan originators. He expects that trend to continue through next year as rates stay at this level or inch higher.
Higher rates are often followed by a burst of activity from consumers worried about further increases. But Ian Shepherdson, chief economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, said he had not seen evidence of pent-up demand. He thinks housing activity is heading for a fall.
Even before this latest bump in rates, he was concerned about a drop in mortgage applications. Mortgage standards have tightened this year, he said, making it more difficult for buyers to qualify despite the steady uptick in wages.
For those looking to purchase a home, different types of loans may become more appealing.
Buyers of new construction, who have to wait months for their homes to be completed, may be willing to pay a little more to lock in a lower rate for an extended period of time, Mr. Gwizdz said. Those who plan to move again in the next few years might be more likely to consider an adjustable-rate mortgage than before.
Bic N. DeCaro, a real estate agent in Northern Virginia, said that before the election most clients had been dragging their feet, uncertain about what to do. But since rates started to move up, “there was a flurry of activity,” she said, leading to more showings and two signed contracts.
In Phoenix, Luis Solis, a real estate broker, said some of his clients have also ramped up their searches in the past week.
“People are afraid they are going to go up really fast,” he said.
