Donald J. Trump’s victory ran counter to almost every major forecast — undercutting the belief that analyzing reams of data can accurately predict events. Voters demonstrated how much predictive analytics, and election forecasting in particular, remains a young science: Some people may have been misled into thinking Hillary Clinton’s win was assured because some of the forecasts lacked context explaining potentially wide margins of error.
“It’s the overselling of precision,” said Dr. Pradeep Mutalik, a research scientist at the Yale Center for Medical Informatics, who had calculated that some of the vote models could be off by 15 to 20 percent.
Virtually all the major vote forecasters, including Nate Silver’s FiveThirtyEight site, The New York Times Upshot and the Princeton Election Consortium, put Mrs. Clinton’s chances of winning in the 70 to 99 percent range.
Google Flu Trends for instance, looked to be a triumph of big data prescience, tracking flu outbreaks based on trends in flu-related search terms. But in the 2012-13 flu season it greatly overstated the number of cases.
This year, Facebook’s algorithm took down the image, posted by a Norwegian author, of a naked 9-year-old girl fleeing napalm bombs. The software code saw a violation of the social network’s policy prohibiting child pornography, not an iconic photo of the Vietnam War and human suffering.
And a Microsoft chat bot, intended to learn “conversational understanding” by mining online text, was quickly retired this year after its machine-learning algorithm began generating racist comments.
Even well-meaning attempts to harness data analysis for the greater good can backfire. Two years ago, the Samaritans, a suicide-prevention group in Britain, developed a free app to notify people whenever someone they followed on Twitter posted potentially suicidal phrases like “hate myself” or “tired of being alone.” The group quickly removed the app after complaints from people who warned that it could be misused to harass users at their most vulnerable moments.
“State polls were off in a way that has not been seen in previous presidential election years,” said Sam Wang, a neuroscience professor at Princeton University who is a co-founder of the Princeton Election Consortium. He speculated that polls may have failed to capture Republican loyalists who initially vowed not to vote for Mr. Trump, but changed their minds in the voting booth.
The enthusiasm for big data has been fueled by the success stories of Silicon Valley giants born on the internet, like Google, Amazon and Facebook. The digital powerhouses harvest vast amounts of user data using clever software for search, social networks and online commerce. Data is the fuel, and algorithms borrowed from the tool kit of artificial intelligence, notably machine learning, are the engine.
The early commercial use for the technology has been to improve the odds of making a sale — through targeted ads, personalized marketing and product recommendations. But big-data decision-making is increasingly being embraced in every industry, and to make higher-stakes decisions that crucially affect people’s lives — like helping to make medical diagnoses, hiring choices and loan approvals.
Mr. Silver, the founder of FiveThirtyEight, did not immediately respond to an email seeking comment. Amanda Cox, the editor of The Upshot, and Mr. Wang of the Princeton Election Consortium said state polling errors were largely to blame for the underestimates of Mr. Trump’s chances of winning.
But even with decades of polls to analyze, it is difficult for forecasters to predict accurately a candidate’s chance of winning the presidency months or even weeks ahead of time. Dr. Mutalik of Yale compared election modeling to weather forecasting.
But, unlike weather prediction, current election models tend to take into account only several decades’ worth of data. And changing the parameters of that data set can also significantly affect calculations.
The FiveThirtyEight model, for instance, is calibrated based on general elections since 1972, a year when state polling began to increase. On Oct. 24, that model put Mrs. Clinton’s chances of winning at 85 percent. But when the site experimentally recalibrated the model based on more recent polls, dating back just to 2000, Mrs. Clinton’s chances rose to 95 percent, Mr. Silver wrote on his blog.
In this presidential election, analysts said, the other big problem was that some state polls were wrong. Recent polls from Wisconsin, for instance, put Mrs. Clinton well ahead of Mr. Trump. And election forecasts relied on that information for their predictions. Britain encountered similar lapses when polls mistakenly predicted that the nation would vote in June to stay in the European Union.
