Off Broadway theaters, under pressure from an aggressive social media campaign by performers, have agreed to pay higher salaries to hundreds of actors and stage managers.
The Actors’ Equity Association, the labor union representing actors and stage managers, and the League of Off-Broadway Theaters and Producers, a trade group representing nonprofit and commercial theaters in New York with between 100 and 499 seats, said Friday that they had reached an agreement after weeks of contentious contract talks. The settlement averts a possible strike or other job action.
The two sides did not immediately release full details of the agreement, which was approved Friday afternoon by the eastern regional board of Actors’ Equity. But Kate Shindle, the Equity president, said it would provide “hefty wage increases” ranging from 32 to 81 percent over the five-year contract, which covers members working in Off Broadway theaters of all types and budgets.
“We champion new voices, we have been at the forefront of diversity on our stages, and we are proud to also support our actors and stage managers with a fair wage,” he said.
Stage acting has long been a poorly paid profession, and it is not unusual for union members to agitate for higher wages. But Off Broadway performers said their campaign this time was different because their wages had become increasingly unacceptable – in most cases, Off Broadway actors are paid no more than $593 a week, in roles that generally last only a few weeks, and they have to pay 10 percent to an agent, 2.25 percent to their union, and about 30 percent in taxes, leaving them with take-home pay that does not, they say, cover the cost of living in New York.
Acting Off Broadway pays significantly less well than acting on Broadway (where the minimum salary is about $1,900 a week), and many professional nonprofit theaters outside New York also pay significantly higher salaries than the Off Broadway theaters.
The performers waged a high-visibility social media campaign, using a hashtag, #FairWageOnstage, to enlist support from celebrities as they sought to pressure the city’s nonprofit theaters and commercial producers to pay higher salaries Off Broadway, where many of the nation’s most critically acclaimed productions are developed.
Actors said they were motivated to action in part by the increasing cost of living in New York City, and in part by an awareness that the city’s biggest nonprofits have become increasingly large — the Public Theater has a $41 million annual budget, and the Signature Theater hired Frank Gehry to build a multimillion-dollar stage complex.
Nicholas Westrate, an actor and organizer for the Fair Wage Onstage campaign, noted in an interview that the agreement did not force smaller theaters to offer the same increases as the larger ones.
