In one of the largest anti-Trump demonstrations since his election on Tuesday, a mass of people marched from Union Square in Manhattan to Trump Tower, the headquarters and home of Mr. Trump. Protesters marched around one of Mr. Trump’s buildings in Chicago. In Los Angeles, thousands of people marched up Wilshire Boulevard, forming a crowd that stretched for nearly a dozen blocks.
The demonstrations followed a week of protests, as thousands of people have taken to the streets. Demonstrations have taken place in Oakland, Calif.; Baltimore; Kansas City, Mo.; Milwaukee; Miami; and Portland, Ore.
Students have walked out of classes, protesters have blocked highways and demonstrators have clashed with the police. Speakers and protesters have talked about their fears of deportation, reduced access to to birth control, a rollback of same-sex marriage and the potential for racially motivated violence.
The demonstrations have mostly been organized on the fly by local activist groups, although national organizations like Showing Up for Racial Justice and the National Action Network have supported the protest efforts. The calls to participate have come largely through Facebook and other social media.
In New York on Saturday, protesters were quick to describe their motivations for marching.
Thousands have turned out to protest in at least 52 cities across the United States in the days since the vote.
Fin Justin Ross, 20, a transgender man from New Jersey, said he had woken up around 3:30 a.m. on Saturday to pick up friends for the rally. “When Trump won, my first thought was I needed to go back into the closet,” he said.
Lisa Harris, also of Long Island, spoke about her father, a Holocaust survivor. “I know hate,” she said.
Many protest leaders had supported Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont in the Democratic primary race and either did not vote or chose a third-party candidate in the general election, said Ben Becker, an organizer with the Answer Coalition, an antiwar and antiracism activist group based in New York. Their anger, he said, had been exacerbated by the conciliatory tone shown to Mr. Trump by President Obama and Hillary Clinton after Mrs. Clinton’s defeat.
More protests are planned for the coming days, and preparations already are underway for a large demonstration at Mr. Trump’s inauguration in January.
It is uncharted territory for a modern American presidency. One would have to go back to Abraham Lincoln’s election in 1860 to see these types of widespread demonstrations in response to the election of a president, said Douglas G. Brinkley, a presidential historian who teaches at Rice University in Houston.
President Lincoln won only about 40 percent of the popular vote and was not even on the ballot in some Southern states. Spontaneous protests broke out across the country after the Lincoln victory, Professor Brinkley said.
But beyond the commotion in the streets, activists are pursuing strategies for what they think will be tumultuous times during a Trump administration.
In Wisconsin, the Latino rights group Voces de la Frontera has scheduled forums to provide emotional support to Latinos and other minorities, and to brainstorm ways to help immigrants fight policies that might hurt them.
Cat Brooks, a co-founder of the Anti Police-Terror Project in Oakland, said her group and other leaders in the city were planning to raise money to provide direct services for social programs they feel certain will be cut under a Trump administration and a Republican-controlled Congress. They were making plans, for example, to find ways to offer diabetes testing and counseling if the Affordable Care Act is repealed.
Ron Gochez, an organizer with Unión del Barrio, an immigrants rights group in Los Angeles, said that it will gather community organizations to discuss what to do if mass deportations occur. It will also train undocumented immigrants to use their cellphone cameras if immigration enforcement agents show up at their door, and help people set up emergency phone lists so they can call neighbors if they are picked up for deportation proceedings.
“It’s not just saying that we’re against Trump, we have to defend ourselves against the policies he’s promising to create,” he said.
As the protest began to wane in Los Angeles, Jay Brown Jr., 42, surveyed the large group around him.
