Within minutes, the post had accrued more than 2,000 comments. Within days, they numbered more than 12,000. Reddit, a hodgepodge of message boards about everything, from kiteboarding to financial advice to Photoshopping human arms onto images of birds, is the eighth-most popular online destination in the United States. The_Donald, devoted, of course, to Donald J. Trump, has become one of the most influential communities within one of the most significant websites on the internet. Yet that post by OhSnapYouGotServed is probably largely incomprehensible to most people.
The_Donald has around 300,000 members. Some are conservative stalwarts, others are meme-making teenagers; all are anonymous, hidden behind user names, making their origins and motivations difficult to pinpoint. But it’s fair to say that many saw themselves as political outsiders who reveled in rallying for the underdog.
This, according to its moderators, was “the largest, best and closest thing to an official campaign subreddit for Donald Trump 2016.” If Barack Obama’s 2008 online presidential campaign was a well-oiled machine that made effective use of supporter data, analytics and social-media tools, Mr. Trump owes some degree of his success to an online mob of rabid, self-organized supporters.
Politics has always been a popular topic on Reddit. The site came of age during the administration of George W. Bush — and Reddit, in general, despised Mr. Bush. It has leaned liberal-to-libertarian ever since, the most popular candidates being Barack Obama, Bernie Sanders and Ron Paul. Until The_Donald.
When created by a couple of volunteer moderators in 2015, the community was just one of many straightforward political-support pages (r/SandersForPresident and r/HillaryClinton were already going strong) that sprang up to aggregate news articles from sources such as CNN and The Hill.
The_Donald’s policy states “no racism/anti-Semitism,” but it also warns “No dissenters or S.J.W.s,” as in social-justice warriors. “Concern trolling,” or questioning views expressed on the subreddit, is also banned.
The community is notoriously difficult to manage. Its top moderator team has turned over at least four times, according to Mr. Huffman. (This usually happened because the community revolted, as in one instance in which a lead moderator wrote that he believed he could get away with raping undocumented immigrants.) Moderators also suspend and bar members more frequently than do moderators of any other section of the site.
The community’s power soon reached beyond Reddit. Mr. Trump tweeted out memes and videos that originated on The_Donald and in July he participated in a popular Reddit “Ask Me Anything” discussion, after his team communicated with the moderators.
This would make little sense if The_Donald were all memes and derision. But according to Reddit, The_Donald’s moderators — nearly 50 far-flung volunteers — deftly managed to channel action out of the chaos. They hosted an extensive and at times informative Wiki about Mr. Trump’s policy proposals and instructed supporters how to help with the campaign. Members often suggested strategies for arguing persuasively against opponents.
There is no way to know how much all this online activism made a difference on Election Day. But there were many discussions of how The_Donald’s hundreds of thousands of members could persuade their friends on Facebook and elsewhere to get out to vote. And, after all, they spent months discussing Nov. 8 on Reddit; it’s hard to imagine they didn’t spend a few minutes in a voting booth.
But now that Mr. Trump is the president-elect, what will happen to The_Donald? What will the centipedes do when the Trump administration becomes the establishment, engaging with lobbyists and compromising on ideals, and all of the typically “Washington” behaviors they despise?
Recent posts on The_Donald have promoted a letter-writing campaign for Julian Assange and WikiLeaks. There’s support for protesters countering the anti-Trump legions in Midtown Manhattan. There’s a proposed boycott of Harry Potter books and movies, with a reminder that J. K. Rowling tweeted that Voldemort was “nowhere near as bad” as Mr. Trump, and a proposal to defund NPR.
There was also, for a moment this fall, a movement to set up a political action committee, something to be expected of a candidate’s fan base after the campaign wraps up. The proposal was met with bile, and rejected as a money grab. Moderators issued an apology and a retraction of the idea. Organizing the “weaponized autists” worked. Asking for letters to support Mr. Assange is working. Asking for money did not.
Whatever The_Donald’s moderators say, the community’s future is uncertain without a controversial, underdog candidate to rally behind. It’s hard to imagine that the allure of insider-only memes and perverse laughs will be enough to sustain it over the next four years.
“There are no brakes on this train,” wrote OhSnapYouGotServed. No brakes, perhaps, but it will almost certainly run out of steam.