I had met Ms. Ebeling in Chicago, along with a dozen more of Mrs. Clinton’s friends, whom I joined to watch the final presidential debate. At the time, I didn’t know what to make of the remark. Mrs. Clinton was certainly not a “girl” — and what makes a “good” girl anyway?
And yet, watching her concession speech on Wednesday morning, I suddenly understood.
Mrs. Clinton did what good girls — women — have to: She played by the rules.
She put her head down and worked hard, devoted her life to service, waited her turn, and never got angry (or at least never showed it). She made mistakes along the way, certainly — but she had the résumé, the qualifications, the stamina, and she didn’t lash out when those things were questioned. Mrs. Clinton took the high road, again and again: deflecting interruption after interruption, maintaining her momentum in the face of a man hovering over her, not responding when he called her “nasty” in front of millions of viewers.
Every opportunity except becoming president.
As the saying goes, “You can’t be what you can’t see.” The idea, of course, is that until that highest ceiling is cracked, until there is a female president, we will never change the reality that for most Americans, leadership is synonymous with maleness. I spent the first half of this election season defending myself for wanting to see a woman in office — in part because she was a woman. Yes, I believed she was the most qualified candidate. No, I didn’t like all of her policies. But did it matter to me that she was female? Yes, it did.
Clearly not all women agreed that it was important to elect a woman. In fact, 53 percent of white women like me voted against Mrs. Clinton, opting instead for a man who has been accused by multiple women of sexual assault, and has been endorsed by the K.K.K. And yet, for those of us who did support her, part of the grief around Mrs. Clinton’s loss is symbolism.
To many of us, Mrs. Clinton was representative of every woman who’s been talked over or overlooked for a job, had her qualifications questioned, or been called a “bitch.” She was those times I was told I needed to be “nice,” and she stood for those women who were told they didn’t “look” like engineers (or in her case, presidential).
She was representative of those things in a country where the average person finds it easier to pair words like “president” and “executive” with male names and words like “assistant” and “aide” with female names. She represented female power in spite of the reality that a woman’s likability is inverse to her leadership status — that is, we like her less the more she rises — while the opposite is true for men.
She was running for president knowing all too well that a woman has to be twice as qualified to be perceived as once as good; and that her mistakes will be scrutinized more harshly and remembered longer than those of her male peers.
In 2008, as Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton were neck and neck in the race for the Democratic nomination, researchers at the University of Texas conducted a study. They discovered that one in four elementary school students they surveyed believed it was illegal for a woman, an African-American or a Latino to be president.
It’s safe to say that President Obama shattered that misperception in 2008, as thousands of young minority children finally saw somebody who looked like them staring back at them from the Oval Office.
The fact is, seeing women in power matters.
Of course, on Wednesday after her defeat, Mrs. Clinton got up, put on her pantsuit, and kept on plugging. She didn’t sulk, or throw a fit, complain, or blame anybody else. She was gracious, humble, and professional. And no doubt she’ll keep fighting. Because that’s what women do.