NAZARETH, Pa. — Debbie Biro became a Republican to vote for Donald J. Trump.
In well-to-do Naples, Fla., Sue Gauta, 47, a small-business owner married to a doctor, also embraced Mr. Trump. So did Wanda Lincoln, 67, a retired college administrator still working to make ends meet in a threadbare mill city in Maine. And Kyleigh Ostendorf, 26, who lives in Los Angeles and produces graphics for ESPN.
As America dissects the results of Tuesday’s election, one trend stands out: Tens of thousands of women — 53 percent of all white female voters, according to exit polls — chose Mr. Trump, playing a crucial role in his victory.
In interviews here in the Lehigh Valley — a bellwether region in a swing state that helped elect Mr. Trump — and around the country, female supporters said theirs was a vote for Mr. Trump and not against Hillary Clinton. America was on the wrong track, the women said, and Mr. Trump alone could fix it.
They are women who want their daughters to grow up and run businesses — and who run businesses themselves. Many said they were eager for a woman as president. Were they offended by Mr. Trump’s vile comments about women, captured on tape? Absolutely. Did they believe the women who came forward and said Mr. Trump had groped them? Not necessarily. Did any of it stop them from voting for him? No.
Where female opponents took to Twitter with #NotOkay, branding Mr. Trump a misogynist and worse, his female supporters saw “a good man and a good father,” said Mary Barket, the head of the Pennsylvania Federation of Republican Women, who knows Ms. Biro from church and helped her get involved in the Trump campaign.
Ms. Biro, who said she was “a quiet, reserved person,” had never knocked on doors or worked in politics before. But she spent one day each weekend since August canvassing for Mr. Trump.
Where those who voted against Mr. Trump saw someone who bankrupted businesses and ducked paying taxes, these women said they saw a man who built a real estate empire and simply followed the law. They saw a man who had raised and promoted a beautiful and successful daughter, Ivanka, and who let a smart and accomplished Washington strategist, Kellyanne Conway, manage his presidential campaign.
In short, they embraced Mr. Trump’s sales pitch for himself.
“I think that women see the big picture — women are smart,” Mrs. Gauta said. “The fact that he said something crude,” she said “is not going to change my mind about the good he can do for our country.
In Chicago, Nicole Been, 22, a Roman Catholic who attends DePaul University, is deeply opposed to abortion and the “hookup culture.” She complained that other students branded her a racist and a bigot for supporting Mr. Trump.
For the women interviewed, as for male Trump backers, the economy was of utmost concern. Mrs. Gauta and her husband are tired of paying $1,800 a month in health care premiums, with a $12,000 annual deductible. Ms. Lincoln, the retired college administrator, now works at her husband’s auto body shop in Old Town, Me., to help pay the bills.
Ms. Ostendorf, the graphics producer in Los Angeles, watched her father’s million-dollar business implode in the economic crash of 2008. He picked up work doing maintenance for the Y.M.C.A.
And they said they are troubled, as well, by an America that seems to have embraced multiculturalism and political correctness without question. They said they did not understand the Black Lives Matter movement, wondered why Democrats seemed so fixated on transgender access to bathrooms and tended to be enraged at the way veterans are treated and violence directed at the police.
They are concerned about immigration and the threat of terrorism.
Research suggests Americans in both parties long ago became open to a female president. By 1999, the Gallup poll found that 92 percent of Americans said they would vote for a woman. When Gallup first asked that question, in 1937, the figure was 33 percent.
Ms. Biro comes close to fitting that mold; although she considers herself middle class, she did not go to college. And Nazareth, a middle-class community in Northampton County, is the kind of community where Mr. Trump did well.
Yet sitting in the kitchen of her tidy Cape Cod-style home here, with the Trump-Pence signs still stuck in the front yard and a poster that speaks of peace as a path to enlightenment on the living room wall, Ms. Biro expressed the same hopes and fears for the country that many of Mrs. Clinton’s supporters now have.
