LORRIE MEYERCORD wants her portfolio to be made up entirely of investments that aim to do social good while earning a return. But in addition to established categories like the environment, clean energy and organizations benefiting women and girls, she invested in arts and creativity. And she hopes others will follow her lead.
This month, she invested $1 million in housing for artists in Dearborn, Mich., and Memphis. The two projects, developed by Artspace, offer subsidized apartments to people who work in creative fields, meet an income requirement and pass a screening process by a committee of artists and creative professionals.
The field, known as impact investing, is generally growing. According to a report released this month by the United States Sustainable Investment Foundation: The Forum for Sustainable and Responsible Investment, $8.72 trillion has been invested in this area, a 33 percent increase since 2014.
Climate change and shareholder activism are popular categories, said Lisa Woll, the foundation’s chief executive. Interest in fostering community investing — like moving money into credit unions and smaller banks that support the local community — has doubled in that period, she said.
But arts investments have yet to register, she said, given that the area is too small for large professional investors to get involved. In this respect, it is ideal for high-net-worth individuals.
To make the Artspace investment work and to encourage others to invest, Ms. Meyercord also made grants to organizations that eased the process along.
She provided $200,000 to the Calvert Foundation, which organized the $2.5 million investment in Artspace, so it could charge a lower interest rate. She also gave $100,000 to Upstart Co-Lab for operational support.
“There aren’t a lot of easy products to invest in on an entry level,” Ms. Meyercord said.
The Calvert Foundation has set returns for its Community Investment Note ranging from 1 to 4 percent, depending on the length of the investment. The note has made $1.5 billion in impact investments in affordable housing, education and small business over the last 20 years, with a 100 percent return of principal and interest.
Jennifer Pryce, president and chief executive of the Calvert Foundation, said that when Calvert was approached by Upstart Co-Lab, it analyzed its own $300 million portfolio and found that it already had $20 million in investments going to creative endeavors.
Artspace has a track record of paying back its loans. Started in Minneapolis in the late 1970s, the organization has $600 million in real estate in 27 cities, said Colin Hamilton, senior vice president of national advancement at Artspace. Its aim is to provide affordable housing to artists and, with it, the security to practice their craft.
Denguhlanga Julia Kapilango, a graphic design artist, recently moved into an apartment in the Dearborn Artspace. She said that going before the arts committee was intense but that she had enjoyed living among other artists for the last few months. Her apartment there is also larger than, and a third the cost of, the one she had in midtown Detroit.
John W. MacIntosh, a partner at SeaChange Capital Partners, a nonprofit group offering investment banking advisory services to nonprofit organizations, has made many investments in arts organizations like Nuyorican Poets Cafe and the Healing Arts Initiative. He said real estate investments work well for impact investors because many arts organizations have buildings and a need to upgrade or maintain them.
Mr. MacIntosh said his firm managed two credit funds, one with money from foundations and the other with money from a group of high-net-worth investors.
The firm has made impact investments across a range of sectors as well as grants to help organizations merge. He said that arts and culture organizations often are overlooked but that they need investment money, just as groups that work with the poor need it.
“It’s completely natural that we’d be as excited about the arts as human services,” he said.
Ms. Callanan, whose background includes stints at McKinsey & Company and the Rockefeller Foundation, said she wanted to draw attention to people who identify as artists starting businesses to bring about change.
Another limit, though, is the size of the investment. Ms. Callanan said she would like the sector to be more open to smaller investors, the way the Community Investment Note accepts investments from $20 on up. Ms. Pryce said Calvert had not started exploring an expansion of the program to lower investment amounts.
Ms. Meyercord said that she wanted to bring other investors along.
