The New York Times attended an exercise session that is part of a national campaign created by the prime minister of Thailand to increase the energy and improve the health of civil servants.
BANGKOK — He is already prime minister of Thailand and the chief of a military junta that seized power in a 2014 coup.
Now, Gen. Prayuth Chan-ocha can add another title: aerobics master in chief.
Thailand’s military junta has turned an eye toward its civil servants’ behavior — and heart rates — through a new policy that urges them to exercise once a week during working hours.
Officials said that the voluntary program, which began Wednesday, was part of a national campaign to model good behavior for children, and that General Prayuth had created it after learning of research that documented widespread physical idleness among Thailand’s youth and older citizens.
“Your health will improve and this will be invaluable in the performance of your duties for the nation,” General Prayuth told senior civil servants at an exercise session last week in Bangkok, according to a report by Thailand’s public broadcaster.
At an exercise session in Bangkok on Wednesday, four instructors from the Department of Physical Education led about 60 Finance Ministry officials through an aerobics class.
Some of the workers grumbled that it was too hot or that they had not brought workout clothes, said Nuttanun Amaroek, a policy and operations analyst at the ministry.
But Ms. Nuttanun, 35, said the 90-minute workout was a win-win situation for her: She said she had not found much time to exercise after a recent promotion added responsibilities and overtime hours to her workday.
“This happens during our working hours, so when I exercise here, it’s like I’m working at the same time,” she said, tying her hair back before the class started.
The military junta seized power from a democratically elected government in a 2014 coup and has since imposed draconian controls over civilian life. It has barred public gatherings of more than five people, for example, and used existing lèse-majesté laws to aggressively prosecute anything — including Facebook posts — that it deems offensive to Thailand’s powerful monarchy.
After the death in October of King Bhumibol Adulyadej, Thailand’s beloved and long-ruling monarch, the junta initiated a one-year period of national mourning. It also ordered an end to “joyful events” for 30 days and asked people to wear only black and white out of respect.
Civil servants mainly wore black and white to the workout that General Prayuth hosted on the grounds of his palatial office complex on Wednesday. But the mood was buoyant as the general, clad in white sneakers and a black tracksuit, led officials through aerobics and sepaktakraw, a Southeast Asian net game that loosely resembles volleyball.
