TUNIS — Mothers trembled with anger demanding justice for sons shot dead during protests that ushered in democracy. Former prisoners described being tortured, humiliated and forced to engage in homosexual acts. The abuses, they recalled, were deliberate, sadistic and aimed to break them.
“Torture in the prison was not systematic, it was chaotic,” said Sami Brahim, who was arrested as a student in the 1990s. “Everything that happened in Abu Ghraib has already happened in Tunisia,” he said, referring to the abuses by American troops in the notorious prison in Iraq.
That was just the first day of testimony in long-awaited public hearings by Tunisia’s Truth and Dignity Commission, an effort unique in the Arab world to salve the wounds from nearly 60 years of dictatorship and give a modicum of recognition and respect to the victims and their families. Seven witnesses testified live on national television and radio Thursday evening in a highly charged ceremony. A second evening of testimony is scheduled for Friday. Much of the nation is riveted.
It is the first time that Tunisians have been given a state venue to air the horrors of decades of systematic human rights violations under both President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, who was overthrown during the Arab Spring, and his predecessor, Habib Bourguiba.
Over the past two years, the commission has taken in 65,000 complaints from victims — investigating about 10,000 of them so far — but has struggled against political and institutional resistance and a hostile national news media, which has accused it of spending money but doing nothing.
With the public hearings, Ms. Bensedrine said she hoped to win greater public support and push back against the current government’s argument that stability and reconciliation are more important than reopening old wounds.
The audience on Thursday included many politicians and activists who themselves had suffered imprisonment, torture and exile under the dictatorships. There were also representatives of truth commissions from Africa, Asia and Latin America, and foreign diplomats. Senior Tunisian government officials were conspicuously absent.
The setting was fittingly symbolic, a reminder of the corrupt regime that oversaw some of the worst abuses: Club Elyssa, a luxurious spa in a northern suburb of Tunis that was once owned by Leila Trabelsi, the former first lady and wife of the ousted president, Mr. Ben Ali.
“It is a way for us to say that society is finally recovering such ill-gotten places to underscore the principle of the rule of law,” Ms. Bensedrine said when announcing the venue.
The significance of the setting was not lost on those who testified, including Ourida Kaddouss, whose 27-year-old son, Raouf, was shot in the head during protests in Sidi Bouzid, where a young man had set himself on fire and initiated the Arab Spring nearly six years ago.
But mostly, she said, she wanted justice for her son and her family.
She and two other mothers who testified complained that the military tribunals that tried the killers of their sons had handed down lenient or suspended sentences for the perpetrators.
Ribeh Briki, whose son Slah Dachroui was one of 300 people who died in Tunisia during the Arab Spring protests of 2011, held up her son’s picture.
In an interview on Tuesday, Ms. Bensedrine said she wanted to see some cases go to trial, and also to have some of the perpetrators testify before the commission at a later stage.
Her ultimate goal remains to dismantle the system so dictatorship can never return, she said. “We have to reflect how injustice went unpunished, and how it was allowed to happen,” she told the audience.
The mothers’ testimonies were a nod to the importance of the revolution in allowing democratic change in Tunisia.

Latifa and Fatma Matmati, the wife and mother of Kamel Matmati, described how he was detained and killed under torture within hours of his arrest in 1991 in the town of Gabès. The police hid it from them for years.
For nearly two decades the family was harassed by the police, accused of helping Mr. Matmati abscond, or told to search for him in different prisons around the country.
Only in 2009 were Mr. Matmati’s relatives finally told that he had died. In 2015 they received a death certificate, but they have never been given his body.
During his testimony, Mr. Brahim, who is now studying for his doctorate, described how on the day of legislative elections in the 1990s, a group of prisoners were ordered into a courtyard by a unit with police dogs.
After he collapsed at the scene, he was moved to the infirmary, where a doctor poured a liter of ether on him, burning his genitals. The prisoners were then branded by the prison staff members as homosexuals.
The torture was supervised by a psychologist. “This man who was in charge of our reform was in fact in charge of the moral collapse of the prisoners,” Mr. Brahim said.
He called on his torturers to come forward and explain their actions. “I chose not to name them, but I don’t think their brothers or wives would expect they were capable of this,” he said.
