ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — Clashes erupted Monday between the riot police and thousands of supporters of the opposition politician Imran Khan in northwestern Pakistan, ahead of his plan to hold a protest in the Pakistani capital later this week.
Mr. Khan has announced that his political party, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf, will “lock down” the capital on Wednesday and prevent the government from functioning until Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif steps down or faces corruption charges.
At least 2,500 supporters and activists of Mr. Khan’s party clashed with the riot police at the border of Punjab and Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Provinces. The police used rubber bullets and canisters of tear gas to stop them from advancing toward Islamabad. The motorway connecting the two regions was blocked with shipping containers and barricades.
In the group was Pervez Khattak, a senior figure within Mr. Khan’s party and the chief minister of Khyber-Pakhthunkwa Province, who said he would force the issue by continuing to try reaching the capital.
The authorities have arrested at least 830 supporters of Mr. Khan’s party across several districts of Punjab Province in recent days.
Mr. Khan has been leading a campaign for the removal of Mr. Sharif over allegations of election fraud and corruption.
Political pressure has increased on Mr. Sharif this year, particularly after the so-called Panama Papers revealed that his family had accumulated offshore wealth. Mr. Sharif has rejected accusations of corruption, and has expressed openness to an investigation. But the opposition political parties and the government remain divided over how to conduct the inquiry.
Adding to Mr. Sharif’s political woes is his increasingly tense relationship with the powerful military, which has been wary of his efforts to have a greater say in the country’s foreign and defense policies.
The latest dip in relations came earlier in October, when a leading newspaper reported that civilian leaders had warned the military of growing international isolation and demanded action against banned militant groups, which are believed to have the tacit support of the country’s intelligence agencies.
Mr. Sharif called the report fabricated, and the military has pressed for an investigation, stressing that a distorted version of the conversation was leaked to the newspaper to malign the intelligence services. On Saturday, Mr. Sharif asked the information minister, Pervez Rashid, to step down.
Mr. Khan has increased pressure on the government with his plans for a massive street protest on Wednesday.
Government officials have said that street protests are unwarranted, as the courts have already taken up the matter. But Mr. Khan has urged his followers to reach Islamabad and said that he expects one million people to shut down the capital’s streets.
On Monday, a high court in Islamabad directed Mr. Khan’s party to hold an approved rally at a designated public space, but Mr. Khan said he would appeal the decision in the Supreme Court.
In 2014, Mr. Khan led thousands of his supporters to stage a sit-in in the capital for months. The protest fizzled out but left Mr. Sharif’s government weakened.
This time, Mr. Sharif seems determined not to take any chances, as rumors swirl that a violent clash between protesters and police could lead to intervention by the army.
All roads leading to Mr. Khan’s residence in Bani Gala, a suburb of Islamabad, have been barricaded, and heavy contingents of police and paramilitary troops have surrounded his luxurious home, which sits on a hill overlooking the capital.