They are bald, blue and earless. They do not talk. They play with their food (and their paint), perform wild music on instruments of their own devising and are the centerpiece of an international entertainment empire with 550 full- and part-time employees and annual revenues of $100 million.
But perhaps the most striking thing about the men of Blue Man Group, which began as a nebulous let’s-do-something-weird response to the banality of downtown culture in the late 1980s, is how comprehensively they have moved from the fringes to the mainstream, and beyond.
In November, the group celebrated its 25th anniversary in a manner befitting an institution whose brand reverberates far beyond the city limits but that also shouts “Manhattan” as thoroughly as the Rockettes or the Circle Line.
Cities with permanent Blue Man productions — Las Vegas; Orlando, Fla.; Boston; Chicago; and New York — declared Nov. 17 “Blue Man Group Day.” Madame Tussauds in Times Square unveiled limited-edition wax figures. There was a party at the Highline Ballroom. And the Blue Men got to flip a switch and turn the Empire State Building blue for a night.
Their popularity is undisputed; two million people worldwide visit their shows every year. But in New York, full of theatergoers who scurry to the other side of the street when tourist buses roll up, wide appeal is hardly a recommendation. It’s easy to write off Blue Man Group as the local equivalent of “The Mousetrap,” a piece of old furniture that is always there but has little new to offer.
But that may be the wrong way to look at it. The show is so winsome, so witty, so energetic that it might ensnare you despite yourself, leaving you as tangled up in blue as the most undemanding out-of-towner. “The appealing peculiarity of these wordless, smooth-skulled creatures remains,” Laura Collins-Hughes wrote last year in The New York Times, checking back on the show 24 years after the newspaper gave it its first (glowing) review.
Snootiness doesn’t bother the original Blue Men, who argue that they never saw themselves as avant-garde, anyway. They couldn’t be, they say, rooted as they are in the populist traditions of vaudeville.
“We look at it like we tapped into something deep and universal and profound,” Chris Wink, one of the original Blue Men, said.
Give in to the Blue Men, and you give in to their silliness, seen to its best advantage during the showstopping Twinkies-based banquet scene that relies on the kindness of a participating audience member. Other unlikely props include splatter-prone paint, Cap’n Crunch cereal and a series of tubes.
The show has been refined and overhauled with new material over the years but still features gentle digs at pretentiousness and technology saturation, and a lot of good drumming. As always, it ends with an exuberant finale that leaves everyone in the theater covered in glorified toilet paper.
Mr. Wink, a musician, and Mr. Stanton, then an aspiring actor, met catering an event at the Temple of Dendur in the Metropolitan Museum of Art. “Chris was putting garbage liners in the big garbage cans, and they asked me to help,” Mr. Stanton said. Mr. Goldman, a software producer, knew Mr. Wink from their junior high days at the Fieldston School in New York.
They have told the story often, but it essentially goes like this. Unhappy about the cultural scene in Lower Manhattan — so exciting in the ’60s and ’70s, so dreary in the ’80s — they began holding weekly get-togethers at the apartment Mr. Wink and Mr. Goldman shared on the Upper West Side.
Performance art was in the air: “We got this idea that we should get blue and walk around,” Mr. Wink said.
But he was savvy enough to send a news release to MTV.  The audience: perhaps two dozen.
MTV hyped the story, Mr. Goldman said, “and through the magic of editing, made it look like you’d missed the Sex Pistols” if you missed the event.
The ’80s were still not over — this was 1988 — and the Blue Men began refining the Blue Man. He would be at once primal and futuristic — and mute, on the grounds that silence would increase his mystery and his power.
They started putting on short sets with homemade props at alternative spaces downtown, got their first reviews when they played at La MaMa, performed (and got a standing ovation at) the Serious Fun Festival at Lincoln Center, and in 1991 moved to their permanent home, the Astor Place Theater on Lafayette Street.
For three years, the original trio were the only Blue Men, performing six days a week without respite. But wanting to expand to other cities, they began training other men (and a few women) for the job. There have been a total of 125 so far.
There have also been albums; television commercials; a rock concert parody tour; multiyear runs in Europe and Asia; appearances on “The Simpsons” and late-night talk shows; a book; a world tour that began last spring and features some old and some new material; and, on “Arrested Development,” a very funny multiseason running gag about Tobias Bluth’s Blue Man obsession, starting from the time he attends a show under the mistaken belief that it’s a depressed men’s support group.
In 2010, Mr. Goldman sold his one-third share to GF Capital, a private equity fund. (Blue Man Group is a private company and won’t disclose the figure.) He is now focused on the Blue School, an independent pre-K through eighth-grade private school on Water Street that the Blue Men helped found and that emphasizes creativity, originality and a sense of wonder.
The group’s New York real estate holdings include the building that houses its theater, a rehearsal space and video editing suite, and a recording studio and instrument creation lab.
Forty percent of revenues are spent on salaries and benefits, said Leslie Kelley, managing director of Blue Man Group. But with financial success has come some friction.
Last summer, Ian Pai, who helped compose much of the show’s early music and worked as the musical director in several cities, sued in New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan, contending that he had been cheated of his fair share of royalties for decades. Though a judge threw out part of his claim, the case is pending.
In a statement, Blue Man Group called Mr. Pai’s suit “baseless,” saying that he has been earning between $100,000 and $200,000 a year. “We look forward to refuting the details of his claims,” it added.
All the Blue Men are trained in a facility downtown, and the place was bustling during anniversary week. In one room, a trio of current Blue Men explained why it was not wearisome to continually play a character who is always blue, always silent and always surrounded by two others of his ilk.
Down the hall, 30 superfans who had come from as far afield as Turkey and Germany were finishing lunch. Like members of any fan group who stay in touch mostly online, they are a little obsessive.
Davitta Simon, 42 and living in Spartanburg, S.C, became entranced by the wild tribal music and the anarchic spirit in the Blue Man videos she stumbled on while in the Navy in Iraq in the 2000s.
The live shows have inspired her to draw and to develop a comic book character. “I’ve never experienced a camaraderie, other than in the military, quite like this,” she said of the Blue Man community.
