Harry Tafur is a captain at Harvard, which won its first Northeast Water Polo Conference title and is a program-record 26-6.
With a 13-12 overtime victory over Bucknell in an N.C.A.A. tournament play-in game Saturday, Harvard’s men’s water polo team achieved a once-unlikely goal: getting to the top of the East Coast’s water polo establishment for the first time in program history.
On Thursday afternoon in Berkeley, Calif., the Crimson will face California, Davis, in another play-in game. The winner will advance to the final four to face top-ranked Southern California, a nine-time national champion.
For Harvard, the pools of the powerful West Coast programs are uncharted waters, a situation Coach Ted Minnis relishes. Minnis, who has led the Harvard men’s and women’s teams for the past seven seasons, has proved as successful in the position as he is unlikely. In the two seasons before Minnis arrived in 2010, Harvard’s men’s team won a total of 12 games; this season the team is 26-6, a program record.
An African-American in a predominantly white sport, Minnis, a 47-year-old Californian, had never coached college water polo or even been east for any length of time before he took the Harvard job. His path to one of the East’s top positions featured two decades of youth, club and high school coaching, including 12 years at the Stanford Water Polo Club.
Having submitted his credentials to Harvard after the departure of Erik Farrar, Minnis advanced through the application gantlet of faculty, students and athletics staff primarily because of his ability to teach and learn.
With a career record of 124-95, Minnis has led the men’s team to results that could scarcely have been imagined by alumni who had endured decades of losing, especially to Harvard’s Ivy League rivals Brown and Princeton, which has reached the N.C.A.A. final four three times. The Bears own a 92-25 record against the Crimson; the Tigers have a 28-16 edge.
This year, Harvard took two of three matches from each, beating both teams on its way to its first Northeast Water Polo Conference championship, which set up the N.C.A.A. tournament play-in game against Bucknell.
There are only 46 varsity men’s water polo programs eligible for the N.C.A.A. tournament, but the sport has prominent advocates, especially at Harvard, where polo is taken seriously. With 42 varsity sports and nearly 80 percent of its undergraduates involved with athletics, Harvard has a wealth of alumni who weigh in on their former teams, demanding results and sometimes seeking change.
Among them is Michael Graff, a 1973 graduate and a captain of Harvard’s club team. Since 2006, Graff has served as chairman of the board of directors at U.S.A. Water Polo, which oversees the men’s and women’s national teams. Graff helped endow the coaching position that Minnis holds, and his endorsement and support are essential to the program’s success.
Another influential alumnus is Mehmet Oz — better known to fans of his afternoon syndicated television show as Dr. Oz. He was a goalie for the Crimson after water polo became a varsity sport in 1980.
Even a program with exemplary coaching needs good players to win. The country’s primary talent reservoir is on the West Coast. No team from outside California has ever won an N.C.A.A. championship in men’s water polo, and the Harvard brand did not resonate at first with a community more familiar with the powerhouses U.S.C., U.C.L.A., California and Stanford.
With connections to the California high school leagues from his time as a youth coach, Minnis re-entered that world as the face of a prestigious academic institution not known for its polo prowess.
He quickly realized that he needed to promote himself.
Noah Harrison, a fifth-year senior from Huntington Beach, Calif., was recruited by Minnis in 2012 and has been a believer ever since.
“The first thing Ted did was he made very clear what his goals and aspirations were, and he made sure they were aligned with ours,” said Harrison, whose 283 goals put him near the top of Harvard’s career list.
Harrison missed his junior season because of mononucleosis. But Ivy League programs allow only eight semesters of athletic eligibility. So Harrison took the unusual step of forgoing his undergraduate studies last spring in order to enjoy one last season of eligibility this fall.
For Harrison, the eventual success of Harvard’s program under Minnis was worth the sacrifice.
