Presumably, when it was announced over the summer that Stephen Colbert was planning a special, live election-night broadcast on Showtime, the expectation was that he would riff on a once-in-a-lifetime political event, as momentous as anything he regularly satirizes as host of “The Late Show” on CBS.
There can be no disputing that the special, called partly “Stephen Colbert’s Live Election Night Democracy’s Series Finale,” was unique, but surely not in the way the politically liberal Mr. Colbert, his guests or his audience had expected. With pre-election polls suggesting a Hillary Clinton victory, Mr. Colbert and his guests were buffeted throughout the broadcast by the growing realization that Donald J. Trump had won the presidency. No entertainer could have managed this task easily; the night had a nervous energy that made it compelling, surreal and sometimes difficult to watch as it unfolded.
Mr. Colbert’s special began with a dark animated sequence in which a seething cartoon version of Mr. Trump reflected angrily on his humiliation by President Obama at the 2011 White House Correspondents Dinner, and the cold, competitive attitude of his father, Fred Trump. Against the backdrop of a stormy night at Trump Tower, he contrives to run for the White House.
Mr. Colbert then took the stage of the Ed Sullivan Theater to deliver a monologue that tried to wink at the possibility of a Trump victory. “You don’t need to stand for me,” he said. “You don’t need to chant my name. America doesn’t have dictators — yet.” (The audience members, whose phones he said had been taken away for the live broadcast, tittered uneasily.) He said a swear word to show he could do it on cable television and announced Marco Rubio’s re-election to the United States Senate, with the help of a nearly nude male model who had the news written on an index card taped to his crotch.
Mr. Colbert told his viewers that the presidential race was too close to call, and that news organizations were exercising caution in declaring the race over. (He then showed a famous image of Harry S. Truman holding up a copy of The Chicago Daily Tribune, digitally replacing the “Dewey Defeats Truman” headline with “Election Defeats America.”) From his desk, Mr. Colbert joked about some of Mr. Trump’s more far-fetched paths to victory, should he lose states like Florida or North Carolina, and his studio audience groaned when he told it that Mr. Trump had won Ohio. When Mr. Colbert introduced what looked like a live interview with Nate Silver, the editor in chief of the data journalism site fivethirtyeight.com, it turned out, somewhat portentously for anyone looking for real-time information, that Mr. Silver’s cameo had been taped several days earlier.
During a live conversation with Mr. Colbert, the journalists John Heilemann and Mark Halperin revealed that Mr. Trump had gone from underdog to front-runner, to the audible dismay of the audience. In addition to winning Ohio, the journalists said, Mr. Trump was also likely to win Florida and was leading in Wisconsin and Michigan. Mr. Colbert tried to inject some levity into the conversation — “Were there crazier moments than what’s happening right now? Or is this just the ultimate fruit of the crazy tree?” — but could not deny the new reality.
When Mr. Halperin said that Mr. Trump was “now on the doorstep of 270 electoral votes,” Mr. Colbert answered: “Wow. That’s a horrifying prospect. I can’t put a happy face on that, and that’s my job.” Mr. Halperin added, “Outside of the Civil War, World War II and including 9/11, this may be the most cataclysmic event the country’s ever seen.” Mr. Colbert replied: “Um. Well. We’ll be right back after this message from Calgon.” Few if any laughs were heard.
Noting that his own mother was born two days before women could vote in their first American presidential election, Mr. Colbert said: “I was thinking this was going to be the time that she got what she wanted. She told me, at age 92, right before she died, ‘Oh, I think I would vote for Hillary this time.’” He tossed out a few truisms that he said all Americans should agree with: “KitKats should be eaten in segments, not bitten into like a normal candy bar, you animal.” “There are too many Portlands.” Then Mr. Colbert closed by singing, “My Country ‘Tis of Thee.” It was difficult to tell whether his audience was singing along.