President Obama, in his first remarks on the violent standoff over an oil pipeline near the Standing Rock Sioux Reservation in North Dakota, called on both sides to show restraint and revealed that the Army Corps of Engineers was considering an alternative route for the project.
In an interview with NowThis news that was published on Tuesday, Mr. Obama said: “We are monitoring this closely. I think as a general rule, my view is that there is a way for us to accommodate sacred lands of Native Americans.
Protesters have been gathering since April outside Cannon Ball, N.D., a town in the south-central part of the state near the South Dakota border, to rally against the pipeline.
Energy Transfer Partners, which has been working to finish construction on the 1,170-mile, $3.7 billion pipeline, contends it would be a safer way to transport oil from North Dakota to Illinois. But Native American tribes say it threatens the local water supply, sacred land and tribal burial ground.
But he said work on the pipeline should be stopped while the Army Corps examined the issue.
The number of protesters has grown to several hundred, many drawn from across the country. Last week, the standoff boiled over as officers in riot gear tried to force crowds from protest camps near Cannon Ball. In the monthslong unrest, more than 400 people have been arrested, some accused of engaging in riots and conspiracy to endanger by fire and explosion.
On Wednesday, the Morton County Sheriff’s Department said in a statement on its Facebook page that officials were in a standoff with protesters across a creek north of the main camp area and had been given orders to arrest anyone who trespassed on private property.
But the Sheriff’s Department said in a statement that the enclosures were “temporary holding cells” made out of chain link fence.
The Army Corps of Engineers was expected to review a crucial stretch of the proposed path for the pipeline, through Army Corps land and under the Missouri River.
Asked to comment on law enforcement tactics, including the use of rubber bullets, Mr. Obama said: “It is a challenging situation. I think that my general rule when I talk to governors and state and local officials, whenever they are dealing with protests — including, for example during the Black Lives Matter protests — there is an obligation for protesters to be peaceful, and there is an obligation for authorities to show restraint.
“I want to make sure that as everybody is exercising their constitutional rights to be heard that both sides are refraining from situations that might result in people being hurt,” he added.
In a statement on Wednesday, the Morton County chairman, Cody Schulz, warned about any delays in finding a solution to the standoff.
Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont said on Twitter on Wednesday that he was grateful Mr. Obama was listening to the protesters and that the pipeline work should stop until the Army Corps review was completed.
Mr. Sanders, a former Democratic presidential candidate, has been a vocal supporter of the movement by rallying outside the White House and calling on Mr. Obama to protect the protesters.