Are Get-Out-the-Vote Efforts Targeting Latinos Working?
Turnout for early voting is up among Latino voters, compared with the 2012 election, in Florida and other swing states. That’s a relief for Hillary Clinton and her supporters. It’s also an opportunity for the small army of organizers, data analysts and researchers who try to better understand and refine the methods for getting people to the polls. Through Tuesday, they will field-test methods that could shape the demographic future of the major parties.
In Florida, Latinos make up almost a quarter of the population and 16 percent of registered voters. That’s more than enough to make the difference in any close election. Polls show a tight race in the state between Clinton and Donald Trump, and historically Latino turnout nationwide has been stubbornly low. Many people of all races don’t vote in presidential elections: Turnout among eligible citizens was 57.5 percent in 2012 and 62.3 percent in 2008. But while the rate was in the mid 60s in both elections for African-Americans and whites, it went as high as 50 percent for Latinos only in 2008 and stayed below 47 percent for Asians in both elections.
This year, the anti-immigrant rhetoric of Donald Trump represented an opportunity for Democrats to increase those numbers (and a threat to Republicans in the medium- to long-term, given the country’s shifting demographics). But Trump’s presence alone may not make the difference. The political scientists Lisa García Bedolla and Melissa Michelson wrote in their 2012 book “Mobilizing Inclusion” that infrequent Latino voters become habitual ones only when voting becomes core to their sense of identity. That can take real effort for people who come from a variety of countries, sometimes spend years without citizenship and don’t necessarily grow up in families or neighborhoods where voting is just what everyone does. “For first-generation Americans, politics is often just one more cultural expression that they must decipher on their own,” Marcela Valdes wrote in this magazine in September.
How do you help people with that deciphering? Chris Torres and María Rodriguez are at the center of one effort, among several around the country, to answer that question. Rodriguez is on the ground directing a canvassing operation for Florida Immigration Coalition Votes. Torres is suggesting strategies and tracking voter data from his desk in Washington at the Center for Community Change Action. The groups are aligned with the Democrats, and C.C.C.A. raised $15 million for a get-out-the-vote effort this year in three swing states. The focus in Florida, in partnership with FLIC Votes, Rodriguez’s group, is 442,000 “low propensity” voters. The term generally refers to people who have voted, if at all, in no more than one of the last four elections. C.C.C.A. is also working with immigrants-rights groups in Colorado and Nevada.
The conversation can happen when someone knocks on your door or over a personal text. An app called Hustle used by the Bernie Sanders campaign loads a text that can be sent individually to many people by pushing send over and over again. It’s time-consuming but far more effective than blasting out spam, Torres says. He’s also using a phone bank for what he called “catch-and-release calls.” The caller asks the voter to tape a short message about why he or she thinks voting is important. On Election Day, the messages will be played back, via automated calls, to the people who taped them, so voters are effectively prodding themselves to go to the polls.
There’s another agenda at stake. In a book published this year, “Brown Is the New White,” Steve Phillips, a founder of the social-justice organization PowerPAC.org, argues that Democratic candidates should quit tacking to the center during general elections and concentrate instead on turning out more of their progressive base. In other words, they should put more faith in low-propensity voters of color. To Phillips, who helped run voter-mobilization efforts for Barack Obama and Cory Booker, the voters who C.C.C.A. and FLIC Votes are reaching are a crucial component of a “new American majority.” This year, states like Florida, Colorado and Nevada could stay blue. Arizona and Georgia are not out of the realm of possibility for Democrats in the next cycle, or even this one. The most significant aspect of the Latino vote is its distribution on the electoral map — and the fact that it’s growing.