RIO DE JANEIRO — It is said that “Cariocas,” people from Rio de Janeiro, like to think that the world comes to them, and that was certainly the case over the last several years as Brazil commanded the global stage like never before.
Turim Family Office and Investment Management, a Brazilian wealth management firm led by Gustavo Marini, had a front-row seat. The office is within walking distance to the Rodrigo de Freitas lagoon, the site of the Olympic rowing events in August, and to some of the Rio Olympics’ hobnobbing hospitality suites like Club France — where the swimmer Ryan Lochte’s infamous adventure began.
Now all is quiet on the lagoon, and Latin America’s largest economy remains mired in its worst recession in decades. So what can an investor in Brazil, the world’s fourth-largest democracy, do?
Cariocas can often seem insular. That attitude is evident among the wealthy and business classes here, where old money predominates. When new Brazilian entrepreneurs start companies, they usually move to São Paulo rather than to here.
Yet Turim and its founding partner, Mr. Marini, who is 57 and a Carioca, seek to chart a different course. He and his partners increasingly say they need to be proactive to diversify their portfolio better even if Brazil’s economy eventually recovers — and they are cautiously optimistic that it will.
The firm’s partners visited India in September, and they have traveled to Silicon Valley three times this year. Despite widespread concerns over “Brexit,” they are keeping one partner, Nelson Isaac Abrahão Jr., in London to lead overseas investments.
Turim, founded in 1999, had about $1.38 billion (4.50 billion Reais) in assets under management as of Dec. 31, 2015, according to an annual filing with Brazil’s securities regulator, the C.V.M.
Turim’s bullishness on India, even though the country is a tiny part of its portfolio, is noteworthy. The business classes in India and Brazil still know very little about each other and do very little business together. But Turim is impressed with the economic management of Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India. “He is doing a good job with economic reforms,” said Mr. Marini, who visited the country with Mr. Abrahão.
The firm made its first small investment there in public equities. Turim also plans to invest in the country’s private equity market. Over all, India “is a huge opportunity,” Mr. Marini said.
In 2015, the firm made its maiden investment in Silicon Valley, in the NEA 15 fund run by the venture capital firm NEA.
Turim invested overseas in its early days, but no more than about 30 percent of its total assets. That started to increase in 2011 as Brazil’s economy showed signs of problems, and reached 60 percent by the second half of last year.
The firm is not a stranger to global transactions. It invested in deals to acquire Heinz in 2013 and Kraft in 2015, led by the global investment firm 3G Capital, whose founders include the Cariocas Jorge Paulo Lemann, Marcel Herrmann Telles and Carlos Alberto Sicupira.
Until now, the firm has allocated much of its capital to Brazilian treasuries, which have payouts that are indexed to inflation plus interest rates. Brazil has long had some of the highest interest rates among emerging economies, giving family offices an easy way to make money.
But in October, the country’s central bank lowered its benchmark Selic rate to 14 percent, from 14.25 percent, the first decrease since 2012. That may be a sign of things to come. “We think interest rates will continue to fall,” Mr. Marini said.
That will create new investment opportunities in Brazil. “We are increasing our exposure to public equities in Brazil,” he said, adding that infrastructure was likely to rebound and become attractive.
Mr. Marini said he and his partners also saw signs of a Brazilian rebound. They think the current crisis will force the country to finally confront needed economic reforms, and they like the economic team of the new government.
