Houses on Stanley Street in Schenectady, N.Y., that are illuminated with LED lights as part of the “Breathing Lights” project.
An art installation is drawing attention to urban blight in three upstate New York cities by illuminating the windows of vacant properties.
Houses on Stanley Street in Schenectady, N.Y., that are illuminated with LED lights as part of the “Breathing Lights” project.Credit...
ALBANY — On a recent evening, Cameron Payne found himself walking along a row of empty and deteriorating homes and businesses in his neighborhood, but suddenly their windows were lighted.
But the lights, which slowly pulsed behind white shades, were a work of art, not a utility. Soon they will go off for good. The buildings are among 200 that are part of “Breathing Lights,” an installation across Albany, Schenectady and Troy that seeks to make a statement about the blight spreading across poor neighborhoods.
Conceived by Barbara Nelson, an architect in Troy, and Adam Frelin, a professor at the University at Albany, and supported by the cities’ mayors and many community groups, the $1.2 million project was one of four winners of the national Bloomberg Philanthropies Public Art Challenge.
For four hours every night this month, structures in the three cities have been lit by battery-powered LED strips fitted into window frames. The lights dim and brighten to mimic breathing, hinting at the people who left the buildings. When Ms. Nelson and Mr. Frelin installed the lights, they said they found houses filled with furniture and clothing, as if the residents had just fled. Other houses had been empty for so long that kitchens had plunged into basements; moss grew on waterlogged carpeting.
The lights illuminate once-proud houses on quiet streets and decrepit structures along main thoroughfares.
Though the lights will go off gradually through the end of the month, the “Breathing Lights” project has also included community discussions, youth film festivals, tours, celebrations and home-buying clinics. Some of these events will continue.
Based on responses to the project, “Breathing Lights” organizers will make recommendations at a public meeting early next year. Ms. Nelson said the recommendations might include better marketing of properties, expediting foreclosures and working more effectively with land banks. She said she hoped the project would also build momentum for helping prospective buyers.
“This can help reinforce the efforts of the people already doing a lot of the hard work,” Ms. Nelson said.
But the success of the project depends on local response, particularly from the people who live around the abandoned properties. The range of feedback has included jubilation to near-rage at the conditions in some neighborhoods.
In dozens of meetings neighbors of “Breathing Lights” houses asked Ms. Nelson why the money for the project could not be spent on fixing homes. (The grant can only be used for the art project.) Some people worried that out-of-town purchasers would become absentee landlords or gentrify their streets. Some said the lights would deter drug addicts and squatters, or attract them. Some resented the notoriety. Others were grateful.
Alan Mallach, a senior fellow at the Center for Community Progress in Washington, said decades of declining population in poor cities had left a glut of empty structures and a lack of effective strategies for managing them. While vacant buildings are quickly bought in affluent parts of Boston, New York City and Seattle, they pile up in Baltimore and Albany. They become an even less viable investments as they deteriorate, Mr. Mallach said.
Vince Perry, 51, has learned this as he restores his 1851 wood-frame house downtown here, just a few doors from the governor’s mansion. Soon after Mr. Perry bought the house at auction for $16,000, the roof sprung a leak, and an original water line broke.
Mr. Perry laid flooring under construction lights while the structures on either side of his house pulsed with “Breathing Lights.” He said he liked the concept, at first.
In Arbor Hill, at Albany’s northern end, some blocks have so many abandoned homes that a house in the “Breathing Lights” project provides the only light.
“I doubt the people who might want to buy buildings are coming through this neighborhood,” Celeste Knight, 49, a lifelong Arbor Hill resident and political leader, said, using her cellphone as a flashlight to navigate the sidewalks.
In South End, yet another Albany neighborhood with “Breathing Lights” houses, Willie White, director of the community advocacy group AVillage..., Inc., has seen similar approaches come and go.
But in Schenectady’s Hamilton Hill neighborhood, Molaine Gilmore sees “Breathing Lights” as a disruption in a long pattern of neglect.
On one side of the street, nearly every home either pulsed with the lights or had been boarded up.
“And I’ll charge the battery,” she added.