LAKE BAIKAL, Russia — Yury Azhichakov set out early by bike for Senogda Bay, his favorite beach, on the northwestern shore of Lake Baikal in Siberia. The world’s oldest, deepest and most voluminous lake, Baikal holds 20 percent of the planet’s unfrozen freshwater. It is often described as the world’s cleanest lake.
As Mr. Azhichakov discovered, that is no longer the case. Senogda’s once pristine sands were buried under thick mats of reeking greenish-black goo.
The muck, scientists have discovered, follows mass algal blooms at dozens of sites around Lake Baikal’s 1,240-mile perimeter. Confined to shallow water and shores near towns and villages, the problem seems to stem from an influx of untreated sewage — the result of inadequate wastewater treatment.
Algal blooms threaten iconic freshwater bodies around the world, including the Great Lakes, Lake Geneva, and Lake Biwa in Japan. But Lake Baikal is especially precious: a World Heritage site home to more than 3,700 species, more than half found nowhere else.
“People are dumping sewage, waste and rubbish around the lake, creating pretty appalling conditions in some places,” said Anson MacKay, an environmental scientist at University College London.
Runoff from fertilizers and other pollutants leads to so-called eutrophication, an excessive growth of algae. These blooms eventually deplete the water of oxygen, suffocating aquatic plants and animals.
Russian scientists had assumed that Lake Baikal is simply too vast to suffer such a fate, but recent growth in tourism and development seem to be changing the calculus.
Dr. Timoshkin and his colleagues have found that Spirogyra, a type of green algae that had rarely grown in Lake Baikal’s shallow zones, accounts for the outbreaks.
In Severobaikalsk, Mr. Azhichakov’s town, the researchers traced Spirogyra blooms to locations downstream of the town’s wastewater facility, as well as to an illegal sewage dumping site.
The researchers also found little difference in phosphorus and nitrogen content — indicators of synthetic detergents and fecal material — in treated and untreated water entering the lake. And, as it turned out, Russian Railways had been adding industrial-grade waste to the town’s sewage system, overwhelming it.
Despite remedial action, high levels of phosphorus and nitrogen in Severobaikalsk’s wastewater persist even today, and fecal bacteria in treated wastewater have turned up at various sites around Lake Baikal. Dr. Timoshkin’s team is trying to figure out which nutrients are fueling Spirogyra’s growth.
Spirogyra smothers other species of algae, and thousands of empty snail shells — gastropod cemeteries, as Dr. Timoshkin calls them — regularly wash up alongside the blooms. But the damage is more extensive than that.
Underwater forests of native Lake Baikal sponges have begun dying off. In nearly 90 dives around the lake, researchers have found that 30 to 100 percent of sponges are affected in a given area. The green stalks — some a century old — are turning a dull brown, reminiscent of cattails.
The cause of death is unknown, although Dr. Timoshkin and his colleagues suspect that pathogens from sewage may be causing disease outbreaks, or that the influx of nutrients is causing symbiotic algae to vacate the sponges.
Without intervention, the researchers believe that the environmental damage will worsen. Algal blooms, for instance, can produce neurotoxins that are harmful to fish and crustaceans — and the humans who consume them. Last year, the largest algal bloom ever recorded shut down the crab and clam fisheries along the West Coast of the United States.
Along Lake Baikal, some locals say they can no longer drink water from their taps during blooms. Fishermen complain of Spirogyra tangling in their nets.
“Will Baikal be able to attract the same amount of tourism, which is a major part of the economy, if tourists show up and see a green lake?” said Ted Ozersky, a limnologist at the University of Minnesota Duluth.
In 2014, Dr. Timoshkin testified before the Duma, Russia’s Parliament, about Lake Baikal’s problems. Earlier this year, he and his colleagues also published their findings in The Journal of Great Lakes Research. They are calling for an immediate ban on synthetic detergents and for help from the federal government in reforming sewage facilities around the lake.
But such fixes will probably be slow to come.
Some government officials and academics insist that the problems are caused by climate change, not pollution; others blame mud volcanoes, or even say that Lake Baikal’s eutrophication is a lie made up by scientists to gain funding. Russia’s Ministry of Natural Resources and the Environment has yet to formally acknowledge that the lake’s health is in question at all.
Even as federal aid stalls, some people are attempting to address the problems where they live, organizing beach cleanups and trying to find ways to put the thousands of pounds of washed-up Spirogyra to use as fertilizer or material for making traditional Siberian paper.
Eutrophication, however, is not the only threat to Lake Baikal.
Overshadowing the threat of pollution and dams, however, is climate change, the effects of which are already being felt at Lake Baikal. Summer surface waters lake-wide have warmed about two degrees Celsius since 1977, and winter ice cover has decreased in duration and thickness compared with a century ago.
Plankton species associated with warm water have also increased in summer months. “The question that many ecologists are asking now is whether the endemic, cold-loving species will be able to adapt and persist if warm-loving species begin increasing in abundance,” Dr. Moore said.
But that first requires acknowledging that Lake Baikal is “absolutely ill,” Dr. Timoshkin said.
