Ivanka Trump can do it all. Throughout this interminable campaign, she has been able, with very little backlash, to promote for her $100 million apparel brand, which she markets with the female empowerment hashtag #womenwhowork, and also support her father, whose campaign is rife with misogynistic language, and who has been accused of sexual harassment by more than a dozen women.
Ms. Trump describes herself as a feminist, and while her feminism might not be a type that Betty Friedan or Gloria Steinem would recognize, it’s a mercantile variety that is familiar to the women the Ivanka Trump brand hopes to reach.
The defining feature of mercantile feminism is its use of values — those of political, social and economic equality for women — to make money. And it works only for individuals and brands with real credibility.
But now, as the accumulated effects of her father’s campaign sink in, Ms. Trump is testing the limit of how far she can take her mercantile feminism.
“There was a tipping point with Ivanka Trump — it was right after the Billy Bush tape came out and she went back on the campaign trail,” said Shannon Coulter, a San Francisco-based marketing executive who, a few weeks ago, started a campaign, #GrabYourWallet, to boycott the 21 retailers, including Lord & Taylor, Zappos, Nordstrom and Macy’s, that carry Ms. Trump’s wares.
More than a week after the “Access Hollywood” tape came out, Ms. Trump issued a short statement to Fast Company saying that her father’s remarks were “offensive.” She has not said anything publicly about the women accusing Mr. Trump of unwanted sexual advances.
But Ms. Trump, who has also seemed to hold the promise for women of something better than her father, is showing her true colors. Young women were hoping that she was a real compatriot, that her brand and words of encouragement to women were real, not just a ploy to get us to open our wallets.
At the beginning of her father’s campaign, Ms. Trump had some plausible deniability that she was anything less than a heartfelt advocate for women, even if she was doing it under the aegis of her commercial brand and profiting from the exposure. But in the last month, she has violated the terms of mercantile feminism that are unspoken but clearly understood by both the buyers and the sellers.
And the Trump campaign has apparently been good for her company. Sales in the first six months of 2016 were up almost $12 million compared with the year before, according to public filings. Her editorial director, Sarah Warren, recently said that web traffic is “through the roof” and the company’s newsletter database is 275 percent bigger than it was last year. “You couldn’t pay for this visibility,” Ms. Warren recently told a reporter.
So far, retailers have not responded to the #GrabYourWallet boycott by dropping the Ivanka Trump brand. But in a national online survey of registered voters by Morning Consult conducted after the release of the “Access Hollywood” tape, 75 percent of Democratic women said they would not purchase clothes from Ivanka Trump’s clothing line, compared with close to 60 percent of independent women and a third of Republican women. A smaller survey conducted by Brand Keys of millennial women found that 51 percent of respondents were still “extremely” or “very” willing to buy Ivanka Trump.
How will her brand fare after Nov. 8? Will she use a Trump victory or concession speech to sell more dresses? As for Ms. Coulter, she says she has no plans to end her campaign for a boycott after Election Day.
