WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — I always feel like I have to be very careful interpreting themes like the one John Lieb offers us today, because I just don’t know enough about the subject matter.
Mr. Lieb offers us a fresh take on an old theme: playing with the names of sports teams. All four of the theme entries are common phrases that are clued as things one coach might say to another, where the last word is the team name. The sports leagues they are in are bracketed in the clue in order to help solvers narrow down the possible team names.
You can see the set of theme entries here.
All four of the theme entries are unique, which means that Mr. Lieb did a good job finding lively phrases that haven’t been used before in a New York Times Crossword.
Other nontheme entries that I really liked include BOSCO (because chocolate), POP UP, ART CRITIC, DON’T STOP, POWER SUIT, COCA-COLA and OH SNAP.
■ 1A: Proof once again that you do not have to be an expert on things (like geography) to solve crossword puzzles. If you don’t know where Zion National Park is off the top of your head, solve 1D. UMA Thurman starred in “Kill Bill,’ right? Now how many American states do you know that begin with a U and have four letters? Work those crossings mercilessly, and you’ll come up with UTAH.
■ 23A: The word “Subj.” is abbreviated, so we know right away that the answer has to be abbreviated. Those who are “working the angles” could either be scammers (try abbreviating that) or they could be people who are studying TRIGonometry.
■ 63A: Even though this gave me “Walk Like an Egyptian” earworm, I liked the clue. “Tosspot” is a Britishism for someone who is drunk, so the answer is REEL.
■ 68A: Sure, you might not be a proofreader, but the word STET has been in The New York Times Crossword 568 times. It’s worth knowing. Want to know how I remember it? I associate it with the Beatles song, “Let It Be,” because that’s essentially what it means. A word or passage has been deleted from a manuscript and a proofreader or editor declares “let it be,” or put it back. Of course, there is earworm associated with this method, but it’s The Beatles, so what could be bad?
The phrase COOL YOUR JETS popped into my head one day and I liked its old-timey feel. It’s something I imagine my Dad saying (perhaps punctuated with a “buster”) and I thought it would be fun to get it into a puzzle. After misses with a couple other themed puzzles including this entry, I hit success with this one. This one’s for you, Pop.
Playing with team names is not novel, of course, so I tried to get as tight a theme as possible, getting one entry from each of the four major sports (sorry, Major League Soccer, I wasn’t ambitious enough to cram in five theme entries) and cluing each entry with the “Coach…” motif. I’m a longtime assistant football coach, having received many requests from other coaches over the years, so I imagined the context to be a head coach talking to an assistant, though others may read it differently.
Hope folks enjoy this one. Wondering if this puzzle was at all timed to run because of 10-Down ...
Are You a Civilized Tabletop Gamer?
Manners are important, and that extends to gaming as well. Teri Litorco, a writer for the popular gaming site, “Geek and Sundry,” has written a hilarious book called “The Civilized Guide to Tabletop Gaming” about how not to be a total wiener (Cleaned up for standards. You’re welcome.) when it comes to playing tabletop games with others.
Ms. Litorco’s book teaches all sorts of useful skills, like proper hygiene for being in proximity to other gamers, how to play gracefully so you don’t get smacked down, how to keep your gaming group from killing you and how to host a game night like Martha Stewart if she ever lowered herself to bother rolling a die.
“The Civilized Guide” is a very funny and useful read on its own, but it also makes a great gift for that sore loser in your life. It’s available in bookstores and online wherever hints about how not to be a wiener are sold.