Tony Romo has ended the Dallas Cowboys’ quarterback controversy with a concession speech.
In one of the more graceful moves by a professional athlete whose starting job was threatened, Romo, who has been the Cowboys’ starting quarterback since 2006, acknowledged on Tuesday that Dak Prescott deserved to continue as the starter when Romo returns from injury.
Romo has been working his way back from a back injury sustained during the preseason, and the Cowboys had insisted that he would not lose his job because of injury. But Romo avoided the usual drama surrounding such situations by saying in a prepared statement that he believed that Prescott had surpassed him on the depth chart.
While Romo is a four-time Pro Bowler with a 78-49 career record as a starter, he managed just four games last season because of injuries to his collarbone and at 36 years old it has not been clear how effectively he could return from having suffered a compression fracture in his back.
In his absence, Prescott, a rookie drafted in the fourth round out of Mississippi State, has teamed with his fellow rookie, Ezekiel Elliott, to lead the Cowboys to eight consecutive victories and the best record in the N.F.L.
Prescott has drawn praise for his presence on the field, his accuracy on deep throws, and his ability to exploit the threat of Elliott’s running ability to make play-action passes particularly effective.
After the duo led Dallas to a dramatic come-from-behind victory over the Pittsburgh Steelers on Sunday, Elliott called Prescott a beast in a televised interview and discussed his leadership on the game-winning drive.
For much of the season the Cowboys had insisted that Romo would return to his starting role, but Prescott’s play during the winning streak, which included wins on the road in Green Bay and Pittsburgh, forced the issue.
Jerry Jones, the owner of the Cowboys, had all but named Prescott the starter after Sunday’s win.
Romo, who signed a contract with $55 million in guarantees before the 2013 season, is an older, more fragile, and far more expensive option than Prescott, which potentially affected Dallas’s decision-making. But in his remarks, Romo acknowledged that he had no plans to retire even if the Cowboys now belong to Prescott.
