You might want to sit down before you read this oh-so-shocking revelation: When “Empire” put Cookie Lyon at the center of an episode, it got the best episode of its third season so far. Largely pushing Lucious and the constant conflicts he engenders between his sons to the side, this week’s focus was squarely on the queen as she attempted to bring her scatterbrained family together to impress the family of her once-again boyfriend, the New York City mayoral candidate Angelo DuBois. Taraji P. Henson’s unerring ability to find the core of Cookie’s every interaction and mine it for all it’s worth is the show’s greatest renewable resource.
“Well, let me hear it for the first time before I make up my mind,” Angelo peevishly retorts.
Later, when Cookie decides to stage a big family dinner as a make-good, she tells her sons that she shouldn’t have to beg for Angelo and his mother to come to it. “You didn’t beg, you yelled,” Hakeem sighs. Psychologically, Cookie is so accustomed to the loud volume of her own thoughts and feelings that she never quite realizes how deafening she can be to others, even when she’s trying to play things low and cool.
Andre, whose Ivy League education was supposed to be the bridge between the Lyons and their upper-crust guests, never shows up at all. About the friendliest interaction anyone has with the intimidating visitor is the thoroughly stoned Jamal’s backhanded compliment: “Mrs. DuBois, you be mad shady, and I catch that, I clock that.” Awkward family dinners are a staple of this show, although they’re usually presided over by Lucious instead of Cookie. This one enters the all-time awkwardness rankings before a single morsel is served.
Yet in the end, what saves the day is Cookie’s blend of Type-A determination and her genuine acceptance of her family’s faults — as opposed to Lucious, who sees his sons’ psychological problems as weaknesses. Acknowledging that her family life is … less than ideal, she nonetheless asserts her affection for every messed-up member of the Lyon clan, presenting Mrs. DuBois with a “love it or leave it” demand that the fearsome figure can’t help but respect.
Cookie then passes the mike to Jamal, who sings a lovely, Marvin-and-Stevie-indebted song about his mother’s hardships growing up, which include the heart-attack death of her father just days after he threw her out of his home and his life. Jamal wants the track to be the cornerstone of his next project, an album and “visual museum” blowing the lid off all his family’s secrets in order to “set them free” — his answer to Beyoncé’s tell-all memoir-cum-multimedia extravaganza, “Lemonade,” no doubt. The song wraps with a brief image of Cookie as a little girl, laughing with delight as her smiling daddy holds her; you don’t have to be a father yourself to find this image deeply moving, but let me tell you, it helps.
The song’s artistic success can be measured here in three ways: It melts Cookie’s heart, which she’d hardened against it because of the trauma from the way her relationship with her late father ended; it wins over Mrs. DuBois, who sees that whatever their faults, the Lyons are doing something right if they can produce art this loving; and it shames Lucious, the show’s arch-villain, into quietly slinking away.
A parallel story line hits many of the same notes. Andre is a no-show because he is at a different family gathering: Shyne and Nessa’s annual cookout in honor of their late brother, Stone. No Mondrians on the wall to impress the elites here. It’s all beer in plastic cups and DMX and Craig Mack on the sound system.
Late to this party, Andre arrives with the trepidatious young M.C. Freda Gatz, an attempt to convince her that she can consider herself part of his and Shyne’s families, despite their checkered history. He intends to leave after that, but Nessa convinces him to stay with a song about her late brother, followed by a duet with Freda that honors her father, Frank Gathers. Andre stands riveted, and justifiably so. How is he to know that another expression of loyalty and love, one that’s just as unguarded and direct, is taking place at the dinner he skipped?
It’s a reasonable demand, and it’s hard to doubt Cookie’s intention to meet it. But intentions only get you so far. As any baker will tell you, you can’t have a cookie without a lot of heat.