FOR the first time in 20 years, the lead-up to the Whitney Biennial coincided with the presidential election, a background that could not help but inform the selection of artists and artwork that will be on view when the biennial opens on March 17, the first in the museum’s new downtown building.
On Thursday, the Whitney revealed the 63 participants in its sprawling survey of what’s happening now in contemporary art — the new, the influential and the potentially provocative.
After visiting artists’ studios, dealers and curators in 40 cities during the past year, the biennial’s curators — Christopher Y. Lew, an associate curator at the Whitney, and Mia Locks, an independent curator — were struck by themes that resonated with the contentious election: personal identity, social struggle, connection to place.
So much of the artwork “is about the artist or a self in relation to the tumultuous world that we’re in,” Mr. Lew said.
While the biennial includes established artists like Jo Baer, William Pope.L, Dana Schutz and Jordan Wolfson, many are largely unknown.
The curators worked closely with a team of advisers: Negar Azimi of the Middle East publication Bidoun; Gean Moreno of the Institute of Contemporary Art Miami; Wendy Yao of the exhibition space 356 South Mission Road and the art shop Ooga Booga in Los Angeles; and Aily Nash, a curator with the New York Film Festival, who is helping organize the biennial’s film program.
“We wanted them to be an invested part of the process from the beginning,” Ms. Locks said.
Below is a sampling of some of the lesser-known names in the show.
RAFA ESPARZA (Born 1981 in Los Angeles; lives in Los Angeles) He builds structures from adobe bricks that he makes with his family and friends out of dirt, hay and horse manure mixed with water from the Los Angeles River. Mr. Esparza learned this technique from his father — who built his own home in Durango, Mexico — just after the artist came out as gay. For the Whitney, he will create a room made of adobe that will also display works by other artists.
SUSAN CIANCIOLO (Born 1969 in Providence, R.I.; lives in Brooklyn) Her fashions of recycled or found textiles have been featured in Barneys and Vogue, and in 2001 she transformed a gallery in the meatpacking district of Manhattan into a pop-up Japanese-inspired tearoom, serving lunch to the installation’s visitors. For the biennial, she will reprise the tearoom in the museum’s restaurant, Untitled, in collaboration with the chef Michael Anthony.
ALIZA NISENBAUM (Born 1977 in Mexico City; lives in Brooklyn) Calling her work “political witnessing,” Ms. Nisenbaum makes portraits of immigrants, many of whom she meets through her art classes at the Cuban-born artist Tania Bruguera’s community space in Queens. At the Whitney, she will show new large-scale paintings, including one of a Latino runner’s club and another of the women’s cabinet to the New York City mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs, where she was part of the 2015 fellowship program.
The artist collective Postcommodity, from left, Cristóbal Martínez, Kade L. Twist and Raven Chacon.
A still from Postcommodity’s video “A Very Long Line,” 2016.Credit...Courtesy of the artists.
POSTCOMMODITY (Founded 2007) This collective — comprising Raven Chacon, Cristóbal Martínez and Kade L. Twist — for four days in October 2015 installed a two-mile “Repellent Fence” of 26 balloons that intersected the United States-Mexico border near Douglas, Ariz., and Agua Prieta, Sonora. The Whitney will feature the collective’s 2016 video installation, “A Very Long Line,” in which the camera rapidly moves laterally along the border to a discordant soundtrack, as if from the perspective of a passenger in a car.
HENRY TAYLOR (Born 1958 in Oxnard, Calif.; lives in Los Angeles) His early portraits of patients at Camarillo State Mental Hospital in California, where he worked as a psychiatric technician from 1984 to 1994, were featured in his solo shows at the Studio Museum in Harlem in 2007 and at MoMA PS1 in 2012. His 2008 piece “He’s Hear, and He’s Thair” — depicting a homeless man named Emory who became his friend — sold at Phillips auction house on Wednesday for $60,000. Mr. Taylor’s recent portraits, some of which will be at the Whitney, feature subjects including friends and family.
MAYA STOVALL (Born 1982 in Detroit; lives in Detroit) Ms. Stovall, who describes herself as a “radical ballerina,” dances in front of liquor stores in her Detroit neighborhood, McDougall-Hunt. She then interviews patrons about her performance and records these events on video, editing the footage and adding a soundtrack. Episodes from this “Liquor Store Theater” will be on exhibition for the first time at the Whitney.
SKY HOPINKA (Born 1984 in Bellingham, Wash.; lives in Milwaukee) In “Jáaji Approx.” (2015), Mr. Hopinka, a member of the Ho-Chunk Nation, films his journey through the territory once traveled by his father. Mr. Hopinka pairs the sights through his windshield with stories, songs and conversation from informal recordings he made over a decade. The biennial will feature his new video, shot on St. Paul Island in the Bering Sea, home to one of the largest Aleut populations in the United States.
OCCUPY MUSEUMS (Founded 2011) Emerging from Occupy Wall Street, Occupy Museums is a largely New York-based group that focuses on the relationship between art institutions and capitalism. The collective’s Debtfair project, coming to the Whitney, packages works by United States artists who are in debt into “bundles” that can be purchased for the cost of the artists’ monthly loan payments.
CHEMI ROSADO-SEIJO (Born 1973 in Vega Alta, P.R.; lives in San Juan and Naranjito, P.R.) In 2014, Mr. Rosado-Seijo transformed a museum gallery in San Juan into a classroom, inviting students from a school to the museum for daily Spanish class, and exhibiting works from the museum at the school. At the Whitney, he will bring this project to the Lower Manhattan Arts Academy on Grand Street, the biennial’s only off-site installation.
Born 1929 in Seattle, Wash.
Born 1949 in Brookline, Mass.
Lives in Berlin and Falmouth, Mass.
Born 1984 in Redmond, Wash.
Born 1969 in Providence, R.I.
Born 1983 in Santee, S.C.
Lives in Hamilton, N.Y.
Born 1949 in Santa Monica, Calif.
Lives in Riverside, Calif.
Lives in Charlottesville, Va.
Born 1973 in Ann Arbor, Mich.
Lives in Oakland, Calif.
Born 1984 in Bellingham, Wash.
Born 1979 in Billings, Mont.
Born 1984 in Raleigh, N.C.
Lives in Roswell, N.M.
Born 1986 in Portland, Ore.
Born 1973 in Vega Alta, P.R.
Lives in San Juan and Naranjito, P.R.
Born 1972 in San Juan, P.R.
Lives in San Juan, P.R.
Born 1976 in Livonia, Mich.
Born 1967 in Riverside, Calif.
Born 1967 in Newport Beach, Caif.
Born 1958 in Oxnard, Calif.
Born 1990 in Macon, Ga.
Born 1972 in San Bernardino, Calif.
