Your Money|The Wealthy Ask Themselves: What Do We Have to Lose?
The Wealthy Ask Themselves: What Do We Have to Lose?
Even before Donald J. Trump defied the odds and was elected the 45th president of the United States, wealthy investors were feeling uneasy about the level of uncertainty in the global economy.
While some people are optimistic that a Trump administration could mean tax breaks, less business regulation and other benefits to the wealthy — and even the stock market eventually rose on the news — the truth is, no one knows for sure what the next months or years will bring.
His list of woes has been common among wealthy investors in the United States. Tony Roth, the chief investment officer at the Wilmington Trust Corporation, has begun to include models for how much a client can lose in the firm’s new investment pitches.
He said many clients had been cautious for several years, when markets performed well and they missed out. Now they want to take on more risk to increase their returns, yet they fear having another loss as in 2008.
Rebecca Patterson, chief investment officer at Bessemer Trust, said she wrote a recent investment paper directed at clients who were overly fearful of a catastrophic event in the markets. “A larger number of clients are seeing the glass as unusually empty at this point,” she said.
Of course, it is easy to be pessimistic after a year of noisy election campaigns, Britain’s “Brexit” vote to leave the European Union, a slowdown in China, saber-rattling and suspected digital snooping by Russia, and the slowing of Brazil’s economic engine by political problems and the Zika virus.
Today, Mr. Sonnenfeldt is the chairman of Tiger 21, an investment club he founded 18 years ago that has 447 members with an average wealth of $100 million. In that role, he likes to poll his fellow millionaires and billionaires on what concerns them and what actions they take to address those worries.
Right now, he said, members are taking money out of the public markets and investing more in private equity deals, which are far less liquid but offer higher returns for people who can afford to be patient. They have minimized their personal debt, gotten out of hedge funds and invested in hard assets, like real estate.
Mr. Sonnenfeldt’s group is not alone in taking an approach that weighs the downside as much as, if not more than, the upside.
Mr. Roth sees that a lot. But it has left him torn on using “drawdown exposure” as a rating.
On the one hand, it is a useful tool for clients, he said. But on the other he worries that he is playing into an echo chamber of woe.
And he is clear in saying that he is not discarding modern portfolio theory and all of the analytical tools the investment profession has to estimate potential rewardds. He is simply trying to add something that might make sense in the current age of anxiety.
It is the long view, of course, that advisers advocate. Whatever may happen between now and Inauguration Day or even later in 2017 is a blip — however painful — on people’s long-term investment plans.
The risk is that so much negative news from so many places in the world has a self-sustaining effect. The doom, real or perceived, resonates more loudly than rational calls for making a plan and sticking to it.
In a recent study of advisers, Eaton Vance found that 76 percent said fear was motivating their clients’ investment decisions. Two years ago, the same study found that clients were motivated equally by fear and greed.
That much fear can be paralyzing. To break that, Mr. Perkin said, he suggested that people do something simple: dollar-cost averaging, which means buying a certain amount of an investment in pieces in case its value goes down.
Of course, that investment’s value can also go up and an investor would have been better off putting all the money in at once. But when fear is such a large force, this simple strategy is a way to “remove the regret factor,” he said.
Taken a different way, Richard Bernstein, chief executive and chief investment officer of Richard Bernstein Advisors, an investment advisory firm, applies a hyperrational view to the present: Even if it is bad now, it will not be bad forever.
Two years ago, he published the paper “Tired of Being Scared Yet?” It listed 50 dire predictions made since 2009 that had not come true.
For Mr. Sonnenfeldt, doing nothing is the worst response. People have to make investment decisions, as he has been doing with clean energy.
The solution from Tiger members? Invest in businesses that make things people will buy no matter what happens. It’s simple — if you can get past your fear.