167 pp. Tyrant, paper, $15.
DeWitt’s novel, set in the summer of 1990, opens with a checklist of that year’s milestones — the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope, Nelson Mandela’s release from prison — which is odd, considering that its central character, a rural farm girl named Jean, still experiences the outside world almost exclusively through television and adult whispers. And yet 12-year-old Jean, teetering between childhood and adolescence, is very attuned to the malaise afflicting the Bottom Feeder, as her mother has taken to calling their home. Jean’s family seems to collapse around her, while the attentions of an elderly neighbor grow increasingly disturbing.
After Jean takes up with a wild boy named Fender Steelhead, she becomes privy to both her father’s indiscretions and her mother’s longing for a different life. But “White Nights in Split Town City” mostly abandons the episodic structure of more traditional coming-of-age narratives. Instead, DeWitt’s supple observations (as when Jean examines herself in the shower, “looking for some ugliness to shed,” or imagines a home “in which the soul could forget itself between doorways”) take precedence over rote storytelling, yielding a novel notable for the delicacy of its moods.
292 pp. Touchstone, $24.
The action of Fuentes’s novel takes place against the backdrop of the divided Spain of the late 1970s, as students and the police clash in the immediate aftermath of fascist rule. Scornful of the “official” history promulgated by their exams, a Castilian university student named Mosca joins her friends in embracing radical politics, punk music and bootleg editions of Lorca. Forced to flee after a protest turns violent, they set out for Madrid, then Paris, where Mosca hopes that her younger brother, who disappeared following his armed resistance to the fachas, might still be working for the revolution.
As they try to decide whom they can trust and how far they can run, the members of Mosca’s group are forced to reckon with the legacy of a country where everyone “knows someone who didn’t come home.” “The Sleeping World” is a politically conscious adventure story in which Fuentes manages to strike a powerful balance between vivid characterization and ideological critique, capturing a generation for whom David Bowie and the Ramones were not merely pop icons but heroes.
372 pp. Ecco/HarperCollins, paper, $15.99.
The title of this fictional portrait of Daniel Boone is decidedly tongue-in-cheek, given that any attempt to portray the life of the famous frontiersman must contend with his outsize legend. Still, Hawley vies for accuracy in rendering Boone’s tumultuous Quaker youth, his forays into the wilderness, the death of his son and his daughter’s kidnapping during clashes with the Shawnee Indians. For Boone, the path through nature is the way to heaven, and he imagines himself a Gulliver of the colonies — an image Hawley contrasts with those created by William Hill, a writer who exploits his friend’s celebrity.
The novel centers on two lengthy episodes: a perilous expedition to chart the unsettled Kentucky territory and Boone’s capture by Chief Black Fish, who adopts him as a son and hopes to turn him against the encroaching whites. Questions of honor, ownership and conquest are posed with a sensitivity that departs strikingly from the rugged posturing often associated with Boone’s story. Throughout, Hawley is careful not to allow contemporary mores to color this often surprisingly tranquil and original portrait of an individual who loomed large in our nation’s rapacious westward expansion.
295 pp. Ecco/HarperCollins, $25.99.
Sarah Thomas and Lauren Brooks have nothing in common but each other. Sarah is the expensively educated daughter of a divisive political pundit, while Lauren is a diffident associate editor at a press that publishes cookbooks by celebrity chefs. Yet their friendship, begun at a private school in Manhattan, has continued well into their 30s. Only now, with Sarah’s impending marriage, is that bond truly tested: by Lauren’s halfhearted romance with an office temp and her impatience with her maid-of-honor obligations, by the disapproval of Sarah’s well-to-do friends and by the revelation that Sarah is pregnant.
It would be easy, at first glance, to mistake “Rich and Pretty” for a breezy social comedy, but Sarah and Lauren aren’t written as broad types; they’re merely reacting to what’s expected of them. Each gives the other access to a different perspective, not to mention an unselfish empathy. The terrain of Alam’s novel may seem familiar, but superficiality is its subject, not its method. The life he breathes into these two characters allows them to emerge as three-dimensional women caught in an oppressive, materialistic world.
312 pp. St. Martin’s, $26.99.
Joanna DeAngelis is dying with her life in shambles. It’s not just that she’s unhappily divorced, leaving behind two adult daughters, but that her sleazy ex-lover, a high-profile blogger named Ned McGowan, has left her for a celebrity dermatologist. Delighted to find herself a ghost, “a mote in the dust of the unresolved dead,” Jo seizes the opportunity to exact revenge on Ned, taking quick possession of people and places, manipulating jukeboxes and iPhones, even enlisting the family dog as she accomplishes in death everything her life left unfinished.
“The Next” is most successful when it’s at its most fiendish, with Jo gleefully terrorizing Ned throughout New York. But when the perspective shifts, moving from her to Ned, her daughters and her ex-husband, the narrative becomes plodding. These other characters can’t help suffering in comparison to the paranormal woman scorned. Gangi has come up with a very cunning variation on the revenge fable, but when she strays from Jo, she undermines its simple conceit.