ISTANBUL — Lt. Gen. Michael T. Flynn, the designated national security adviser for the incoming Trump administration, once wrote on Twitter that it was “rational” to fear Muslims, but that does not seem likely to cause him any grief with Turkey’s government, even though it is led by a religiously conservative Muslim, Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
Ankara has paid far more attention to General Flynn’s full-throated support for Mr. Erdogan’s government, and especially its wish to extradite the Islamic scholar Fethullah Gulen from his sanctuary in the Pocono Mountains of Pennsylvania.
General Flynn wrote an article published in The Hill on Election Day calling on the United States to be more sympathetic to the concerns of Turkey, a NATO ally, and embracing Mr. Erdogan’s position that Mr. Gulen is an extremist who was behind the failed July coup against his government.
Mr. Gulen and his supporters deny that, and depict him as a moderate more concerned with building thousands of schools than with toppling Turkey’s government. Mr. Gulen was once an ally of Mr. Erdogan, but they had a falling out.
General Flynn’s article, as Politico reported, did not disclose that he was a paid lobbyist for a consultancy founded by a Turkish businessman, Ekim Alptekin, who is also the head of the Turkish-American Business Council.
Mr. Alptekin denied in a telephone interview on Friday that the council was a government entity or that the contract with General Flynn’s company, Flynn Intel Group, had anything to do with the article in The Hill.
“The assumption that General Flynn wrote that in the context of a lobbying contract with me is completely false,” Mr. Alptekin said. “He never consulted with me. I would have advised against it.” And he said the notion that Mr. Erdogan would pay to have the article published was “preposterous,” citing its criticism of the Muslim Brotherhood, which Mr. Erdogan has supported in the past.
The discussion of General Flynn’s Turkish connections has occurred in the context of President-elect Donald J. Trump’s promise to prevent officials in his administration from lobbying for foreign governments once they leave office.
Mr. Erdogan spoke warmly of Mr. Trump in a speech after the American election, one in which he also accused Hillary Clinton of receiving campaign contributions from the Gulen camp.
Mr. Alptekin said he had hired General Flynn’s company to consult on the region’s security environment in connection with a commercial venture he was considering. Later, one of General Flynn’s associates suggested that the company also advocate for better relations between the United States and Turkey, which would require registering as lobbyists with the United States government, Mr. Alptekin said.
Mr. Alptekin declined to say how large the contract was. “It’s tens of thousands of dollars, not hundreds of thousands of dollars,” he said.
Ragip Soylu, a commentator writing in The Daily Sabah, a pro-government newspaper, contended that General Flynn’s article would not have been commissioned by the Turkish government. “Everyone knows that you can’t change a former senior American commander’s opinions by hiring his firm with a $100,000 contract,” Mr. Soylu wrote.
Mustafa Akyol, a commentator for Al-Monitor, said, “From a Muslim point of view, Flynn’s appointment is a concern, globally speaking.” He added, “That’s exactly what we mean by Islamophobia, extrapolating from extremists to all Muslims. You would expect to see that concern here, but quite the contrary: Flynn is quite a respected figure now in government circles, just because he wrote that Gulen should be extradited to Turkey.
