For Armistice Day, which commemorates the agreement signed to halt hostilities on the Western Front during World War I, crosses at Westminster Abbey honored the fallen with the symbolic poppies common on the battlefields of France and Belgium.
In Airewas, Staffordshire, Britons observed Armistice Day at the National Memorial Arboretum.
A British World War II veteran at an Armistice ceremony at the Menin Gate memorial in Ypres, Belgium.
Students from the Eden Girls’ School in London held poppies just before observing two minutes of silence on Armistice Day.
Military personnel at Menin Gate in Ypres, Belgium, where a memorial bears the names of 55,000 World War I soldiers whose bodies were never found.
Lloyd’s of London staff members gathered for an Armistice Day service at the Lloyd’s building in London.
The French flag at the Arc de Triomphe monument during Armistice Day ceremonies in Paris.
Romanian military officers who served in Iraq or Afghanistan at a Veteran’s Day service at the Fallen Heroes Memorial in Bucharest.
United States veterans during a ceremony at a parade in New York on Friday.
A veteran during the Veterans Day ceremony at the World War II Memorial on Friday in Washington.
As nations honored their war veterans on Friday — Armistice Day and Veterans Day —a 19-year-old in California is trying to preserve as many voices of World War II veterans in the United States as he can.
Many of the veterans are in their twilight years, with ages in the late 80s and the 90s. The teenager, Rishi Sharma, has started a nonprofit organization, Heroes of the Second World War, to record video interviews with them for posterity.
Of the 16 million Americans who served in World War II, about 620,000 are still alive, and 372 die each day, according to the National World War II Museum.
The teenager, who graduated last year from Agoura High School outside Los Angeles, wrote on a crowdfunding page that there is “no commercial aspect” to the project. He said he’s putting off many of the typical priorities of 19-year-olds, like going to college, finding a job or dating, so that he can focus on the project.
Rishi Sharma interviewing William Hahn, a World War II veteran, in Los Angeles as part of Mr. Sharma’s project to record every surviving veteran from that war.Credit...Nick Ut/Associated Press.
Mr. Sharma received an influx of donations on Friday as the United States commemorated Veterans Day. Across the country, Americans — including President Obama, who laid a wreath in Arlington Cemetery in Washington — led tributes to past and present military members.
Several countries also honored their veterans on Armistice Day, commemorating the end of World War I, with two minutes of silence on the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month.