NEW DELHI — Tensions between India and Pakistan were raised again on Tuesday, when a group of heavily armed militants disguised as police officers attacked an Indian Army unit in the northern state of Jammu and Kashmir, killing seven soldiers, the Indian government said in a statement.
The assault began early Tuesday in the officers’ dining hall at Nagrota, about two miles from the army’s regional headquarters for the country’s northernmost state, which has been at the center of a nearly 70-year dispute with neighboring Pakistan.
After killing four soldiers there, the militants moved on to two other buildings, where they held hostage a group of 16 soldiers and relatives, including “two ladies and two children,” the statement said.
All of the hostages were rescued, the government said, but an officer and two soldiers were killed in the operation, along with three militants.
Also on Tuesday, Indian security forces in Jammu and Kashmir reported killing three heavily armed militants after a battle near the town of Ramgarh, on the Pakistani border, that lasted several hours. Dinesh Kumar Upadhyaya, inspector general of the Jammu frontier area for the Border Security Force, said the militants were armed with AK-47s, wore suicide belts and hurled about a dozen grenades before being killed.
Tensions have heightened between the two nuclear-armed countries since a Sept. 18 assault by militants on an Indian Army post in the disputed region of Kashmir killed 19 soldiers. India, which said the assailants had come from Pakistan, conducted retaliatory military strikes two weeks later on terrorist camps in Pakistani-controlled Kashmir.
Since then, nationalist statements have increased in intensity in both countries, worrying many. India and Pakistan have been at war three times since they gained independence from Britain in 1947.
Analysts said the attack was unlikely to provoke the type of retaliatory strikes from India that followed the assault in September. But they also said it was unclear how India would react, because Prime Minister Narendra Modi has not followed the pattern of previous governments. Those acted quietly, while Mr. Modi publicized his military’s retaliation to the September attack.
“It’s clear that India won’t be responding in the predictable fashion,” said Nitin A. Gokhale, a national security analyst at the Vivekananda International Foundation.
Separately on Tuesday, Lt. Gen. Qamar Javed Bajwa took command of the Pakistani Army from Gen. Raheel Sharif, who retired.
Before Tuesday, India had already lost 23 security officers in border skirmishes since the September assault on the Kashmir army base. Pakistan has also lost a substantial number of security officers, although it has not released an official count.
Dozens of civilians have also been killed, and diplomatic relations between the two countries have been virtually suspended.