During World War II the crucibles of the Holocaust and the atom bombs refined certain souls. Two new nonfiction books for middle-grade readers present two such people: a man devoted to God who planned murder in order to save others, and a girl who, seeing that her family was destroyed, grew into a woman who spoke out for peace.
Despite its catchy title, “The Plot to Kill Hitler,” by Patricia McCormick, a two-time National Book Award finalist, is not only about the attempts on Hitler’s life. Rather, it’s a fascinating biography of the German theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer, who not only plotted to kill Hitler but risked his life speaking out for Jews until he was hanged in the Flossenbürg concentration camp.
The sixth child of a prominent Berlin psychiatrist and a college-educated mother, Bonhoeffer was a quiet, musical boy whose choice to become a minister seemed at odds with his mostly non-churchgoing upbringing. He became known for his brilliant theology. Arguing that the community of the church could transcend all boundaries, even religious ones, he became a relentless critic of Hitler.
While most of the German clergy swore allegiance to Hitler and preached “Mein Kampf” instead of the Bible, Bonhoeffer joined a group of resisters. When his brother-in-law began to compile evidence of Nazi atrocities, particularly against Jews, Bonhoeffer smuggled the information out of Germany, pleading with the Allies for help.  Three assassination plots failed. Bonhoeffer and several family members and co-conspirators were killed by Nazis, but Bonhoeffer’s words survived to inspire Martin Luther King Jr., Desmond Tutu and others still today.
Caren Stelson’s “Sachiko: A Nagasaki Bomb Survivor’s Story” presents with equal clarity the devastation of the atomic bombing on one small girl. Six-year-old Sachiko was playing outside with friends half a mile from the hypocenter when the bomb fell on Nagasaki on Aug. 9, 1945. Her four friends died instantly, but all of Sachiko’s family except her 2-year-old brother survived the initial explosion. Within days one brother died of radiation sickness and another from infection. Sachiko, her sister Misa, her mother and her father all suffered terribly from radiation sickness; Misa died of leukemia without ever being strong enough to attend school.
Despite their shattered lives, extreme poverty and desolation, Sachiko’s father spoke to her of peace: “Hate only produces hate.” He taught her about Mohandas K. Gandhi and about Helen Keller, who visited Nagasaki in 1948. As hibakusha, or “explosion-affected people,” Sachiko and her parents remained in the mushroom cloud’s shadow: Her father died of liver cancer, and Sachiko herself overcame thyroid cancer but had to work hard to regain the ability to speak. She worked as an accountant and studied the words of Gandhi and Martin Luther King Jr. As the 50th anniversary of the atomic bomb on Nagasaki approached, Sachiko found she had something to say. For the next 20 years she traveled in North America and Japan, spreading a message of peace.
Caren Stelson met Sachiko Yasui in Minneapolis in 2005 and made five trips to Japan to interview her. While the book contains historical notes, informational sidebars, photographs and maps, most of the narrative is Sachiko’s account, magnetic and chilling in its simplicity. Stelson lets Sachiko become the hero of her own story; her quiet survival is an inspiring trajectory of redemption. Like McCormick, Stelson has created a book that is both personal and universal, both thoroughly researched and real.