BERLIN — President Obama and several European leaders “unanimously agreed” on Friday to keep sanctions in place against Russia for its intervention in Ukraine, amid concern that President-elect Donald J. Trump would soften the United States’ stance against Moscow.
The show of solidarity came as American allies — and Ukrainians themselves — have been unsettled by uncertainty regarding what kind of foreign policy Mr. Trump will pursue.
With surging populist movements straining alliances and Mr. Trump’s election upending the political calculations of many countries, Ukraine may be among the most vulnerable to the shifting political winds.
Fighting in Ukraine has continued since Moscow stealthily fomented an uprising among ethnic Russians in eastern Ukraine with the help of undercover Russian forces, and then annexed Crimea in March 2014.
As a candidate and as president-elect, Mr. Trump has frequently expressed admiration for President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, and a former Trump campaign manager, Paul Manafort, previously worked for a former Ukrainian president, Viktor F. Yanukovych, who is now exiled in Russia.
Meeting in Berlin, Mr. Obama and the European leaders agreed that the sanctions should stay until Moscow upheld its pledge for a cease-fire and to withdraw heavy weapons from front lines in eastern Ukraine, according to the White House.
Those in attendance on Friday included the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and the French president, François Hollande, as well as the prime ministers of Britain (Theresa May), Italy (Matteo Renzi) and Spain (Mariano Rajoy).
The agreement on Ukraine followed remarks by Mr. Obama on Thursday warning Mr. Trump to “stand up” to Moscow when it violated international agreements.
Ms. Merkel also reminded Russia that peace in Europe had been possible over the past several years only because all nations respected the boundaries drawn after World War II.
Friday’s meeting concluded a weeklong visit to European allies by Mr. Obama, whose terms ends in January.
But what was supposed to be a valedictory lap turned into an exercise in calming anxieties about the future of trans-Atlantic relations spurred by the victory of Mr. Trump, who repeatedly called the NATO alliance into question during his election campaign.
The group also discussed tensions in the Middle East, including the situation in Syria, the White House said.
The leaders agreed that attacks on the city of Aleppo should be halted immediately, and they called on Russia and Iran to end their support for the government of President Bashar al-Assad.
That consensus, too, was another potential point of departure from the incoming Mr. Trump, who has signaled that he may side with Russia in backing the Assad government against the opponents trying to unseat it, including the Islamic State.
After the meeting in Berlin, Mr. Obama left Germany for Latin America.