In Mayor Bill de Blasio’s view, the election of Donald J. Trump was an almost apocalyptic upset: worrisome for immigrants, demoralizing for advocates of the poor and disastrous for just about all of New York — but not necessarily so for Mr. de Blasio.
As he seeks re-election in 2017, the mayor is trying to emerge from the chaos of the postelection period as the strongest messenger of Democratic Party resistance, a crowded field of left-of-center leaders that includes Senators Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Bernie Sanders of Vermont as well as Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, the mayor’s chief Democratic rival in New York.
Unshackled from the need to defend Clintonian triangulation, freed to give full voice to his liberal views and presented with a ready-made antagonist rejected by the city’s voters, Mr. de Blasio has shown new energy in the days since his preferred candidate, Hillary Clinton, the Democratic nominee, was defeated by President-elect Trump, a Republican.
At union halls, in front of Trump Tower and in City Hall, Mr. de Blasio has forcefully presented himself as a defender of the city’s working people and minorities, who he has said are “fearful” of a Trump presidency. He is expected to give what aides described as a major speech on Monday about the election’s impact on the city.
Union endorsements have poured in — three so far in the past week — and other labor groups are considering climbing aboard early as well. No serious re-election challenger has emerged against Mr. de Blasio, whose approval rating, in a poll conducted after the presidential election, has already increased.
A recent Quinnipiac University poll, released after Mr. Trump’s election, showed some momentum for Mr. de Blasio: His support rose among blacks and Hispanics and showed a slight uptick among whites. But the poll also showed the mayor’s vulnerability: A plurality of voters told pollsters that he did not deserve a second term, and about two-thirds of white voters still disapproved of his handling of the job.
Political analysts cautioned that the benefits Mr. Trump presents in the short-term for the mayor may prove illusory, as the shock of his election wears off and the take-out-the-garbage details of a municipal election return to the fore.
Some drew parallels between the defeat of Mrs. Clinton, a press-shy centrist who ran on her record and expected a victory, and Mr. de Blasio’s re-election effort. Mr. de Blasio is counting on a base of support from black and Latino voters to ward off a large number of skeptical white voters in the Democratic primary, where the city’s mayoral elections are often won and lost.
Even among Mr. de Blasio’s supporters, there has been discontent at the pace of change around his signature issues like police reform and affordable housing.
While many New Yorkers, particularly white residents of Manhattan, have counted on a challenge to Mr. de Blasio from a centrist Democrat — that is, from the right — he might find himself more vulnerable to a charismatic candidate on the left. Mr. de Blasio has, in some cases, struggled to combat well-organized political efforts, particularly from the ride-hailing company Uber, which presented him as a powerful mayor protecting a favored industry against working New Yorkers.
There are now two groups of potential candidates: Republicans who have declared their candidacy, and Democratic leaders who are weighing whether to mount a challenge to an incumbent mayor of their own party.
On the other side are figures more familiar to followers of local politics: the city’s comptroller, Scott M. Stringer; Representative Hakeem Jeffries, whose district includes parts of Brooklyn and Queens; and the Bronx borough president, Ruben Diaz Jr. All have been privately mulling the possibility of running with their aides and confidants; none have taken steps to formally declare a run.
Mr. Tusk and representatives of the mayor predictably disagree on the answer to that question.
Despite Mr. de Blasio’s efforts to lock down support, the city is in the first chapter of the 2017 election story, not the last, analysts and potential candidates said. All of the prospective challengers are awaiting the findings of federal prosecutors who are said to be looking into whether his administration traded favorable action for campaign contributions.
John A. Catsimatidis, the grocery story magnate who is considering another Republican run for mayor, said he would not make a decision until at least January. Similar timelines were described by other potential challengers who have not yet declared.
“What do you want to do, go around campaigning at Christmastime?” Mr. Catsimatidis said.