The red Jeep wedged between a parked truck and a patrol car, the bloodied body hanging out the window and the evidence markers scattered across the sidewalk — they all told of a fleeing ex-convict trapped on a dead-end street, and a heavy firefight that followed, leaving a New York City police sergeant and his assailant, Manuel Rosales, dead.
But Mr. Rosales’s violent last minutes on Friday were hardly the panicked coda to a home invasion gone wrong, as they first seemed from the 911 call that had come in that afternoon.
Mr. Rosales had more on his mind than simply avoiding arrest, his father and friends said. On Thursday, the day before the shootout, he had written on Facebook, “This nightmare is coming to an end … goodbye.” Years earlier, he had told a suicide hotline operator that he wanted to commit “suicide by cop” by firing at a Long Island station house and dying in a hail of police shots.
His desperation and defiance had swelled over two decades. Much of it he rarely spoke of: his diagnosis of bipolar disorder around 15, and years of petty lawbreaking, gang membership, abuse and living out of his car.
He wore a final perceived indignity on his sleeve, though, a court order obtained by his estranged wife that he told people was keeping him from the one he cared for most: his blond, round-faced son, Antonio Miguel, who was in the Bronx apartment he stormed on Friday.
Mr. Rosales had not entered that apartment looking for money. He had come to negotiate for time with his 3-year-old son.
School and law enforcement officials in Suffolk County had seen his deterioration at every stage, said his father, also Manuel Rosales, who pleaded with them to step in. He said he believed that judges and police officers gave his son second chances because of his light complexion; darker-skinned siblings were locked up longer for less serious crimes, the elder Mr. Rosales, who is from Honduras, said.
Mr. Rosales and his son, Antonio, in a Facebook photograph.
He added that he was confounded by American institutions that both failed to protect his son from bullying as a special education student, and later did not see routine arrests over almost two decades as a cry for a harsh sentence.
The younger Mr. Rosales had been born into the margins of city life. At 15, his mother moved into foster care in the Bronx to escape her shame of her protruding belly. She raised Manuel there for his first months. At birth his chest was caved in at the sternum. Doctors told the family he might not make it to 30 without a heart attack.
A spokesman for Brentwood schools did not respond to a phone message seeking comment on Sunday.
Mr. Rosales, who was 35 when he died, never again received treatment, his father said.
The Suffolk police arrested him 17 times from 1998 until this year, mostly on minor charges, but once in 2006 on felony assault charges. A county police spokesman did not have details of arrests or other encounters involving Mr. Rosales, but Mr. Rosales told a friend the assault charge was for getting into a fight with a police officer. He was imprisoned from 2006 to 2010, and again from 2012 to 2014 on a stolen property conviction. He later told friends he had once been in the Latin Kings gang.
On Sept. 23, 2013, with Mr. Rosales locked up in Downstate Correctional Facility in Fishkill, N.Y., his son was born.
A friend, Michael Jennings, 26, said Mr. Rosales told people that his father had been physically abusive. Recently, when he was living out of his car, a black Nissan Sentra, and showering at rest stops, Mr. Rosales called home to ask if he could stay, but his father hung up on him, Mr. Jennings said. The elder Mr. Rosales said he punished his son for acting out but never beat him.
Mr. Rosales’s twin loves were Antonio and cars. The sale of three Nissan Sentras for $1,200 by an old Brentwood acquaintance living in Charleston, S.C., drew him there last year. He moved in with the acquaintance and his wife, Joana Avendano, until they fixed up the cars, and ended up spending most of his time in Charleston until this summer.
When he talked with Antonio in video chats, “his face would glow — he was so happy to see him,” Ms. Avendano, 22, said.
But Mr. Rosales’s estranged wife often hung up on him. She got an order of protection amid frequent fights. Some time ago, his father said, Mr. Rosales was jailed after he had an argument with his wife’s aunt, who told the police he had threatened her. Mr. Rosales’s father said Child Protective Services had limited him to supervised visits with his son. He was awaiting a Nov. 16 court date for an arrest on criminal contempt charges.
Mr. Rosales met friends at car meet-ups in a Kmart parking lot in Charleston and at drag races in the woods. He commented on how hospitable South Carolina was compared with New York. He picked up odd electrical jobs, drawing on skills he had learned working for his father, a contractor. But after moving into Mr. Jennings’s mobile home, Mr. Rosales confided how desperate he still was to reunite with Antonio.
He told friends he planned to go back to Charleston over the weekend. But first, on Thursday night, he parked his car outside his wife’s apartment. She called the police; by the time they arrived, he was gone, and they told her to call 911 if he returned.
On Friday morning he did return, this time with a gun, slipping inside as someone left to move a car for alternate-side parking. For four hours he stayed in the apartment with his son, his wife, her godmother and a 13-year-old girl, apparently negotiating for time alone with Antonio, law enforcement officials said. His wife was adamant he could not take him.
When he stepped outside around 2:45 p.m., the godmother called 911 to report a break-in. About a minute later, Sgt. Paul J. Tuozzolo, a father of two children himself, picked up the call and spotted the Jeep. “He’s heading back toward Tremont,” he told the dispatcher. Forty-five seconds later he was shot dead.