Politics|Yes, He Thought Trump Would Win. No, He Didn’t Use Hard Data.
Yes, He Thought Trump Would Win. No, He Didn’t Use Hard Data.
The story of the 2016 election is one of a stunning defeat, not just for Hillary Clinton, but also for the pollsters, pundits and data-driven journalists who overwhelmingly predicted her victory.
But at least one scholar, Allan J. Lichtman, saw both coming. Dr. Lichtman, a historian at American University in Washington, is the co-creator of a historically based model that has correctly predicted the winner of the popular vote in the last eight presidential contests — and, back in September, predicted the supposedly unthinkable election of Donald J. Trump.
The model, developed in 1981 with the Russian mathematical geophysicist Vladimir Keilis-Borok and elaborated in the book “Predicting the Next President: The Keys to the White House 2016,” is simple on the surface. It disregards complex formulas in favor of 13 true-or-false statements measuring the underlying force that Dr. Lichtman, based on analyses of elections from 1860 through 1980, believes really matters: the strength of the incumbent party.
Six or more false keys “predict upheaval,” Dr. Lichtman said on Wednesday.
We reached Dr. Lichtman, whose other books include “White Protestant Nation” and “FDR and the Jews,” by telephone in Doha, Qatar, where he was covering the election for Al Jazeera. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
You have been called the “one major political historian” to predict a Trump victory. Is it satisfying to be right?
Not really. Henry Clay said I’d rather be right than be president. I don’t exactly feel that way. But the thing I like most about being right is that it puts some pressure on conventional punditry, which I think is really a pernicious influence on our nation.
Punditry has no scientific basis but simply reacts to the latest polls, which miss the fundamentals of an election and what really drives our politics.
Even the pundits are calling the election a stunning defeat for polling itself. Is the success of your model also a victory for historical scholarship over so-called quant-driven political science?
Yes. A lot of the quant-driven political science was also wrong. Those people who said, “Hillary has a 75 percent chance” — one guy at the University of Illinois even said it was 99 percent — are just compiling polls. I’m not saying history is perfect. But it gives you a vastly better understanding of how elections work.
You developed your model in 1981, in collaboration with the Russian geophysicist Vladimir Keilis-Borok, who was perhaps the world’s leading expert on predicting earthquakes. Did you seek him out specifically because of that part of his work?
Everything we know about elections we’ve stolen from geophysics anyway — we talk about tremors of change, volcanic elections. What our model looks at isn’t Republicans versus Democrats, liberals versus conservatives, or one personality versus another, but the underlying stability of the incumbent party.
The conventional wisdom is that Trump has shattered the norms of American politics. Does the fact that his victory conforms to patterns going back to 1860 suggest otherwise?
This year I did issue a qualification of my model for the first time. I said that in Donald Trump, we may have a candidate who is so outside the bounds of history that he could break the patterns of history. This should be a change election, but maybe Trump was too much of a change?
Your focus on the incumbent party cuts sharply against the narrative of this year’s election, which emphasized the supposed implosion of the Republican Party, or at least its leadership. Was all that attention to the state of the party totally misplaced?
I said in advance, in one of my columns for The Hill, that the real danger was to the Democratic Party: If they lose the presidency, they’ll also lose the Senate, the House, the ability to shape jurisprudence for a generation. The other big danger is to the Obama legacy. If the Republicans control everything, it will almost be as if Obama didn’t exist for eight years. They can wipe out every part of his legacy: climate policy, immigration reform, liberal jurisprudence, the Affordable Care Act.
But contrary to all the pundits, Donald Trump won not because of Donald Trump and his campaign, but despite them. Hillary Clinton wasn’t to blame for this loss. The Democrats are already a shattered party. They hold nothing. They would further undermine themselves and pulverize themselves if they blamed Hillary Clinton for this loss. She didn’t do anything wrong. She won the three debates. But she was up against a bigger force.
So much of the commentary on Trump by your fellow historians concerned analogies: Is Trump a new Hitler? Mussolini? George Wallace? Do you see any use in that kind of historical comparison?
I don’t talk like that. I think that’s superficial. He’s none of those, but he may be a danger unto himself. Or he might not be. I hope not. He has certainly stirred up the worst elements in America. Whoever thought the Ku Klux Klan would endorse a major-party candidate?
Is there anything about the actual voting results that did surprise you?
Maybe that Trump won more of the Hispanic vote than you might have expected, but I don’t really want to analyze that. [The bigger picture] is that the outcome is utterly inexplicable, based on conventional analysis. Some of the pollsters are good friends, and good people, but during the next election, I hope we send them to a very nice Pacific Island for a very nice vacation.