The generic drug industry was jolted on Thursday as shares of many major companies tumbled after a news report said that a federal inquiry into drug price-fixing was wider than previously believed and could lead to charges by the end of the year.
Shares in Teva Pharmaceuticals, the world’s largest generic drug maker, fell more than 9 percent, and the stock of competitors like Mylan, Endo Pharmaceuticals and Impax Laboratories had similar declines.
The report, from Bloomberg, said that the investigation, being done by the Justice Department, was looking at more than a dozen companies, and that the prices of about two dozen drugs were involved.
A spokesman for the Justice Department declined to comment. Several of the companies either did not respond or declined to comment beyond statements they had previously made about the inquiry, which began about two years ago.
But investors were clearly not waiting for any additional confirmation.
In a note on Thursday, David Maris, an analyst for Wells Fargo, said the potential impact of such an investigation could shadow the industry well past next week’s election and into the new presidential administration.
“We are less concerned about the financial impact of fines, although they could be significant, but rather how items like this can bring calls for controls and oversight,” he said.
Drug companies have come under intense scrutiny over the last two years over the prices of their drugs, particularly old drugs that have lost their patent protection but have, in some cases, jumped in price. In the case of doxycycline, an antibiotic, for example, the price went from $20 a bottle in October 2013 to $1,849 by April 2014, according to members of Congress who are investigating drug prices.
The same report found that the price of a pill of digoxin, an old heart medicine, rose to $1.10 in 2014 from 11 cents in 2012. Companies, including Impax, have said that federal investigators have asked about digoxin and other drugs.
Close to 90 percent of all drugs dispensed in the United States are for generic versions, which are generally far less expensive than name-brand drugs. A report this summer by the federal Government Accountability Office, for example, found that over all, prices of generic drugs purchased through Medicare’s Part D drug program declined 59 percent from 2010 to 2015, although some price increases were “extraordinary” during the same period.
