In this series for T, the writer and author of “Worn Stories,” Emily Spivack, interviews creative types about their most prized possessions.
The designer Lindsey Adelman considers the design language she shares with her husband, Ian Adelman (the former director of digital design for The New York Times), through glass structures he created when they were both students at RISD.
These two pieces were blown by my now-husband Ian in 1994. As his girlfriend, I would always hang out in the hot shop watching my hot boyfriend blow glass. I’d just arrived at RISD as a transfer student and everything was new to me. I had studied “The Faerie Queen,” but I’d never used a drill press. My state of mind was totally open, and when you’re in that place, you pick up so much unintentionally.
I remember watching Ian work with this sea creature language in so many different mediums — sheet metal, aluminum, glass. Coming from a family background steeped in design, he understood craft on a level that I didn’t. These skate egg pods represented something that came naturally to him. But it was an elusive thing that I was after. That also happens when you date someone. They have something that you want in yourself, a quality that you’re like, “Oh, I want a piece of that!” Not only do I want to date that person, but I want that quality.
It happens with glass, too. You try to catch something that’s elusive, that’s a fleeting moment, because glass looks like liquid stopped in time, in a phase of development or a phase of decay. It’s like a film still.
These glass vessels of skate egg pods represent so much of a common visual language that Ian and I share. We never talk about it — we’re just drawn to the same signifiers. It’s like we both have this primary experience with source material that then becomes a shared experience—whether it’s through snorkeling, walking on the beach, collecting things or traveling—it happens naturally and becomes part of the work that we both make.
Sharing that visual language with Ian has shown me by osmosis how to turn references, like sea creatures, into an abstract form that I could use in design. When we studied industrial design, the process was rigorous — it’s about paring down a naturalistic form into a language that can be repeated and communicated. It’s a balance of picking up the emotional and visceral response you have to form and, at the same time, taking measurements, studying proportions and dimensions. Once you pick up on these proportions and refined details to capture the essence of natural forms, you start to understand why we respond to them. It’s like the golden mean through history. Or the Fibonacci sequence. Or why models’ eyes are a certain distance apart. We can’t really explain how we’re drawn to these gorgeous creatures but it’s undeniable that we are. And that power can be harnessed as a designer.
While the glass I design has to be technically perfect, it also has a mysterious quality that you can’t totally pinpoint or understand, a cryptic quality. It never gets old, because it’s inherently challenging to make work you can’t totally understand or predict. It’s a pretty fun lifelong chase.