“Same Family, Different Colors” begins with Tharps’s story of marrying a man from the south of Spain whom she met during her junior year of college, while she was studying near Madrid. Tharps describes her husband as having a “milky-white complexion” and describes herself as having medium-brown skin that easily darkens in the sun. Their three children represent a broad range in skin color, from, borrowing Tharps’s descriptions, “the color of cinnamon” to “beige” to “warm almond,” yet two could pass for white. While Tharps and her husband were not concerned with these differences, they found that people all around them were noticing that there was something unusual about their family — the neighborhood dry cleaner, a 5-year-old playing an innocent game of “I Spy” (“I spy something white!” the girl exclaimed, pointing to Tharps’s daughter), the Brooklynites who assumed that Tharps was her son’s nanny. Tharps soon faced the reality that our identities are rarely our own. She was constantly seeing herself, her husband and her children through the eyes of others.
It may come as a surprise that often those who can be the most unkind are one’s own family members. Tharps delicately but honestly presents the recollections of many people who were insulted — indeed, wounded — by family members mocking their darker skin. She also tells the stories of light-skinned individuals who felt isolated from their own families and communities because their skin color made them feel as though they did not fit in. Some parents prized their lightest child’s beauty, while others paid more attention to their darker children, worried about the emotional consequences of societal beauty norms that would ignore or denigrate them. Some parents did not talk about color at all. The range of experiences that Tharps presents is wide and rich. In all but a few cases, skin color exerted considerable pressure on those of nonwhite backgrounds and played a profound role in shaping self-understanding and sense of personal value.
Tharps reminds us that this problem is found not only in the United States: Latin America, East and South Asia, the Caribbean and Africa all grapple with colorism. It is an interracial and an intraracial problem.
Studies have shown that white Americans often demonstrate preferential treatment of lighter-skinned blacks that leads to disparities in employment and hiring practices and in socioeconomic mobility. In Latin American countries, popular telenovelas focus on white-skinned Latinos and Latinas, correlating lighter skin with higher social class and casting darker-skinned actors to portray the roles of lower-class characters, including maids, gardeners and even criminals. In East and South Asian countries, the legacy of colonialism has led to the reverence of white skin and European features. The Bollywood movie industry in India prizes lighter-skinned actresses, sometimes even importing white actors to play Indian people.
These ideas, planted in one’s home country, become even more insidious in the United States. Observing that African-Americans were situated and largely stuck on the lowest rungs of the social, economic and political ladders, immigrants learned upon arriving in the United States that to succeed, one had to distance oneself as far as possible from blacks — despite the common oppression and common economic disadvantages that nonwhite groups shared.
Progress on this front, given the long histories and the worldwide phenomenon of colorism, seems to occur only at a glacial pace. But we are already seeing the diversification of the black-white American racial binary, as well as cracks in the edifice of the “one-drop rule.” Tharps ends on a hopeful note: Beliefs that parents with mixed-race children do not “match” are giving way to new ideas about the irrelevance of skin color to the composition of a loving family. We are on the front lines of a new racial order that has been a long time coming.
People of all races and backgrounds deal with race each and every day in a multiplicity of ways. This thoughtful, honest, historically textured and valuable book offers a detailed and current syllabus of work on the social and cultural meanings of colorism around the world and brings colorism “out of the closet,” as Tharps writes. Most important, “Same Family, Different Colors” makes clear that we are all implicated in how just and inclusive that new order will be.