As the number of New Yorkers living in shelters continues to rise, the administration of Mayor Bill de Blasio has told real estate developers they must make room for the homeless in buildings that received tax breaks under a program designed to increase the stock of affordable housing.
Under the program, known as 421-a, 20 percent of apartments in buildings whose units were otherwise market rate had to be set aside for low- and moderate-income tenants. Half those apartments were to be distributed through individual lotteries; the other half were to go to those covered by so-called community preferences, a group that can include local residents, older men and women, disabled people or military veterans.
The de Blasio administration now wants up to half of all community-preference units to be reserved for people living in homeless shelters. In a 300-unit building, that could mean up to 15 apartments for tenants who were previously homeless.
The city quietly rolled out the new policy over the past several weeks. Some developers, fearing an influx of tenants with drug or alcohol problems or in need of mental health services, “freaked out” upon learning about it, said Alvin Schein, a real estate lawyer opposed to the new policy. Some worried that their buildings’ reputations would be tarnished by the presence of people who had been homeless. City officials have tried to allay those fears, saying the apartments would not go to people who needed extensive social services, but to those who had simply been priced out of New York’s housing market.
At a meeting with city officials on Tuesday at the offices of the Real Estate Board of New York, one developer was particularly vocal: Gary Barnett, who leads Extell Development, among the city’s more prolific builders.
The program lapsed in January amid a dispute among city and state officials and construction unions, though there are dozens of buildings still under construction that received the subsidy.
Vicki Been, the city’s housing commissioner, and Steven Banks, who oversees homeless programs, were at the meeting on Tuesday, as were about 40 developers, lawyers and marketing agents.
Ms. Been said at the meeting that the policy change was just one way of addressing the homeless problem. She said that those to be considered for community-preference units would be people who were employed but had recently lost homes in areas where 421-a buildings were located.
Over the past three years, the number of people living in shelters overseen by the homeless services agency has swelled to about 60,000 from about 51,000.
Ron Moelis, chief executive of L&M Partners, which builds market-rate and mixed-income housing, said the new policy was “not unreasonable,” so long as building owners retained the right to interview qualified renters. Developers or their marketing agents typically screen tenants for criminal records and problematic credit histories.
The city already screens any prospective tenants rigorously before making referrals, he said.
Adam Rose, a president of Rose Associates, agreed with Mr. Levine. But with the sudden change in policy, Mr. Rose and other developers expressed concern in interviews about the fate of people who may already have been notified that they had secured a subsidized unit through a community preference.
In the case of Mr. Barnett, the new policy would affect 555Ten, a 56-story tower nearing completion at West 41st Street and 10th Avenue. Marketing for both market-rate and subsidized units there is in full swing. Banners on the tower proclaim luxury rentals at a building that includes an indoor saltwater lap pool, a bowling alley, a yoga studio and 24-hour doorman service.
In return for tens of millions of dollars in 421-a tax breaks and the right to build higher than is normally allowed, Mr. Barnett agreed to set aside 120 apartments, roughly 25 percent of the building’s 478 units, for low- and moderate-income tenants.
Elected officials and housing activists have criticized Mr. Barnett in the past for creating so-called poor doors — entrances for subsidized tenants separate from the ones used by condominium owners at a 33-story Extell tower at 50 Riverside Boulevard on the Upper West Side, among other buildings.
He argued that he needed to install the separate entrances to get the highest possible prices for the condominiums in order to help subsidize the affordable apartments.
The city subsequently banned poor doors.
Mr. Barnett said that requiring buildings that received 421-a subsidies to accept previously homeless people as tenants was a jarring change that would, by the city’s own estimates, affect only about 750 apartments.
