Illustrated. 687 pp. Dey Street/William Morrow Publishers. Paper, $18.99.
Reynolds admits in the book’s introduction that glam is a “fuzzy” category, overlapping with prog rock, hard rock and other subspecies. That fuzziness plays to one of Reynolds’s great strengths: his capaciousness as a critic and listener, his ability to write about all of those categories (and more) with authority and genuine interest. But that fuzziness is also inevitably a weakness; the book is littered with insights and treats, but it rarely coalesces in a fully satisfying way. We sometimes lose sight of glam as home base, and Reynolds stretches to make a few pieces of his genealogy fit.
But if you’re going to have a baggy book, you want it to be written by Reynolds, a tireless researcher with an eye for entertaining diversions and a penchant for alluding to everything from the “anti-theatrical prejudice” dating back to Plato to the glam implications in a short story by perhaps the least glam human ever to live, Willa Cather. Reynolds also leaves readers (this one, anyway) enthusiastically jotting a list as they go: of songs to listen to, books to read, YouTube clips to hunt down.
Bowie and his reliably unreliable transformations serve as the book’s one through-line, the one anchor to check Reynolds’s (and glam’s) magpie tendencies. Shuffling through T. Rex, Mott the Hoople, the Stooges, Gary Glitter, Queen and dozens of others, we always return to Bowie’s arc. The book closes with several pages about his death last January at 69.
Before ending with Bowie, Reynolds goes full A.D.H.D. and spends about 75 pages in a section called “Aftershocks” quickly moving among brief encyclopedia-like entries on developments in the glam ecosystem up to the current day. Siouxsie and the Banshees are “glam to the core.” Def Leppard is “filed under pop metal,” but “really glam.” Marilyn Manson gets compared favorably (I guess) to Alice Cooper (“He’s a non-singer who’s not much of a looker either”). We get fleeting glances of Grace Jones, Kate Bush, Adam Ant, Lady Gaga.
