Lupita Nyong’o calls her “badass.” Ava DuVernay says, “She’s a big part of my creative process.” The ballerina Misty Copeland has her to thank, in part, for the ads that made her a household name, not to mention her namesake Barbie doll. And Raoul Peck, the director of the bold documentary “I Am Not Your Negro,” says that he couldn’t have made his film, a current awards season contender, without her.
Unknown to those outside Hollywood, the lawyer Nina L. Shaw is a secret weapon, a behind-the-scenes power player adept at striking deals that cultivate freedom of voice, especially for black members of the creative class whose mission it is to be artist and advocate.
“When I started making films, she was the first person I called,” said Ms. DuVernay, the director. “Not just for legal advice — she’s really a bit of a consigliere in all things.” Well-connected and well-liked enough to navigate the industry, Ms. Shaw is also someone “who really has power behind her punch,” Ms. DuVernay said.
Despite strides in broadening onscreen and production roles in the wake of #OscarsSoWhite and other movements, the business side of Hollywood — in particular the talent agencies — remains “overwhelmingly white and disproportionately male,” according to a study released in February by the Ralph J. Bunche Center for African American Studies at U.C.L.A. A flip through many of the entertainment industry’s lists of power lawyers yields approximately the same results.
Those teams and projects aren’t always an easy sell. At a panel at the Albertine cultural festival this month, Ms. Shaw spoke about the studio and network programs meant to foster diversity in hiring, calling them out for their limitations — a taboo subject in Hollywood.
Ms. Shaw’s background also gave her a deep affinity for the arts: A child of Harlem and the Bronx, she grew up going to Broadway shows and spending hours at the Met Museum. It gave her, Ms. DuVernay said, an uncommon appreciation for the artistic side of Hollywood; Ms. Shaw is part of a small group of people Ms. DuVernay invites to critique working cuts of her films. Ms. Nyong’o, too, has embraced her in her inner circle — last year, Ms. Shaw joined her on a trip across Kenya, visiting Ms. Nyong’o’s ancestral home.
Sharp and elegant, Ms. Shaw also has a reputation as a tough negotiator, skilled in getting equitable deals for her female and minority clients, pressing the other side to explain why her clients won’t get fair pay.
