Food|Opening a Restaurant Is Hell. So Here I Go Again.
Opening a Restaurant Is Hell. So Here I Go Again.
Last week, the Food section published an article detailing, in hard numbers, how daunting the financial climate is for restaurateurs in New York. But Keith McNally, who has opened more restaurants than most, and kept most of them open, believes that money is only part of the equation.
 Even so, on Tuesday I opened Augustine, my 14th in 36 years.
The first was the Odeon in 1980, which I opened as a bit of a lark, something to fill in the time while I decided on my future. I’m 65 and still deciding on my future. The only thing I’m sure of is, I don’t want to sound like 65.
Which is why I avoid saying what I believe: that restaurants were easier to build and a whole lot more fun in 1980 than they are today.
One crucial change that’s hurt restaurants in Manhattan is the drastic rise in rents. During my first 30 years as a restaurateur, I expected to pay around 7 percent of my income on rent. Today, it’s at least 14 percent.
The worst effect of this increase is to discourage the more interesting restaurateurs — those young, vital and bursting with new ideas — from opening places in Manhattan. This is an incalculable loss to the life, in particular the creative life, of the city. It’s also why many of the most dynamic new restaurants (and certainly restaurateurs) are in Brooklyn and upstate. Why this has been allowed to happen I’m not sure, but it’s far from healthy.
Considering the intrusive role that landlords, lawyers and city officials now play in operating a restaurant, it’s a wonder that people still open them.
In my case, it’s partly to pay the bills but mostly a result of an urge to correct the mistakes I’ve made with previous restaurants. Despite their relative success, there isn’t one that doesn’t possess elements that make me wince every time I enter the space. A salad overdressed, a mirror poorly hung, a reviewer’s criticism I can never forget.
The only way I deal with this is to start this mad, and madly expensive, process all over again: finding a space, signing a lease and starting on what is usually a two- to three-year project.
Eventually, after years of sawdust and scaffolding, the restaurant opens and the bloggers, critics and public arrive and have their say. It’s never what I want or expect, and within weeks of creating a masterpiece, I’m left scrambling to salvage the pieces. And the James Beard Award that was within touching distance a month earlier is now drifting out toward the Indian Ocean.
It’s at this point that I vow never to open another restaurant. The rents are too high, the bureaucracy too overwhelming and the New York critics too severe. But months pass, and gradually I begin to have the semblance of an idea. An idea to build a restaurant that could, under the right guidance, be the most sublime restaurant imaginable.
Yes, I’ve said this before, but this time it’s different. This time it’s the real thing. I’m sure of it.
Augustine, the Beekman hotel, 5 Beekman Street (Nassau Street).