When Leonard Cohen’s family announced last week that he had died at 82, it gave no cause. Although the poet and songwriter had been open about his failing health in recent months, fans knew little other than what The New Yorker reported in its weekly radio show, that Mr. Cohen had been battling cancer.
On Wednesday, however, Mr. Cohen’s manager, Robert B. Kory, offered more detail about his client’s death.
In the months before his death, Mr. Cohen was busy. Even as his body was growing frail and he was experiencing pains in his back, he was working diligently to bring several projects to completion, according to friends and colleagues. In addition to finishing his last album, “You Want It Darker,” which was released in October, he was working on two other musical projects and a book of poetry.
Mr. Cohen, whose working pace was slow — he took five years to write his most famous song, “Hallelujah” — had been extremely productive in recent years, touring steadily between 2008 and 2013 and releasing three studio albums since 2012. Some of that work, his collaborators say, was a matter of polishing material he had been working on for many years.
Mr. Leonard said that when Mr. Cohen died, they were at work on an album of string arrangements of his songs and another of songs that he said were inspired by old rhythm-and-blues grooves.
Describing their working method, Mr. Leonard, who has collaborated with Madonna, Pink Floyd and many other artists, said that he would sometimes get emails through the night in which Mr. Cohen tweaked lyrics. Then Mr. Cohen joked about it in further emails the next day.
At times this year, people who wrote to Mr. Cohen — usually a dependable correspondent on email — got an automatic response. Chris Douridas, a host on the California public radio station KCRW, got a terse “Unable to read/reply,” and got a worried feeling.
“It told me that he was unplugging from the digital world,” Mr. Douridas said.
But that message was also Mr. Cohen’s way of keeping distractions at bay while he worked. In the weeks and months before his death, he appears to have engaged in as much creative activity as he could handle. Mr. Leonard said that he emailed Mr. Cohen a set of new R&B tracks the morning he died. Other friends spoke of dining with him just days before.
Last month, Mr. Cohen and his son, Adam, who produced “You Want It Darker,” were interviewed by Mr. Douridas in a promotional event for the album at the Consulate General of Canada Los Angeles. Mr. Cohen had to be helped to his seat and appeared short of breath. But he spoke with his typical mixture of spiritual wisdom and dark, self-effacing wit.
“I’ve often said that if I knew where the good songs came from I’d go there more often,” Mr. Cohen said, in his dry, deep baritone, when asked about his songwriting method.
Mr. Douridas said that after the event, he asked Adam Cohen whether fans could expect another album. “He genuinely seemed to not know the answer to that question,” Mr. Douridas said.
Even near death, Mr. Cohen’s debonair charm was intact. Sharon Robinson, a singer and songwriter who has been a longtime collaborator of his, said she was sitting in the front row at the Canadian consulate event, and she gave Mr. Cohen a hug as he stepped down from his seat. “He said into my ear, ‘You look beautiful, darling,’” Ms. Robinson recalled.
She had last seen Mr. Cohen in August, just before she left for a concert tour. He invited her to his house, and after first offering her “chocolate, ice cream and sandwiches,” played her the new album on a boombox.
As the songs played, he closed his eyes and recited the words quietly to himself, she said, a ritual she had witnessed many times before. But this time he was working against the clock.
