Travel|What Impact Will Trump Have on Tourism?
What Impact Will Trump Have on Tourism?
Last summer, Donald Trump spoke at the opening of Trump Turnberry hotel and golf resort in Turnberry, Scotland, a village on the Firth of Clyde.
With Donald J. Trump set to become the 45th president of the United States, the spirit of openness that has permeated everything from our increasingly global economy to how we travel may be poised to change.
Less than 24 hours after Mr. Trump’s unexpected victory, travel experts and economists were asked to try and read the tea leaves. Below, they offer some early thoughts about how Mr. Trump’s presidency might affect tourism, including foreign travel to the United States, Americans traveling abroad, access to Cuba, the cost of airfare, and, of course, Trump Hotels.
More money is spent in the United States by international travelers than anywhere else in the world, said Adam Sacks, president of Tourism Economics, an Oxford Economics company based in Wayne, Pa.
Yet experts say that how attractive the United States continues to be to foreign tourists will depend on how affordable it is to visit; what, if any, policies the Trump administration puts into place (new immigration procedures that make the customs and border process harder, the scrutiny of particular groups of people); and the perception of how welcoming and safe (or not) the United States is.
Gary Leff, the founder of the View From the Wing travel blog and a co-founder of the frequent flier site InsideFlyer.com, agreed that, for now, the world likely sees the United States as less open to tourism and immigration. (The day after the election, Rafat Ali, the founder of Skift, a travel news and research company, tweeted that the industry was “gobsmacked” and that attendees at the World Travel Market London conference were coming up and “offering condolences.”) That perception is not good for airlines and hotels, Mr. Leff said, though in the short term it could mean that travelers benefit from lower airfares.
It remains to be seen whether those sentiments last, and if there will be actual policy changes that help or hurt travel to the United States.
Few think that Mr. Trump, and whomever he appoints to his cabinet, will carry out mass deportations and erect a wall between the United States and Mexico, if only because of the impracticalities of such endeavors. “I don’t believe he will build a wall,” said Mr. Harteveldt of Atmosphere Research Group. But he said he is concerned that Mr. Trump might break with NATO, and that he might make it more difficult for people to get visas.
Mr. Sacks of Tourism Economics said policy proposals that would undermine longstanding alliances, along with Mr. Trump’s rhetoric, could certainly hurt tourism to the United States. But by how much?
He and his team examined data from 2000 to 2006, comparing arrivals to the United States with the Pew Research Center’s favorability index, which rates America’s image. The takeaway was that while there was a correlation between the perception of a place and the growth in visits to that place, it wasn’t a strong one. Even if Trump the president is not more conciliatory than Trump the campaigner, Mr. Sacks said, the United States is still likely to be an aspirational travel destination because of its arts, culture and diversity. “That’s not going to change in a wholesale way,” he said.
On the other hand, Mr. Faucher of PNC Financial Services Group said that if high-earning Americans end up seeing tax cuts under Mr. Trump, they might decide to travel more.
The cost of airfare will be interesting to watch. United States legacy airlines like American Airlines, United Airlines and Delta Air Lines don’t want more competition; they want American travelers to buy their (costly) tickets. To that end, they have been fighting to limit access to the American market by major Gulf carriers like Etihad, Emirates and Qatar Airways, which would breed competition, pushing the airlines to improve and to lower airfares.
While that would be a boon to travelers, Mr. Leff said that the legacy airlines are hoping to prevent it by capitalizing on Mr. Trump’s “protectionism” to keep their competitors at bay. If that protectionist attitude prevails, options will continue to be limited and prices will continue to be high.
Cuba is only just opening up to the United States, yet it is already on many travelers’ bucket lists.
Airlines and cruise ships have begun taking Americans there, and more hotels are in the works. But during the presidential campaign, Mr. Trump said that unless there is greater political freedom on the island, he might reverse the historic agreement President Obama made with President Raúl Castro of Cuba. Are Americans still likely to be able to go?
“There’s some risk to Cuba policy changing,” said Mr. Leff, because Mr. Trump could issue his own directive. Additionally, Mr. Leff said that the uncertainty surrounding Cuba could delay investment there in terms of new hotels and other travel-related infrastructure, slowing tourism.
During Mr. Trump’s campaign, his eponymous hotel brand appeared to be in trouble. And when the family announced that a new hotel brand was in the works but that it would not use the Trump name, some companies speculated it was because the Trump brand was indeed tarnished. In May, Hipmunk, the travel comparison site, said that “while overall Hipmunk hotel bookings have been on the rise year-over-year, that has not been the case with bookings of Trump Hotels.” The share of Trump bookings on Hipmunk as a percent of total bookings was down 59 percent year over year.
But now that Mr. Trump will be the next president of the United States, things could be looking up.
That could generate jobs and help the economy. Exactly how that huge increase in spending — Mr. Trump has pledged to spend nearly $1 trillion on infrastructure — will be paid for is unclear, said Mr. Leff. Assuming Mr. Trump’s administration finds a way to make it happen (more recently he has suggested creating a federal infrastructure fund supported by government bonds), infrastructure projects still take years. So while there may be new roads and airports, this is a change that’s unlikely to happen in the near term.
Change is one thing the industry can be sure of when Mr. Trump takes office.
The only unlikely outcome, Mr. Harteveldt added, is that Mr. Trump will be in the middle.