Times Insider shares historical insights from The New York Times.
With all the autographed presidential portraits hanging in the board room (“For Iphigene Ochs, with regards of Theodore Roosevelt”), you might think The Times was a Grand Central Terminal for the nation’s chief executives.
But on Tuesday, Donald J. Trump became the first president-elect to visit the headquarters of The New York Times, to the best of anyone’s recollection.
“I have a distinct memory of arguing with Ronald Reagan at a Times lunch, but I suspect that was while he was a candidate for president,” Max Frankel, a former executive editor and former editor of the editorial page, said.
Al Gore and Joseph R. Biden Jr. came to The Times as vice presidents, Albert DeVivo, the senior security supervisor, recalled. But in his three decades at The Times, no incumbent United States president has visited.
In fact, 52 years have passed since the first (and last) sitting president paid a call on The Times.
On Feb. 6, 1964, President Lyndon B. Johnson attended a two-hour lunch at 229 West 43rd Street, then the newspaper’s headquarters, as the guest of Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the publisher, and his father, Arthur Hays Sulzberger, the chairman.
Both publisher and president were new to their jobs when they dined together that day. Mr. Sulzberger had been named publisher of The Times on June 20, 1963, after the death of Orvil E. Dryfoos. Mr. Johnson succeeded to the presidency on Nov. 22, 1963, after President John F. Kennedy was assassinated.
Their meeting gave them a chance to take one another’s measure, over shrimp cocktail, prime rib of beef, mashed potatoes, broccoli in butter sauce, fresh strawberries and pineapple, cookies and coffee.
What Mr. Johnson and Mr. Sulzberger said to each another, however, is lost to history.
Security was then, as now, a big concern. More than 100 Secret Service agents, detectives, police officers and security guards were stationed around the 43rd Street plant. Critical posts included electrical vaults, ventilating ducts, the attic over the 14th-floor board room and the rooftop above the 11th-floor executive dining room.
Westinghouse mechanics took control of the automatic elevators to ensure they would bypass the 11th and 14th floors during Mr. Johnson’s visit. The Secret Service directed that the floral arrangement be placed in a transparent glass container, so that it would be evident if a bomb had been planted in the vase.
At 1:10 p.m., 10 patrol cars and the presidential limousine roared down 43rd Street. The publisher was ready, umbrella raised against a cold rain. Mr. Johnson stepped out of his car, coatless. (The cultivated Mr. Daniel noted that the president was attired in a “fresh white shirt with a tab collar, a figured gray tie, pearl cuff links and a dark suit.”) Crowds were held at bay about 50 feet from the entrance. Mr. Johnson stepped through a side door rather than the central revolving doors, because the Secret Service did not want to take the chance of his getting stuck.
Mr. Sulzberger escorted the president to the board room, where his 72-year-old father, greatly diminished by two strokes, waited in a wheelchair. The older Mr. Sulzberger stood up to greet Mr. Johnson, telling him that he had come into the office for the first time in months just for this occasion. Then the group went down to lunch.
Before President Johnson could take his seat — a custom extra-wide, extra-low, folding upholstered chair — he was called to a hotline telephone, labeled simply “White House,” that had been installed at The Times that morning.
Fresh information was arriving about the latest crisis in Cuba, where the Castro regime had shut off the water supply to the Guantánamo Bay naval base. The Times executives stood at their places while Mr. Johnson finished the call. Jack Valenti, the president’s special assistant, urged the older Mr. Sulzberger to make himself comfortable.
“I am so pleased to be able to stand up that I want to show I can do it,” Mr. Sulzberger said.
After lunch, the president seemed in no hurry to go. He walked into the pantry to shake hands with everyone on duty. He took another telephone call and came back to the dining room with the latest news from Cuba. He greeted each of the telephone operators on the 11th-floor switchboard, who had been watching and waving from behind a glass door.
Downstairs, instead of getting back into his limousine, Mr. Johnson surprised his security detail by striding over to shake hands with a sodden but enthusiastic crowd of onlookers. As he did so, the president made the mistake of crossing directly in front of Edith Evans Asbury, a Times reporter who was never to be trifled with. Ever.
Today, Mr. Johnson keeps company with 18 other presidents in photographic portraits around the 16th-floor board room at 620 Eighth Avenue. Woodrow Wilson and Franklin D. Roosevelt were looking over Mr. Trump’s shoulders on Tuesday, as were Hubert Humphrey, Andrew Carnegie, Theodor Herzl, Thomas Alva Edison, Chiang Kai-shek, Mary Pickford and Douglas Fairbanks, Viscountess Astor and the Shah of Iran.
Seated before them, the president-elect did not disguise his ambivalence about The Times.
