Edgar Oliver conducts the most extraordinary séances. In “Attorney Street,” his seriously haunting new performance piece at the Axis Theater Company, the phantoms summoned by this one-of-a-kind monologuist are both vivid and elusive, as such manifestations must be.
What sets them apart, though, from the usual revenants is that they are ghosts of the man who conjures them. The specters with which Mr. Oliver communes are the shadows of his own self, displaced versions of the boy and the man he was, is, never was and never will be.
Self-examining memoirs are the basis for many one-person shows, and New York theatergoers may be excused for feeling that they’ve had their fill of them. But Mr. Oliver — whose earlier autobiographical pieces include “East 10th Street,” “Helen and Edgar” and “In the Park” — reshapes and reanimates this well-worn formula by infusing it with a sepulchral darkness. His style is sentimental gothic, and though it should be easy to caricature, it defies imitation.
Consider the anecdote that begins “Attorney Street,” which opened on Tuesday night, a perfect moment for theatergoers in a post-Halloween state of reflection, and which has been directed with care by Randy Sharp. “When I was in the sixth grade, my voice changed,” begins the story, a tale of a misfit’s encounter with bullying classmates.
Their curiosity may be cruel, but it’s understandable. His voice is deep and dank and baleful, an exotic cousin of Vincent Price’s from-the-crypt baritone, and his pronunciation stretches syllables into fluttering shadows. Every word Mr. Oliver utters contains a scream — of loneliness, of loss, of the terror that lurks in the everyday.
The hole has only grown wider. Sometimes he fleetingly glimpses the father he never met, through a stern and kindly recorded announcement on a Staten Island Ferry boat; in a fountain’s statue of Neptune near a “home for aged and decrepit sailors”; in a fortuitous encounter with a friend of his sister’s, and that man’s young son, in a restroom at a Lowe’s in Wheeling, West Va.
As Mr. Oliver says “Lowe’s,” that unromantic home improvement store acquires a numinous glow, as do the words Build It Green, the name of a house-fixtures salvage store in Queens, N.Y. The idea of home, you see, is as tantalizingly insubstantial to Mr. Oliver as that of a father.
True, he lived for more than three decades in a rooming house in the East Village in New York. But even when he was there (and rooming houses are, by nature, provisional) he spent much of his time walking with purposeful aimlessness through the city.
That name comes from Charles Dickens’s “Nicholas Nickleby,” and Mr. Oliver’s tone often seems poised between that of Dickens and Edgar Allan Poe, with perhaps a touch of Tennyson’s memorializing rapture. Mr. Oliver is, above all, an elegist, as so many 19th-century writers were.
The present always seems to be fleeing from him, turning into the past, even as he lives it. And so he stands in the cave of darkness that has been gently crafted by the designers Chad Yarborough (set), David Zeffren (lighting) and Paul Carbonara (music). He is a liminal, anachronistic presence with his Victorian hand gestures and melancholy droop.
Mr. Oliver is, in short, everything a living ghost should be.