CLASSIC GERMAN BAKING: The Very Best Recipes for Traditional Favorites, From Pfeffernüusse to Streuselkuchen. By Luisa Weiss. (Ten Speed, $35.) Even if you don’t have the stamina for homemade apple strudel or Black Forest cake, this Berlin-born food blogger will win you over with her sandy almond sugar cookies.
COOKING FOR JEFFREY: A Barefoot Contessa Cookbook. By Ina Garten. (Clarkson Potter, $35.) If these recipes are good enough for the Food Network star’s husband, they might just please your own mate.
DEEP RUN ROOTS: Stories and Recipes From My Corner of the South. By Vivian Howard. (Little, Brown, $40.) Howard won a Peabody Award for her PBS series “A Chef’s Life.” In her first book, she celebrates the culinary heritage of the Carolina coast.
DORIE’S COOKIES. By Dorie Greenspan. (Rux Martin/Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, $35.) Greenspan has written two previous baking books, “Baking Chez Moi” and “Baking: From My Home to Yours.” Here she concentrates on the smallest but perhaps most satisfying creations to come out of her oven.
EATALY: Contemporary Italian Cooking. (Phaidon, $49.95.) A wide-ranging collaboration with Eataly, the international Italian marketplace, featuring over 300 recipes, with a foreword by Eataly’s founder, Oscar Farinetti.
HOW TO BAKE EVERYTHING: Simple Recipes for the Best Baking. By Mark Bittman. (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, $35.) The author of “How to Cook Everything” takes readers back into the kitchen for a wide-ranging tutorial that mixes lessons on technique with hints on adapting some of the book’s more than 2,000 recipes.
INGREDIENTI: Marcella’s Guide to the Market. By Marcella Hazan and Victor Hazan. (Scribner, $20.) Marcella Hazan may be gone, but her authoritative voice lives on in this handy primer on how to choose the best vegetables, olive oil, cheeses and other culinary staples.
LAND OF FISH AND RICE: Recipes From the Culinary Heart of China. By Fuchsia Dunlop. (Norton, $35.) This British author was the first Westerner to attend the Sichuan Institute of Higher Cuisine, and in the aftermath she produced a trio of impressive cookbooks. Her latest introduces readers to the cuisine of the Lower Yangtze River.
LUCKY PEACH PRESENTS POWER VEGETABLES. By Peter Meehan and the editors of Lucky Peach. (Clarkson Potter, $35.) Aggressively tasty recipes, not all of them vegetarian, from the staff of the quarterly magazine.
MASTERING THE ART OF JAPANESE HOME COOKING. By Masaharu Morimoto. (Ecco/HarperCollins, $45.) Hoping to do for Japanese cooking what Julia Child did for French, the noted restaurateur presents recipes for a range of dishes, from simple soups to surprisingly unintimidating grilled, steamed and simmered main dishes.
A MODERN WAY TO COOK: 150+ Vegetarian Recipes for Quick, Flavor-Packed Meals. By Anna Jones. (Ten Speed, $35.) The London-based chef, a longtime collaborator of Jamie Oliver, is now out on her own as a columnist and author. Her new book is organized by the time it takes to prepare a recipe — starting with 15-minute dishes for the ultra-harried.
MY TWO SOUTHS: Blending the Flavors of India Into a Southern Kitchen. By Asha Gomez with Martha Hall Foose. (Running Press, $35.) What links a village in Kerala with big-city Atlanta? The sensibility of a restaurant chef who’s at home using Indian spices to give American classics a new twist.
A RECIPE FOR COOKING. By Cal Peternell. (Morrow/HarperCollins, $29.99.) Peternell’s previous book, “Twelve Recipes,” guided novice cooks through a host of basic techniques and recipes. This follow-up takes things a little further, with seasonal suggestions for appetizers, first and second courses and, of course, desserts.
THE RED ROOSTER COOKBOOK: The Story of Food and Hustle in Harlem. By Marcus Samuelsson with April Reynolds and Roy Finamore. (Rux Martin/Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, $37.50.) Essays, interviews, playlists and lots of recipes inspired by the Harlem restaurant that was named after a neighborhood speakeasy.
SMALL VICTORIES: Recipes, Advice + Hundreds of Ideas for Home-Cooking Triumphs. By Julia Turshen. (Chronicle, $35.) Turshen has collaborated on cookbooks with Mario Batali, Gwyneth Paltrow and Dana Cowin. This collection of her own favorite recipes is loaded with “spin-offs,” suggestions for variations on her carefully curated basics.
TASTE & TECHNIQUE: Recipes to Elevate Your Home Cooking. By Naomi Pomeroy with Jamie Feldmar. (Ten Speed, $40.) Building on years of experience as a caterer and restaurateur in the Pacific Northwest, Pomeroy uses techniques and ingredients as “building blocks” to coax her readers into greater comfort in the kitchen.
YASHIM COOKS ISTANBUL. By Jason Goodwin. (Argonaut, $35.) One of the delights of Goodwin’s series of mysteries set in 19th-century Istanbul was the culinary prowess of his detective. This handsome collection of recipes is accompanied by excerpts from the novels that inspired it.