LONDON — One of two men who escaped from a London prison in an audacious breakout has been captured and arrested after three days on the run, the police said on Thursday.
Scotland Yard said that Matthew Baker, 28, who had been awaiting sentencing after being convicted of attempted murder in the stabbing of a man in East London, was arrested on Wednesday in Ilford, also in the east of the city. The authorities said that Mr. Baker had been held in a police station overnight.
In a statement announcing Mr. Baker’s capture, Scotland Yard said that a 21-year-old woman and a 33-year-old man, neither of whom was identified, had also been arrested, but the police did not elaborate on their roles.
Mr. Baker and the other inmate who escaped, James Anthony Whitlock, 31, broke out on Sunday after apparently using diamond-tipped cutting equipment to sever the bars of their fifth-floor cells at Pentonville prison.
Then, according to news reports, they climbed onto the roof and jumped onto a 25-foot perimeter wall before shimmying down a makeshift rope to freedom.
In a scheme that recalled some details of a legendary escape from Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary in San Francisco in 1962, Mr. Baker and Mr. Whitlock were reported to have left pillows under their bedsheets to approximate the form of bodies to fool security guards. The escape was discovered Monday morning, about 12 hours after the two men broke free.
The police said that Mr. Whitlock, who has been described as slender and with the word “Tracy” tattooed on his torso, remained at large. They appealed to the public for any information that could help lead to his arrest.
The daring escape from Pentonville, a creaking Victorian-era building that opened in 1842, has generated strong criticism about the poor state of Britain’s aging prisons.
Prison managers said this week that government budget cuts were undermining their ability to do their jobs, including the primary mission of keeping facilities secure.
Investigators are examining whether the cutting equipment used by the two men in Pentonville had been dropped near the prison by drones and then smuggled in through openings in dilapidated windows.
Last week, the Justice Ministry in Britain announced a package of changes at prisons, including the addition of 2,500 officers and the establishment of no-fly zones over jails to try to stop drones from delivering drugs.