It is the beginning of the holiday shopping season on Fifth Avenue, even if the festive spirit is dampened a bit by the long guns of stationed police officers and the regular presence of bomb-sniffing dogs.
Some of the city’s most storied stores have found themselves blocked behind police barricades. In the days since the presidential election, protesters have come through angrily, shutting down Fifth Avenue, filling the streets from Trump Tower at East 56th Street down to the Valentino store between 54th and 55th Streets and beyond.
Even when the protesters take their placards elsewhere, camera-wielding gawkers loiter on the sidewalk, gazing up at the tower where Donald J. Trump, the president-elect, is taking meetings.
Pedestrian access is largely restricted on the east side of Fifth Avenue between 56th and 57th Streets, where Mr. Trump both lives and works. So outside Tiffany’s, Trump Tower’s neighbor to the north, and Gucci, whose Fifth Avenue flagship is within the tower (though with its own entrance), scarf-wearing employees have been dispatched to the sidewalk, doing their best to usher shoppers, following police bag checks, past the barricades.
In the final months of the Obama presidency, as the president-elect plans his transition, Trump Tower has become the seat of power. For neighboring retailers, the congestion, the blockages, the protests and the occasional street closures have already affected foot traffic and are a cause for concern: The holiday season accounts for an outsize stake of retail business.
“You always hear the number 40 percent for Christmas,” said Dan Biederman, the president of the 34th Street Partnership, a neighboring Business Improvement District.
For those who would, a spirit of make-do reigns.
The company has been in frequent communication with the New York Police Department and the Secret Service regarding safety and security, and decided to cancel two events in the immediate aftermath of the election: one celebrating its capsule collection with Eddie Borgo on Nov. 10 (it was rescheduled for early December) and one to unveil the holiday windows on Nov. 14.
Nevertheless, the holiday windows are up and customers are finding their way around the obstructions, Mr. Bennett said. (Helping Tiffany is the fact that the store also has an entrance on East 57th Street.) Tiffany declined to discuss specifics of foot traffic or sales numbers.
For one couple, who wanted to get engaged at Tiffany, the aid of “a very understanding member of New York’s Finest” became “a memorable part of their proposal and their lives together,” Mr. Bennett said.
A representative for Gucci declined to comment on how the agitation and blockages had affected the store.
The response from the city was not initially sympathetic. “I will not tell you that Gucci and Tiffany are my central concerns in life,” Mayor Bill de Blasio said at a news conference held outside of Trump Tower, following a meeting with the president-elect on Nov. 16.
But at a subsequent news conference on Nov. 18, the mayor and the police commissioner, James P. O’Neill, announced their intention to keep Fifth Avenue open, following three temporary closures in the immediate aftermath of the election and the protests that followed.
He said that he was “very concerned to make sure that businesses continue to thrive, continue to be able to serve their customers and do well,” but also asked that New Yorkers avoid the area between 53rd and 57th Streets, between Madison Avenue and Avenue of the Americas, “to the maximum extent possible,” a request not likely to please those retailers in this high-priced luxury corridor, where rents can run a reported $5,000 per square foot.
On Fifth Avenue between 56th and 57th alone, there are stores for Abercrombie & Fitch and Prada, as well as the multiunit Crown Building at 730 Fifth Avenue, home to Mikimoto, Piaget and Bulgari. Ermenegildo Zegna plans to open a store there. Jason Maurer, the leasing agent for the property, declined to discuss the building.
But those in the epicenter of the ongoing commotion are likely in for continued disruption, especially given the announcement that Melania Trump and the couple’s son, Barron, are to stay in New York until the end of the school year. The president-elect plans to move to the White House, said Hope Hicks, a spokeswoman for Mr. Trump, though speculation endures that he will continue to spend time in New York.
Representatives of the Fifth Avenue Business Improvement District, which includes the area, did not respond to requests for comment.
At Henri Bendel, on Fifth Avenue between 55th and 56th, anti-Trump protests had forced the store to close a few times and to reschedule a holiday shopping event.
The store’s holiday display, a “Love Wall” of painted hearts by the artist James Goldcrown, ended up being “kind of timely,” Ms. Ferlisi said. Mr. Goldcrown was at Henri Bendel installing the wall the night after the election, as protests raged outside.
Shoppers are adjusting as well.
