An illustration by Frederic Remington for the memoirs of Gen. Nelson A. Miles, who defeated Geronimo.Credit...Frederic Remington, from "Personal Recollections and Observations of General Nelson A. Miles." Chicago: Werner Publishing Company, 1896.
Illustrated. 544 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $35.
Seldom does a nonfiction book pack the cultural wallop that Dee Brown’s “Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee” did in 1970. Just months before its publication a group of Native American activists calling themselves Indians of All Tribes had occupied Alcatraz Island in San Francisco Bay, demanding that the former prison outpost be deeded back to them by the United States government. So when Brown — a white novelist and historian from Arkansas with a degree in library science — published his searing account of westward expansion, accusing the Army of annihilating Indians between 1860 and 1890, his timing was explosive. While Brown’s book contained factual errors, it dramatically succeeded in changing the attitudes of the Vietnam War generation about how the West was really won.
His picture is disheartening. During Reconstruction numerous Native Americans from the East were assigned to Western reservations under the watch of the Army. Inebriated rank-and-file soldiers routinely disobeyed orders and sometimes burned down Indian villages. The Civil War generals William T. Sherman and Philip Sheridan, tasked with overseeing Indian affairs, come off as fierce conquer-at-all-cost leaders, morality be damned, as their troops ferociously battled against recalcitrant Arapaho, Comanche, Cheyenne and Kiowa tribes.
And nobody can accuse Cozzens of candy-coating Native American culture. Rivalries between tribes, outlying examples of weird mysticism and secret collaborations with the Army are all explored. After explaining how Plains Indians saw warring as a “cultural imperative,” a way to prove manhood, Cozzens offers a graphic description of the art of scalping. “Indian men wore their hair long, which made taking the scalp of an enemy warrior relatively swift and simple,” he writes. “Grasping a tuft or braid in one hand, with the other a warrior made a two- or three-inch-wide cut around the base of the skull, usually with a butcher knife.  ” According to Cozzens, many Native American warriors mutilated corpses because disfigurement was thought to safeguard the killer from the dead person’s revengeful spirit in the afterworld.
The pacification of Geronimo serves as a closing metaphor for the crushing Native American defeat retold in “The Earth Is Weeping.” For every Indian triumph like Little Big Horn (1876), there was a drubbing like Wounded Knee (1890), for every surprise Indian victory there were huge retaliations by the Army. As if to add insult to injury, one evening in February 1909, Geronimo got drunk in the town of Lawton, Okla., fell off his horse and was discovered the next morning half-submerged in icy water. “Four days later,” Cozzens writes, “at age 79, the man whom no bullet could ever kill died in bed of pneumonia.”  Still, I have a feeling the academic fight for the true legacy of the Indian Wars — Brown versus Cozzens — has just begun.