Two former advisers to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo were indicted on Tuesday on federal corruption charges, another legal milestone in a bribery and bid-rigging scandal that has struck at the highest levels of the Cuomo administration.
The two men — Joseph Percoco, a close friend and former top aide to Mr. Cuomo, and Alain E. Kaloyeros, former president of the State University of New York Polytechnic Institute, who helped oversee Mr. Cuomo’s economic development programs in upstate and Western New York — were arrested in September.
In addition to Mr. Percoco and Dr. Kaloyeros, a federal grand jury in Manhattan voted to indict six executives of companies that did business with the state. Prosecutors say the executives bribed Mr. Percoco to obtain favorable treatment from the state or conspired with Dr. Kaloyeros to rig a bidding process to ensure that they won lucrative state contracts.
Though the indictment moves the cases toward trial, it is not yet clear whether the investigation has broadened to target others.
Lawyers for the defendants said they were confident that their clients would be exonerated.
The arrests of Mr. Percoco, Dr. Kaloyeros and the others came after an inquiry by the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, Preet Bharara. A criminal complaint outlined what prosecutors said were two overlapping schemes: Mr. Percoco was accused of taking at least $315,000 in bribes from a firm that was building a power plant in the Hudson Valley, and COR Development, a Syracuse-area developer that won a state economic development contract worth hundreds of millions of dollars; Dr. Kaloyeros was accused of steering state contracts to COR and LPCiminelli, a Buffalo developer.
Another former aide to Mr. Cuomo, Todd R. Howe, who worked for Dr. Kaloyeros and consulted for COR and LPCiminelli, has admitted to arranging both schemes. He has pleaded guilty to eight corruption charges and is cooperating with prosecutors.
The indictment on Tuesday follows the contours of the charges in the criminal complaint, but adds one wire fraud count for each of the bids that Dr. Kaloyeros and the development executives are accused of rigging. The other counts include conspiracy to commit wire fraud, extortion under color of official right, conspiracy to commit honest services fraud, solicitation of bribes, payment of bribes and making false statements to federal officers. No date has been set for arraigning the defendants.
Dr. Kaloyeros’s lawyer, Michael Miller, said his client had “dedicated his life” to science and economic development.
“We are confident that, at the end of this process, a jury will conclude that he committed no crimes along the way,” Mr. Miller said in a statement.
The charges against Mr. Percoco include allegations that the energy company’s bribes to him were funneled through a “low-show,” $7,500-a-month job for his wife, Lisa Toscano-Percoco. Those allegations raise the possibility that she may face federal scrutiny, which could give prosecutors leverage to pressure Mr. Percoco into cooperating.
The indictment comes days after Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, announced a set of ethics reform proposals, including capping outside income for state legislators and appointing an official in his own office to review all state contracts.
