I have tried, for the duration of this election, to stay informed, without being obsessive. It hasn’t been easy. The media has been frenzied, at best, particularly as they cover Donald J. Trump. Early on, cable news networks aired entire Trump events before he was even his party’s nominee. They created an unhealthy demand for “news” that they were more than happy to supply. There is no escape.
People who care about this election, which is to say most people, have also become frenzied. At times, I see people reacting to the election online and I want to say, “Get ahold of yourselves.” There is an almost dark, sexual energy to how people talk about the portent Donald Trump, as if they are both disgusted and excited about each new terrible revelation about the Republican candidate. I watch these people and wonder why they are surprised, how they can be surprised.
We knew everything we needed to know about Mr. Trump when he said Mexicans were rapists and when he called for barring Muslims from entering the country. We knew exactly who he was years ago when he was a reality television spectacle and we knew exactly who he was as he cycled from one marriage to the next. Each new revelation simply reminds us that Mr. Trump is exactly who he appears to be.
The closer we get to the election, the more I see people on social media rending their garments about how terrible 2016 has been and how terrible this election is, sharing tired jokes about Nov. 8 as the end of the world. In some ways, I understand the frenzy, the panic, the obsession over this election. It is a hell of a thing to see fascism being so robustly embraced by so many Americans.
This anxiety is exhausting to watch. But regardless of this election’s outcome, Tuesday will not and cannot be the end of the world. We don’t have that luxury.
I am excited about Hillary Clinton as a presidential candidate and soon to be (I hope), president of the United States. I haven’t written this too many times in the past year. This is not because I am apathetic. In part, I haven’t had the energy to deal with the inevitable harassment that rises out of demonstrating any kind of support for Mrs. Clinton. I’ve also been torn. I like, admire, and respect so many things about Mrs. Clinton. She is fiercely ambitious, intelligent, funny, interesting and complex. She prepares for everything she does like her life depends on it and in many ways, politically speaking, it does.
During each of the three presidential debates I marveled at the extent of Mrs. Clinton’s policy knowledge and how she knew when and where to attack her opponent. I’m also thrilled to see a woman as president. Small-minded people want to call this voting with my vagina, as if there is something wrong with wanting to see a woman become president after 44 men have had a go at it. Despite the historicity of this moment, I am voting with my head, mostly, and some of my heart.
Hillary Clinton does not come without baggage, though I must confess, I cannot bring myself to give one single damn about the emails. As a woman, as a human being, I find some of Mrs. Clinton’s decisions unacceptable — her vote for the war in Iraq; some of the rhetoric she used during the 1990s; her stance, for far too long, that marriage equality was best left to the states. She has made decisions that treated marginalized lives cavalierly. It is difficult to reconcile such decisions with everything I admire about Mrs. Clinton.
I also know that no one can spend a lifetime in politics and public service and emerge with clean hands or a clear conscience. This is what I tell myself so I can feel more comfortable with supporting her. I recognize the rationalization.
In truth, I am not overlooking anything. I see the whole of who Mrs. Clinton is and what she has done throughout her career. At their best, people are willing and able to grow, to change. Clinton is not the same woman she was twenty years ago, or ten years ago. Even during the primary, running against Bernie Sanders, she demonstrated an ability to move further left from many of her centrist positions. Mrs. Clinton, as she presents herself today, impresses me. I am choosing to believe she is at her best.
And to be president of the United States, of any country, means making many impossible decisions, many of which will cost people their lives. As president, I know Hillary Clinton will make more decisions that appall me or make me uncomfortable. There is no such thing as an ideal president who never has to make life or death decisions. I can only hope that as president, Mrs. Clinton will make those decisions with grace and compassion.
The election is imminent and for that, I am grateful. I cannot remember a longer election cycle in my lifetime, or one that has felt so disgraceful, because Mrs. Clinton is running against a man who is unworthy, in all ways, of any public office, let alone the presidency. I live in Indiana, a fairly conservative state. Mike Pence, the Republican nominee for vice-president, is the state’s governor so I know just how horrible, homophobic, and misogynistic he is. Governor Pence makes the threat a Trump presidency even more of a travesty.
Whether it is Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump who is elected, we will be living not in an apocalypse, but in a new world, and each and every one of us is going to have a lot of work to do to hold the new president accountable to the needs of the people they have been elected to serve. And when I think about everyone who will suffer if Mr. Trump is elected, I am overwhelmed. I feel hopeless. I also feel ready to fight.