WASHINGTON — Rudolph W. Giuliani, a top adviser to President-elect Donald J. Trump, said on Sunday that it would be “unrealistic” to remove Mr. Trump’s children from their roles in running his business empire and place the assets into a strict blind trust like the ones used by previous presidents.
As president, Mr. Trump will not be required to sell his assets, which he has valued in billions of dollars. But the vast scope of Mr. Trump’s assets and business dealings is likely to lead to questions about how his actions as president would affect the financial fortunes of him and his family. Most modern presidents have elected to use a blind trust, which puts their assets under the control of an independent trustee.
Ethics experts said Mr. Giuliani’s remarks were misguided on ethical and political grounds.
Turning his business operations over to his children would not insulate him from ethical questions, Mr. Gross said, and may even exacerbate them.
Richard W. Painter, a White House ethics officer during the George W. Bush administration, said it would be problematic if Mr. Trump used such an arrangement, given that he would ultimately retain ownership of the assets.
Mr. Giuliani, a vice chairman of Mr. Trump’s transition team who is believed to be under consideration for various posts in the Trump administration, including attorney general, said fears of a conflict of interest were groundless.
Mr. Trump’s three eldest children, who hold leadership positions in his businesses, said in an interview on “60 Minutes” that was broadcast Sunday that they would not work in the administration in any formal capacity.
The financial arrangement was one of a number of questions surrounding Mr. Trump’s transition efforts, as his team moved toward announcing staff positions, tried to clarify the president-elect’s agenda and sought to reassure those still questioning his fitness for office.
Kellyanne Conway, Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, batted down questions on several television news programs about who would fill critical positions in the coming administration, and she argued that Mr. Trump’s victory had already demonstrated that he could bring together Democrats and Republicans.
She said on NBC’s “Meet the Press” that she disagreed with Mrs. Clinton’s remarks to donors on Saturday in which the candidate blamed the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, for her election defeat. The Clinton campaign “misread America,” Ms. Conway said, and should take ownership of its loss.
The House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, seeking to outline a prospective Republican legislative agenda for Mr. Trump’s first days in office, said on Sunday that Mr. Trump’s border security efforts included no plans to create a deportation force — a specter raised during the campaign.
