The dramatic presidential campaign of 2016 has often felt like something beyond even Hollywood’s wildest imagination.
So it seems fitting that when this two-year slog toward Election Day finally comes to its conclusion on Nov. 8, you’ll be able to watch it in stadium seating with surround sound, clutching a box of buttered popcorn.
AMC Theaters announced on Oct. 24 that it would show CNN’s election-night coverage in 50 theaters in the United States — designating a “red” and a “blue” theater in each of 25 cities. It follows a move by a rival chain, Regal Cinemas, which showed the final two presidential debates in more than 200 theaters across the country.
Unlike at a feature film, there are no $16 tickets for these events: Regal didn’t charge for its debate viewings, while AMC is not charging but is asking people to join its Stubs loyalty program to reserve a seat for election night. Mr. Smith said some Alamo theaters would most likely charge a nominal fee to guarantee a reserved seat and then give customers a voucher for food and drink.
As with a feature film screening, the bigger profit margin comes from concession sales, and at Alamo, that means campaign-themed drink specials: the Canadian Passport (Canadian whiskey, maple syrup and bitters) and Political Punsch (gin, Swedish punsch and lime juice), both $9.
Gathering with a crowd to watch election-night returns is by no means a new pastime. In 1944, an estimated 250,000 people gathered in Times Square to wait for election results outside the New York Times building. And across the country this year, countless bars and restaurants will have their TVs tuned to the news on election night.
“I mean, who doesn’t need a few drinks to get through these things?” said Jess Giesenkirchen, the director of operations at Nitehawk Cinema in Brooklyn. Nitehawk, which also acts as a restaurant during its film showings, won’t be showing the election night in any of its auditoriums but is expecting a crowd in its lobby bar and screening room, Lo-Res, where the debates drew a full house to watch on a large projection screen.
For Mark Sudduth, 45, an undecided voter and a movie buff in Wilmington, N.C., the election has already seemed “like a script for a crazy movie or even ‘House of Cards.’ ” Seeing a presidential debate live on the big screen felt like a civic duty, he said.
“It was absolutely a riot,” Mr. Sudduth added.
John Rubey is the chief executive of Fathom Events, which has built its business by organizing live events like opera screenings, sporting events and classic films at cinemas around the country. (It is not involved in this year’s election programming.) He attended a live debate event and said he was impressed by the diversity in the audience.
"Young, old, black, white, everyone was in the room,” he said.
Ms. Frank said AMC was hoping to attract civic groups to its theaters. Across the country, there are many local political groups that host watch parties, “and we’re a terrific platform for them,” she said.
But this is 2016. Campaign rallies have been violent. Some supporters of Donald J. Trump have warned of an armed revolution if he loses to Hillary Clinton. A USA Today poll last week found that one in five voters was “very concerned” about violence on Election Day. Is a big crowd really the best place to spend election night?
Ms. Frank said she hoped that allowing customers to “self-select” into separate theaters for their preferred candidates would reduce the potential for conflict.
“I think the people who are going to turn out for this are people who are much more sincerely interested in the process,” she said.
Mr. Smith said Alamo would be relying on event hosts (in patriotic costumes) to “set the tone for the evening.” The hosts are also responsible for channel selection, he said.
“Because we have alcohol, we’ve got a ton of staff who’s monitoring what’s going on,” he said. “We’ve got managers who are pretty constantly in that room.
Mr. Sudduth, who said he was “grateful” for the chance to see a debate live, was unsure if he would be willing to attend election night at a theater. “There’s just enough apprehension that I just may stay home and keep tabs on everything,” he said.
What happens if there’s a cliffhanger?
Ms. Frank said that AMC was leaving it to the theater managers to decide how late to go, citing interest not just in the presidential election but in local elections as well. “The nature of that local crowd engagement is going to vary dramatically,” she said.
Mr. Smith said that in many places where Alamo operates theaters, local liquor laws dictate closing hours. If things do go late, he said, the managers of local theaters will most likely be communicating on a group email to determine their next steps.
