BERKELEY, Calif. — Chanting “Not my president,” several hundred protesters streamed through the streets of Berkeley and Oakland in the predawn hours of Wednesday venting their anger at the election of Donald J. Trump as president. Demonstrations were also reported in Pittsburgh, Seattle and Portland, Ore.
The California Highway Patrol said that one protester, who was not identified, sustained major injuries after being hit by a car when protesters attempted to move onto a freeway.
The demonstration was one of the first visible signs of anger in the liberal and heavily Democratic San Francisco Bay Area after Mr. Trump’s surprising victory.
In Seattle, a group of about 100 protesters gathered in the Capitol Hill neighborhood, blocked roads and set a trash bin on fire.
“We can’t just sit back and let a racist and sexist become president,” said Adam Braver, a 22-year-old political science student at the University of California, Berkeley, who marched with other protesters past empty fast-food restaurants in the early hours.
A pro-Trump supporter, right, clashed with an anti-Trump protester at Lee Circle in New Orleans on Wednesday after the man on the left grabbed a Trump flag from a truck.
Credit...Matthew Hinton/The Advocate, via Associated Press.
Elizabeth Bushnell, who said she is Muslim, is embraced by Conner Crenshaw, left, and Jamal Edwards during an anti-Trump protest at Lee Circle in New Orleans on Wednesday.
The police clashed with demonstrators blocking traffic on the 101 Freeway through downtown Los Angeles on Wednesday.
An anti-Trump protest at Columbus Circle in Manhattan on Wednesday.
Marchers said the protest had begun spontaneously among students who had gathered on the Berkeley campus to watch the results.
When it became clear that Mr. Trump would win, students filled a wide avenue and began marching toward neighboring Oakland.
Mr. Colin and a number of other Latino students on the march said they were concerned about what would happen to their friends and relatives during a Trump presidency because of his stance on migrants from Latin America.
Daniel Austin, an African-American first-year student at the California College of the Arts in Oakland, said he felt threatened by Mr. Trump.
The protesters dispersed after 3 a.m., but many vowed to return to the streets in the coming days.