By now, the imitation speakeasy is familiar territory. Dozens have opened in Manhattan and Brooklyn, behind unmarked doors, Potemkin coffee shops and hidden alleyways. But Queens is proudly behind the curve.
The Last Word opened in August on Ditmars Boulevard, tucked behind Square Hardware, a fake storefront with white pegboards holding keys, caulking guns and hammers. But even longtime residents aren’t fooled. “This must be some kind of bar or something,” said two middle-aged Greek women in sandals and sundresses on a late summer night as they passed the imposing doorman outside.
Tin ceiling? Check. Edison bulbs? Check. Bearded bartenders in snappy vests behind a marble bar? Check. The formula for an ersatz speakeasy is replicated to a T, as are the meticulously prepared drinks. The biggest difference between this joint and its forbearers across the East River is size. There’s plenty of space between tables so you won’t be annoyed or drowned out by your neighbors’ inebriated conversations.
Like Astoria, the scene is diverse. The clientele on one Friday night was mostly in their 20s and 30s and dressed casually in T-shirts, shorts and sneakers.
Is it rock, jazz or R&B? Hard to tell, but that may be the point. The Last Word is the rare bar where yelling is not necessary.
Unlike most bars, this is a table-service-only operation. There are no reservations, just a first-come, first-serve list managed by a friendly woman standing in the storefront with zero attitude and a iPad that she uses to text patrons. Expect a 10- to 20-minute wait on weekends after 10 p.m., longer for larger parties.
The club’s namesake is a drink from the Detroit Athletic Club, circa 1916 — a tart mix of gin, chartreuse, maraschino liqueur and lime. The menu is aimed at cocktail novices, divided into three levels of complexity: Easy Drinking, Know Your Spirits and Feeling Adventurous. On the expert’s end, the Fat Monk ($15), a frothy mix of pear-infused tequila and hefeweizen syrup, seemed popular, keeping the bartenders busy shaking up an egg-white storm.