Archer, the central character in the transgender playwright MJ Kaufman’s “Sagittarius Ponderosa,” used to be Angela. He still is, as far as his family knows, and he doesn’t tell them otherwise when he goes home to Oregon as his father is dying. At 29, he can’t quite work up the courage to explain to them who he really is.
He is most at ease when he leaves the house for the comforting company of an ancient Ponderosa pine. In Ken Rus Schmoll’s production for the National Asian American Theater Company, the tree is enormous, ethereal, majestic — and translucent white, as if it had been pieced together from ghosts.
Such unearthly elements suffuse “Sagittarius Ponderosa,” which is also a domestic drama. That’s a tricky combination to pull off, and a challenge that almost entirely eludes this flat, disjointed production, at 3LD Art & Technology Center.
A large part of the problem is the alley-style staging, with the audience on either side of the action. This is an intimate, slow-paced play, and if we can’t see characters’ faces at significant moments — sometimes for an entire scene — then we are locked out of that intimacy.
The other trouble is Archer, who, by the way, has taken his new name from his astrological sign, Sagittarius, a centaur who wields a bow and arrow.
Whatever facade Archer is showing to his family, we need to be able to sense the flesh-and-blood person behind it. Yet as played by the transgender performer Bex Kwan, Archer has only two dimensions. We need to see a spark, too, between Archer and Owen (Daniel K. Isaac), the cheerful Californian he hooks up with — first a sexual spark, then something more romantic. But the characters have no chemistry with each other.
The finest performance comes from Mia Katigbak, who slips into the skin of Archer’s mother with her customary grace. Her ease with the script’s gentle humor is most welcome.
The production has some superb elements, like that Ponderosa pine (the set is by Kimie Nishikawa), the howling-wind sound design (by Miles Polaski) and a puppet (designed by Tom Lee) named Peterson, the neighbor of Archer’s grandmother (Virginia Wing).
Mostly, though, the production fails the play, which is about mutability and the cycle of life, coming-of-age and coming into oneself, the roots that sustain us and the need for new growth. It’s about the importance of naming things, and the necessity of telling the people we love who we are.
One of its sweetest moments comes when Peterson (operated by Glenn Kubota) and Archer’s grandmother, both hard of hearing, page companionably through the newspaper.
