UNITED NATIONS — In the genteel, carpeted halls of the United Nations headquarters, a 20-minute walk from Trump Tower, diplomats from the world over are holding their breath about the American president-elect.
The optimists among them are expressing relief that Donald J. Trump said nothing during the campaign about dismantling the United Nations altogether — or turning its iconic tower facing the East River into condos.
Sarah F. Cliffe, a former United Nations assistant secretary general who is now director of the Center on International Cooperation, a research organization at New York University, said she expected a reprise of the tensions that erupted between the United States and the United Nations during the administration of President George W. Bush. John R. Bolton, who was ambassador to the United Nations under Mr. Bush, once said the United Nations would be more effective without its top 10 floors, where its senior leaders have their offices. Mr. Bolton is one of Mr. Trump’s many would-be candidates for secretary of state.
But Ms. Cliffe said Mr. Trump may also find the United Nations useful.
As one of Manhattan’s pre-eminent builders, he also offered to handle the renovation at half the price. In 2012, he complained on Twitter about the marble behind the speaker’s lectern at the General Assembly hall, claiming he could build it better.
Mr. Trump, who has called climate change a hoax, has suggested he would withdraw the United States from the Paris accord, widely regarded as the most important United Nations achievement in years. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and President Obama invested a great deal of political energy in its success.
This past week, speaking in Marrakesh, Morocco, at an international meeting on climate change, Mr. Ban said he had spoken by telephone with Mr. Trump and looked forward to a personal meeting about the importance of saving the planet from environmental disaster.
“As president of the United States, I am sure that he will understand this, he will listen, he will evaluate his campaign remarks,” Mr. Ban said.
Even if Mr. Trump does not withdraw the United States from the accord, he could ignore important commitments, including cuts in carbon emissions or contributions to a global fund to help poor countries deal with the damage wrought by climate change. American disregard of the accord could cause other countries to renege on their promises as well.
Diplomats are trying to convince the Trump transition team that adhering to the deal is good for American businesses.
Mr. Trump has said he wants to bar entry to refugees from certain countries, and his campaign has defended a widely pilloried Twitter message by his son, Donald Trump Jr., comparing Syrian refugees to poisoned Skittles.
He is to take office less than three weeks before Mr. Trump.
Mr. Trump has repeatedly threatened to scrap the agreement reached last year between Iran and six world powers, including the United States, that severely limited Iran’s nuclear activities in exchange for sanctions relief.
Mr. Ban has expressed the opposite view, calling the agreement a triumph of diplomacy that reduced the threat of war. He has urged all participants to respect its provisions.
The agreement was also endorsed by the Security Council in a unanimous resolution.
Almost immediately after the agreement was announced in July 2015, Mr. Trump expressed his hostility in a Twitter post.
At that same March meeting of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, a lobbying group, Mr. Trump asserted that “my No. 1 priority is to dismantle the disastrous deal with Iran,” arguing that the Iranians had outsmarted the United States in winning concessions and could still develop a nuclear weapon when the pact’s restrictions expire in 15 years.
Despite Mr. Trump’s assertions, it remains unclear whether he will seek to annul or amend the nuclear agreement. The other countries involved — Britain, China, France, Germany, Iran and Russia — have all expressed their intention to honor it.
Senator Bob Corker, a Tennessee Republican who is under consideration for a cabinet post in the new administration, said Mr. Trump would probably be cautious about any change of policy.
“I don’t think he will tear it up, and I don’t think that’s the way to start,” Mr. Corker said on CNN.
Mr. Trump has vowed to restore waterboarding as a counterterrorism tool, saying “torture works.” That would contravene an international convention on torture.
Kris Kobach, a member of Mr. Trump’s transition team, has suggested that the new administration could create a national registry for immigrants from countries where terrorist groups are active. That would go against an international convention on nondiscrimination, which took effect nearly 50 years ago.
Mr. Trump has not specified his view on the Arms Trade Treaty, which was overwhelmingly adopted in 2013 by the General Assembly and entered into legal force nearly two years ago. But gun-rights advocates in the United States led by the National Rifle Association, one of Mr. Trump’s most powerful supporters, strongly criticized the treaty and vowed to ensure that the Senate never ratifies it.
The treaty is an attempt to regulate the enormous global trade in conventional weapons, and for the first time it links sales to the human rights records of the buyers.
The N.R.A. has argued that the treaty’s provisions amount to an infringement of the Second Amendment. Kelly Ayotte, a Republican senator from New Hampshire who is among those being talked about as Mr. Trump’s potential ambassador to United Nations, has been an outspoken critic of the treaty.
Mr. Trump has sharply criticized President Obama’s reconciliation with Cuba, a change that was widely welcomed at the United Nations, where an annual resolution condemning the American trade embargo with Cuba passes overwhelmingly. Mr. Trump’s running mate, Mike Pence, has vowed that the new administration’s policy will be much tougher.