Traveling can be complicated and nervous-making, yet for many of us the compulsion to be propelled across the map and renewed amid unfamiliar landscapes is irresistible. As Bill Bryson writes in his introduction to THE BEST AMERICAN TRAVEL WRITING 2016 (Mariner/Houghton Mifflin, paper, $14.95), which highlights two dozen locations across the globe, travel is “enriching, stimulating, seductive, pleasurable — but very often a touch compulsive, too.” For an example of all these qualities, consult Gretel Ehrlich’s ravishing, troubling essay about her perilous journeys by dog sled on the melting ice floes off Greenland’s coast. (“When I asked if we were going to die, he smiled and said, ‘Imaqa.’ Maybe.”) Yet some travelers do seem to have reined in their wanderlust, alert to geopolitical flux. Five years ago, I learned the prudence of such caution when friends emailed me in alarm from Damascus, where they had been lured by an article I’d written about the city’s beguiling old-town souk — and had landed just as Syria’s civil war began. My apologies! But not everyone is deterred by warfare or global warming. A batch of new books bridges the gap between the timid and the intrepid wanderer, showing that with planning, a little luck and a modicum of attention to headlines, the world’s most arresting sights, tastes and wonders can still be yours — whether you conduct your journey in the 50 states, overseas, from the sanctuary of an armchair or from the bobbing back of a camel.
But hundreds of other tantalizing destinations come without a disclaimer: Kazakhstan, where golden eagles hover at the wrists of fur-hatted huntsmen; “lavish and decadent” Austria, whose snowcapped mountains, “jewel-box Hapsburg palaces” and Viennese coffeehouses beckon year-round; the former “pariah state” Myanmar, “slowly coming in from the cold,” where “towering golden stupas dot the landscape like giant candlesticks.” Lonely Planet’s book is a consoling reminder that while dastardly regimes may come and go, the spirit of a place can still abide.
Traveling with children overseas, even to a peaceful land, requires a level of courage — or masochism — that invites awe. Nonetheless, when the English journalist (and Cordon Bleu alum) Michael Booth decided to spend three months exploring Japan’s culinary mysteries and “slowly, methodically, greedily” working his way from Hokkaido south to Tokyo, “then on to Kyoto, Osaka, Fukuoka and the islands of Okinawa,” he took along his wife, Lissen, and their two young sons, Asger, 6, and Emil, 4, because “I crumble if I don’t see my family for more than a few days.” Aww.
SUPER SUSHI RAMEN EXPRESS: One Family’s Journey Through the Belly of Japan (Picador, $26), his account of their “foodie family road trip,” establishes Booth — already memorable for his teasing Rorschach of Scandinavia, “The Almost Nearly Perfect People” — as the next Bill Bryson. He grudgingly gives “pampered” Kobe beef cattle a rub with a distilled spirit called shochu and takes his kids to lunch at a sumo “stable,” where they wonderingly watch the rikishi (“two mammoth mounds of diapered blubber”) collide in a premeal bout before sitting down to a vegetable-rich chicken and soy sauce chanko nabe hotpot. “Are sumos people?” Emil whispers.
“I believe,” Stewart explains, that “walks are miracles — which can let me learn, like nothing else, about a nation, or myself.” But the miracle of “The Marches” is not so much the treks Stewart describes, pulling in all possible relevant history, as the monument that emerges to his beloved father. Brian Stewart, who died last year, was a proud Scotsman, a wearer of the Black Watch tartan and champion of Scottish dance. He was also a loyal Briton in the heroic mold, a soldier who blew up panzers in World War II and served the Queen for half a century in Asia and at home as an intelligence officer (he commissioned spy gadgets for MI6, like Q in the James Bond films). Father and son first walked Hadrian’s Wall in 1985, during one of the author’s school breaks. By then, they had already visited China’s Great Wall six times, and the younger Stewart was unimpressed with its Roman counterpart. Seeing a fort reduced to “one-foot-high walls, arranged in squares and rectangles,” he thought of a “playing field for a game whose rules were forgotten.” Thirty years on, he has resurrected the game, the rules and the man who taught him to see their timeless sport.
At Scotland’s northern tip, in the wind-blasted Shetland Islands, just beneath the Arctic Circle, another restless son was moved to travel by the memory of another cherished father. At 17, Malachy Tallack woke from fitful sleep at his home in Lerwick, Shetland’s capital, and peered out at the harbor. Sick and shivering, he imagined that if he looked east, he could see all the places that girdled the planet at the same latitude as the Shetlands: Norway, Sweden and Finland; Russia and Alaska; Canada and Greenland. In SIXTY DEGREES NORTH: Around the World in Search of Home (Pegasus, $26.95), he explains that “if I could see far enough, my eyes would eventually bring me back, across the Atlantic Ocean.”  More than a decade later, he embarked on an odyssey to enact his fever dream, following the invisible parallel of land and water and ice that connected him to the planet and to himself, but heading west, not east. On the coast of Greenland he saw icebergs “like shadows made solid,” rising “blue-white against the vitreous shiver of the water” and reminding him of cloud formations caught “between two worlds.” In Canada he watched as a “boulder-sized shape” came to life, “a shape that lifted its head, unfurled itself and became a bear.” Hiking toward a mountain portage, he admired the way “the river twisted in upon itself in eddies and whirlpools, piling up in unbreaking waves.” All along his route, he lived among the locals, seeking “placefulness: an engagement with place that is united with and strengthened by our engagement with people.” A handful of photographs provide a visual record of his journey, but the book’s real power comes from Tallack’s poet’s eye.
It was language that drew the New York journalist Zora O’Neill to spend months crisscrossing the Middle East, beginning in the fall of 2011, as she ignored the region’s post-Arab Spring upheavals in her quest to learn colloquial Arabic. The difficulty, she writes in ALL STRANGERS ARE KIN: Adventures in Arabic and the Arab World (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, $25), is that no single, official version of the spoken language exists; each country has its own dialects. The Khaleeji spoken in the gulf states has soft consonants (“galbi, instead of qalbi”), while Morocco’s Darija can “squeak, like a bath toy,” Egypt’s Ammiya “honks like a goose,” and Lebanese Arabic “sighs like a dove.” As a college student, O’Neill had attempted to master Fusha (classical Arabic), attracted by its “beautiful efficiency,” but when she arrived in Egypt after seven years of studying the written language, she discovered that nobody spoke that kind of Arabic. “I could parse a poem composed in the sixth century, but barely chitchat with my landlord in Cairo,” she explains, because “spoken Fusha, with its archaic grammar and vocabulary, always sounds unnatural, like speaking in Shakespearean forsooths and whithers and thous.” After acquiring a grounding in the Cairene dialect, she returned to America, eventually abandoning the study of Arabic to become a journalist. Her recent reimmersion hasn’t brought her the proficiency she sought: “After all my country-hopping, my vocabulary was a jumble of dialects, and my precious Fusha grammar was close to broken.” Yet in the end, she writes, her “Year of Speaking Arabic Badly” taught her an unexpected lesson. Observing and listening to the people she met served her better than speaking fluently: “A spark of connection had arced over the language barrier.” In Morocco, for example, O’Neill “watched men wrestle skeins of brilliant indigo floss out of giant vats” in the dyers’ quarter of the Fez medina while in the coppersmiths’ square “the ping of small hammers rang out.” She needed no translation to catch the meaning of such scenes.
A Fez tannery appears among thousands of other beguiling and quirky wonders in the richly annotated ATLAS OBSCURA: An Explorer’s Guide to the World’s Hidden Wonders (Workman, $35), a wanderlust-whetting cabinet of curiosities on paper devised by Joshua Foer, Dylan Thuras and Ella Morton. A photograph provides a pigeon’s eye view of the work floor of the Chouara Tannery, whose colorful soaking tubs resemble a Candy Crush grid. This 11th-century facility “still operates,” the authors write, “as it did a thousand years ago.” But the “Atlas Obscura” also entices with modern enchantments: a Hobbit hole in New Zealand, a fortunetelling fox-woman in Pakistan, mermaids in Florida and an elf school in Iceland.
You could enjoy the holiday of a lifetime simply by flipping through the pages of these peripatetic volumes. But if you, like Malachy Tallack, can’t resist that “fizzing pressure within” that makes you “long for what is elsewhere, for what is far away” — welcome to your itinerary.