On a March day, another show was being fashioned here, though “Stars Hollow: The Musical” is unlikely to join that pantheon any time soon. But that won’t matter for the millions of fans of “Gilmore Girls,” who have sojourned in that idyllic (albeit fictional) Connecticut town during its initial run on the WB from 2000 to 2007 or since Netflix picked up all 153 episodes two years ago.
The musical, filled with enthusiastic but talent-challenged townspeople, is one of the story lines in “Gilmore Girls: A Year in the Life,” a new, four-part mini-series Netflix will release on Nov. 25. More important, the revival is the inspiration of the show’s creator, Amy Sherman-Palladino, and her husband and collaborator, Daniel Palladino. A decade after a contract dispute led to their departure from the show, they actually get to wrap up the story on their own terms.
The entire, sprawling cast — including its stars, Lauren Graham and Alexis Bledel, and supporting actors who’ve gone on to fame elsewhere, like Melissa McCarthy and Milo Ventimiglia (“This Is Us”) — has returned. So has the show’s fizzy cocktail of rapid-fire repartee, pop culture savvy and heartfelt drama about mothers and daughters and relationships.
But the creators used this second chance to amp up the storytelling complexity. Which explains the faux musical. Both theater obsessives, Ms. Sherman-Palladino and Mr. Palladino roped in the Tony Award winners Sutton Foster and Christian Borle to appear as regional theater actors, and convinced Jeanine Tesori, the composer of “Fun Home” and “Violet,” to write four songs for it.
On the surface, the series Ms. Sherman-Palladino pitched back in 1999 would seem to be your basic sentimental family drama. The free-spirit Lorelai Gilmore (Ms. Graham) flees her disapproving family in haughty Hartford at the age of 16, after giving birth to a daughter, Rory (Ms. Bledel). She remakes her life in Stars Hollow, the kind of small town that is filled with quirky, borderline insufferable characters who all know your business. And mother and daughter are best friends, in stark contrast to Lorelai’s fraught relationship with her mother, Emily (Kelly Bishop).
And the witty banter does speed by. The scripts for most 42-minute TV episodes come in at a page a minute; “Gilmore Girls” scripts ranged between 75 and 80 pages.
But after six seasons, Ms. Sherman-Palladino and Mr. Palladino abruptly departed the show. A decade on, the couple and studio executives at Warner Bros. Television still sound bewildered that an expired contract led to the rupture.
The news didn’t sit too well with the cast.
Even though many of the writers had long worked on the show, something felt off. “It just didn’t sound the same,” Ms. Graham said. She reached for a pop-cultural reference of her own to elaborate, saying that Van Halen was different once David Lee Roth left the band.
Fans noticed, and the WB canceled the show after the seventh season.
At first, Ms. Sherman-Palladino and Mr. Palladino had no desire to revisit Stars Hollow. They had moved on to other projects like “Bunheads” (on which Ms. Foster starred) and “The Return of Jezebel James.” But they increasingly encountered a whole new generation of viewers who had discovered the show in reruns, on DVD and then on Netflix, clamoring for a revival.
A changing entertainment landscape also gave them an avenue to resurrect the characters but not get bogged down by a full-blown series. The very short seasons and 90-minute running time of the British series “Sherlock” enticed.
And four, 90-minute chapters, each one pegged to a season, seemed appropriate for a series that showcased the seasons.
Despite the professional divorce from Warner Bros. Television, reconciliation came quickly. Peter Roth, president and chief content officer of Warner Bros. Television Group, who bought the original series pitch back in 1999, jumped at the reboot.
“The story had not been finished, not in a way that anybody was satisfied with,” he said.
“When you have the original creative team, proactively offering they have a desire to continue telling the story, those are already great ingredients for us,” said Cindy Holland, vice president of original content at Netflix.
Ms. Sherman-Palladino had more prosaic reasons for agreeing to the Netflix deal.
“Though I must say that ‘Gilmore Girls,’ in its original run, sold a lot,” Mr. Palladino chimed in.
With the bigger budgets, the two could do more location shoots and elaborate setups.
And, of course, they could put together a musical.
“We have tap dancing and kick lines,” said Ms. Sherman-Palladino, enthused during a break in filming on that March day.
Ms. Foster, who also starred in “Violet,” signed up, and Mr. Borle (“Something Rotten!,” “Falsettos”) was dragooned into joining his ex-wife, Ms. Foster.
Ms. Sherman-Palladino didn’t have to do the hard sell on the rest of the cast.
“Frankly, I was badgering Amy for most of those years to do a movie,” Ms. Bishop said.
Scheduling, though, was a nightmare. The deal between Warner Bros. Television and Netflix took a while to finalize, and that meant a scramble to line up dozens of cast members and film during the brief window the studio back lot was available. The timing was so tight that Ms. Graham read the scripts just a day before the first table read.
“There’s just been a feeling of right place, right time, right moment,” Ms. Sherman-Palladino said.
When Ms. Sherman-Palladino pitched “Gilmore Girls” in 1999, she — unlike many television show creators — actually knew the endgame. Down to the final four words a character would speak.
On Nov. 25, the world will learn which words she’s been planning all along.