She was filming that drenched performance for “Before the Dawn,” a string of 22 concerts in London at the 3,600-seat Eventim Apollo (the former Hammersmith Apollo) in 2014. They were Ms. Bush’s first live shows in 35 years, but she had hardly been forgotten. Tickets sold out in 15 minutes, drawing enough requests to crash her website. The shows left critics and fans agog.
On Friday, Dec. 2, she is releasing the live album of the show on Concord Records: more than two and a half hours of music on three CDs, four LPs or as a digital download. It will not be available via streaming services like Spotify or Apple Music, Ms. Bush’s decision. “She’s very involved in everything,” said Margi Cheske, president of the Fantasy Label Group at Concord.
Ms. Bush has been a vivid, influential, love-her-or-hate-her art-pop figure since the late 1970s. She is an emotive singer, an adventurous songwriter and producer and, during her long absence from live concerts, a maker of startling videos.
While Ms. Bush rarely gives interviews — she learned, early in a self-guided career, to maintain her privacy — she comes across as far more pragmatic than otherworldly, an artistic problem-solver. And even her speaking voice is melodic.
The “Before the Dawn” shows were phantasmagoric spectacles, involving video, choreography, lighting and puppetry. They were filmed, but early ideas about releasing both audio and video of the concert gave way to the current audio-only release. At the moment, Ms. Bush said, there are “no plans” to release the film.
Ms. Bush became a hitmaker in Britain when she emerged in 1978, still a teenager, with the single “Wuthering Heights.” At the height of British punk, the song retold the Emily Brontë novel in an odd, arresting tour-de-force of piano filigree, continually unfolding melody and stratospheric vocals.
In Britain, Ms. Bush’s songs have reached the Top 10 from 1978 to 2012. In the United States, she’s best known for the 1985 single “Running Up That Hill (A Deal With God)” and her radiant guest vocal on Peter Gabriel’s “Don’t Give Up,” but she has a devoted following that includes many songwriters, among them Tori Amos and Maxwell. Through the years, Ms. Bush’s music has encompassed operatic agility, folky delicacy, hard-rock power, cabaret guile and global rhythms, while her lyrics have featured or alluded to characters from history and literature (Joan of Arc, Molly Bloom from “Ulysses,” Peter Pan) as well as anonymous but affecting archetypes: parents, children, dreamers, mystics.
She had been thinking about performing again after making her 2011 album, “50 Words for Snow.” She also wanted to work with her son, Bertie McIntosh, then 16, who urged her to “push the ‘go’ button,” she said.
Her choice of material for the bulk of the show was obvious, Ms. Bush said. With a fixed, theatrical production rather than a stripped-down tour, she could perform two extended narrative suites from albums 20 years apart: “The Ninth Wave,” from the 1985 album “Hounds of Love,” and “A Sky of Honey,” half of “Aerial” from 2005.
