ESCALANTE, Utah — With the jury acquittals last week of Ammon and Ryan Bundy and their accomplices in the 41-day armed takeover of the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge in Oregon last winter, the lives of federal land managers in the American West got a whole lot more difficult.
This was more than just a court victory.
The Bundys landed a blow against a culture of public service embodied by the federal employees responsible for maintaining law and order and protecting our wildest Western landscapes. And while we don’t know the reason for the acquittals in what seemed like an open-and-shut case of guilt, it comes against a backdrop of deep antipathy in parts of the West toward the environmental regulation of the hundreds of millions of acres of rangeland, forests and national parks managed by the federal government on behalf of all Americans.
The federal land managers I’ve spoken to — rangers, biologists and law enforcement officers, almost all of them so fearful they won’t go on the record — worry that extremist copycats who seek to undermine the federal public lands system will be emboldened by the verdict.
And why shouldn’t they be afraid? This isn’t the first time the Bundy family has struck in their crusade against the federal government. The Nevada rancher Cliven Bundy, the father of the two men acquitted in the Oregon case last week, led an armed standoff in 2014 against federal agents who had sought to seize his cattle, which had been grazing illegally on federal land for more than two decades, and continue to do so.
“The message of the Malheur verdicts is that the federal land management agencies stand alone,” Dennis McLane, the retired deputy chief of law enforcement for the Bureau of Land Management, told me.
To get a sense of the implications, I talked with federal employees closest to where I live, here in Escalante, Utah, the northern headquarters of the 1.9-million-acre Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument. This is one of the crown jewels overseen by the B.L.M., the agency that has come to symbolize for the Bundy militia movement the overreach of federal regulation of the public domain.
Assaults and threats of violence against federal employees on public lands in the West were up last year, following Cliven Bundy’s standoff but before the takeover of the Oregon refuge by his sons, according to figures compiled by the group Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility.
Threats and assaults against B.L.M. employees rose to 28 from 15, and to 155 from 97 against employees of the United States Forest Service.
Before Ms. Shelton retired last August, security was significantly expanded at monument facilities to guard against attacks on employees and buildings, including installing panic buttons, dual-authentication door locks and, in some buildings, bulletproof glass.
She told me the Utah office of the B.L.M. went so far as to hire a former military terrorism expert, who advised that in the event of “security threats” — which are constant — B.L.M. employees should not go out in the field, wear B.L.M. uniforms or drive B.L.M.-marked vehicles.
The government may yet have its day. Cliven Bundy and his sons remain in custody and still face federal charges for their armed confrontation with government agents in 2014. A trial date has been set for February.
But at this point, from this vantage, the Malheur militants, triumphant in court, have also triumphed over the American people, who all share ownership of the land the Bundys covet.