Milwaukee — I love telling people I’m from Wisconsin. Maybe it’s my defense mechanism for when people accuse me of being a coastal elite, out of touch with Real America. I like fulfilling all the Wisconsin stereotypes. I love cheese and cheese curds, of course. I love our sports teams out of a vague sense of homerism. And my accent (all hard A’s) comes out in full force after ah coupl’ah beers.
Mostly I love my grandma, who has called Wisconsin home for 88 years. Her parents immigrated to Wisconsin from Germany, and she started public school without knowing a word of English. She forgot most of the German her parents taught her years ago, but taught me the words to the “Liechtensteiner Polka” that we would sometimes hear when my family would go to a Friday night fish fry.
As much as Mr. Trump won the election in Wisconsin, Hillary Clinton lost it. Her campaign, which prided itself on employing all the data wizards and ground game gurus money can buy, did not do nearly enough to lock down the upper Midwest, particularly Wisconsin and Michigan, and instead treated those states as a given.
Paul Soglin is the mayor of Madison, Wisconsin’s capital city, in cerulean Dane County. He supported Senator Bernie Sanders in the Democratic primary, and said he talked at least once a week with a field organizer from the Sanders campaign during the primary. But once Mrs. Clinton locked up the nomination, it was radio silence from the Clinton campaign.
President Obama, by contrast, made two campaign stops in Madison during the 2012 election, including a huge rally with Bruce Springsteen on the Monday before Election Day.
Mr. Soglin’s frustration with the Clinton campaign was apparent.
“I don’t understand the strategy. I’ve never seen an explanation for it, other than assuming that they wanted not just a victory, but a smashing victory — actually, the kind that Donald Trump had,” he said.
Wisconsin’s voter turnout in 2016 was the lowest it’s been in 20 years. Roughly 40,000 fewer Democrats voted in Milwaukee County this year than did in 2012.
The drop in turnout in Milwaukee County might be partially attributed to a voter identification law in the state. In 2014, a federal judge found that roughly 300,000 registered voters in Wisconsin lacked the necessary photo ID card to vote under the new law, and a “substantial number” of those voters were low income. However, election watchers have said the voter ID law alone could not have flipped the state in Mr. Trump’s favor.
Mrs. Clinton did not visit Wisconsin once after the Democratic National Convention in July. Neither did President Obama or Michelle Obama. Mr. Sanders made multiple trips to the state on behalf of Mrs. Clinton, but that was not enough to gin up voters’ enthusiasm.
Throughout the general election, the Clinton campaign’s surrogates appeared reassured to the point of hubris that they would be able to convert moderate Republican voters in Midwestern suburbs.
“For every blue-collar Democrat we lose in western Pennsylvania, we will pick up two moderate Republicans in the suburbs in Philadelphia, and you can repeat that in Ohio and Illinois and Wisconsin,” New York Senator Chuck Schumer said in July.
This line of thinking was not just wrong, but disastrously so. In 2008, Barack Obama won 59 of Wisconsin’s 72 counties. This year, 59 counties voted for Donald Trump. Republicans successfully built on the map that helped to elect Mr. Walker to the governor’s mansion while the Clinton campaign was looking to run up the score in states like Arizona and Georgia.
A triumvirate of Wisconsin Republicans also helped elect Mr. Trump, both actively and passively. First, there is Reince Priebus, who worked his way up from Republican politics in Wisconsin to head the Republican National Committee, and now, to serve as Mr. Trump’s chief of staff. Then there is House Speaker Paul D. Ryan, who now has a historic opportunity to pass his agenda through Congress. Finally, Mr. Walker, recovered from his own failed presidential campaign, will now oversee the Republican Governors Association.
Charlie Sykes is a longtime radio host in Milwaukee, who became a voice on the right for the #NeverTrump movement. After 23 years on the air, he will retire from his radio show this year. Along with being a vocal opponent of the Trump campaign, he has taken on a new role as chief apologizer for right-wing media.
He expressed frustration with his listenership, who, he said, had gradually grown immune to any inconvenient fact presented to them. While he read news from The Washington Post, Politico and National Review throughout the election, his audience seemed to glean most of its news from Fox News, talk radio and their Facebook feeds.
He says he is disappointed, but not surprised, to see conservative media falling in line and supporting Mr. Trump’s cabinet picks.
Mr. Sykes spent half of 2016 arguing that Wisconsin conservatism was fundamentally incompatible with what Mr. Trump was offering his party.
“Wisconsin conservatism has been distinctive, I think, in being aggressive but substantive, and very, very policy-oriented, and also proving that you can do things and be rewarded by the electorate,” he said.
Mr. Trump has certainly been aggressive if not very policy-oriented, and he has proved that you can run an atavistic, substance-free campaign and still win — even in the mild-mannered Midwest.
The Wisconsinites I know don’t like to argue about politics in general, and certainly not at the Thanksgiving table. We are creatures of habit; we don’t like to make ourselves or others uncomfortable; we loathe confrontation. But this year seems to bring with it a moral imperative to have uncomfortable conversations about the very real stakes of this election. This year we may need to break the habit, worry less about being nice and talk more about what it means to be decent.