LONDON — “Being weak, seem so”: That injunction, delivered by the vengeful daughter Regan toward her increasingly frail and erratic father midway through “King Lear,” is currently being memorably — even mightily — ignored by Glenda Jackson on the London stage.
At the age of 80, the two-time Oscar-winning Ms. Jackson has returned home to the theater after several decades to play no less a personage than that fellow octogenarian, Lear himself. Deborah Warner’s modern-dress production of this Shakespeare tragedy opened on Friday at the Old Vic here (through Dec. 3) and manages in an instant to render issues of gender and one’s advancing years utterly irrelevant.
Ms. Jackson more than delivers in a role for which she is in some ways a not altogether unexpected fit. Beyond matching the character in age, the actress has rejoined her profession after 23 years as a Labour member of Parliament, that peppery voice still singularly capable of slicing the air. And when she strides onstage in an opening scene that will famously reduce Lear’s family to tatters, Ms. Jackson at once communicates a power and an authority that you mess with at your peril.
Stylish in a black pantsuit and loose-flowing red jacket, hair androgynously short, Ms. Jackson’s Lear at first laughs at the inability of Cordelia (Morfydd Clark, whose vigor suggests a chip off the parental block) to express her love, as if the youngest daughter’s silence were some sort of joke.
But once the import of the moment sinks in, a savagery takes hold: “I loved her most,” Lear says, Ms. Jackson consumed by a primal fury that presumably hasn’t been easy for any of Lear’s three daughters to live with over time.
It’s often thought that actors who are the right age to play Lear don’t possess the stamina for it, but such thoughts are quickly quelled here. Could it be that a seasoning in the daily parry and thrust of the House of Commons has kept Ms. Jackson’s wit and acumen, not to mention her capacity for language, razor sharp? Whatever the reason, the actress at every turn rides the emotions of a play that makes room for bottomless grief, notwithstanding the gusts of rage along the way.
On this occasion, as before, the habitation of the role is what counts, not pronouns, which remain as they were. And perhaps because Ms. Warner has twice previously directed “Lear,” she communicates a feeling for the play from the inside out. I’ve rarely heard the multiple set pieces in this play sound more conversational and matter-of-fact, as if the speech were second nature to the speaker and not some sort of pileup of well-known quotations.
One only wishes that the storm scene wasn’t quite so busy competing with the actors’ voices, however satisfying the squall is as a piece of total theater in which Jean Kalman’s crystalline lighting, Mel Mercier’s sound design, and the projection work of 59 Productions transmit a visual apocalypse: an already-spare stage giving way to an image that evokes a homeless encampment or the Jungle in Calais postdemolition.
Ms. Jackson is the story here, of course, but the starry supporting cast includes Rhys Ifans’s towering, furry-chested Fool, a sidekick to Lear who is for a change both genuinely funny and truly anarchic: He appears sporting a Superman cloak and, later, a joker’s mask.
Simon Manyonda’s malevolent Edmund is all appetite — he works out while delivering his lines — while Jane Horrocks’s vampy sex kitten of a Regan complements Celia Imrie’s Goneril, forever appearing drink in hand, clearly guzzling her way to an early grave.
And by the time Lear reaches his fabled end, Ms. Jackson dragged in on a tarpaulin for the character’s final scene, the question that surrounded this staging in advance has long been answered. At a time when many of her colleagues have called it quits, Ms. Jackson is back with us and in fighting form — a loss to politics, perhaps, but in every way a gain to art.