The Learning Network|Do Your Parents Spy on You?
Do Your Parents Spy on You?
Do your parents keep track of your whereabouts through the location-tracking feature of your phone? Do they look at your social media accounts or read your texts or emails? And if so, do you mind?
She and I have both tracked the whereabouts of our 13-year-old daughter using her phone to reassure ourselves that she was on her way home from school or a trip to the store.
When did you start working for the National Security Agency, I’ve asked myself in jest.
Most Americans don’t like the idea of their government spying on their internet activities, and a lot of them have misgivings about companies tracking their online habits for commercial purposes. But when they are presented with the tools and opportunity to play Big Brother with others in their family, it’s tough for some to resist.
The answer depends on whom you ask. Strong believers in privacy reject the premise of the question outright, while others believe it is possible if consent, trust and respect are involved.
... Parents now routinely keep tabs on their children’s digital behavior in one form or another. A Pew Research Center survey of adults with children 13 to 17 years old published this year found that 61 percent of parents checked the websites that their teenagers visited, 60 percent visited their social media accounts and 48 percent looked through their phone calls and messages. The portion that tracked their teenagers’ whereabouts through their cellphones was 16 percent.
— What kind of tabs do your parents or guardians keep on your digital behavior? How do you know? What aspects of your online behavior do they monitor?
— Have you and your family discussed this topic openly, or do your parents check up on you surreptitiously?
— However your parents handle this, what effect have their actions had on you? For instance, if they have a hands-off policy and do not track you in any way, has that made you more independent — or has it led you to do things you regret? If they do track you in some way, how do you think that has affected your relationship with them?
— What degree of digital “spying” do you think you’ll do with your own children? Why?
