MONDAY PUZZLE — The theme of today’s puzzle will come as no surprise to those of you who know what constructor Bruce Haight does for a living. As he says below in his notes, he’s an ophthalmologist, so he was born to make a puzzle like this one. Frankly, I’m surprised he didn’t submit it sooner.
You won’t see why until you get to the revealer in the last Across entry. The theme will seem like your average Monday weight for most of the solve, but the payoff really ties things together.
Dr. Haight offers us a set of five theme entries that consists of two-word phrases whose first letters all begin with the letters “I” and “C.” I liked the fact that four of the five theme entries are unique and they’re all lively phrases, especially INNER CHILD.
So we have an “I C” theme, but what makes that special? Well, Dr. Haight ties it together by noting that “I C” is a sound alike for the common phrase I SEE (67A). That’s not a bad way to start our solving week.
■ 1A: Even if you’re not into jazz, you should know ETTA James. Ms. James is the official jazz chanteuse of the New York Times crossword, having appeared in the puzzle many times.
■ 58A: The IVORY COAST is typically rendered in its French name, the Côte d’Ivoire.
■ 1D: “Prayer hands” and “heart eyes” are EMOJI (yes, that’s the plural). They look like this and this.
■ 3D: You would think a nice phrase like THANKS A LOT would get used more often, wouldn’t you? It hasn’t been seen in the New York Times crossword since 1974.
■ 52D: Beethoven may have been honoring a woman named Elisabeth Roeckel with his work, “Für Elise,” although the true identity of the woman has been a mystery for the ages.
Considering my day job — ophthalmology — and the fact that “I SEE” is the tenth most common four-letter entry in crosswords, it’s a wonder it took me so long to come up with this theme idea.
Four of these theme entries had never appeared in a New York Times crossword and two had never appeared in any big-name crossword, but fortunately the XWord Info word list had all of them. INTERNET CAFEs are on the wane, but 10 years ago when Wi-Fi was less available, they were big.
I submitted this puzzle by snail mail on July 7, four months before publication. It was accepted on July 22, mostly because David Steinberg was doing an internship with Will and Joel and blasted through boatloads of mail. Favorite clues that ended up on the editing room floor: “Spaceship-shaped thing from Mars” for M AND M, and “You can bet that they’re wrong” for ODDS MAKERS. I suggested maybe cluing I SEE as “when doubled: ‘Aha! The puzzle theme!’” , but I was outvoted.