To drink one 50-year-old wine as it evolves in the glass over the course of a meal can be an intensely personal, emotional journey. To taste 30 old bottles is overwhelming and, in the end, perhaps, a dreadful disservice to the wines and their long-departed makers.
But 14 bottles can be a solid history lesson that gives a clear picture of another era while offering a profound opportunity to receive and retain the individual messages each wine has to offer.
So it was with keen anticipation that I arrived at Maialino, a restaurant facing Gramercy Park, in early November, where a back room had been commandeered for a group of Barolo lovers to gather for a dinner featuring bottles from the great 1964 vintage.
The crowd of about 20 included fans like Scott Handwerker, a lawyer who especially prizes old Barolos; Gregory Dal Piaz, who writes often about Italian wines; Nicholas Russotto, a music administrator, who came with Garrick Ohlsson, the concert pianist; and Jamie Wolff, a partner in Chambers Street Wines, which organized the dinner.
Barolo is one of a handful of unfortified wines with the ability to age and evolve gracefully and beautifully. Bordeaux and Burgundy, of course, both red and white, would head that list. Champagne, too, along with sweet chenin blancs from the Loire Valley, German rieslings and Tokaji aszu from Hungary.
Of all those wines, Barolo in 1964 was probably the least known and least valued, even in its home territory, the Langhe region of northwestern Italy.
Paradoxically, if the people of the Langhe preferred to spend their money on dolcetto and barbera, another everyday wine of the region, it was partly because Barolo seemed too good for daily consumption.
Barolo in 1964 was a region in the early stages of a profound transition, yet its winemaking had more in common with the decades before World War II than with those leading up to the 21st century. Few wine producers at the time grew their own grapes, instead buying them from farmers who had little incentive not to maximize their yields at the expense of quality. It was not until the 1970s and ’80s that many growers began to bottle their own wines, and many producers began to acquire vineyards.
In the cellar, most producers had already traded up to Slavonian oak vats for fermentation, leaving behind containers made of the local chestnut. Temperature-controlled steel tanks were still to come.
Most likely, these producers allowed their wines to macerate with the tannin-rich skins of the nebbiolo grape for far longer periods than today, although some had already begun to reduce the maceration times in hopes of suppler wines. After fermentation, the wines were aged in barrels for prolonged periods, sometimes five years or more.
The results were powerfully structured wines that were sternly austere when young, and which could take years to soften and emerge from their tannic cocoons. The ’64 vintage, which Barolo producers at the time thought would be superb, was typical.
Was it the best vintage of the decade? At the dinner some argued for 1961, and others for ’67. Up until the mid-’80s, few decades had more than two or three fine years. Improved farming practices and cellar techniques, along with climate change and economic prosperity, have made it much easier to make good wine even in challenging years.
The 14 wines were served in four flights, grouped roughly by geography, though this was sometimes hard to conjure as most producers back then blended grapes from the different villages of Barolo into one complete wine: Castiglione Falletto for structure and power, for example, with La Morra for delicacy and beguiling aromas. The trend toward single-vineyard Barolos, which are common today, was still in its infancy.
Mr. Wolff said the wines had been acquired from private cellars in Italy, where they had rested since their original purchase.
“One advantage is they didn’t travel across the Atlantic before there was temperature control,” he said. The prolonged heat of that journey could easily have marred the wines.
He had two bottles of each of the 14 wines, plenty to provide us with good drinks of each. The wines had been decanted hours before by Jenni Guizio, Maialino’s wine director.
Even so, with wines in their sixth decade, every bottle is a gamble. Of the 28 bottles, four seemed off, which Mr. Wolff said was not a bad statistic for 50-year-old wines.
Nonetheless, some of the wines were unforgettably gorgeous, beautiful missives from a year when the world salved its grief over the 1963 assassination of President Kennedy with the balm of Beatlemania.
Maybe so, but for me, two wines were even more moving. A Ceretto riserva was pale and sheer in texture, beautifully floral, yet had a tensile strength and profound minerality, tasting of steely red fruit, a flavor that lingered in the mouth long after I swallowed, what the Italians call “retrogusto,” or aftertaste.
Best of all, if one can say such a thing among great wines, was the Cantina Mascarello, which in 1964 was run by the father-and-son team of Giulio and Bartolo Mascarello, and which in the 1970s came to be known as Cantina Bartolo Mascarello.
This wine was pale in color, yet absolutely fresh, with aromas and flavors of roses, minerals and a hint of tar. It was pretty, deep, delicious and resolutely soulful. The cantina, now run by Bartolo’s daughter, Maria-Téresa, continues to be known as Bartolo Mascarello, though he died in 2005.
How could a wine seem so simultaneously mature and young?
One of the wines, at least, from Marchesi di Barolo, seemed suspiciously young. It was improbably dark, rich and fruity. We all assumed it either was not a ’64 or had been adulterated by wine from other regions, as was sometimes done to beef up wines that seemed thin.
Another bottle, a Fontanafredda riserva, also seemed too young, though it was more clearly Barolo. Mr. Dal Piaz speculated that it had been topped off by the producer in the 1970s before it was sold.
Other highlights included a supple Cordero di Montezemolo, which had the aroma of soft leather; a Vietti that was as pale as a dark rosé yet dense with earthy, meaty flavors; a floral, sweetly fruited Cavallotto riserva; and a savory, fresh, complex Franco Fiorina, a producer I had never encountered before.
Rounding out the 14 producers were a graceful Prunotto; a Marcarini from the Brunate vineyard, which one person said, “smells like something I would want to eat,” but seemed a bit strident to me, and three wines that seemed a little off or musty, from Francesco Rinaldi, Luigi Einaudi and G. B. Burlotto, a producer whose wines I ordinarily love.
The exhilarating qualities of the best wines made up for these disappointments. They offered a trip through time to an era when so many wines still spoke only the local dialect. A half-century later, they could be understood around the world.