THURSDAY PUZZLE — There is a point in developing one’s solving skills where you finally get good enough to drop in quite a few answers without having to think about them very much and that, to be honest, is when most people get a little cocky. There’s nothing wrong with that; confidence is a wonderful thing, especially when you’ve spent so much time battling the grid.
Sooner or later, however, you will meet your Waterloo, so to speak. For me, that Waterloo is any puzzle with a rebus element, or entries where more than one letter (or number or symbol) could fit inside one square. I’m just blind to them. I always know that something is wrong, because even though I think I know some of the answers, I cannot fill in my normal amount of gimmes or even guesses. My frustration level climbs. More chocolate than usual is required.
But not today, my friends! I zeroed in on that “AG” rebus in Mel Rosen’s puzzle like a hunting dog, and it was the most satisfying feeling ever.
Was it just easier? I would imagine it depends largely on what’s in your wheelhouse. But I’m going to go ahead and award myself a silver medal (for argentum, abbreviated AG) for tumbling to the trick early.
It’s a shame that all four of the Across double rebuses didn’t have one AG in each word (BAGGAGE CLAIM contains both AGs in one word) and it seemed a bit odd to have the word AGAIN repeated in 27A to take advantage of the AG. It’s a very lively phrase, though.
■ 6A: The word “Draft” can have multiple meanings, but today it means to take a large SWIG of liquid.
■ 19A: “E-con?” with a hyphen is not a class in economics, unless you are studying about how to get ripped off online. The answer here is SPAM, which is typically an online con.
■ 24A: #TodayILearned that the leader of our armed forces is some guy named ARNIE. In all seriousness, the “Noted ‘army’ leader” is Arnold “ARNIE” Palmer, the pro golfer who has a fan club and charitable foundation called ARNIE’s Army.
■ 44D: #NowIKnow that the “Gertrude of 1926 news” is Gertrude EDERLE, the first woman to swim the English Channel.
59D: At first, I honestly thought that “Golfo” was some sort of game, but it turns out that it’s actually Spanish for “gulf.” The answer is AGUA.
This “Silver Mine” puzzle was a long time in the making. The original construction had a “reveal” answer, but Will said he didn’t care for it. He suggested I redo the grid to (1) eliminate that answer and (2) replace the two theme answers that involved plurals, so I started over. I was happy to find the two 13-letter answers, and this was the final result.
As he had indicated once in the Cruciverb-L discussion, Will has a big backlog of rebus puzzles, and this one proves the point: It was accepted in December of 2014! Patience is a virtue.
Oh, by the way, it’s no surprise that many of my clues were improved. A lot.