BERLIN — Bar Convent Berlin, a sprawling trade show held in October in a former train station here, heralded every sort of spirit. There was a booth pouring a new German gin. There was a stand mixing daiquiris with rum from Cuba. Nearby was a new German gin. Around the corner, a Campari bar was handing out Negronis. Further down the aisle was a new German gin.
Notice a pattern? Germany, the land of beer, riesling and schnapps, has gone gin mad. In the last decade, the number of small gin distillers has exploded.
An exact figure is hard to pin down, but many here say there are now hundreds of gin makers. And the nation is giving England and Spain a run for their money in its love of the gin and tonic.
Mr. Meyer said the new crush on juniper is all part of the rising fortunes of gin worldwide, a boom helped along by the classic cocktail movement, which has prompted drinkers to rediscover the spirit. The makers of the Duke Gin, in Munich, credited Germans’ new interest in the provenance of what they are eating and drinking.
The Duke, first produced in 2008, is among the more prominent of the new gins. Many bartenders and distillers agree that the rush to gin began with Adler Berlin Dry Gin in 2005.
But the best-known brand so far is the fancifully named Monkey 47, made in the Black Forest. It quickly attracted a following after arriving in 2010. This year, after years of climbing sales, the brand was bought by Pernod Ricard, the liquor conglomerate, making it the German gin most widely available in the United States.
Other notable labels include Siegfried Rheinland Dry Gin, Gin Sul from Hamburg and Windspiel Gin from the Volcanic Eifel region.
“I have seen gins come and go for more than six years, and there comes a time you stop counting,” said Alexander Stein, the chief executive of Monkey 47.
And Stephen Garbe, the founder and chief executive of Gin Sul, said the momentum shows no signs of slowing. “There are a lot of bandwagoners, late-movers and followers,” he said.