Updated, Nov. 15.
We have reordered this lesson to reflect the results of the election.
• Bring your classes to answer our Student Opinion question, What Is Your Reaction to the Results of the 2016 Election?
• Please tell us how you’ll be talking about this “stunning culmination of an explosive, populist and polarizing campaign” in your classrooms, and we’ll update this post with your answers.
Donald John Trump was elected the 45th president of the United States on Nov. 8 in a stunning culmination of an explosive, populist and polarizing campaign that took relentless aim at the institutions and long-held ideals of American democracy.
Donald J. Trump’s stunning election victory on Tuesday night rippled way beyond the nation’s boundaries, upending an international order that prevailed for decades and raising profound questions about America’s place in the world.
Do you agree? Students, what do you think a Trump presidency means for you, your community, our country and our world? What questions does it raise? What do you predict will happen in the days and weeks to come?
Teachers, we also invite you to let us know how you will be teaching about this “stunning culmination of an explosive, populist and polarizing campaign,” and we will update this post with your answers.
“What are the most important qualities of a national leader?” Seventh-grade students in my World Cultures class wrote for ten minutes about that prompt as soon as they walked into the room today. One of the essential questions around which I build my course is, “What makes a good leader and how do leaders come to power?” Situating the election results within that framework made sense. After students wrote about the prompt, we went around the room and shared one quality each. We used those qualities to write a letter to the president elect, expressing our hopes and dreams for the United States over the next four years and letting Mr. Trump know the kind of president we hope he will be. Tomorrow, we’re diving back into Ancient Egypt, considering the same qualities as they regard the pharaohs of Egypt.
My junior AP Language class, here in California, had a class discussion about empathy, and perspectives that are so different between the two parties, as well as in America as a whole. Many of my students were grieving, as supporters of Clinton, and confused. We cited quotes from the TED talk that we felt were important this morning, and the students gave their perspective on what ideas and issues were important. We will continue our discussion next week, and work to write research papers on understanding what divides our country in regard to race, gender, politics and such. We also talked a bit about how our current media and culture encourages each of us to surround ourselves with like-minded people, and are often unaware of those who have a different view.
Round 1: How are you feeling now? You might feel proud or you might feel scared; you might feel excited or you might feel sad; whatever you’re feeling, let it flow onto the paper so you’re in a place to share, think, and move forward.
Round 2: Choice, depending on what you need.
a) What do you think may happen? What are you afraid of? What are you looking forward to?
b) What does “power” mean to you? How does this election make you feel empowered or disempowered?
Round 3: We all need to remember that as powerless as we may feel as (insert age), we aren’t helpless. We have influence in our homes, our communities, our schools, our neighborhoods. What can we do here and now, and in the future, to make our spaces safe; to make our world a safe place for everyone? To make it what we want it to be? Brainstorm on paper, then we’ll make a class poster.
The kids who usually hate to write and talk throughout wrote diligently and with intense focus. While they shared, I used the smart board and computer to pull up graphics or facts, to fact-check, and to illustrate or explain what they didn’t understand. At some point in the discussion, they became aware that at least some of what they said was not borne out by what they were seeing. This led us to discuss the need to question everything; to research and cross-reference; to believe anything they choose, but to look for evidence before they form an opinion. They loved the idea of questioning everything.
They came up with great lists, ranging from researching to voting to praying to talking to bullies (if they seemed not to realize that they were hurting people) to standing next to someone being bullied to protesting to petitioning to becoming doctors, lawyers, or teachers to help people…We all needed to end on a positive, empowering note.
What are you doing? Tell us in the comments, or write to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| In the days and hours before...
Understand the electoral map and make your own predictions.
The image above shows how the nation voted in 2012, down to the individual ZIP code. While we’re not asking you to get nearly that detailed, we are inviting you to map your predictions — and looking at how the nation voted in the last presidential election can help.
What states reliably vote Republican in presidential elections? What states reliably vote Democrat? What states are tossup or swing states, where either Donald J. Trump or Hillary Clinton might win? How will those states determine the outcome of this election?
Individually, with a partner or in small groups, map what you think will happen on election night by coloring states red for the Republican candidate and blue for the Democratic candidate on a blank United States map, along with your guess for what will be the final Electoral College tally. Another option is to fill out an online map, such as ABC News’s interactive map or FANschool’s Election Challenge. Finally, post your work publicly, perhaps in your classroom or elsewhere in your school, then see who gets closest to the actual results when the election is over.
You can watch “Electoral College 101,” a seven-minute film by the political humorist Mo Rocca, to learn more and consider whether it is truly the best way to choose our president.
In the latest episode of the Op-Docs series “Electoral Dysfunction,” the political humorist Mo Rocca consults a third-grade class on the fairness of the Electoral College.
Then, before you make your final predictions, consult The Upshot’s regularly updated “Who Will Be President?” page, which draws on The New York Times’s state-by-states polling estimates or forecasts from other organizations to make as educated a guess as possible. And play around with this Times interactive to explore the 1,024 possible paths for Mr. Trump or Mrs. Clinton to win.
As you watch...
React to what you see.
Here’s when the polls will close across the nation, and how we’ll know who won.
We know teachers all over will be assigning their students to watch the returns on election night, but we’re hoping you’ll tell us what you’re having students do, and we’ll add your ideas to this post.
For instance, will your students be responding in real time on a class blog or via social media? Will they be keeping track of the math? Will they be preparing for something you’ll do in class the next day? Let us know.
Follow the Senate races too.
It’s not just the presidency that’s at stake in this election — control of the Senate is another big story. Going into the election, Republicans hold 54 seats while Democrats hold 44 seats, with two additional senators caucusing with the Democratic Party. The Times has identified seven Senate races that are competitive.
Choose one or more of the 34 Senate races by clicking on a state in this Times interactive and find out who is running and whom The Times projects to win. Or, concentrate on these 10 races that will determine whether Democrats will regain control of the Senate. As the results come in, find out if The Times’s projections are correct, and use this interactive Senate map by 270towin.com to track the results.
Who ends up controlling the Senate? Why does it matter? Why does party control of the majority in the Senate and House have a large say in whether the next president is able to get things accomplished?
Evaluate the reporting.
On Election Day 2000, television news organizations staged a collective drag race on the crowded highway of democracy, recklessly endangering the electoral process, the political life of the country, and their own credibility, all for reasons that may be conceptually flawed and commercially questionable.
“And as television news gears up for 2016’s big finale, an intense public distrust in the media is threatening the networks’ traditional role as election night scorekeeper,” writes The Times.
How cautious are different news sources being during this election? Do you find that they are pausing to make sure their reporting is accurate, or do you think they are sloppy or even reckless in their reporting? On election night, flip between different sources to see if you notice a difference in the tone or substance of the report. Which do you find most and least trustworthy?
Separate fake news from real news.
In the last couple of weeks, Facebook, Twitter and other social media outlets have exposed millions of Americans to false stories asserting that: the Clinton campaign’s pollster, Joel Benenson, wrote a secret memo detailing plans to “salvage” Hillary Clinton’s candidacy by launching a radiological attack to halt voting (merrily shared on Twitter by Roger Stone, an informal adviser to the Trump campaign); the Clinton campaign senior strategist John Podesta practiced an occult ritual involving various bodily fluids; Mrs. Clinton is paying public pollsters to skew results (shared on Twitter by Donald Trump Jr.); there is a trail of supposedly suspicious deaths of myriad Clinton foes (which The Times’s Frank Bruni heard repeated in a hotel lobby in Ohio).
The Times invites readers to help debunk fake news on Election Day by submitting any stories, social media posts or memes you see that aim to purposely misinform, hoax or frighten the public. And we have a lesson plan to help: Fake News vs. Real News: Determining the Reliability of Sources.
Remember history with 41 elections as reported on the front page of The New York Times.
Click through this slide show of images to see front pages for every election since Franklin Pierce in 1852 — and to read commentary on each by presidential historian Michael Beschloss.
A “Rigged” Election?
American elections are, unlike those in many democracies, largely decentralized, rendering the possibility of large-scale fraud extraordinarily unlikely. Further, the balloting in many of the hardest-fought states will be overseen by Republican officials, individuals who would be highly unlikely to consent to helping Mrs. Clinton rig the vote.
There is, however, evidence that some state election officials have attempted to make voting more difficult for specific groups. For example, a federal appeals court struck down a North Carolina law this summer, saying its provisions deliberately “target African-Americans with almost surgical precision” in an effort to depress black turnout at the polls.
The Times also reports that federal and state officials, facing the possibility of a determined cyberthreat for the first time, are focusing on five possible ways the election could be hacked. Here is a look at their biggest concerns, which include an internet disruption, more WikiLeaks releases and the possibility that a foreign power e could interfere with voter registration rolls.
As you watch on election night, and follow the news in the days after, look for and evaluate claims that this election was in any way tampered with. What is the evidence? What can be done if the claim is true?
Teachers, remember to let us know how you are teaching about the results of this election, and we’ll update this post with your answers.