Their first original musical, “Dear Evan Hansen,” a daringly heart-wrenching show that explores the charged interplay between collective grief and social media after a misconstrued high school suicide, begins previews Monday, Nov. 14 and is generating prize chatter even before it opens on Broadway Dec. 4. Five days later, their first live-action Hollywood movie, “La La Land,” a romantic Ryan Gosling-Emma Stone musical fantasia for which they wrote the lyrics, opens; that film was the hit of this year’s festival circuit.
But that’s not all. In an era in which the film and television industries are showing a renewed interest in musicals, they have written all the songs for a movie starring Hugh Jackman — a P. T. Barnum biopic called “The Greatest Showman” — which is now in rehearsal and scheduled for release late next year by 20th Century Fox. Disney has hired them to write new songs for a live-action remake of “Snow White.” Oh, and they even have a song in “Trolls,” the DreamWorks Animation comedy that opened early this month.
Musical theater history is peopled by composer-lyricist pairings. And even before they graduated from the University of Michigan, Pasek and Paul — that’s the branding they fell into as 19-year-olds, their surnames in alphabetical order — have been prospectively placed in the pantheon. “Rodgers & Hart. Lerner & Loewe. Pasek & Paul? It has a nice ring to it,” said a university publication in 2006.
They are handsome and charming, quick-witted and exuberant, observant, obsessive, and, of course, neurotic. Mr. Pasek writes words, and Mr. Paul writes music, but they have opted, right from the beginning, to share credit for both elements of their songs.
They estimate that they spend 350 days a year together, for six to 12 hours at a stretch, sending texts and video clips back and forth when they are not in the same room, and even sometimes when they are.
Although their sensibility is contemporary, they are deeply rooted in the musical theater tradition, and their sound is somewhere on the border between show tunes and pop — they are not part of the hip-hop revolution on Broadway.
They have proven especially deft at musicalizing emotional yearning: The 11 o’clock number in “Dear Evan Hansen” is a poignant effort by an apologetic single mother (Rachel Bay Jones) to comfort her disconsolate son (Ben Platt). In “La La Land,” the climactic song is a stirring recollection by an aspiring actress (Ms. Stone) reflecting on inspiration at a casting call.
“I think we’re attracted to material that’s hopeful and messy, and in that mess, there’s an attempt at getting at truth,” Mr. Pasek said.
The Tony-winning composers Benj Pasek and Justin Paul joined us on Facebook Live to talk about the songs that didn't make it into their musical "Dear Evan Hansen."
Mr. Pasek also sang with a parent: His mother is a developmental psychologist and professor with a propensity for bursting into song. (“She’s like a real-life musical theater character, in the best possible way,” he said.) She wrote and performed songs from a child’s point of view (“They were a big hit on the synagogue circuit,” he said), and he remembers guest starring with her at about age 7.
They compare themselves to brothers, who bicker and bond, knowing their relationship will endure. A recent fight, over whose bad habits were to blame for their difficulty replacing the final first act song in “Dear Evan Hansen,” sent Mr. Pasek stalking out of their Columbus Circle studio into the street, but then, 10 minutes later, calling Mr. Paul for a lengthy air-clearing that prompted the pair to ditch the disputed number and start over.
Mr. Pasek and Mr. Paul met the summer before college, at a freshman orientation weekend, and connected over a shared sense of humor, a passion for the work of Jason Robert Brown and an obsession with “Merrily We Roll Along.” (The title “Edges” alludes to a “Merrily” lyric.) Mr. Pasek wanted to record some songs he had written as a high school senior, and he recruited Mr. Paul as an arranger and accompanist; with that, their collaboration began.
Raised in the digital age, and aware of the role social media played in fueling their popularity, they have demonstrated an ease promoting their work — at first with CDs and a homespun tour of “Edges,” and more recently with producers, performers and journalists — that has served them well. “They’re salesmen, and always have been — they know how to explain what they’re doing and why they’re doing it,” Mr. Blaemire said.
Michael Gracey, the director of “The Greatest Showman,” had imagined asking a number of songwriters to contribute songs to his film, but, as he talked with Mr. Pasek and Mr. Paul about the movie, abandoned that plan to give them all the work. He even videotaped their songwriting sessions, convinced that they would be of significance for posterity. “I can’t even begin to describe the enormous impact those two have had on this film,” he said.
The director of “La La Land,” Damien Chazelle, had a similar experience: He was looking for seasoned lyricists who could write words for songs composed by Justin Hurwitz when Mr. Pasek and Mr. Paul, seeking the gig, gave him proposed lyrics for a song called “City of Stars.” That became a signature number. “It was screamingly obvious that we had stumbled onto a gold mine with these guys, and we brought them on right away,” Mr. Chazelle said.
Jeff Marx, the Tony Award-winning co-creator of “Avenue Q,” was equally convinced — so sure that he placed a bet on them. A Michigan alumnus, he had taken on Mr. Pasek as an assistant in the summer of 2005. (“I looked at his Friendster profile and he seemed like a nice kid.”) The next year, when Mr. Pasek asked to return, Mr. Marx told him he needed to stop interning and focus on writing shows with Mr. Paul.
Mr. Paul couldn’t afford to write full time — he needed to earn money for school — but Mr. Marx was so intent that he offered to give Mr. Paul money in lieu of what he would have earned from a summer job. Then, when Mr. Paul said he was unwilling to accept charity, Mr. Marx repositioned his offer as a wager, staking him $7,000, to be repaid only if Mr. Pasek and Mr. Paul made it to Broadway within the next decade.
It happened, but in an unexpected way.
They had a frustrating experience adapting the Roald Dahl children’s book “James and the Giant Peach,” which was mounted at Goodspeed Musicals in 2010, and has been revised since. They remain proud of their songs, and the show is still being produced at small theaters, but the Dahl estate has decided to restrict professional productions to make room for a different adaptation.
Their musical version of the 1991 film “Dogfight” was presented at Second Stage, Off Broadway, in 2012, and was generally admired, but not well enough to make the leap to Broadway.
But after the initial songwriter for the adaptation of the 1983 family film “A Christmas Story” was let go, they were brought in — and nominated for a Tony Award — when the show, which was developed to tour, ended up transferring to Broadway in 2012.
Six years after Mr. Marx’s bet, Mr. Paul handed him a check at the opening night party. “My money was safe,” Mr. Marx said.
The new show was borne from an observation Mr. Pasek had about how his own high school community reacted when a former student died unexpectedly; he noted the desire of many, including himself, to be counted among the bereaved for someone they did not know well.
Mr. Pasek and Mr. Paul had talked about the idea for years when a producer, Stacey Mindich, who had helped commission “Dogfight,” offered to finance their dream project. She introduced them to the work of a playwright, Steven Levenson, who became the “Dear Evan Hansen” book writer, turning their musings into a narrative.
But still — on one particularly busy recent day, they started in Dumbo, Brooklyn, at 8:30 a.m. for a “Greatest Showman” script meeting; traveled to Midtown to tweak “Dear Evan Hansen” arrangements with their orchestrator, Alex Lacamoire; split up so Mr. Paul could go to a Chelsea studio to record tracks for “Showman” while Mr. Pasek sat in on auditions for Mr. Platt’s understudy; went to MoMA for a screening of “La La Land” hosted by Jennifer Lawrence; and then to an after-party at the Rainbow Room’s Bar SixtyFive.
Most days aren’t nearly that varied or that glamorous. And at the start of each project, it is still the two of them, trying to figure out how to tell a story through music.
“Nothing changes — the next time we have to write a song we’re going to sit down at a piano and bang our heads against it for a long time and talk ourselves blue in the face about what it should be,” Mr. Paul said.
