New Yorkers are finding catharsis for their post-election emotions in an unexpected place: a subway station. The street artist Matthew Chavez took sticky notes and a pen into the Sixth Avenue station at 14th Street and told passers-by to write messages to stick on the wall.
To learn how New Yorkers feel in the wake of the presidential election, you may want to visit a certain tunnel between two Manhattan subway stations.
The tunnel, which connects the 14th Street stations at Seventh Avenue and Avenue of the Americas, is plastered with thousands of words and phrases scrawled on pastel-colored notes. There are messages of love and support, of fear and anger and hope, all written by strangers to one another.
Anyone can post one.
The project was the idea of Matthew Chavez, an artist known as Levee, who said he felt that New Yorkers, never shy about their thoughts or feelings, needed a place to vent their emotions after the surprising defeat of Hillary Clinton, the Democratic nominee. More than 80 percent of voters in New York City did not vote for the Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump, and for many residents, Mr. Trump’s victory has cast a pall over the city.
Mr. Chavez said he arrived at the tunnel on Wednesday with a stack of sticky notes, some pens and an open mind.
“Express yourself,” he posted on the wall. Thousands of people responded to his offer by day’s end.
Since then, the wall has become one of New York’s most significant public forums of late — a tribute to the city’s diverse voices, a monument to its drive to speak out and a testament to the strength that New Yorkers, in moments of intense emotion, often draw from one another.
Other comments capture a range of reactions to the election’s outcome. Hope: “Keep your head high.” Respect: “It’s an honor to be in this struggle with you.” Humor: “Love is the new black.” Calls to action: “Mobilize.” One note shows a simply drawn heart, broken and bleeding. There are many references that celebrate New York’s diversity.
“I wanted to give people the opportunity to express something without talking about it,” said Mr. Chavez, who also does a performance piece in the tunnel, “Subway Therapy,” in which he plays a therapist at a card table to whom people can unburden themselves.
There were also a few messages in support of Mr. Trump.
Still, most of the messages reflected a constructive tone, a stark contrast to the hostile messages targeting minorities that have appeared in some places since the election.
On Thursday night, a large group of people gathered near the wall. Many who stopped said that writing a note had helped ease the sense of dread they had been carrying since Mr. Trump’s victory.
Standing in the tunnel, a college student from Mexico who identified herself only as Linet wiped away a tear. She said she was not a legal resident of the United States. Seeing that her concern about the future was not unique — many of the notes expressed similar worries — gave her some comfort, she said.
Giona Maiarelli, a graphic designer originally from Italy, was one of many who said the dark mood that seemed to be blanketing much of the city reminded him of the period after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
As more commuters paused to look at the notes on Thursday, the crowd grew so thick that it nearly blocked the tunnel. Other people pushed through, muttering and cursing under their breath.
