BEIJING — Pope Francis has spoken of his admiration for Chinese culture. He has greeted a delegation from China, accepting a silk imprint of an ancient inscription about Christianity. And he had his picture taken with a Chinese bishop in St. Peter’s Square last month.
Now, he appears to be considering more significant action: a grand compromise with China’s Communist leaders to heal the bitter, decades-old rift that has divided generations of Chinese Catholics and prevented the pope from openly exercising authority in the world’s most populous country.
“Most agree that the two sides must talk,” said a priest in Hebei, a northern province with many “underground” Catholics who reject state oversight.
The Vatican has long dreamed of returning to China, bringing the underground church out of the shadows and healing divisions among Chinese Catholics. Under Francis, negotiations with Beijing over reconciliation have gained momentum.
“We need patience, a lot of patience,” Cardinal Pietro Parolin, the Vatican secretary of state, who has overseen talks with China, told reporters this month in Bologna, Italy.
Though expectations have been building, a breakthrough has been elusive given the Communist government’s deep suspicion of foreign and religious influences as subversive, and the fears of Chinese Catholics wary of state interference in their faith, said people closely following the talks. “There are still difficult issues that are not yet agreed upon,” said the Rev. Jeroom Heyndrickx, the acting director of the Ferdinand Verbiest Institute in Belgium, which studies Catholicism in China.
Most Chinese bishops are recognized by both the Vatican and the Chinese authorities, but there are several in the state-backed church who are excommunicated and working without papal approval, including some rumored to have broken their vows of chastity and fathered children.
There are also more than two dozen underground bishops, many of whom are viewed with suspicion by the government and a few of whom are believed to be in prison.
Any deal would have to decide what happens to both groups. “The Vatican can’t be seen as selling out people who have suffered and gone to jail for their faith,” said a Vatican official, who requested anonymity to speak candidly about the secretive talks.
There is little doubt of Francis’ enthusiasm for China.
In 2014, he sent a greeting to President Xi while flying through Chinese airspace on his way to South Korea. And his encounter with Joseph Xu Honggen, the bishop of Suzhou, in St. Peter’s Square last month was said to be the first public meeting between a pope and a bishop resident in mainland China since the Communist Revolution.
“For me, China has always been a reference point of greatness,” the 79-year-old pontiff told an Italian reporter in January.
Mr. Xi has repeatedly warned against religion’s being used to undermine Communist rule, and his government has torn down crosses from Protestant churches in eastern China and instituted new controls on worship.
But an environmental foundation run by an official with longstanding ties to Mr. Xi attended a Vatican conference in September and presented the pope with a gift heavy with symbolism: a silk drape bearing an inscription from an ancient tablet that records the presence of Christianity in China nearly 1,400 years ago.
Already, most bishops appointed by the state-controlled church quietly win the pope’s approval before ordination, or seek and receive papal forgiveness and acceptance afterward. But Beijing sometimes appoints bishops against the Vatican’s wishes, and the Vatican sometimes appoints bishops without Beijing’s approval. In August, Cardinal John Tong, the bishop of Hong Kong, disclosed in a pastoral letter that “the Chinese government is now willing to reach an understanding” on the issue. But he also acknowledged concerns among members of the underground church and their supporters.
Hundreds of underground Catholic clergy were jailed under Mao’s rule. But today, the term “underground” is often a misnomer, because many unregistered churches operate openly and are warily tolerated by local officials. Underground clergy still risk harassment and detention, though, especially if they resist demands to join the state-run Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association.
A year ago, Pedro Wei Heping, also known as Wei Heping, an underground priest in northwest China, was found dead in a river. The police said he had drowned himself, but supporters said suicide was unthinkable and suspected foul play. “China is negotiating with the Vatican, but the political environment is tightening,” said Sister Beatrice Leung, a professor in Taiwan who studies Chinese Catholicism.
Supporters of Francis’ approach said the Chinese church was in danger of splintering further if there was not a compromise. Rival claims to lead some Chinese dioceses and the absence of bishops in others have left many priests and parishioners isolated or feuding, they said. There are as many as 70 dioceses in China without a bishop, said Anthony S. K. Lam, the executive secretary of the Holy Spirit Study Center in Hong Kong.
There is a precedent for a papal compromise with a Communist government. In the 1990s, the Vatican reached a deal effectively giving the Vietnamese government a veto over the pope’s appointment of bishops.
Cardinal Tong, the Hong Kong bishop, noted the Vietnam model in his pastoral letter, and appeared to suggest that Francis could make appointments based on the recommendations of a local bishops’ conference. But he noted that a legitimate conference would have to include China’s underground bishops and exclude state-backed bishops found unacceptable by the pope.
This month, a bishop was ordained in Changzhi, a city in northwest China, with the approval of both the Holy See and the Chinese authorities.
