For decades, if there was an empty bench on Bedford Avenue in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, Leonora Russo was there to take it. With her electric dresses, chunky jewelry and oversize, Elton John-esque sunglasses, Ms. Russo was a familiar sight in the neighborhood’s ever-changing landscape.
If there is a tale of two Williamsburgs, Ms. Russo occupied the realm alongside the waiters and the shopkeepers. At Vinnie’s Pizzeria, on Bedford Avenue near North Ninth Street, a photograph of Ms. Russo in a bright red dress still hangs on the wall.
As the neighborhood became more popular, she was featured in short documentaries, magazines and blogs. Some referred to her as the Queen of Williamsburg.
Up and down Bedford Avenue last week, Ms. Russo’s death this month was announced on pink fliers taped to lampposts. She died at New York University Medical Center in Manhattan after a short illness. She was 91.
Karen Holley recalled the first time Ms. Russo sauntered into her clothing shop, Lawanna’s, about 10 years ago. There had been a young man eyeballing a $50 silver skull ring he could not afford.
“She was our Iris Apfel,” she added, referring to the fashion icon.
Ms. Russo was born and raised on East 28th Street in Manhattan. Her parents were Sicilian immigrants. She had lived in her third-floor, rent-controlled railroad apartment on North 11th Street in Williamsburg for 68 years. Her sister, Marie Coradetti, 90, lives in Queens, and her brother, Ignacio Ferraro, 93, in Pennsylvania. Neither attended a memorial service for her on Monday night. Their mother had lived to be 102.
The service, organized by Ms. Russo’s nephew, John Labarac, who lives on Long Island, was held at Arthur’s Funeral Home in Greenpoint, Brooklyn. The crowd was sparse but diverse, a snapshot of both old and new Williamsburg. Many loved ones, who had left the city years ago, could not make it. Others were stuck at work, just down the street.
According to friends and relatives at the service, Ms. Russo had been a remarkable beauty in her youth. She was a singer and a dancer, even in old age, and had modeled before she married. Friends recalled her boasting about her extraordinary figure as a younger woman, and family legend has it that she had caused at least two car accidents in her day. She did not just stop traffic, they said, she crashed Cadillacs.
Ms. Russo dreamed of moving to Hollywood, friends said, to make it big as an actress. Instead, she married and settled into the apartment on North 11th Street, and had a son. Her husband, Gaspar, whom everyone called “Spotty,” died of cancer in the 1970s. Their son, Nicholas, died in the 1980s. Ms. Russo took a job as a school bus matron.
In 1989, William Basinski, a 58-year-old recording artist who now lives in Los Angeles, moved to Williamsburg. Late one night he was drinking beer with his friends in an old car he was restoring when Ms. Russo came walking down the blighted street. She leaned up against the fins of the car, as though sidling up to a bar, and introduced herself.
“‘I used to have a car just like this,’” Mr. Basinski recalled her saying. For decades afterward, she attended parties at his loft on North Ninth Street. When he opened a shop on Bedford Avenue, she was a daily presence there, too. They continued to have weekly phone conversations until her death.
“She would say the most outrageous things and we would laugh and laugh,” Mr. Basinski said through tears before the service, at a bar near where Ms. Russo had lived.
At the memorial service, Anna Gianfrate, 24, a photographer who moved to Brooklyn from Italy, recalled the day in 2011 when she met Ms. Russo. She was taking photos on Bedford Avenue when a brassy older woman shouted from a bench: “Hey you! What are you taking pictures of that garbage for? You should be photographing me!” Ms. Gianfrate spent the next two years photographing Ms. Russo, mostly in her home, and said she had been a grandmotherly figure.
After Ms. Russo’s remains are cremated, Mr. Labarac said he planned to discreetly scatter her ashes around Williamsburg.
