During their last two games, both victories, the Knicks have played some of their most resilient basketball of this still-emerging season. In defeating two possible playoff teams, the Knicks have generally looked cohesive and fluid and, for the most part, defensively stout. Coincidentally, they have done it without Joakim Noah, their marquee off-season signing.
Noah’s absence and the Knicks’ good play of late are not necessarily related, but their play in his absence was another example of the rocky beginning Noah has had in his return to New York. The Knicks signed him to a four-year, $72 million deal this summer — one of the priciest doled out to a free agent, even in a landscape that often looked like a gold rush.
It was a questionable deal from the outset, but Noah, a 31-year-old self-professed New Yorker, was supposed to at least be a conspicuous cog in the Knicks’ attempt to return to the postseason.
Instead, his playing time at center has been irregular, and his performances have been bumpy. Occasionally, the Knicks have looked better without him, and Noah acknowledged that he needed to improve substantially if he wanted to evoke memories of his chest-thumping prime in Chicago.
It is difficult to judge Noah’s true value because he has hardly ever been a stats-fueling star. He has never averaged 13 points per game in a season. But he was clearly a life force for the Bulls, anchoring their defense for a good part of nine seasons and operating as a savvy passer.
This year with the Knicks, however, Noah does not look like the man who helped provide the Bulls with their best years of the post-Michael Jordan era. Instead, his current statistics more closely resemble his final two injury-riddled seasons with the Bulls. He is averaging 4.3 points per game and 8.9 rebounds, along with 3.5 assists.
Noah has looked his old self only in spurts, said Jeff Van Gundy, the ESPN broadcaster. He has followed poor outings with strong ones.
“Certainly, he’s had some really good moments,” Van Gundy said.
Over all, Noah is averaging just 23.4 minutes a night and has sat on the bench the majority of the time in eight out of the 12 games this season when he has dressed.
Jeff Hornacek, the Knicks’ head coach, said the fact that Noah had sat so much — he missed the last two games with an illness — is not all that significant. Kyle O’Quinn has started in his place in recent days and has had an effect. Willy Hernangomez, an import from Spain, has shown himself to be capable as well.
When the Knicks sit Noah, it allows them, at times, to move Kristaps Porzingis to center and Carmelo Anthony to power forward and to fill the court with shooters. And it benefits Porzingis defensively, allowing him to use his length and shot-blocking skills around the rim.
Anthony, 32, has professed his comfort in playing as the nominal power forward, something he has done with the Knicks in the past. Van Gundy said he believed Anthony would grow into that position more and more. But Anthony said he wanted to play it only in bursts. Hornacek is also hesitant to play Porzingis, 21, at center for long periods of time, wanting to avoid too much wear on him.
But when the Knicks do use that formation, they are in sync with the direction the N.B.A. is taking.
“I think the way that the game is going now, the way that the league is going, small ball is in,” Anthony said.
How much the Knicks miss Noah when he is out is difficult to ascertain. He has been, by player efficiency rating, an average player this year. Yet, according to ESPN.com’s real plus-minus, Noah was the sixth-best center in the league before he was struck by illness.
In general, the Knicks seem to benefit from his presence on the court. They average 11.7 points more per 100 possessions when he is playing than when he is not.
And some of Noah’s value is hard to quantify. He is a vocal leader for the Knicks and a veteran guidepost. On defense, he does not necessarily accrue statistics that can be counted, but he helps the team with his positioning and defensive rotations.
Still, as questions pop up about Noah’s usefulness to the Knicks, and the value of his deal, Van Gundy offered a reminder that it is still early in the season, and still early in Noah’s four-year contract.
