New York|‘I Love N.Y.’ Signs Have a Lot to Say. The Government Says They’re Illegal.
‘I Love N.Y.’ Signs Have a Lot to Say. The Government Says They’re Illegal.
But there is one problem: The federal government says the signs are illegal.
So the campaign, intended to generate love and money for New York, has instead set off an escalating feud with the government threatening fines and the potential withholding of federal financing if the state does not get rid of the signs. The signs, federal officials say, are out of compliance with signage rules because they are so big and crammed with words and information that they are dangerous distractions to drivers.
The federal Department of Transportation, in fact, told the state that signs were not allowed even before the first one went up, more than five years ago. But, like a recalcitrant teenager, the state went ahead anyway, and now 514 have sprouted along the shoulders of roads across New York.
The situation may soon come to a head — leaders of the state and federal transportation departments plan to meet in December to discuss a solution, or perhaps hash out potential penalties if nothing is done. The state does not seem inclined to bow to Washington’s demand, believing it has done nothing wrong.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo himself has championed the signs, promoting them in his State of the State address in 2014, three years after federal officials first raised concerns. “The goal is to get people who are on the roads off the roads and into communities and fostering and promoting the economy of the State of New York,” he said in his speech.
Federal officials warn that the state’s continued flouting of the rules could have dire consequences.
“We hope it does not come to that,” Mr. Gaffney added.
Of all the things for the state and federal governments to come to loggerheads over, road signs seem a strange battleground. But the issue of distracted driving has emerged as a major problem on the country’s roadways. Over 35,000 people died in car crashes in 2015, about 2,500 more than the year before, according to data compiled by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Data from the first half of 2016 shows that traffic-related fatalities are on pace to eclipse the total in 2015.
The signs vary and some offer more details than others. Some advertise the “I Love N.Y.” app. They also feature the logos of various state tourism initiatives by Empire State Development, the state economic development agency, like Path Through History, which alerts people to historical sites, and Taste NY, which indicates purveyors of local foods.
State officials have argued that the signs have been important to their efforts to increase tourism, especially to areas in upstate New York that are in economic distress. Last year, tourism generated $102 billion for the state, officials said.
Beyond the federal government’s objections, the signs have had a mixed reception. In North Hudson, N.Y., a buffalo farmer named Dorreen Ossenkop told a local news site that the large signs, some of which denote local attractions like her Adirondack Buffalo Company, have helped her business. Yet the sign that would mention her farm is not allowed on Interstate 87, according to federal officials, citing the bible for such rules, the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
In Montauk, on the easternmost end of Long Island, where eight of the blue signs went up in July, many locals loathed the “I Love New York” signs.
