The presidential race was not far from the minds of executives from America’s biggest brands and advertising agencies last month in Orlando, Fla., at the annual conference held by the Association of National Advertisers. The industry leaders had traveled from cities like New York, Chicago and San Francisco, and any political conversation seemed to be premised on the assumption that Hillary Clinton would win.
There was some talk about how to best market to Donald J. Trump’s supporters after Nov. 8 and debate about what a potential Trump media organization might look like. Many were aghast that the race was close at all, criticizing aspects of Mrs. Clinton’s branding and messaging for holding her back in what they thought should have a no-brainer for voters.
So when Mr. Trump won the election last week, an industry that prides itself on always knowing what motivates and excites the American public was in a state of shock. Marketers now find themselves asking serious questions about how they study consumers, use data and quantify the value of facts — questions about the fundamental nature of their business.
Advertisers, like many others, “may have found ourselves in bubbles of our own making,” said Rishad Tobaccowala, chief strategist for the Publicis Groupe.
Sarah Hofstetter, the chief executive of the digital agency 360i, said the disconnect between Mr. Trump’s win and the predictions from polls and forecasters threw into question “the rules of market research,” traditionally rooted in surveys, interviews and discussions with focus groups in controlled settings.
That information should now be supplemented with “social listening” on Twitter, Reddit and other parts of the internet, and behavioral data including what people are searching for online, said Ms. Hofstetter, whose agency has worked with brands like Oscar Mayer and Toyota.
Some marketers have been left wondering if facts and reason matter less than they expected — a counterintuitive discovery in the age of information.
Wendy Clark, the chief executive of DDB North America and a former Coca-Cola marketing executive, said the election showed “facts are somewhat negotiable.” Ms. Clark spent some time working with Mrs. Clinton’s campaign last year, a rumor confirmed last month when an email she wrote about the importance of Mrs. Clinton’s logo was disclosed by WikiLeaks.
Mr. Schwartz said he saw that reflected in how Mr. Trump was able to fashion himself as the protagonist of a David and Goliath story, appealing to those looking for an “outsider” to “fix the system,” he said. It was akin to what Bernie Sanders offered voters, he said.
Some see a broader lesson in the rejection of experience by the electorate. Richard Edelman, the chief executive of the public relations company Edelman, said Mr. Trump’s use of Twitter — which he often used to forcefully attack Mrs. Clinton and the news media — and reduced reliance on traditional TV ads showed the power of “peer-to-peer” communication.
“The more effective messaging might be from the mass population as opposed to using celebrities and using media and academics,” he said.
Ms. Clark said on Thursday that she was eager for people to “lean back into being Americans,” especially after “the level of dialogue that took place,” a reference to the often ugly nature of the campaign. She anticipates more ads highlighting values like the importance of diversity as the nation works to find common ground.
