The president of boxing’s international federation was closely involved in guiding a $10 million loan to the organization, a transaction that ultimately led to such financial disarray that investigators from an auditing firm recommended that the group find a criminal lawyer, according to documents recently obtained by The New York Times.
After The Times reported on the financial problems last week, the federation, based in Lausanne, Switzerland, and known by the acronym AIBA, released statements saying the loan was largely the work of the president’s former deputy, who was fired in 2015.
But the new documents, including letters and emails obtained from former federation employees who do not believe that a full airing of the financial problems has occurred, show that the AIBA president, Ching-kuo Wu, spoke directly to a government minister in Azerbaijan about obtaining the loan, which was given by a company from that country and was spent on a boxing venture in the United States.
Some former federation officials said that the loan coincided with an uptick in medals by Azerbaijani boxers, and they suspected that the loan was aimed at buying influence, successfully or not.
The loan was supposed to have been retired in 2013, but the Azerbaijan company has yet to be repaid. The confidential investigation done by the accounting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers showed that much of the loan was missing and was not properly accounted for on AIBA’s financial ledgers.
Mr. Kim, in an email to The Times, suggested his involvement in the loan derived from following Mr. Wu’s orders.
Although Mr. Jomard did not challenge the authenticity of the Aug. 10, 2010, letter, his statement said the federation was looking into whether it was sent without Mr. Wu’s authority.
Still, there was another indication Mr. Wu was aware of the loan and the financial chaos it fed into.
The loan was used to develop a set of matches run by an organization called the World Series of Boxing in North America. But by February 2012, the venture had lost millions of dollars, apparently consuming the $10 million that had been lent. Mr. Wu received a letter from Abe Lin, a longtime friend whom he hired to keep track of the finances at the venture, saying additional money, about $1.35 million, was needed to keep it afloat.
