59E59 Theaters, 59 E. 59th St.
Can it really be that Molly Ringwald, who for a generation of moviegoers — my generation of moviegoers — will forever be fondly recalled as the fresh-faced, lovable teenage star of John Hughes movies, is now playing a grandmother? Gulp.
The production, at the 59E59 Theaters, written by Dan Gordon, is billed as being based on both the novel by Larry McMurtry and the Oscar-winning screenplay by James L. Brooks, who also won an Oscar for his direction.
But those fans of the movie not holding tickets, who may grow misty-eyed even at the recollection of its many heart-tugging moments, may want to keep their memories of the material intact. The stage version, directed by Michael Parva, is largely pedestrian. Whereas the movie jerked tears and evoked laughs, too — many provided by Jack Nicholson, who also won an Oscar as Aurora’s ornery bedmate, Garrett (Jeb Brown) — the stage adaptation more often evokes yawns.
It follows the outlines of the movie pretty firmly, depicting the sometimes close, sometimes fractious relationship between Aurora and Emma across three decades, beginning when Emma is just a baby and ending with, well, I’m sure you recall. The theater’s relatively small stage is divided into three playing areas that represent various locations. Snatches of recordings of various standards — from “Anything Goes” to “I’ll Be Seeing You” — are sprinkled throughout.
Ms. Ringwald, in long red curls, gives a satisfactory if perhaps insufficiently feisty performance as the self-involved Aurora, who disapproves huffily of her 18-year-old daughter’s decision to marry a local boy, Flap Horton (Denver Milord), and predicts that the marriage is doomed.
But while this disapproval leads to some alienation, the apron strings are never quite cut, and when Emma runs into trouble in her marriage and, later, receives a devastating cancer diagnosis, Aurora steels her spine and rides to the rescue.
Ms. Dunne is likewise fine as the often exasperated Emma, who tries and fails to keep her mother at a comfortable distance. But neither gives a performance that will blur memories of Debra Winger and Ms. MacLaine in these roles. I was not a particularly great fan of the film — and I intentionally did not watch it again before seeing the play — but those performances were indelible, and the ghosts of them inevitably hover over the production like a dampening shroud.
That’s the case, too, with Mr. Brown, saddled with the unforgiving task of playing Aurora’s on-again-off-again love interest, Garrett. You can be thankful that he doesn’t try to imitate Mr. Nicholson’s patented brand of seductive devilishness. He’s convincingly ambivalent and obstreperous as the womanizing ex-astronaut who eventually reveals a core of tenderness, but once again, flickering movie shadows loom.
In the other principal role, of the loving but philandering Flap, Mr. Milord at least does not face the uphill battle the other actors do. (I’d forgotten that Jeff Daniels played him in the movie.) He infuses the role with a subdued, hangdog air, the buried sense of guilt of a man who knows he should do better but somehow cannot.
I didn’t compare play and movie scene by scene, although there are a few places in which they diverge. (In the movie, Flap agrees to let Aurora raise his kids, but the question is left hanging in the stage version.) But the most notable difference between them may be that, while the movie was rated a family-friendly PG, Mr. Gordon’s play is more frank about sex, laced with a few vulgarities and some crude jokes. It’s a change, but not really an improvement.