Movies|Review: Aliens Drop Anchor in ‘Arrival,’ but What Are Their Intentions?
Review: Aliens Drop Anchor in ‘Arrival,’ but What Are Their Intentions?
In what’s perhaps the first science-fiction film — Georges Méliès’s 1902 marvel “A Trip to the Moon” — a group of astronomers lands in the Man in the Moon’s eye. They’re soon taken prisoner by moon men, but a quick-witted astronomer clobbers the king and they escape, with one earthling vanquishing moon men with an umbrella. Humans have been zapping extraterrestrials ever since. It’s so easy to fight the unknown, at least in movies.
“Arrival” is a science-fiction parable in a distinctly more idealistic hopeful key than most movies in this genre, one in which the best solutions don’t necessarily materialize in a gun sight. It has a little action, a bit of violence and clenched-jawed jittery men. Mostly, it has ideas and hope, as well as eerie extraterrestrials who face off with a soulful linguist-heroine, Louise Banks (Amy Adams), the story’s voice of reason and its translator. She’s thoughtful, serious, at ease with her own silence and fears. She’d get along fine with Sandra Bullock’s character in “Gravity,” which like this movie leans into feeling and thinking, and reminds you again that there’s more to this genre than heavy artillery.
The movie begins with an elliptical prelude that guides you in but is forgotten as soon as the aliens touch down minutes later. The director Denis Villeneuve teases his way through these preliminaries, with shots of newscasts and panicked crowds, revealing just enough to work up some excitement. In a sly preview to things and tall creatures to come, Louise keeps looking up — at a blaring television, at shrieking military jets — turning Ms. Adams’s pale face into a screen for the movie that’s just starting to come into view. She’s soon hustled off to the show run by the military (Forest Whitaker plays the good cop, Michael Stuhlbarg the bad), having been enlisted to interpret the alien tongue.
In “Arrival,” Amy Adams plays a linguist who tries to communicate with aliens by translating their language. In her review, Manohla Dargis writes: Denis Villeneuve’s newest science-fiction movie is distinctly more hopeful key than most in this genre, one in which the best solutions don’t necessarily materialize in a gunsight. It has a little action, a bit of gunfire and clenched-jawed jittery men. Villeneuve likes big stories with big stakes and he’s very good at working your nerves. “Arrival” isn’t a visionary movie, an intellectual rebus or a head movie; it’s pretty straight in some respects and sometimes corny, with a visual design that’s lovely rather than landmark.
Mr. Villeneuve likes big stories with big stakes, and he’s very skilled at working your nerves. In some of his movies, he punctures the stories with bluntly violent shocks — a stunned survivor seated before a burning truck in “Incendies,” corpses sealed inside a drug-house wall in “Sicario” — that distill terror into a grabber moment. These visuals can be real showstoppers (the narratives briefly shift into idle); they’re at once off-putting and unsettlingly seductive, and even if you want to look away, it can be hard to. Some of his limitations as a filmmaker are best expressed in the perfect crackling of those flames and the pictorial balance of that shot of walled-up torture victims.
“Arrival” doesn’t need self-regarding jolts. It’s based on Ted Chiang’s “Story of Your Life,” one of those unassumingly smart science-fiction puzzles that blend absorbing storytelling with meditations on the universe, being, time and space. Part of what makes it so enjoyable is that Mr. Chiang not only raises questions about the nature of reality and what it is to be human, but he also embeds them in his writing through different verb tenses and times. In one section, he rummages around in the past; in another, he jumps onto a separate timeline. The movie — the script is by Eric Heisserer — does something similar with cutaways to Louise’s life, shardlike glimpses that help fill in the whole.
Having been spirited away, Louise is moved into a makeshift military base in Montana, one of 12 locations across the globe where the aliens have dropped anchor. There, next to one of their enormous ships — a vessel that hovers over the ground and looks like an elongated black egg with one side neatly sliced off — she’s briefed and prepped amid furrowed brows, data crunching and intimations of the apocalypse. Once she settles in, the movie gets its groove on. The visitors have set up regular visiting hours for the humans, opening a portal through which a small team in hazmat suits can enter. As their machines whir, Louise and the rest gape across the cosmic divide and into the unknown.
The scenes inside the alien ship are transporting. After Louise and her team move through the ship’s portal, they end up in a large chamber facing a luminous rectangle, a kind of window — it looks like a movie screen — through which they can see the aliens. But the room is also a type of a stage, an immersive theater that engages sight, sound and a sense of touch. Louise’s hands and voice quaver, but her eyes shine and widen as the pleasure of the new — and knowing — edges out fear. And when her physicist colleague, Ian (Jeremy Renner), runs a gloved hand over one of the ship’s textured black walls, his expression suggests the delight of a child at the moment of discovery.
By turns inviting and opaque, Ms. Adams turns softness and quiet into heroic qualities, keeping her voice low, modulated, and using stillness to draw you near. In a nice reversal of how many puzzlers work, the movie becomes more fragmented the closer that Louise gets to figuring out why the aliens have arrived, what they want from Earth and why. Increasingly, her steadiness becomes the very foundation for the narrative, which serves its meaning beautifully. The movie complicates Mr. Chiang’s story, adding action scenes and political notes, which comes off as pretty puny compared with its larger, grander adventure about a woman who, in staring into the void, leaps into life and finds herself.
“Arrival” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned) for some gun action. Running time: 1 hour 56 minutes.