WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — When we last saw Molly Young in 2015, she was making her New York Times crossword debut in a collaboration with David J. Kahn, who taught a crossword-making class in New York City that Ms. Young attended.
Today, Ms. Young makes a terrific solo debut with a midweek puzzle that provided a forehead-slapping “Aha!” moment for me, which got the attention of the entire floor here. It’s O.K. They’re used to me, and any loud expressions of “Ohhhh ... now I get it!” are usually met with understanding smiles meant to humor me.
That’s a tight theme, and I really enjoyed having the Ipenny IDROP on this one. It’s not the first time we’ve seen a theme set where the entries all substitute the letter I for the word “eye,” but it is the first time that I’m aware of where the entries are so tightly related to a physical eye. The only answer that bothered me a bit was ISTRAIN (“New colander from Apple?”), because I wanted the answer to be ISTRAINER.
Here is the entire theme set for today, if you would like some extra help.
■ 1A: “Rings up?” sounds like a veddy British way to say “telephones,” but it’s not, at least for today. What other kind of rings can you think of? If they’re “up,” they might be sitting on angels’ heads and they might be HALOS.
■ 22A: Great misdirection. “Groovy” can mean “like, really rad, man ...” or it can mean something that has grooves in it. Like an LP (Hi kids!  If I am ever lucky enough to be owned by a Great Dane, I am definitely naming him HAMLET.
■ 30A: #TodayILearned that a BOTA is one of those leather bags that hold wine.
■ 7D: “Eggs rich in omega-3 fatty acids” would be fish eggs, or ROE.
■ 25D/45D: I struggled with this pair of clues at first, because my interpretation was that it was saying that people have to physically “have a baby” to be a MOM or a DAD. Of course, all families are different, and adoptive parents or, in fact, anyone who loves and raises a child is a parent.
■ 37D: Sometimes a NOVELLA is just a NOVELLA. I thought that the clue, which refers to Orwell’s “Animal Farm” and Kafka’s “The Metamorphosis,” was directing us to something about dystopia, but no.
My top three apple products are, in order: apple crisp, apple strudel and apple pie.
My top three Apple products are … none, actually. I have a hate-hate relationship with my iPhone, which has ruined my attention span and made it possible for my office to contact me at any hour. This puzzle is an exercise in mild, mischievous revenge.
That’s the nice thing about crossword construction. It’s so much cheaper than therapy.