PARIS — The suburban Paris home studio of the Argentine artist Julio Le Parc, widely considered a pioneer of Op Art and Kinetic Art, is a circus of hands-on — sometimes anarchic — delights. In one of a series of rooms surrounding an overgrown courtyard, the artist’s motorized “contorsions” come to life when a switch is flipped, and their rotating arms and reflective metal ribbons refract light into patterns on the wall. Nearby, mirrored sculptures from his “Déplacements” series produce disorienting optical illusions as a viewer moves around them, while the projected-light installations in yet another room create disco-ball effects of shifting color.
Based in France since 1958, Mr. Le Parc is one of Latin America’s foremost proponents of Kinetic Art, which he discovered while a student at the Escuela de Bellas Artes in Buenos Aires through the work of the Hungarian-French artist Victor Vasarely.
Although Mr. Le Parc won the Golden Lion award in painting at the 1966 Venice Biennale, and has had exhibitions in major institutions around the world, including Serpentine Gallery in London and the Palais de Tokyo in Paris, he is little known to American audiences.
That is changing this month with New York gallery shows at Galerie Perrotin (until Saturday) and Nara Roesler (until Dec. 19), followed by his first-ever solo museum exhibition in the United States, starting Friday at the Pérez Art Museum Miami, or PAMM. The retrospective, “Form Into Action,” has been organized to coincide with Art Basel Miami, and includes over 100 artworks spanning 60 years.
The curator of the show in Miami, Estrellita Brodsky, has written extensively on Mr. Le Parc, emphasizing the importance of his often overlooked contributions to art history. Other experts in his work echo her perspective, and say the new attention in North America to his work is reflective of an increasing openness to global cultures.
The son of a train engineer, Mr. Le Parc was born in the Argentine city of Mendoza. As a child, he recalled, he was fascinated by the way things worked, breaking open his toy cars to inspect their gears and even making toys from fabric, strips of iron and olive-oil cans.
While at art school in the 1950s, he was intrigued by the participatory possibilities of Op Art and Kinetic Art, then nascent movements in France, and a 1958 grant from the French Cultural Service brought him to Paris, where he immediately made connections with other Latin American artists including Jesús Rafael Soto and Carlos Cruz-Diez.
Along with fellow members of the collective he founded there in 1961, Groupe de Recherche d’Art Visuel (Visual Arts Research Group), Mr. Le Parc took to the streets with public “interventions,” subversive games and politically charged questionnaires and fliers, all intended to engage spectators. His Op and Kinetic sculptures, which he began to develop in the mid-60s, took on a similarly political dimension by appealing to viewers to interact with them, thus calling the individual to action.
Indeed, rather than define his practice by a single style or medium, Mr. Le Parc describes it as a series of continuing “quests” or “research inquiries” that frame art as a social laboratory, playing down the notion of the individual creator.
Today, Mr. Le Parc’s influence can be seen in the socially engaged work of artists as diverse as Olafur Eliasson, Tauba Auerbach and Rirkrit Tiravanija.
Still active in his studio, Mr. Le Parc regularly revisits his works, and occasionally remasters or enlarges certain pieces. Although he does not use computers, preferring to make sketches and then experiment with three-dimensional models, he is a perfectionist, Ms. Brodsky said.
“He balked at showing work in Miami that is not at its highest level of reflectivity, so every mirror piece has to be just as reflective as it was in 1962,” she said, explaining that Mr. Le Parc insists on replacing any materials that have dulled with time.
The show at PAMM is organized by series, beginning with two-dimensional geometric and color studies from 1958. It will also include more recent works, such as the gargantuan “Sphère Rouge” (2001-12), a glistening ball made of red plastic squares hung individually from the ceiling. One room will be devoted to the interactive games Mr. Le Parc began developing around 1964, many of which evoke arcade or carnival amusements.
Strolling around his studio, Mr. Le Parc pointed to a “Surprise Movement” work from 1965, “Ensemble de onze mouvements-surprise.” Resembling a modular credenza, it spanned the length of the wall with 11 compartments, each one featuring a different arrangement of motors and materials.
