Each of us belongs to many groups: large and small, those close to home and those on a more global scale. Think about all the various groups you consider yourself a part of. How do you identify racially, ethnically and socioeconomically?  What other groups do you fit into, such as body type, degree of athleticism and personality traits? Are you an extrovert? Introvert? Part of a large family? An only child or “singleton”?
When you are finished, share your list with a partner, and then add to your own list if you discover new groups your partner thought of that you had not.
Which of these identities is most important to you? Why?
1. What does this article define as “whiteness”? How has there sometimes been “a certain fluidity” to the concept?
2. What is happening today to cause “a crisis of white identity” in the United States and elsewhere in the West? Why, according to some research, have economic and social transformations led many people to “anchor themselves more fully in their whiteness”?
3. What is the difference between “achieved” and “ascribed” identity? Which do people tend to be most attached to?
4. Why, according to the article, has white people’s officially privileged status waned over the latter half of the 20th century? How has that led to a feeling of lost identity?
5. What is “white fragility” and what does it lead to?
6. Researchers have found, “It’s not the amount of racial or ethnic diversity in a community that predicts white resentment and support of anti-immigrant policies, but the pace of change.” What examples does the article give to show this?
7. This article ends with the thought that “there will not likely be a return to the whiteness of social dominance and exclusive national identity” — and that unless whites accept that, the “crisis of whiteness seems likely to continue.” Now that you’ve read the whole article, do you see this “crisis of whiteness” in your own life or community? If so, how?
How do you see the role of whites in America today? How does reflecting on one’s own place in society help to alleviate fear? How does it exacerbate it?
Is there a way to make everyone, in every group, feel like they belong? What do you predict will happen in the United States in the next year? Do your predictions change depending on which candidate wins the presidential election? Share your thoughts with us in the comments section.