If you happen by Stacy Christopher’s home in Santa Barbara, Calif., early on Thanksgiving Day, you may think that her husband, her son and their guests chose an odd time for yard work. They rummage through the greenery. They cart away branches.
It’s no cleanup, though. It’s the first small step in a big show of gratitude.
The branches go into a vase inside. Nearby are leaf-shaped pieces of paper in yellow, orange, red: the archetypal colors of the season if not the actual ones on the Southern California coast, where autumn isn’t such a fiery showboat. People write concise missives on the leaves, then affix them to the branches, and what Ms. Christopher calls the Thankful Tree takes blazing form. It claims the center of the table, a reminder of what this holiday is really about.
There will be a thank-you for someone’s professional opportunity. A thank-you for someone else’s recovery from illness. A thank-you for the comfort of kin, not just on this day, but on the many days surrounding it.
I nodded and smiled. My family, too. And in her Thanksgiving, I recognized ours — and, really, everyone else’s, because while the rituals vary, the attachment to them doesn’t, and all of them follow the set of instructions spelled out bluntly in the holiday’s very name. They express gratitude. It turns out that there are infinite ways — succinct and expansive, subtle and fanciful — for turkey-minded Americans to do that.
My relatives would never consider a Thankful Tree, for one simple, unimpeachable reason: It would take precious real estate on the table away from booze, condiments and other items integral to our gorging.
But we, too, insist on the moment of calm that Ms. Christopher described. Someone, usually my Uncle Jim, says a grace of greater length and intensity than the ones at other holidays. He speaks of God and gratitude, demonstrating that if we look at our lives through the right lens, we see blessings everywhere, and they outnumber obstacles.
Gratitude is a feat of perspective. When I talked with other people recently about their ways and whys of giving thanks, I was most struck by how often their rituals arose from travails, not triumphs. Hardship was handmaiden to an examination of all that remained good, all that they should cling tight to.
Tim Shiley, a manufacturing-plant manager in Buffalo, mentioned a profound loss when I asked him about the origins of his family’s habit of making everyone at the Thanksgiving table talk about what he or she is grateful for. His parents, he said, both died before their 50th birthdays, and that has encouraged him, his siblings and his own children to huddle tight and not overlook — or take for granted — the importance of their solidarity.
Meg Cox, the author of “The Book of New Family Traditions,” told me about a family whose most cherished ritual pays homage to the perseverance of their ancestors, who made it through the Depression and the Dust Bowl on a diet of turnips from their parched land. Decades later, the dish at the center of the family’s Thanksgiving table is mashed turnips, though lavish with the butter that a more affluent generation can afford.
The Times asked 15 American families to talk about the dishes on their Thanksgiving tables that speak best to their heritage and traditions, and to who we are. These are their stories.
Those turnips, she noted, are more than a companion to turkey, stuffing and such. They’re thanks for the sacrifice and suffering that paved the way to better times.
The commingling of generations is central to Matthew Gertzog’s Thanksgiving, one detail of which especially amuses him. Every year, his father, Sonny, surveys his grandchildren and tells them what they should be grateful to him for.
“He makes these goofy comments about how fortunate we are to be descendants of his gene pool,” said Mr. Gertzog, a senior executive for a nonprofit medical society.
One grandchild has red hair, like her granddad’s, and he solicits thanks for it. Another has an especially nimble mind: He wants credit for that, too, and for another’s athleticism. 
So many kinds of rituals, so many offers of thanks: Jean Vintinner, who teaches at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, shows her gratitude for how much she has by giving some away. She, her husband and their daughter have turned Thanksgiving into a pre-Christmas pruning: Before they get new stuff for that holiday, they give away old stuff on this one, dropping off toys, clothing, art supplies and more to local charities.
The actor Dan Bucatinsky, who starred in the television show “Scandal” and is currently shooting “24: Legacy,” said it was always important to him to encourage displays of gratitude from his husband, Don Roos, their two children and their guests on Thanksgiving Day. But it took him a while to find a method he really liked.
He noticed that the children and guests could become stiff and shy if they were expected, one after another, to make some profession of what they were thankful for. So, a few years ago, he bought tiny, empty journals and put one at each person’s place.
Guests write in them and keep them, but Mr. Bucatinsky always finds that a few notebooks, including his children’s, are left on the table.
“I collect them to make sure the right person gets them back,” he said, “and — it’s terrible to say — I look!” What does he find in the notebooks of his children, now 11 and 9 years old?
My family says everything through food, and on Thanksgiving, our tendency toward excess takes exaggerated, almost satirical form: four kinds of pie along with three kinds of cookies, not to mention several kinds of cake and various kinds of ice cream.
But that overflow exists partly because everyone who walks through the door wants to emphasize his or her thanks for being there, and does so in calories.
And when I reach for yet one more sweet, I’m not just revealing my gluttony. I swear. I’m showing my gratitude — that my Thanksgiving is an occasion of plenty, with an abundance of everything that matters most: wine, whipped cream, love.