The Overlook Lodge, a bar in the Pleasant Ridge neighborhood of Cincinnati, looks cozy enough at first, with wooden rafters and a fireplace big enough to sit inside.
Yes, the Overlook Lodge takes its style cues from “The Shining,” the 1980 Stanley Kubrick film of Stephen King’s horror classic. The cocktails have names like Writer’s Block and the Elevator, and the list of whimsical boilermakers is called Twin Shots, a reference to the film’s spooky girl ghosts.
Movies have done their bit to glorify bars and drinking over the years: Think of Nick and Nora Charles swilling martinis in “The Thin Man,” and the Champagne cocktails hoisted in Rick’s Café Américain.
New York has Stay Classy New York, where fans of Will Ferrell films can toast their comic idol, and Beetle House, where a man dressed in Beetlejuice’s striped suit greets you at the door.
If the business concept seems gimmicky, the motivation behind many of these bars is quite heartfelt.
The friends opened the bar, named for a catchphrase from Ron Burgundy, the title character in the “Anchorman” movies, and covered the walls with original art inspired by Ferrell films. They keep the actor’s work in permanent rotation on the bar’s many televisions.
The therapeutic exercise proved an unexpected hit, with lines down the block during the bar’s first months. The venture went so well that in April the partners opened a second bar, Beetle House. It is equally busy.
“I’ve always loved movies,” Mr. Trevino said. “I was trying to marry my love of cinema and cocktails.” While working as bartender for one of Cincinnati’s leading mixologists, Molly Wellmann, he had staged a series of pop-up events called “Gorilla Cinema,” in which film screenings (“Pulp Fiction,” “Footloose”) were paired with drinks. When it came time for Mr. Trevino to open his own bar, he put that concept into more long-term practice.
As one may expect, first-time customers at these bars are fans of the movies being shown. But if they come for the film, they often stay for the bar.
Autumn Heisler and her fiancé knew Mr. Trevino from previous bars where he worked. Both are now regulars at the Overlook Lodge but with differing levels of enthusiasm for the theme.
