For love of all the cakes and cookies and treacle and tarts in childhood stories, one mother brings books to life in the kitchen.
I want, in a greedy way, to see the illustrations again and feel the reassuring cadence of the words I read and reread in order, back then, to not go to bed. This longing is about wanting to be that child again, because books, especially children’s books, can still make me forget the corporeal, that I am who I am.
I remembered vaguely one book I loved, about a rodent. (There are so many rodents in children’s books! Nocturnal, squirmy — it makes sense.) Anyway, about a rodent, and about cakes and icing, illustrated with color photographs. Slowly, with some inside-out search terms and some emails to my brother I rediscovered “Monty Mouse Looks for Adventure,” by Esta de Fossard.
 After startling a puppy dog eating porridge, Monty catapults into the sugar bowl on a table laid for tea and loads up a roller skate with doughnuts and iced buns before narrowly evading a woman wielding a broom. The photos were spellbinding: the porridge sticky, the iced cakes pink and white and sugary, the mouse cute. Looking at them now, they fall in the so-crap-they’re-great variety. Monty mouse (either taxidermied or trained) looks downright greasy, but still, a deep happiness stirs at the sight of that roller skate heaving with buns.
The books I loved best usually had something to do with food. Like “Socks for Supper” by Jack Kent, which is a blunted “Gift of the Magi”-type tale about a poor couple who eat only turnips. I loved the crusty drawings of Mickey in Maurice Sendak’s “In the Night Kitchen,” though I didn’t understand what kind of batter they were putting milk into or what “morning cake” was. I also liked Else Holmelund Minarik’s “Little Bear” (illustrated by Sendak), who cheerfully makes some grim-sounding soup that is upstaged by a layer cake. I dreamed of the “chocolate sauce Rasputin” Tomi Ungerer’s young heroine Zeralda makes for a grumpy cannibal in “Zeralda’s Ogre.” I too wanted to squeeze Frances the badger’s Chompo Bar in “A Birthday for Frances,” or eat one of Paddington Bear’s marmalade sandwiches and quaff a root beer with Woodstock and Snoopy.
But my favorite book by far was “The Sugar Mouse Cake,” by Gene Zion, delicately illustrated by Margaret Bloy Graham, a favorite Canadian illustrator of mine and of many, who died last year. It is, tragically, out of print. It’s about a royal cake competition; Tom, a talented but bullied pastry cook; and his friend Tina, a rodent. The mildly food-shaming plot involves a music box baked into a cake; a fat, fainting queen; and a bossy, dismissive king; but Graham’s drawings of a court filled with cake sweeten the stereotypes.
Growing up, there was a no-sugar policy in my house. We ate bran flakes for breakfast and fruit for dessert. Cake and cookies were gobbled down in other children’s kitchens. I would savor the ads for Hostess cupcakes and pies on the back pages of my “Archie” and “Casper” comics. I still eye boxes of Fruit Loops and Frosted Flakes longingly. The men I’ve loved all, in some way, resemble Tony the Tiger.
Based on Edmund Pevensie’s loyalty to the White Witch in “The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe,” by C.S. Lewis, I thought Turkish delight must be some delicious cross between Toffifay chocolates and baklava. Until I tried the real thing.
As I got older, desserts from holiday parties became tradition and then portal. I still remember how a slice of chocolate devil’s food cake, soggy with vanilla ice cream, tastes, before taking a bath in a cousin’s bathtub. Suddenly I’m getting into the back seat of an Oldsmobile in pajamas and a ski jacket. A triangle of pumpkin pie, with a spoonful of whipped cream slopped over it, brings me back to an iron-frame bed in an attic above a black potbellied stove in a converted schoolhouse during an October cold snap in Parry Sound, Ontario. A 1950s framed color picture of Queen Elizabeth II hangs on the far wall. Now I wonder what scenes and places will make their way from my daughter’s stomach to her heart.
I tell her that years before she was born, her father and I had staged a mince tart-off. We each made a batch of homemade mince and had friends judge. I went the more exotic route; my recipe included pineapple and beets and Branston Pickle, while her father went traditional. He drove across state lines to buy lard for his crust. I can’t recall who won.
Going back to the story of Alice, my daughter and I find that the Queen of Hearts’ tarts were not jam tarts, as I recalled, but were in fact treacle tarts.
It occurs to me that we could bake our way through a number of my favorite stories. After preschool the next day, we walk to Myers of Keswick, an English grocer in the West Village, which I know sells Lyle’s Black Treacle, Lyle’s Golden Syrup and Devon clotted cream. I also buy a paper poppy, a pork pie and a package of HobNobs. The shop is a rhapsody to nursery food.
I look up Dan Lepard’s recipe for tart pastry crust. His book “Short & Sweet” is an oft-thumbed, floured brick on my windowsill. Then I look up various versions of treacle tart online and decide to follow one that uses oatmeal instead of white bread crumbs to thicken the syrupy filling.
After her karate class, my daughter and I flour and butter the tins, roll out the dough and scrunch together small foil packets of rice to weigh down the tart cases for blind baking. In the original John Tenniel illustration the tarts are open top, but for the tops of our tarts we cut small pastry hearts.
These are the lines that taught me how to see when I read.
The verse in my 1949 Little Golden Book edition is illustrated with hard candies, cookies and an orange floating above the children nestled in bed. Still, I want to make something resembling my own vision of sugarplums.
I find an Alton Brown recipe online that I adapt, adding some dried fruits I have in my cupboard already. Sugarplums, traditionally, have little to do with plums, and from the 17th to the 19th century referred to a variety of small candies with a hardened sugar shell (and then, in popular parlance, to a sweet person). Still, I want to make something resembling my vision of sugarplums.
After pulsing the ingredients into a sticky, nutty pile, the mix looks (and smells) like an energy bar. My daughter and I butter our hands and form the mix into 32 glistening dark balls and one worm. We then push them across a plate of raw sugar until they sparkle like gumdrops.
The resulting “plums” are earthy and nutty, and taste ... vintage. I like this time-travel aspect. I get the same wrinkle-in-time feeling from Victoria sponge cake and Madeira wine. But I can easily imagine updated variations using peanut butter and dried black currants, or maple syrup instead of honey.
As December approaches, we read books about snow and I think of Christmas cake. I’ve always wanted to make a blazing pudding, like in “A Child’s Christmas in Wales” by Dylan Thomas, or “A Christmas Carol” by Dickens. But the cake residing in my imagination is from “A Christmas Memory,” by Truman Capote. While it isn’t a children’s story (in fact it involves a 7-year-old, drunk on whiskey), it’s a lush and loving piece of time travel wherein a boy and his elderly cousin bake 31 fruitcakes from windfall pecans.
I decide to bake during a visit to my parents. They live north of Toronto along an escarpment. It’s cold when we arrive, the wood stove is glowing and my daughter is happy to play with some startled-looking dolls a neighbor is throwing away. I couldn’t find Brazil nuts, dried cherries or figs on the drive up, so my father and I head to the Bulk Barn in a nearby town. We talk about a number of tests he’s recently had to undergo. While I dig in barrels for the dried fruit, he walks his German shepherd in the parking lot.
Back at home, my daughter would rather color than help with the fruitcake so I measure, chop and mix myself, listening to the house as I do, the low noise of the TV in the family room, my mother’s voice, my father vacuuming my old bedroom upstairs. I cobble together a recipe from the Capote text and a book of fruitcake recipes written by Marie Rudisill, his aunt. It comes along nicely. I forgo the dreaded red and green candied cherries, and the molasses.
My mother finishes baking lasagna for our dinner, and I put two full loaf tins in the hot oven to bake for three hours. There is a power outage after two, but the heat is convection so we cross our fingers.
Fruitcake is supposed to sit for weeks and be plied with booze, but in the morning we cut into one of them to sample. It is chewy and fragrant, studded evenly with the nutmeats and fruit. I set the loaves on the counter and scrounge around my parents’ basement for airtight containers and clean cloth to soak and wrap the loaves. I can’t find either, but I do find snapshots my father took in Chicago as a teenager, a drawing of a raccoon I made when I was 18 and a green plastic key chain I loved as a child. When we leave to attend a fund-raising concert for Syrian refugees at a local church, the loaves are still next to the stove. Upon our return, we find the speckled and ravaged heel of one loaf on the countertop. The German shepherd has gobbled the loaves down. He is flopped in a corner, tail wagging, nose resting on his paws.
Here, the author — and illustrator — shares a recipe for fruity sweets.
1. Pulse the nuts and fruits in a food processor until chopped into small pieces, but before the mixture becomes a ball.
2. Combine the confectioners’ sugar, anise, caraway, cardamom and salt in a medium mixing bowl.
3. Add the nut-and-fruit mixture and the honey. Using buttered hands, combine well.
4. 