A still from the movie “Jackie,” in which Natalie Portman plays Jacqueline Kennedy.
Come again? Mrs. Kennedy was, after all, acutely aware that her highbrow tastes and meticulously orchestrated wardrobe had everything to do with the glamour she wished to project as first lady.
Certainly that is the view of Pablo Larraín, the Chilean-born director of “Jackie.” No hagiography, Mr. Larraín’s film, which opens on Friday, presents a Jackie (Natalie Portman) as savvy and exacting in managing her persona as any cinema diva of the day, her fixation on style anticipating the image-drunk culture that was to define the coming decades.
Ms. Portman’s character next to the coffin of her husband.
There is plenty of ego in the onscreen Jackie, who is prompt to grasp that image often supersedes reality. Indeed, Ms. Portman’s Jackie preens with a purpose, assiduously refining and exploiting her style in a way that was ripe for the television age.
“Jackie,” which bears the noirish stamp of its producer, Darren Aronofsky, ventures past the character’s glazed exterior, revealing the Jackie of the White House years through a screen of contradictions: alternately bemused and tormented, vulnerable and self-willed, but ultimately the product of her own towering vanity.
“If anything that a first lady does is different, everyone seizes on it,” Ms. Portman’s Jackie says, clearly relishing the notion. She is as quick to rationalize her propensity for mythmaking. “People like to believe in fairy tales,” she says.
In a riveting sequence, Jackie is seen just after the assassination pacing in her private White House rooms, smoking, popping pills and sipping vodka from a cut-crystal tumbler, as she listens distractedly to Richard Burton’s Broadway recording of “Camelot.” She rifles through her wardrobe, considering, then rejecting, in succession a bright coral gown, one in pale green and another of gold brocade, at pains at every instant to strike just the right note.
Pablo Larraín narrates a sequence from “Jackie,” featuring Natalie Portman.
Luxuriously pliant but restrictive nonetheless, they functioned as armature, shielding Jackie from a rapacious public and, at the same time, defining her.
“Her look gives the impression that someone has neatened you up with a sharp razor blade and finished off the whole effect with a small mathematical bow,” Siriol Hugh-Jones, a Briton, wrote in a 1962 article in Town & Country. It seemed, as has been noted, chosen to be easily legible on small home screens.
Jackie’s artfully made Chanel suits and Dior gowns, along with others copied or reinterpreted by her friend, the designer Oleg Cassini, were replicated for the movie. Reproducing them, though, was a challenge.
Ms. Portman in another scene in the film. Mrs. Kennedy was “an entrepreneur of appearances,” Wayne Koestenbaum wrote.
The real Mrs. Kennedy would likely have appreciated the fuss. “She managed her public wardrobe as if she were a costume designer in theater or film,” Hamish Bowles wrote in “Jacqueline Kennedy: The White House Years,” a book accompanying the Metropolitan Museum of Art 2001 Costume Institute exhibition of the first lady’s wardrobe.
“She had a keen understanding of the semantics of dress and of the way in which she could use her public image to help communicate the more abstract ideas that were important to her,” Mr. Bowles wrote.
“Whatever turmoil she may have felt, however exhausted she may have been, she insisted on being very much the representation of perfection,” says the film’s costume designer, Madeline Fontaine.
That assessment was more tactful, perhaps, than that of the filmmakers and other students of the “Jackie look.” Mr. Koestenbaum, for one, called it as he saw it.
By the film’s final frames, it seems not to matter. At the wheel of her car, Jackie glimpses a series of primly suited, bouffant-haired mannequins, each perfectly cast in her image, being loaded from a truck to a local department store. She follows their progress attentively, on her face a look of rapt contentment — and just the shadow of a smile.