294 pp. Atlantic Monthly, $26.
Death, personified as a beret-wearing connoisseur of misfortune, begins this novel by confessing a predilection: “Arabs make my life worth living, such pleasure they have given me through the years.” On the evidence of the pages that follow, he might have said gay Arabs in San Francisco during the AIDS epidemic. Cue Jacob, who one night takes himself to a psychiatric clinic because he is haunted by drone strikes in the Middle East as well as by the memory of lost loved ones. He recounts his past while a host of phantasmagoric figures — including Death, Satan and St. Denis holding his severed head in his lap — discuss his case like sports commentators.
 Equally bracing is the release he finds in gags, whips and paddles. “Like all saints before me, I relished the ecstasy of martyrdom,” he says. Occasionally the story leads down a forking path, as in one interlude from the perspective of a crashed drone. But Alameddine, entrancing and unflinching, is in easy command of his bricolage narrative, and he leavens its tragedy with wit. St. Denis is even good for an oral-sex joke. By the end, readers may feel as though they have been bound in the same S & M dungeon as Jacob, lashed, excoriated, yet ultimately transfigured and given to see the world anew.
147 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.
Such pellucid language is at odds with the vaporousness of this slender work, which at one point descends into a literal fever-dream.  Neither the gentleman nor Mani Steinn can afford for their true identities to be exposed. But Sjon is not one to neatly tie all of this together. “Moonstone” is as ethereal and elusive as the clouds of fumigant that a doctor asks Mani Steinn to release in the Reykjavik cinemas, or a dream that has fled.
323 pp. University of Wisconsin, $26.95.
Until a few years ago, Bledsoe knew little about her namesake aunt, who died in an apartment fire in 1966. But a search engine led her to an obituary and to an entry in “The Biographical Dictionary of Women in Science,” and from there she gathered the facts that ground this novel, depicting the shadow cast by the lavender scare.
It opens as Lucybelle Bledsoe, a whip-smart scientific editor who has ditched Arkansas for the bohemian pleasures of Greenwich Village, is herself ditched by her lover for a man. Felicitously, she is offered a job at a Chicago-area lab researching snow, ice and permafrost, and accepts despite a warning from her boss that presages latter-day military policy: “With regard to your inclinations,” it’s no concern of mine, he says. Only, “we have to ask you not to act on them.” This is the narrow path that Lucybelle and her friends must tread. Is it safe to attend a baseball game with a romantic interest? Should a couple drive to work in the same car? “You’re an attractive girl,” a suspicious government investigator tells one of them. “Why would you wear such a manly suit?” Structured chronologically and peppered with dates, the novel possesses the granularity of a diary. Bledsoe stresses the importance of the science she describes, which she says is at the root of climate-change studies, but the book’s heart beats elsewhere. It triumphs as an intimate and humane evocation of day-to-day life under inhumane circumstances.
432 pp. Grove, $26.
Murphy’s skills are most nakedly on display as he describes the addictions in which Mateo and others find solace, and their electrical-shocking, soul-warping, mind-annihilating trips. They culminate in the mother of all benders at an apartment in an anonymous Los Angeles neighborhood, the room “spinning slowly into a horny, mellow, gooshy lull,” as Mateo and three confederates inhale or snort or else couple up on a futon, and a porn film with a pounding techno soundtrack plays on the TV. Desperately intense, it is the kind of scene that requires putting a book down for a moment to take a breather.