It’s almost unheard-of for a pop soprano in her 70s to surpass her younger self in stamina, precision of intonation and vocal command. But that was what Judy Collins, 77, did at Thursday’s opening-night show of her latest engagement at Café Carlyle. The evening was particularly intense because of the death of her friend Leonard Cohen, which she only acknowledged after a performance that culminated with a somber rendition of his love song “Suzanne.” Her 1966 recording put him on the songwriting map.
With her lunar sliver of a voice, there is little room for slippage because Ms. Collins has so few overtones to cushion and absorb tonal deviations. If the singing isn’t consistently on the note, her angelic perfection is compromised. The enjoyment of watching her is tinged with the same anxiety you feel while watching an Olympic gymnast execute a challenging routine that could be ruined by a less-than-perfect landing. On Tuesday there wasn’t a single misstep.
The show follows the release of “Silver Skies Blue,” an album of duets with Ari Hest, a 37-year-old folk-pop singer whose strong, rounded baritone is a comfortable match for Ms. Collins’s ethereality. Their two-part harmonies on several songs were impeccable. Their strongest collaborations included “Strangers Again” and “I Choose Love,” contemplations of long-term relationships, the first nostalgic, the second practical. “I Choose Love” acknowledges the work it takes to maintain a bond that has developed the usual potholes once the initial thrill of discovery has worn off.
Ms. Collins is a wonderful storyteller who always finds new ways to describe her early days as a New York folk singer. She is the first to admit that she didn’t think much of the very early Bob Dylan, although her skepticism quickly evaporated. She recalled listening outside a door in the home of his manager Albert Grossman as Mr. Dylan composed “Mr. Tambourine Man.” And her rendition of “Masters of War” had a subtle biting edge.
Popular music critics, especially men, have always been suspicious of unalloyed musical beauty, and Ms. Collins has endured considerable hostility for taking the high road in a rough-and-tumble musical culture where aggression is seen as proof of authenticity. But her kind of traditional beauty always has a place. And as Ms. Collins sang her 1962 hit “Golden Apples of the Sun,” it was a healing beam of light at an anxious historical moment; it was beautiful.