Fashion|Does Cranberry Sauce Come With That Flogging?
Does Cranberry Sauce Come With That Flogging?
“Just because someone is wearing lingerie doesn’t mean you can touch them,” said Ellen Robin, the consent guardian at a risqué party held last Thursday in Bushwick, Brooklyn.
Her face covered in sequins, Ms. Robin, 28, a set designer from Williamsburg, stood on the sidewalk outside Lot 45, a large event space on Troutman Street. She had a clipboard full of release forms. 
After patrons signed the releases, they were patted down by a gruff security officer and led into a cavernous room drenched in red light and velvet. Bodies were in various stages of dishabille and discipline.
Others are drawn by the occasion to dress up. “We fell in love with costume culture,” said Doug Nightwine, 52, an audio engineer for Hall & Oates who lives on the Upper East Side, and wore metallic jeans and a silver brocade waistcoat.
About 330 attended the gathering, a quarter of them performers. Notwithstanding a film crew from VICE, photography was frowned upon and participants were asked to put away their smartphones. But voyeurism was encouraged.
To keep the audience titillated, Ms. Hertz, who wore a strappy bra, corset and garters by the lingerie designer Lorna Laurentino, encouraged performers to crack a whip, spank a bottom or flash a nipple. “The production values are just so high,” said Retro Stinga, a grizzled playwright from Manhattan who declined to give his age. He wore a marching-band hat, a Motocross body suit and dark lipstick.
Entry was $45 for early birds. Those wishing to push the boundaries paid upward of $175 more for early access to the dungeon, which was set up in a red tent near the D.J. booths. Inside, a woman in a tight leather corset named Lydia Vengeance whipped those who wanted whipping.
After the human dinner tables rose and toweled off, a “cuddle puddle” formed in the center of the space. As vaguely Arabic music played overhead, scores of partygoers lay down to snuggle on a platform covered with pillows.
It was like a sensual die-in. Some couples conversed, others cavorted. A 50-something woman let her dark green velvet dress ride up, while her date, a portly man wearing a pinstripe vest with no shirt, massaged her thighs.
Shortly before midnight, Stefan Zeniuk, a musician with the band Gato Loco, mounted the bar with a saxophone. As he blew a mournful note, flames shot from the instrument, five feet out. The crowd, deep into their cuddling and seminude dancing, stopped what they were doing, turned to the sound and moved toward the light.