The great Anglo-Irish writer William Trevor, who died on Sunday at 88, was a late bloomer.
His style was so pure and uncluttered that when he first came on the scene, in the mid-1960s, it almost seemed radical.
What interested Mr. Trevor was not himself but his world, or two worlds, really: England and Ireland, though he never fully belonged to either. He wasn’t, like Yeats or Wilde, born to the Anglo-Irish gentry. His family was middle-class, and he grew up a Protestant in the Catholic south of Ireland, where he was, inevitably, an outsider.
He lived most of his adult life in London and then Devon, but his writing toggles back and forth between the countries, with roughly half his fiction set in each. Mr. Trevor’s England in many ways resembles that of V. S. Pritchett, his only real rival as a master of the British short story. There are the same lonely bed-sits, rundown boardinghouses, cheerless cafes.
The difference is that Mr. Pritchett’s world is enlivened by his cheerful embrace of eccentricity, while Mr. Trevor’s London is drabber, sadder, a place of widows and widowers, blighted romances, unraveling relationships. It would be a depressing place to read about if Mr. Trevor didn’t describe it with such care and fondness. He never pitied or condescended to his solitaries; instead, he loved and understood them.
Mr. Trevor’s Ireland is just as lonely, or even lonelier, than his England, and additionally burdened by the weight of the past, which is always tugging his characters backward. There are occasional topical references in these stories, snatches of pop songs or allusions to the Troubles, but many of them take place in a changeless, timeless Ireland where ancient patterns and identities are always asserting themselves.
“The Ballroom of Romance,” for example, one of Mr. Trevor’s most famous stories, is about a rural Irish dance hall where solitary men and women, most pushing middle age, go every Saturday night in hope of finding love, and leave with the certainty that nothing will ever change.
The title characters of “The Hill Bachelors” are Irish farmers tied to the land by an inheritance of guilt and obligation. They yearn to be married, but the available women all want to live in town, not in some dreary cottage with a turf fire.
So many of the stories are set in this sort of eternal past that it’s often hard to tell a story written in the ’60s, say, from one written in the ’80s or ’90s. He found his voice right at the beginning, and it didn’t evolve much, except for getting a little darker.
Writing like this is the real source of Mr. Trevor’s greatness: at once familiar and magisterial, polished and unassuming, every word clicking into place as surely as a key fitting a lock.