The Breeders’ Cup World Championships, which began as a one-day, seven-race event at Hollywood Park in 1984, has grown into a two-day, 13-race affair, headlined by the $6 million Breeders’ Cup Classic. The horses for the Classic on Saturday are listed in order of post position, with win, place and show picks provided by Joe Drape and Melissa Hoppert of The New York Times. The morning-line odds were set by Jon White.
Track Santa Anita Park in Arcadia, Calif.
Melatonin (12-1) is four for four on this track, two of them Grade 1s. The crafty trainer David Hofmans has captured previous Breeders’ Cup races with horses with odds of 40-1 and 36-1, but sprang his biggest upset 20 years ago in this race with Alphabet Soup, a 19-1 outsider. He beat a superhorse that day by the name of Cigar.
California Chrome (1-1) has gotten better with age and earned his even-money odds, which will be bet down to 1-9 once his devoted “Chromies” place their bets. Sooner or later, they all get beat (see: Cigar), and why not today?
Frosted (5-1) looked unstoppable in winning the Met Mile and the Whitney Stakes before putting in a desultory effort in the Woodward. This gray is a threat with his best.
California Chrome (1-1) is the richest horse in North American history with career earnings of $13.4 million. He is 6-0 this year, and it is hard to believe his streak won’t continue.
Arrogate (5-2), a late-developing 3-year-old who won the Travers by a whopping 13 ½ lengths, drew the favorable outside post, which should keep him out of trouble and forwardly placed.
Hoppertunity (15-1) Maybe I’m being sentimental, but this brilliantly named colt has hit the board in 16 of his 22 races and won the Jockey Club Gold Cup his last time out. The Whitney winner Frosted rounds out my superfecta.
Gormley (5-1) The winner of this race is made the early favorite for next spring’s Kentucky Derby. This colt from the same owner and trainer of the great race mare Zenyatta has two victories — the last on this track at this distance.
Syndergaard (6-1) can flat out run and will try to lead this field every step of the way. He was caught by a nose last time in the Champagne, but the colt is the speed of the speed.
Practical Joke (6-1) caught Snydergaard with a game late run. He can pick up the pieces if the speed breaks down in front of him.
Not This Time (7-2) The trainer Dale Romans is very high on this colt, who won his last two, including the Grade III Iroquois by 8 ¾ lengths.
Classic Empire (4-1) This son of Pioneerof the Nile threw his rider in the Hopeful, then came back with blinkers on to win the Breeders’ Futurity by three lengths.
Practical Joke This undefeated multiple Grade I winner is the third choice, showing just how deep this field is. But his trainer, Chad Brown, has been red hot this year.
I’m a Chatterbox (12-1) will be overlooked in a loaded race featuring the undefeated Songbird, the three-time Eclipse champion Beholder and the 2015 champion 3-year-old filly Stellar Wind. Don’t leave her out.
Beholder (5-2) is the horse for the course — winning 13 of 15 here with two seconds. She has had a remarkable career.
Stellar Wind (5-2) is coming off two monster victories over Beholder. As good as Songbird is, she has never seen the likes of these.
Songbird (6-5) Would have loved to have seen this 3-year-old filly, undefeated in 11 starts, take on California Chrome in the Classic. In the distaff, she drew the rail and will face older females for the first time, but she should continue to roll.
Beholder (5-2) A winner of two Breeders’ Cup races and three Eclipse Awards, this talented 6-year-old mare will be running her last race. She has lost three in a row, but drew outside her rivals and looks to be in the perfect spot.
Stellar Wind (5-2) The 2015 champion 3-year-old filly bested Beholder in their previous two meetings, but she had perfect setups with outside posts.