The pace of emails from readers with questions about The Upshot’s political polling feature is picking up as the election nears. I’ve looked through the public editor’s mail bag and tried to zone in on the questions most frequently asked. Amanda Cox, editor of The Upshot, agreed to take them on.
Liz Spayd: At this point, what polls or numbers in The Upshot should readers most focus on? Are forecasts in a handful of states like Florida and Pennsylvania more important than the overall number?
Amanda Cox: I’m partial to our comparison table, which shows how nine different models rate each of the states. But that may be more numbers than some readers want. If you don’t like tables, we also have an interactive tree that shows 1,024 paths to victory, depending on the outcomes in 10 of the most competitive states.
Spayd: With only four days left, is the amount of polling and new data going to start drying up? In other words, is there much new we’ll learn that could change the forecast?
Cox: Monmouth University released its last state poll of 2016 yesterday. We do expect to see a few more state polls, and the tracking polls will update. But the amount of data left is unlikely to change our forecast in very significant ways.
Spayd: What accounts for the sometimes big gaps between the competing polling models? A few readers have written quite recently to ask why The Upshot, for example, shows Clinton with an 84 percent chance of winning while that of another popular one, ESPN’s 538, shows her with a 66 percent chance (at time of publication).
Cox: All models have to make assumptions. These assumptions are based on data and history, but there’s room for good people to make different choices. The biggest differences between the Upshot model and 538 involve two questions: Are older polls useful? And how much, if anything, does a poll in one state tell you about the race in other states? There’s more on those questions in this post from September by Josh Katz, the creator of our model.
Cox: We know the field-goal analogy is divisive. With it, we’re mostly just trying to remind ourselves that events with a 10 or 20 percent chance of happening actually happen: quite regularly, in fact. I know very little about football, but I can still picture a miss, and that’s about all we want anyone to do with that sentence. We’ve tried cards, dice and coin flips as analogies, but they don’t cover all of the necessary probabilities without getting complicated. Random facts — like the chances of being left-handed — seem less intuitive. We welcome suggestions for alternatives, and have received some we enjoy.