Mahler’s 11th Symphony? There is no such thing. Mahler didn’t really finish his 10th Symphony, which, aside from its great opening Adagio, was left in various states of sketchiness when he died in 1911.
Still, at the start of his concert with the Berlin Philharmonic on Thursday at Carnegie Hall, the conductor Simon Rattle asked the audience to indulge him in an experiment: to fashion a kind of Mahler 11th from three masterpieces of the so-called Second Viennese School by Schoenberg, Webern, and Berg.
In his comments, Mr. Rattle spoke of how deeply Schoenberg and his students Webern and Berg revered Mahler. They were especially fascinated by the Sixth and Seventh Symphonies, composed between 1903 and 1906, in which Mahler seemed to be pushing tonal harmony to its breaking point.
With this Berlin Philharmonic program, which followed another concert on Wednesday and which ended with a fresh, exciting account of Brahms’s Second Symphony, Mr. Rattle concluded his two-year Perspectives series at Carnegie Hall. (It was also his final performance in New York as this great orchestra’s chief conductor and artistic director.) In October, as if to prepare the way for his experiment with the Second Viennese School composers, Mr. Rattle conducted the Philadelphia Orchestra at Carnegie in Mahler’s Sixth Symphony; and on Wednesday, he led the Berliners in Mahler’s pathbreaking Seventh.
Mr. Rattle began on Thursday with Schoenberg’s Five Pieces for Orchestra (Op. 16), a seminal work from 1909 lasting 18 minutes. Written in a freely atonal harmonic language, the music seeks to express, as Schoenberg wrote, “all that swells in us subconsciously like a dream.” Then, without break (having requested no applause), Mr. Rattle conducted Webern’s Six Pieces for Orchestra, another atonal milestone composed in 1909 (and later revised). Webern, like Schoenberg, explores deep recesses of longing, tenderness and terror through radically concise structures: The six pieces last just 10 minutes. It’s as if expansive Mahlerian phrases are condensed into short, epigrammatic gestures, almost fragments. A few notes, a series of chords that unfold and overlap, become momentous events.
Mr. Rattle ended with Berg’s Three Pieces for Orchestra (Op. 6, completed in 1915 and later revised). This 21-minute work in three movements (Prelude, Round Dance and March) is like an early-20th-century response to the heritage of the late Romantic symphony. Berg folds remnants of tonality, plush colorings, sweeping lyrical lines and sheer orchestral din into his atonal language. Still, heard in this context, the radicalism of the music came through.
Played without pause, these works made for a 14-piece “Second Viennese School Suite,” or, as Mr. Rattle would have it, a 50-minute equivalent to Mahler’s nonexistent 11th Symphony. Either way, he drew riveting performances from his inspired orchestra, lushly rich yet uncannily transparent.
The other revelation came on Wednesday, with Mahler’s Seventh. Mr. Rattle began the program with Boulez’s “Éclat,” a 10-minute work from 1965 scored for 15 instruments, including guitar and piano. Boulez also revered Mahler, seeing in him a pioneer of harmonic and structural exploration. This precisely notated, essentially 12-tone score includes stretches of improvisation, within given parameters. Overall, though, you are captivated by the sheer sensual beauty of the sounds Boulez devised for the instruments, especially as played in this gorgeous performance.
Mahler’s 80-minute Seventh Symphony baffled audiences at its premiere. It’s written in five movements: an opening Adagio and concluding Rondo-Finale bracket two atmospheric “night music” movements and a boisterous Scherzo. The shock element still comes through in the daring discontinuities of the music: the fractured phrases; the almost stream-of-consciousness shifts; the juxtapositions of seething angst with near-banal evocations of Austrian folk tunes, complete with cowbells. Conducting from memory, Mr. Rattle went all out to convey the dramatic contrasts of the score while also somehow revealing the purposefulness that threads through this teeming symphonic essay.
Mr. Rattle’s all-but-official fall residency in New York, which included his superb conducting of “Tristan und Isolde” at the Metropolitan Opera, is now over. He takes charge of the London Symphony Orchestra next season, while finishing up in Berlin in 2018. Lucky Londoners.