Adaptations (109 Franklin Street) is a vintage furniture store that focuses mostly on pieces from the 1970s: boxy wooden cabinets, platform sofas, macramé wall hangings and eight-track-friendly stereo receivers. Arranged like a home, with a bedroom nook in back, the store has an unintimidating atmosphere and prices that are not astronomical for items that are in excellent condition. To pair with the vintage finds there are new, plush upholstered ottomans, which the shop makes to order in a variety of fabrics.
Earlier this year, the store’s owner, Kyla Burney, opened a companion shop, Porter James (116 Franklin Street), nearby. The sensibility at her newer location is more refined, with midcentury pieces (such as, recently, a sleek chocolate-brown leather sofa) that seem more suited for a spacious co-op apartment than a first-time rental. Still, there are some smaller options, too, like a glass cocktail shaker for just under $50.
There are plenty of stylish items for one’s residence at Home of the Brave (146 Franklin Street) as well, which offers a curated selection of mostly artisanal goods — like woven rugs made in India and Morocco, handmade ceramic mugs and sugar bowls, and woven African baskets. Everything has a quiet sense of utilitarian style, with many choices under $100.
The store is an offshoot of Wolves Within (174 Franklin Street), where you’ll find clothes and accessories for both sexes. Its sensibility is quite similar to its sister boutique: well-cut dark jeans, soft cotton button-downs, geometric brass jewelry and sturdy boots have a no-nonsense polish that is likely to appeal to fans of Steven Alan or A.P.C.
The women’s offerings at Pas Mal (99 Franklin Street) are also restrained. The store, owned by a former blogger who is from Korea, offers laid-back closet staples, like a slouchy gray alpaca coat and mohair cardigans, in a mostly neutral palette, with relaxed silhouettes. There are shoes and a bit of jewelry, too, with a similarly soft mood. And peppered around the store are spools of yarn by Wool and the Gang.
With Greenpoint’s many millennial residents, vintage clothing stores are, not surprisingly, abundant. There are several well-stocked ones near the Nassau Avenue G station: Awoke Vintage (688 Manhattan Avenue), which also has a Williamsburg location; Mirth (606 Manhattan Avenue); and Fox & Fawn (570 Manhattan Avenue), where a pair of strappy Jimmy Choo high-heeled sandals for under $30 might be found among the well-worn leather jackets and polyester dresses.
For music fans, there’s Academy Records (85 Oak Street), a huge space with more than 100,000 vinyl albums in many genres, although alternative rock is a strong point. About 80 percent of what’s available is used, including some CDs and cassettes. 
At Bellocq Tea Atelier (104 West Street), the atmosphere is more upscale, despite its location on a rugged industrial block. It offers around 100 varieties of loose tea, stored in huge canisters; customers are encouraged to make their choices at leisure. Everything is blended and elegantly packaged at the brand’s headquarters in back. Gift items, like Yixing pottery and handmade copper kettles, are also available.
Archestratus Books & Foods (160 Huron Street) offers cookbooks, both new and vintage, with some stationery items — Kaweco pens, Blackwing pencils, thick Drei Sterne Kreide chalk crayons — thrown in for good measure. In back there’s a large open kitchen and cafe where Italian cookies and snacks are served during the day, with themed dinners a couple of nights a week.
For the food obsessed, Acme Smoked Fish (30 Gem Street) is a neighborhood landmark. It supplies salmon to lox specialists like Barney Greengrass and Zabar’s; on Friday mornings, it is open to the public. Prices are close to wholesale, with an ample selection of flavorful choices, including salmon punctuated with sharp peppercorns or pastrami spices.
For a post-shopping bite, Cassette (113 Franklin Street) offers healthy versions of comfort food — avocado toast, salmon tartare and roast chicken — with a French twist. Although it’s been open for only about a year, the laid-back bistro-like restaurant feels like a mainstay.
In the evening, Cherry Point (664 Manhattan Avenue) serves mostly small plates, such as oysters on rosemary with hollandaise, accompanied by cocktails like a Thinking Cap, made with rye and bitters, and wines from a well-chosen list.
Propeller (984 Manhattan Avenue) is popular with the neighborhood’s laptop-and-latte crowd. It’s an unpretentious spot for a coffee and pastry, decorated in vintage finds.
For a taste of the neighborhood’s Polish community, Polka Dot (725 Manhattan Avenue) specializes in well-prepared traditional fare like fried apple pancakes, smoked meats and hearty soups to eat in on several roomy tables or to take home.