William Trevor, whose mournful, sometimes darkly funny short stories and novels about the small struggles of unremarkable people placed him in the company of masters like V. S. Pritchett, W. Somerset Maugham and Chekhov, died on Sunday in Somerset, England. He was 88.
His death was confirmed by his son Patrick Cox.
Mr. Trevor, who was Irish by birth and upbringing but a longtime resident of Britain, placed his fiction squarely in the middle of ordinary life. His plots often unfolded in Irish or English villages whose inhabitants, most of them hanging on to the bottom rung of the lower middle class, waged unequal battle with capricious fate.
In “The Ballroom of Romance,” one of his most famous stories, a young woman caring for her crippled father looks for love in a dance hall but settles, week after week, for a few drunken kisses from a local bachelor. The hero of “The Day We Got Drunk on Cake” repeatedly phones a young woman he admires in between drinking sessions at a series of pubs. The relationship deepens and, during a final call in the wee hours, takes a sudden, unexpected turn.
The emotional weather in Mr. Trevor’s world is generally overcast, with a threat of rain. “I am a 58-year-old provincial,” the narrator of the novel “Nights at the Alexandra” (1987) begins. “I have no children. I have never married.” From this bleak premise, a mesmerizing tale unfolds.
“I’m very interested in the sadness of fate, the things that just happen to people,” Mr. Trevor told Publishers Weekly in 1983.
His cast of characters, nearly all of the middling sort, was extraordinarily varied.
His fiction could be wry, satirical, boisterously comic, lugubrious or pathetic. He delved deeply into the hearts of his struggling characters, whose limitations, frustrated ambitions and self-delusions evoked an authorial sympathy that became more pronounced over the years.
As with Chekhov, the comic brio of the early stories mellowed with time, giving way to a more muted, sorrowful tone, although, like Chekhov, Mr. Trevor achieved some of his finest effects by blending comedy and tragedy.
William Trevor Cox was born in Ireland on May 24, 1928, in Mitchelstown, County Cork, to Protestant parents. His father, James, was a bank manager who took his wife, the former Gertrude Davison, and children from one town to another, as promotions and transfers arose.
An outsider by family circumstance and religion in a predominantly Roman Catholic country, Mr. Trevor learned at an early age to observe quietly from the sidelines, a skill that served him well as an Irish writer describing the British, and as an expatriate looking across the Irish Sea to the towns and villages of his youth.
“I was fortunate that my accident of birth placed me on the edge of things,” he wrote in The Guardian in 1992.
After graduating from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1950, he taught at a preparatory school in Northern Ireland. In 1952, he married Jane Ryan, whom he had met at Trinity. She and their son Patrick survive him, as do another son, Dominic Cox, and a granddaughter.
In secondary school, Mr. Trevor had begun sculpting in wood, and his growing proficiency led to a job in England teaching art at schools in Rugby and Taunton as he developed a sideline carving statues for churches. He began showing in exhibitions and, working in wood, terra cotta and metal, he embraced abstraction.
In 1958, he published a wispy comedy of manners, “A Standard of Behavior” (1958), which he later disowned. He also dropped his last name, to avoid confusion with his identity as a sculptor, although that chapter in his life was already drawing to a close. His abstract work, he later said, dissatisfied him because of its remoteness from human beings. “I sometimes think all the people who were missing in my sculpture gushed out into the stories,” he told The Times in 1990.
To bring in income, he began working as a copywriter at Notley’s, a leading advertising agency in London, where, he once said, he failed to produce a single usable line of copy. The job left him plenty of spare time, which he used to write fiction.
He grabbed the attention of critics in 1964 with “The Old Boys,” a blackly humorous account of former schoolmates who resume their old rivalries when they gather for a reunion. Evelyn Waugh called the novel “uncommonly well written, gruesome, funny and inspired,” and it won the Hawthornden Prize. As a writer, Mr. Trevor was on his way, and Notley’s lost one of the least promising copywriters it had ever hired.
For the next half-century, most of it spent in the Devon countryside — he most recently lived near Shobrooke — Mr. Trevor turned out stories, novels and plays at a steady rate, developing an expanding world that readers came to recognize as Trevor territory, and a galaxy of characters that included the village sociopath of the novel “The Children of Dynmouth” (1976), the fabulously boring Raymond Bamber in the short story “Raymond Bamber and Mrs. Fitch,” and many variations on vacillating, timorous Prufrock Man.
As Ireland became more remote to him, he found it more congenial as a subject — observed most closely from a distance — although he often turned back the clock, writing about the Ireland of 50 or 100 years ago, but with a keen historical eye for the signs of sectarian conflict that would explode later.
The novel “Fools of Fortune” (1983), which opens in 1918, develops into a parable of the Troubles, and there are, inevitably, historical foreshadowings in the novels “Other People’s Worlds” (1980), “The Silence in the Garden” (1996) and “The Story of Lucy Gault” (2002), which begin at the close of the First World War and the early years of Irish independence, and even in “The News From Ireland,” one of Mr. Trevor’s most celebrated later stories, set during the famine years of the 1840s.
