Storytelling matters desperately to Michael Chabon’s characters. It’s a way to remake an unhappy reality and exert control (“Werewolves in Their Youth”), a means of grappling with personal or historical disaster (“The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay”), or, in the case of his elegiac and deeply poignant new novel, “Moonglow,” a tool for connecting the dots of a family’s life and making sense of the past.
His grandfather’s disjointed accounts of being a soldier in World War II and his fascination with rocketry and space travel have a hallucinatory, drug-addled sheen, and they are tangled up with his wife’s enigmatic and contradictory retellings of her experiences in occupied France. Mr. Chabon weaves these knotted-together tales together into a tapestry that’s as complicated, beautiful and flawed as an antique carpet. The novel would have benefited from some rigorous editing — there are digressions about business travails, V-2 rockets and “Gravity’s Rainbow” that are tedious and superfluous. But the fraying story lines seem to be a deliberate narrative strategy meant to convey the chaos of life and distortions of memory, and the bright threads of meaning that can be extracted, with imagination and will, from the mess.
His grandfather’s romance with the woman who becomes his wife — a French refugee who already has a young daughter (who will grow up to become Mike’s mother) — is a love story about two people who build new lives together after the war but who can never really manage to swim free from the undertow of the horror they witnessed in war-torn Europe. His grandfather suffers from a form of post-traumatic stress disorder, while his grandmother slips into bouts of madness that seem to be part mental illness, part guilt or shame over something that happened to her during the war.
Although “Moonglow” grows overly discursive at times, it is never less than compelling when it sticks to the tale of Mike’s grandparents — these damaged survivors of World War II who bequeath to their family a legacy of endurance, and an understanding of the magic powers of storytelling to provide both solace and transcendence.