Politics|Trump’s Supreme Court List: Ivy League? Out. The Heartland? In.
Note the plural: justices. So the promise applies not only to the vacancy created by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia in February, but also to any other Supreme Court nominations during the Trump presidency. Given the advanced age of some justices, retirements are a distinct possibility.
Mr. Trump’s seemingly set-in-stone list has important clues about the president-elect’s judicial priorities, and it has a few surprises. The list manages both to reassure the conservative legal establishment and to represent a rebellion against it.
In important ways, Mr. Trump’s candidates represent a sharp break from the current conservative justices, who all went to law school at Harvard or Yale and who all served on federal appeals courts in the Northeast or in California.
If the list has a main theme, it is that there are plenty of good judges who went to law school at places like Notre Dame, Marquette, the University of Georgia and the University of Miami.
The résumés of the current justices, by contrast, reflect a legal profession that is deeply hierarchical, obsessed with credentials and dominated by lawyers on the two coasts. Mr. Trump’s list, like his campaign, is a revolt against the elites.
At the same time, Mr. Trump’s candidates are, unsurprisingly, committed judicial conservatives. Mr. Trump credited two leading conservative policy groups — the Heritage Foundation and the Federalist Society — with helping to draw up his list.
The list is a good reflection of Mr. Trump’s dual priorities, said William M. Jay, a lawyer with the firm of Goodwin Procter and a former law clerk to Justice Scalia. “It was consistent with the message he was trying to send: that he was not going to be naming establishment choices but that the establishment might well be happy with the people he chose from Alabama and Iowa and places like that,” he said.
The top priority for conservatives, Mr. Malcolm said, is to avoid another disappointment like Justice David H. Souter, who was appointed by President George Bush in 1990 but whose voting record turned out to be decidedly liberal.
Both Mr. Jay and Professor Fitzpatrick said Justice Scalia would have been pleased to be succeeded by one of his former law clerks, Justice Joan Larsen of the Michigan Supreme Court. She went to law school at Northwestern, served in the Justice Department and taught law at the University of Michigan.
“Joan Larsen has a very decent chance,” Mr. Malcolm said.
Mr. Trump’s list has some striking omissions, among them Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit and Paul D. Clement, who was solicitor general from 2005 to 2008 and often argues cases before the Supreme Court.
Their perceived drawbacks say a lot about Mr. Trump’s priorities. Mr. Malcolm, who proposed both men for the list, drew some conclusions.
Judge Kavanaugh dissented from a decision upholding the health care law, but he did so on jurisdictional grounds. Ideological purity would have required him to vote to strike down the law on constitutional grounds.
Mr. Malcolm said Mr. Clement could satisfy skeptics with a stint on an appeals court. “Let him build up a body of work and then maybe nominate him to a second vacancy,” Mr. Malcolm said.
But that would require Mr. Trump to enlarge a list he had said was firm. Could that happen? Perhaps.
