There are still days in late November that manage to slip past 60 degrees. For all of their warmth, the angle of the sun is unmistakable; not as low as it will be as we move toward winter, but well on its way. Shadows stretch for yards by 3 p.m., and by 5, the cold returns and the reprieve from winter is over.
Years of experience have taught me that autumn walks along the Atlantic shore, even in vanishing daylight, are energizing. But walks behind its dunes are a meditation. No one takes the protection of dunes for granted since Hurricane Sandy, but their shelter can be appreciated without the crisis. The surf and howling winds are always within earshot, but in the clefts behind the primary dunes, the world is mysteriously still. Here, the rich purple-browns of bayberry mix with the spare tans of American beach grass and the burnt-orange leaves of stunted black cherry. Seaside goldenrod (Solidago sempervirens) often stands out as the only green thing in this earth-toned habitat. Where conditions are right, masses of its yellow blooms can be found well into late November.
Plants and animals capitalize on these pockets of Shangri-La-like peace. Summer lingers a few days longer here than on the surfside slopes just yards away. Seaside goldenrod provides the last few flowers in the last pockets of warmth and consequently monopolizes the last pollinators — making its late-blooming strategy pay off. While I have enjoyed my share of December dandelions, seaside goldenrod’s blooms are not simply happenstance flowers out of season; flowering is the plant’s response to shorter days. Seaside goldenrod often greets the first snowflakes with blooms, even as other plants die. In fact it is often noted as the latest blooming plant in New York State. I’m uncertain who is ultimately the arbiter of this debate, but tucked contentedly between the dunes, listening to the “chips” of myrtle warblers and the occasional line of honking snow geese overhead, who am I to argue?
Seaside goldenrod’s leathery leaves can be found along the Atlantic Coast from Canada to Florida, then along the Gulf of Mexico into Texas. It also ranges inland considerably, almost to the Mississippi, as its other two preferences — full sun and poor soil — are not difficult to find. Locally, the plant grows happily along road shoulders and in dry meadows, too. In fact, for a drive-by view of the plant, you need only travel along the Belt Parkway or Beach Channel Drive, in the Rockaways.
Like other goldenrods, seaside goldenrod hosts a number of insect parasites that lay eggs in the plant’s living stems. As the stem dries in winter, it swells to encase the developing larvae in woody protection. This valuable food source is enormously attractive to overwintering insectivorous birds like downy woodpeckers, which can be observed far from their familiar woodland homes, hammering at the dried goldenrod stems and disturbing the peace behind the dunes, while foraging for a winter meal.