On a recent Sunday afternoon, holiday lights strung from the tin ceiling of Hank’s Saloon shone on Jeannie Talierco as she grabbed a cigarette and hustled toward an open door. She planted one foot indoors and one on the sidewalk, keeping an eye on the bar while taking a break.
“Whatcha smokin’, Jeannie?” the bandleader, Sean Kershaw, asked from the meager stage. “I don’t do drugs,” she said, prompting laughs throughout the group assembled for Honky-Tonk Brunch.
Mr. Cuffee had his first drink in this building in 1969. Ms. Talierco knew his wife before she died, and she knows his children and grandchildren. “Eddie knows me many moons,” Ms. Talierco confirmed.
Hank’s Saloon is a rare bird in Boerum Hill, an otherwise tony section of Brooklyn. The sofas are of uncertain vintage, the bathrooms are grimy, tangled string lights wind around pictures of the regulars who have passed away and the mirror behind the bar is blanketed with tattered band stickers.
And they did, starting before World War II. In those days, the bar was frequented by the Mohawk ironworkers who helped build the Empire State Building and who for years populated this neighborhood and adjacent ones. Later generations lived on State Street for as little as $15 a week and patronized “Boerum Hill’s last Mohawk hangout.” It wasn’t until 2005 that the facade at 46 Third Avenue was repainted with enormous flames and the Doray became Hank’s.
Memorable stories proliferate online. In one, a woman describes her boyfriend walking here from ground zero, covered in ash. The drinks writer David Wondrich praised the place in Esquire. Alex Battles wrote a song about Hank’s that you can stream on YouTube.
The air was less caustic on this particular Sunday. Regulars perched on weathered stools, sipping beer, coffee or a Bloody Mary. Others milled around nibbling burritos and tortilla chips from the Fort Greene cantina Pequeña, brought in to ensure that the “brunch” in Honky Tonk Brunch included more than booze.
After her few drags, Ms. Talierco re-entered and patted the arm of a man waiting for Mr. Kershaw and his New Jack Ramblers to bring Hank Williams back to life again.
“Are you O.K., Hon?” she asked him, her brown eyes fixed. The band kicked in, as if on cue, and the two turned to watch a twirling couple, dressed like Tammy Wynette and George Jones.
Ms. Talierco beamed. The guitarist Seth Kessel gripped a white, hollow-bodied Gretsch, coolly soloing through Johnny Cash’s “Folsom Prison Blues.” Old salts drank beer in cans and stared into the middle distance. Mr. Battles, who spontaneously joined the New Jack Ramblers for a song, writhed with delight, his bottled beer swaying. The ghosts of Doray, if they were present, danced along.