In June 2013, the Supreme Court ruled in Shelby County v. Holder that states with a long history of racial discrimination no longer needed to approve any proposed changes to their voting procedures with the federal government, as had long been required under the Voting Rights Act. That meant this year’s presidential election was the first in 50 years without the full protections of the act.
What was the result? Fourteen states had new voting restrictions in effect in 2016, including strict voter ID laws, fewer opportunities for early voting and reductions in the number of polling places. These restrictions depressed turnout in key states like Wisconsin, particularly among black voters.
Among advocates for voting rights, there was hope that a Hillary Clinton presidency and Democratic control of Congress would help reverse this situation. But with Republicans now in control of the presidency, Congress and two-thirds of state legislative chambers, the attack on voting rights is almost certainly going to get much worse.
When the current chief justice of the Supreme Court, John G. Roberts Jr., was a lawyer in the Justice Department in the early 1980s, he led a charge against Section 2. He argued in a 1981 memo that the provision should block only those voting laws that were found to be intentionally discriminatory. This was a much higher standard (and in practice, much more difficult to establish) than showing that a voting law had a discriminatory outcome. “Violations of Section 2 should not be made too easy to prove,” Mr. Roberts wrote. If the Supreme Court were to adopt Mr. Roberts’s 1981 position today, the country’s most important civil rights law would be effectively dead.
A new challenge to the Voting Rights Act could come before the court soon. Briefs are due later this month in North Carolina’s appeal of a decision by the Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit that struck down voting restrictions in the state. Four days after Mr. Trump’s inauguration, a federal court in Texas will consider whether the state’s voter ID law was unconstitutional. If Congress were to quickly confirm a Trump nominee to the Supreme Court, its conservative justices could easily reinstate such voting restrictions.
Things are hardly better at the state level. After the 2016 election, Republicans control both legislative chambers and the governor’s office in half the states (compared with only six such states controlled by Democrats). They are likely to intensify efforts to pass new voting restrictions in those states. Voters in Missouri approved a constitutional amendment on Election Day requiring a government-issued photo ID to cast a ballot. Republicans in Wisconsin have vowed to cut early voting following high early-voting turnout in heavily Democratic cities like Madison and Milwaukee.
Republicans in Congress could also jump into the fray. Senator Ted Cruz has introduced legislation to require proof of citizenship such as a passport or a birth certificate to vote in federal elections. Mandating a government-issued photo ID for federal elections — which disproportionately burdens low-income voters and minorities — is another top conservative priority. Kevin D. Williamson of National Review has called on Congress to repeal the 1993 National Voter Registration Act, which allows voters to register at the Department of Motor Vehicles and other public agencies.
The Voting Rights Act once enjoyed bipartisan support, but that consensus has collapsed. Recent elections illustrate that when more people vote, Democrats tend to do better, which is why Republicans want to restrict access to the ballot. After this year, the party that claimed the election was rigged will be the one doing the real rigging.