“Good Behavior,” a noirish new series beginning on Tuesday on TNT, about a sultry con artist, has a built-in pitch. See Lady Mary clean a toilet! See her make a crack pipe out of a light bulb! Devout fans of “Downton Abbey” will want to check it out just for the freak-show appeal.
Michelle Dockery, who played the highborn Mary Crawley in “Downton,” actually brings some of the same qualities to the lowlife Letty Dobesh in “Good Behavior,” and they serve the character well. The guarded eyes, the hard stare, the general sense of sarcasm waiting to happen — if Mary had been reincarnated as a parolee in present-day North Carolina, she’d look and act like this.
As the show opens, Letty is flipping burgers after being released from prison early for, yes, good behavior. She has a long rap sheet, various addictions and a restraining order that keeps her from seeing her young son. Unfairly fired from the diner, she turns to what she knows, robbing hotel rooms in league with a crooked desk clerk.
These opening scenes of the pilot (three of the first season’s 10 episodes were available for review) are promising — crisply paced, suspenseful and clever. We get clues to Letty’s personality, and her demons, as we watch her quickly rifle the rooms, sweeping the contents of a minibar into her bag, along with the clothes and jewelry.
Then comes the plot twist that sets the show on its true course. It’s formulaic, but not a deal-breaker: Surprised by a hotel guest while she’s in his room, Letty hides in the closet and overhears him discussing plans to carry out a murder for hire.
So now the show’s title comes into focus: Will Letty, not accustomed to doing the right thing, take the trouble to warn the victim? The answer is predictable, being the one that opens the door to the possibility of a long-running television series.
But the framework that the show’s creators, Chad Hodge and Blake Crouch, build off that incident is rickety. “Good Behavior” is based on a series of books by Mr. Crouch, as was the two men’s previous collaboration, the Fox sci-fi series “Wayward Pines.” The shows, while very different on the surface, share a high-concept, credibility-stretching approach.
“Wayward Pines” asked us to believe that a mad genius kidnapped and froze thousands of people and reanimated them in the future to rebuild human society. “Good Behavior” asks us to believe that Letty and the contract killer she tries to foil, Javier (the Argentine-Spanish film actor Juan Diego Botto), end up as partners in an uneasy combination of brutal thriller and romantic comedy: “When Harry the Killer Met Sally the Scam Artist.” Mr. Botto has charisma (and improbable good looks), but so far his character — a hit man with a soul who, for some reason, wants to be Letty’s life coach — doesn’t make much sense.
The problem may be more in the execution than in the premise: Mr. Hodge and Mr. Crouch, who share the writing in the early episodes, can’t seem to find the balance between suspense and incipient romance. The best part of the show is the sniping banter between Ms. Dockery and Mr. Botto, but there isn’t enough of it, and it’s so out of tune with the mystery and murder plot — which is grim and rather pedestrian — that you’re never really prepared for it.
It doesn’t help that Letty’s addictions and general world-weariness are given so much space in the story: Each episode begins with her listening to recorded affirmations. Ms. Dockery can’t do much with that material, but she’s fun to observe when the show just lets her be a sexy, smart crook. And Mr. Hodge, who’s the showrunner, has style, as he’s demonstrated in “The Playboy Club” and “Wayward Pines,” and does again here. You may not buy “Good Behavior,” but you might not have a bad time watching it.
What Should You Watch Next?
Not sure what to stream anymore? We can help you sort through the options.
Plenty of movies and television series await on streaming services. Here are the best movies on Netflix, the best TV shows on Netflix, the best movies on Amazon Prime, the best TV shows and movies on Disney+ and the best shows and movies on Hulu.
This summer, there is plenty to watch on the big and small screen. Here are the TV shows and the movies to see this season.
Celebrate Pride Month with these five campy movies you can stream right now.