SEOUL, South Korea — President Park Geun-hye said Friday that she was willing to submit to questioning by prosecutors investigating a scandal that has engulfed her administration, saying she would sever ties with an old friend accused of using their relationship to extort money from businesses.
Ms. Park’s nationally televised speech came as a poll by Gallup Korea indicated that she has become South Korea’s least popular president since the country moved to democracy in the 1980s.
Ms. Park, who at times seemed to be nearly overcome by emotion, said she had been unable to sleep because of the humiliation and despair she had experienced since the scandal involving her friend Choi Soon-sil erupted, and that at times she regretted having become president. She said she had told her staff to cooperate fully with prosecutors investigating Ms. Choi and her connections to the administration.
Ms. Park did not elaborate on that statement. But under South Korea’s Constitution, the president is protected from indictment even if she is accused of a crime.
No sitting president has ever been questioned by criminal investigators, and prosecutors have yet to say whether they want to question Ms. Park. But they have come under mounting pressure to do so from opposition politicians and a public outraged by the recent developments in the case.
Ms. Park’s apology, her second in 10 days in connection with the scandal, came hours after prosecutors formally arrested Ms. Choi, her friend of 40 years, on criminal charges of abuse of official power and attempted fraud. Ms. Choi was detained for questioning on Monday.
Ms. Choi, who holds no government job, is accused of using her influence with Ms. Park to coerce dozens of businesses into donating about $70 million to two newly established foundations that she controlled.
Prosecutors have also detained two former presidential aides of Ms. Park who they say aided Ms. Choi with her alleged activities. They said they were expanding their investigation to include allegations that Ms. Choi’s influence-peddling went far beyond collecting funds for her foundations.
In her first apology, on Oct. 25, Ms. Park admitted that she had let Ms. Choi, who has no experience in government or policy-making, edit some of her speeches.
Ms. Choi, 60, is a daughter of Choi Tae-min, the founder of an obscure religious sect who befriended Ms. Park in the 1970s, when her father, the military dictator Park Chung-hee, was in power. Mr. Choi and his daughter remained close to Ms. Park after her father’s assassination in 1979, when Ms. Park lived a secluded life in Seoul.
On Friday, Ms. Park said that when she was elected president in 2012, she was determined not to repeat the mistakes of her predecessors, all of whom had been entangled in corruption scandals involving relatives. For that reason, she said, she cut ties with her only siblings, a sister and brother, and lived a “lonely life” in the Blue House presidential compound.
Ms. Park, who has never married and has no children, said she turned to Ms. Choi for help in handling some of her personal matters. That, in retrospect, was a mistake, she said, vowing to end all relations with the Choi family.
In recent days, Ms. Park has replaced her prime minister and reshuffled her presidential staff in a bid to recover from the scandal. But her approval ratings have slipped to a mere 5 percent, according to the opinion poll results released by Gallup Korea on Friday. It was the lowest rating for any president since the late 1980s, the organization said, even below the 6 percent former President Kim Young-sam had in the late 1990s when South Korea went bankrupt amid the Asian financial crisis.
A rally is planned for Saturday in downtown Seoul to call for Ms. Park’s resignation or impeachment. A similar rally took place last weekend.