WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court on Tuesday weighed whether cities can sue banks under the Fair Housing Act for predatory lending, even if foreclosures that stem from such loans affect a city only indirectly.
The case before the justices was brought by Miami after the 2008 financial crisis. The city said that discriminatory mortgage lending practices by Bank of America and Wells Fargo had led to a disproportionate number of defaults by minority home buyers and, in turn, to financial harm to the city.
“We are aggrieved in every sense of the word by the discrimination that was propounded here,” said Robert S. Peck, a lawyer for the city.
The justices appeared divided over whether Miami’s asserted injuries were enough to allow it to sue under the housing law.
“Here the cities are standing up and saying, ‘Every time you do this redlining and this reverse redlining, essentially a community is becoming blighted.’ And who better than the city to recognize that interest and to assert it?” she asked.
Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. appeared to disagree, telling Mr. Peck that the harms Miami claimed to have suffered were secondhand.
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy also appeared skeptical of aspects of the city’s arguments. “The statute doesn’t prohibit decreasing property tax values,” he said.
Curtis E. Gannon, a lawyer for the federal government arguing in support of the city, offered a limiting principle. He said people, businesses and local governments hurt by a decline in property values ought to be able to sue under the housing law.
The law allows suits from “aggrieved persons.” No one disputed that cities may sometimes count as persons in a legal sense, but Neal K. Katyal, a lawyer for the banks, said Miami was not aggrieved just because it asserted an indirect financial injury.
He said the city had tried to piggyback on the borrowers’ interest in being free from discrimination and had “cut and paste” their grievances into its lawsuit.
Mr. Peck, the city’s lawyer, said its harm was more direct.
“The banks’ practice of providing minority borrowers with more expensive and riskier loans than they qualified for, or that nonminority borrowers received, actually frustrated and counteracted the city’s efforts on fair housing,” he said.
The court heard a single hour of argument in two consolidated cases, Bank of America v. Miami, No. 15-1111, and Wells Fargo v. Miami, No. 15-1112.
A 4-4 tie in the Supreme Court, which seemed a viable prospect on Tuesday, would leave the appeals court’s ruling in place, handing a victory to Miami but setting no national precedent.