After years rising through the ranks in the insurance industry, Jay S. Fishman reached the pinnacle of his professional career when he became the chief executive of Travelers in 2004. But nothing prepared him for the diagnosis he received in 2014 of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig’s disease, the irreversible neurodegenerative disease that attacks the nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord.
It took awhile for Mr. Fishman, who was 62 when he disclosed the diagnosis in 2015, to get over the shock.
“I came a little tongue and cheek to one of two conclusions, either because I was being punished for something I did in a previous life that was horrible or alternatively because I could make a difference,” Mr. Fishman told Forbes magazine months later.
In his remaining time, he tried to make the best of his misfortune by donating $20 million for three academic medical centers that conduct research into the causes of the disease and potential treatments.
He also turned to sports. Travelers is the lead sponsor of an annual P.G.A. golf tournament, and when his chief administrative officer, Andy F. Bessette, suggested raising money for A.L.S.-related causes at this year’s event, Mr. Fishman immediately said yes.
About $2.8 million was raised at the weeklong event held in Cromwell, Conn., in early August. Mr. Fishman died at age 63, 12 days after the final round. About 20 percent of the $1.5 million from donations went to the A.L.S. clinic at the Hospital for Special Care in New Britain, Conn., near Travelers’s executive offices in Hartford. Another $1.3 million was raised at a dinner to benefit the Bruce Edwards Foundation, which is devoted to A.L.S.-related research. The foundation is named after Tom Watson’s former caddy, who died of A.L.S. in 2004.
Some of that money came from the pro golfers, including Bubba Watson, who gave $100,000. Mr. Fishman, who got around on a motorized scooter, gave the golfer Jim Furyk, who had shot a record-setting round of 58, a check for $58,000. Furyk gave half the money to an A.L.S.-related group.
While the money raised at the event paled compared with what Mr. Fishman gave away himself, the exposure of aligning with a prominent sports event may have done more to further his cause than any single check.
Nonprofit organizations clamor to be associated with sports teams, leagues and events because of their broad reach and the popularity of the athletes. Sports fans are also more inclined to give to causes linked with their favorite players or teams.
What motivates teams, leagues and sports event operators to choose one cause over another can vary. But as Mr. Fishman’s case at Travelers illustrates, many times the choices are based on personal experiences of the key decision makers, some of whom gave money to charities before they became involved in sports.
In September, the Nascar Foundation gave $1 million to NYU Langone Medical Center as part of a three-year partnership to help children, a cause championed by Betty Jane France, the mother of Brian France, Nascar’s chairman. Nascar’s charitable arm has donated $25 million and helped more than one million children since it was created in 2006.
In many cases, there are several reasons. Sports leagues like to support charitable efforts linked to their sports. Major League Baseball, for instance, runs the R.B.I. program that builds baseball fields in inner cities. The program not only creates park space and helps children stay active, but it also inspires future generations of baseball fans. The National Football League and National Basketball Association team with nonprofit organizations to achieve similar goals.
Because sports attract so much attention, leagues like the N.B.A. as well as many teams and organizations are often besieged with requests to help promote charitable causes. Ms. Behrens said the N.B.A. worked with about a dozen core partners and half a dozen others less frequently. Cracking the lineup can be tough. The league receives about 100 pitches a year, though it leaves room for the possibility of working with new organizations.
A pro sports league can raise awareness like few other organizations. The N.F.L., for instance, has helped raise almost $15 million for the American Cancer Society since 2009, in part by having players wear pink game apparel in October, which is Breast Cancer Awareness month. No doubt, the league is trying to appeal to women through this alliance, but it also donates the profits from N.F.L.-related pink merchandise.
Some players have their own charities and can motivate a team to be involved. Stephen Curry of the Golden State Warriors donates money for each three-point shot he makes to Nothing but Nets, a group that provides insecticide-treated bed nets to regions where malaria is prevalent. The Warriors and other teams have taken up the cause as well.
In Philadelphia, the former first-round draft pick of the Eagles, Jermane Mayberry, started providing vision care to uninsured children in 1996. The cause was dear to him because he had an underdeveloped optic nerve in his left eye. Years after he left the Eagles, the team continues his effort in the form of the Eagles Eye Mobile.
Mr. Mayberry said that although he started the program, the Eagles had taken it to a new level because of its prominence in the community.
For some teams, giving is not just an obligation, but also a way to bond with a community. After Jeff Vinik bought the Tampa Bay Lightning in 2010, he wanted to find a way to better steer the team’s charitable giving to the people most in need. But as a newcomer to the city, he did not know the best way to do that. So he pledged $10 million and asked fans to nominate community heroes, who once chosen would tell the Lightning to whom to give money.
The Lightning Community Hero program has achieved multiple goals by helping the team help the community and getting fans involved in the process. Because the winners are introduced at every home game, fans can put a face with a name of a charity. That, in turn, can add to the glow of the team.
