When Molly Ringwald’s manager brought up an offer to star as the mother in a stage adaptation of the classic melodrama “Terms of Endearment,” it came with a caveat: “It’s a fantastic role, but you’re probably too young for it,” Ms. Ringwald recounted being told.
“Shirley MacLaine was 50 when she won the Academy Award in 1984, and I’m 48,” Ms. Ringwald said recently in reference to “Endearment” and perhaps traumatizing those who will always think of her as Claire Standish, the rich, popular high schooler from “The Breakfast Club.” That the women both have red hair was yet another coincidence.
So now Ms. Ringwald is at 59E59 Theaters in the outsize role of Aurora Greenway, a widow who spends half her time bickering with her grown daughter, Emma, and the other half pursuing a romance with a roguish former astronaut. Let’s just say there will be tears.
After complimenting her co-star Hannah Dunne (who plays Emma) on her all-pink outfit in the dressing room they share, Ms. Ringwald nimbly pinned her hair in preparation for her show wig (“I’m ruining a good haircut!”) while touching upon the evolution of female sexuality and her stint as an advice columnist. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
When was the last time you saw “Terms of Endearment”?
I saw it two or three times [when it came out]. Once I took on this role, I made a choice not to see it again. I did read the book — the play is based on both Larry McMurtry’s novel and the screenplay. The way Aurora looks is more faithful to the book, where the character is supposed to be more voluptuous. She’s supposed to be a bit of a suburban sexpot.
A lot of the movie’s humor derives from showing an older woman as sexually prim. Do you think this attitude has evolved?
A lot of parents try to be pals with their children now. While Emma and Aurora are close, they also argue a lot. What do you think of their relationship?
It’s interesting, because even though they talk every day, they don’t really have a best-friend relationship. She’s not trying to be her daughter — she’s trying to change her: the way she dresses, her hair, everything. She’s trying to turn Emma into this sort of image of herself, and Emma fights it all the time.
Aurora is opinionated and brisk and not necessarily likable at first. Is that fun to play?
It is! She’s a complete narcissist, very judgmental, very imperious, and just very involved with herself and the way things ought to be. And she makes a complete transformation toward the end of the play.
Besides appearing in movies, TV series and onstage, you have written fiction and nonfiction, recorded a jazz album, and for a year you wrote an advice column for The Guardian. Are you the kind of person whose friends call, moaning, “Molly, I don’t know what to do”?
Yeah I guess so [laughs]. I’m pretty good at giving advice — not so good at taking it. Because of those [1980s John Hughes] movies, I became a reluctant role model, and people started asking for my advice before I felt qualified to give it. So by the time the Guardian column came around, I thought, OK, I’ve been through some stuff, I might have an interesting point of view.
If Aurora or Emma were to write to you, what would you say to them?
I would probably counsel Emma to stand up to her mother more, tell her to have boundaries. But the fact is, they wouldn’t listen anyway. And it wouldn’t be a very interesting play if they took my advice.