BEIJING — Nearly 20 years after government officials barred Bai Ling from returning to China, the Chinese-born Hollywood actress has once again found herself at the tense intersection of entertainment and nationalism.
A new television documentary series commemorating the Long March, a pivotal event in Communist Party history, has instead provoked public outrage for featuring Ms. Bai, who is seen by some as anti-China, in one episode.
After the uproar last week, CCTV, the state broadcaster that produced the series, removed the offending episode from its websites and reposted a new version without the scenes featuring Ms. Bai.
“I will bring the wonderful and beautiful culture of our motherland to Hollywood and to the whole world!” she added.
Ms. Bai is the latest in a growing list of entertainers who have been pilloried in China for holding “incorrect” political views. Many, like Ms. Bai, have issued public apologies, fearing the consequences of losing access to one of the world’s biggest markets.
Soon after “Red Corner” was released, it was banned in China, and Ms. Bai was prohibited from returning to see her family.
Years later, Ms. Bai is apologizing again.
The documentary is one of many programs that have been released this year to commemorate what China considers the 80th anniversary of the end of the Long March, the fabled trek across China by embattled Chinese Communists as they fled Chiang Kai-shek’s advancing Nationalist troops.
Ms. Bai, also known for her work in films like “The Crow” (1994) and “Nixon” (1995), was originally featured in the sixth episode of the series.
During the course of filming, Ms. Bai is said to have spent about a month retracing the route of the Long March — a journey that she closely documented on her social media accounts. In photos posted online, she is seen wearing a light-blue Red Army uniform and braids.
Videos on her social media accounts show her singing with schoolchildren in Sichuan Province and making traditional sticky rice in the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region.
In one photo, she is dressed in a red-and-white sleeveless jumpsuit, leaning seductively in the doorway of Mao Zedong’s former residence in Yan’an.
 Get out!” The sentiment was echoed by many others.
A commentary published last week in Global Times, a nationalist-leaning newspaper, cited Ms. Bai’s “many vulgar nude photographs” and her arrest in 2008 for shoplifting two magazines and a pack of batteries at Los Angeles International Airport as additional reasons Chinese have a “very negative impression” of her.
