In a country where it is said: “Without bread, there is no more life,” local bakeries are disappearing quickly.
Two years ago, the 650 residents of La Chapelle-en-Juger lost their bakery, the last local business where they could meet one another, chitchat and gossip while waiting in line for their daily baguette or their weekend éclairs. For the community, the closing of the bakery was “un drame,” as one newspaper put it, or a tragedy, one that is being repeated in countless French villages.
Traveling in rural France these days means spotting closed bakeries, the faded paint on old windows and doors giving an indication of when the lights went out. It means encountering people mentioning with visible relief that their village still has one. Like in La Chapelle-en-Juger, the bakery is very often the one business that clings on after the disappearance of the butcher shop, the grocer or cafe.
The number of bakeries overall is increasing in France, especially in big cities. In Paris, people walking home at the end of the day, munching on a bit of baguette, remains a part of the cityscape.
But traditional mom-and-pop bakeries in rural areas are disappearing quickly — sometimes at a rate of four percent, or even higher, within a single year.
Few countries keep such extensive data about bakeries as France does.
Half the nation lives within 1.4 miles of a bakery, “as the crow flies,” according to a 2017 government report. In cities, 73 percent of the population lives within less than a half-mile.
How long do the French take to reach their bakery? According to the national bakery and confectionary association, the average trip to a bakery takes 7.4 minutes on foot, by car or with another mode of transportation. To be more precise, it’s five minutes in a city or 9.4 minutes in the countryside.
In La Chapelle-en-Juger, Mr. Vigot, 71, used to cross the street to the bakery. Now, he drives about two and a half miles to the small town of Marigny-le-Lozon, where he always buys two boules and a sliced loaf.
Between 30 and 40 residents of La Chapelle-en-Juger now buy their bread at Jeannot and Valérie Culeron’s bakery in Marigny-le-Lozon. Despite the positive effects on his business, Mr. Culeron, 48, who began his career as an apprentice at age 15, worries about the overall trends.
“We were there for baptisms, communions, weddings, and we made their yule logs,” Mr. Culeron said.
After everything in La Chapelle-en-Juger, except for the church tower, was razed during World War II, it was rebuilt with two grocery stores, a butcher shop and a bakery.
In the country where bread shortages helped trigger a revolution, Ms. Villedieu was aware of bread’s sensitivities: She herself had never purchased bread outside La Chapelle-en-Juger.
