A psychological thriller series debuts on Apple TV Plus. And the first two “Godfather” movies air on IFC.
SERVANT Stream on Apple TV Plus. A recent trailer for this series has all the ingredients of a shocking story: an unsettling doll, foreboding rain and a title card that reads “from M. Night Shyamalan.” That filmmaker is an executive producer of the series, a psychological thriller about a couple (Lauren Ambrose and Toby Kebbell) who have lost a child. As part of a form of therapy meant to help them cope, the pair start taking care of a lifelike baby doll. They even enlist a nanny (Nell Tiger Free) to help — which is when matters begin to take a turn for the exceedingly strange.
BRICK (2006) Stream on Netflix; Rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu and YouTube. The filmmaker Rian Johnson just released an Agatha Christie-style murder mystery called “Knives Out,” which hit theaters this week. He’s no stranger to a murder tale: “Brick,” Johnson’s debut feature, also centers on a mysterious killing. The movie injects film noir into a 2000s Southern California setting, telling the story of a teenager (Joseph Gordon-Levitt) who takes it upon himself to solve the murder of an ex-girlfriend (Emilie de Ravin).
THE GODFATHER PART II (1974) 9:30 p.m. on IFC. There are two big reasons Francis Ford Coppola’s revered mob sequel is worth revisiting this month: Roger J. Stone Jr. and Martin Scorsese. Scorsese’s new mob movie, “The Irishman,” pairs Al Pacino and Robert De Niro, who each had one of the biggest roles of their career in “The Godfather Part II.” The films would make a natural (if very long and gruesome) pairing. The second “Godfather” movie also came up this month in the trial of Stone, where a text message Stone once sent asking an associate to “do a Frank Pentangeli” came into play. The message was a reference to a character who gives obtuse answers during a Senate hearing in “The Godfather Part II” — and is a good example of the deep cultural impact that the series has had. For memorable lines about “an offer he can’t refuse” and a muscleman sleeping with the fishes, see the original movie, THE GODFATHER, which will air at 5:30 p.m. on IFC.