For decades, they lived in a crumbling palace in Delhi, claiming to be the royal heirs to the fallen kingdom of Oudh. Who were they?
It was a stunning and tragic story. But was it real?
On a spring afternoon, while on assignment in India, Ellen Barry got a phone call that sent her looking for the truth.
Listen to the story below, in three parts.
A woman appeared on the platform of the New Delhi railway station with her two adult children, declaring they were the descendants of the royal family of Oudh. She said they would not leave until what was theirs had been restored. So they settled in and waited — for nearly a decade.
I’m having trouble finding my way out.
Huh. Really strange — it always was strange.
I never thought I’d be telling you the story I’m about to tell you, but here goes.
In the spring of 2016, which is when this story begins, I was the New York Times bureau chief in Delhi. And I was spending a lot of my time trying to solve problems that were not strictly journalistic. For one thing, our power blinked on and off at two-minute intervals for much of the day. This seemed to be related to the troop of monkeys — rhesus macaques — that lived on the roof of the building and had been chewing through the rubber insulation on the wiring.
During the monsoon, water had seeped into the walls of the office, which had begun to ripple, and smelled like damp cardboard. We solved these problems the way we solved all our problems: with makeshift solutions. There is a word for this in Hindi, “jugaad.” It served to preserve some kind of complex equilibrium that kept everything running. This approach could seem like negligence, or, on occasion, like kindness.
— a few feet away from the woman who had replaced him. Our landlord insisted on being paid six months rent in advance, in cash, so we would have to take the money over to her in rolling suitcases, as if we were hitmen.
When I did get a chance to focus on journalism, the bigness of it all could be paralyzing. My beat contained 1.6 billion people, one-eighth of the world’s population.
We were writing about budget reports.
There were landslides, mudslides, floods, droughts, stampedes.
Avalanches. Outbreaks of chikungunya and encephalitis.
— the death count is likely to rise.
But there was another kind of story that rarely made it into the newspapers. These were the dramas that captivated people in their everyday lives — doomed lovers, epic battles, stunning reversals of fortune, magical transformation, legends. These stories were at the heart of the city where I lived, but they were not part of my standard workload.
Every morning, when I dropped my kids off at school, I drove past a narrow road that led into a forest. It was said that deep in that forest, in a palace cut off from the world, lived a prince and a princess — the last surviving members of a Muslim royal family. Few people had actually seen them, but everyone knew the story.
It was like a story being born in front of your eyes, and a story that could easily be fiction.
I don’t think I will ever hear of such a story in my lifetime again.
They were kind of semi-mythical figures themselves. They turned into, almost, figures from an Indian epic.
And once, we were just going for a walk in the forest. And he said, oh, have you heard about this prince who lived in these ruins of the forest?
Their story was passed between tea sellers and rickshaw drivers and shopkeepers in Old Delhi.
But how could there be a king in the jungle?
There are different versions of this story, depending on who you spoke to. Some people said that the family, the royal family of Oudh, had been there since the British had usurped their kingdom in 1856, and that the forest had somehow grown up around the palace, engulfing it.
In the bushes, I just couldn’t see much. But I just saw him. He was running.
Some said they were a family of jinns, the shapeshifting spirits that were seen at Delhi’s holy sites.
It was a story that had lodged in my mind.
And then one day, in the spring of 2016, I got this message from our office manager.
Ellen, have you been trying to get in touch with the royal family of Oudh?
There was a call from Princess Sakina Mahal, or her secretary, I guess. The secretary left precise instructions on when you should call her — between 11:00 and 12:00 noon.
She ended this message by saying, if you’re interested. I was.
I’m Ellen Barry, and this is the story of the jungle prince.
Chapter 1: The Railway Station.
The story goes — in the early 1970s, a mysterious woman appeared on the platform of the New Delhi railway station, announcing herself as Wilayat, the Begum of Oudh, the great-great-granddaughter of the warrior queen Hazrat Mahal, from the fallen kingdom of Oudh. Oudh was a Shiite Muslim dynasty that once ruled an area the size of Scotland, until the British annexed the kingdom and exiled its rulers. And at that point, that’s when the queen, Hazrat Mahal, led an uprising against the British. It’s sometimes called the first war of Indian independence, but her army was vanquished. She died in obscurity.
So the woman in the train station said she was Hazrat Mahal’s great-great-granddaughter. 
It included mosques, shrines and palaces — famous buildings now maintained by the Indian government. It’s almost as if she had come into Washington and asked for the Lincoln Memorial, the Capitol, the White House and the Washington Monument.
She declared that she would stay there, in the railway station, until they had been restored to her. So she settled in the V.I.P. waiting room and unloaded a whole household there — carpets, potted palms, a silver tea set, huge, glossy Great Danes. She and her children settled on red plastic chairs and waited. They waited for almost a decade.
The begum was an arresting-looking woman, nearly six feet tall and broad-shouldered, with a face as craggy and immobile as an Easter Island statue. She wore a sari of dark, heavy silk, and kept a pistol hidden in its folds. The children appeared to be in their mid-20s. They were known as Prince Cyrus and Princess Sakina. I’m told that they were strangely submissive, reluctant even to accept a mouthful of food without their mother’s permission. They addressed her as “Your Highness.” They were attended by Nepali servants in livery, wearing white turbines, so overawed by their mistress, the begum, that they approached her on their knees. If you wanted to talk to the begum, you couldn’t just go up and talk to her. You had to submit a written petition on embossed stationery that would then be placed on a silver platter and carried to her. And she would write back a response which would be read aloud by one of her children.
Crowds would sometimes gather around the begum, sometimes weeping to see a queen in such lowly condition. Sometimes, people walked away backwards, so as not to insult her by turning their back. Once, during Muharram, the annual Shiite ritual of mourning, a visitor found her surrounded by pilgrims flagellating themselves with chains to which razor blades had been attached, leaving the railway platform spattered with blood.
The mention of the kingdom of Oudh, even today, stirred feelings in most Indians, but especially in Shiite Muslims. And seeing them homeless, on a railway platform, was even more powerful. Her story of treachery and dispossession had found an audience.
But still, the government wouldn’t budge.
And after several years of this, Wilayat hit upon a far more effective way to advocate her case — journalists. In particular, foreign correspondents.
The Washington Post, Sunday, August 9, 1981. Stubborn queen holds court in New Delhi railroad station.
The begum’s dogs have teeth.
Princess stationed at depot, waiting for her kingdom.
A palace is all that they want.
The begum imposed stringent conditions on journalists. She could only be photographed when the moon was waning, one outlet reported. The journalists complied, delighted by the Gothic peculiarity of it all.
For the 51-year-old matriarch of a royal line that once ruled 5 million subjects in an area the size of West Virginia resides today just off platform number one at the New Delhi railroad station.
Her aristocratic bearing, and an entourage that includes seven servants and nine Doberman pinschers, lend a regal air to her presence.
— lend a regal air to her presence. The surroundings definitely do not.
This coverage worried the government. It was inconvenient and embarrassing. The last thing they wanted was more unrest.
They seem to have free run of the area near the portico.
A reporter and a staff photographer visited the station.
One person who worried a lot about the begum’s appearance was the chief minister of the state of Uttar Pradesh, where Oudh had once been based. The Shiite population there could easily explode if they believed that their queen was being abused. So the officials there put together a plan to get the family out of the public eye. Ammar Rizvi, an aide to the chief minister, was sent to Delhi to present the begum with an envelope containing 10,000 rupees to be used for her return to Lucknow. The begum’s reaction was imperious and dramatic. She threw the bills up into the air so that they fluttered down to the platform.
Rizvi asked his personal assistant to run around and pick them up. They returned with an offer of a four-bedroom house in Lucknow, which the begum dismissed as too small.
She wanted something grander — a palace, something that would separate her and her children from the commoners.
The begum has rejected as meaningless an offer in 1976 of a modern home in Lucknow, formerly known as Oudh, in Utter Pradesh, bordering Nepal. I never even looked at it, she said. It isn’t good enough for my precious dogs. I would rather die in one small, ruined palace, or in this dirty, vulgar railway station, than accept dishonor. This offer still stands. The case is at a standstill. The petitioning continues.
As the years went by, the government got more anxious. And then, in 1984, nearly a decade after the Oudh family began its campaign on the railway platform, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi accepted their claim. She granted them the use of an abandoned 14th-century hunting lodge, with pavilions and a commanding view of Delhi. It was known as Malcha Mahal, a retreat built for an emperor. It had no electricity or running water, but it had grandeur and separation — the things that the begum had demanded.
The begum found this offer acceptable, and so they packed up their trunks, rolled up their carpets, and with their ferocious dogs and their loyal servants, vacated the railway station for good. They moved their belongings into Malcha Mahal and proceeded to cut themselves off from the city that surrounded them. They lined the perimeter of their property with loops of razor wire and menacing signs, warning intruders will be gunned down.
And that’s where they stayed for the next 40 years — in the middle of the city, in the middle of the forest, hidden from the world.
My name is Sachit (ph). I am a rider — cyclist. And one day, while riding, we saw this road going up. And we never knew what is up this road. So just we noticed a strange, sort of haunted, and a quiet place. There were no windows, no doors.  So we were scared, initially.  A lot of times, what happened was that a few guys, local guys, they were trying to sneak in. And once I saw that the prince was running. And those guys, they got scared, and they jumped off the fence and they ran away. He was very, very thin — very thin, pale. That’s the only visual contact of the prince I have ever had. They never interacted with anyone.
The begum and her family had settled in the woods, in absolute seclusion. But they were still an object of fascination in Delhi. People would come to the lodge, braving the guard dogs, hoping to get a glance of what was inside.
— people interested in retelling their story.
I’m an artist, and would like to draw some sketches of Mahal.
It came as a profound shock to me to learn that the royal house of Oudh is devoid of light and water, and honorable allowances.
Your Royal Highness, please accept our salutations, and forgive us for interrupting your Sunday morning.
Most respected majesties, Christopher Thomas of The Times told me the story of your family, and I’ve been doing a little research of my own. It is one of the most amazing and moving histories I’ve heard about. And I would like to tell your story on international television for those who have not read about it.
— leaving letters full of flattery and compassion.
I would be honored to meet you. I greatly admire your courage for taking such a principled stand to regain your palace and what is rightfully yours.
Sometimes, outright begging.
I am truly sorry for this botheration, but we have tried every option on flights to meet Your Highness’s specified time.
The Begum would speak only to foreign correspondents. Commoners, by which she meant Indians, were not allowed in. And her children followed suit.
Your Highnesses, I am a Canadian broadcast journalist in India preparing a one-hour radio program for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, CBC.
I feel your own words, in your own voice, will set the record straight. We do not wish to pry into the private and personal grief which Your Highness clearly feels, but this, I repeat, is a story which must be told to the world accurately, carefully, and in your own words.
Very truly yours, Newsweek magazine.
The Associated Press for India.
And then, in 1997, the begum’s children, Prince Cyrus and Princess Sakina, told The Times of London that their mother, in a final gesture of protest against the treachery of Britain and India, had committed suicide by drinking a poison made with crushed diamonds and pearls. They called it the drink of silence.
She took her life. You asked me how you crush up a diamond — I think it’s pretty difficult. But crushing diamonds, drinking them, which then destroys the esophagus and the stomach and just rips your insides to pieces, and is a very empress-like way to take her own life, shall we say. Cyrus, he then took her body, put it in his bed, and lay with her for several days or weeks or months until she decomposed to the extent that they decided to bury her. Then, the dogs dug her up and ate her. They then became absolutely paranoically obsessed with the fact that the spirit of the royal tradition of Oudh was also inside the dogs.
Because the dogs ate part of the mother.
I think so, yeah. I really do believe so.
In the early 2000s, a man named Nick Kulukundis, a friend of a friend, heard about the story over dinner one night and decided to look into it.
They didn’t let anyone in.
Nick and his brother-in-law Sachin weren’t far from Malcha Mahal, and they decided to take their chances and walk through the forest up to the lodge to see for themselves.
With that, Cyrus softened, and a kind of friendship began to form. Whenever they were in town, Nick and his brother-in-law would go back to visit Cyrus in the woods.
But they were never allowed inside the lodge.
When you say weird, what do you mean?
But then, finally, one day, Cyrus invited them in.
And what they found was a grand building, but one with no electricity, no running water, completely open to the elements.
— throne chairs lined, one next to each other. And then some other chairs arranged in a semicircle about, say, eight or nine feet in front of them. It was right in the middle of the table, in the back of that sort of anteroom, if you like — was a glass, a little glass with pearl on its side, like this, covered in mold and stuff. This was the glass that she had drunk the crushed diamond. It had fallen there like this, this angle. The sort of moldy stuff here was the remnants of whatever the drink was into which she’d inserted the diamond. And it was as it had been. We sat down. And it was just Cyrus. This is exactly as — we have changed nothing since the day.
They’d changed nothing since the day their mother took her own life years before.
The siblings had been frozen in time.
— used as a big dining table, set with absolute beautiful gold and silver and all of that. It was a normal-looking dining table, except for one thing — that on each plate there was a mountain of mold about this height. This was the dinner that had been on the night that she had first ingested this entire — they hadn’t changed anything. And the mold was a meter high.
Oh, Jesus. Oh, my god.
Cyrus disappeared and returned with two beers.
I opened it, and it was treacle.
It had turned into a thick syrup.
And we had to drink it.
The beers had been in a pantry for 30 years.
But we realized — because he was watching, we had to drink this, whatever it was.
He became very much more formal.
— until Cyrus turned to them and asked, would you like to meet the princess?
And he said, Her Grand Majesty is coming. And from a passageway emerged the princess. It was pretty much actually in line with what I’d seen through my telephoto lens. She was a person who had been living like an animal for 30 years. According to Cyrus later, she had neither washed nor had a bath or washed her hair, nor nothing, for more than 30 years — since they moved in. She’d never left the place. She had stayed in that property. And she had reverted to her state of living, which was a Stone Age person. I mean, extraordinary. You’ve seen matted hair on people at, like, Burning Man and stuff. Imagine that over 30 years — it’s solid lumps of hair. It’s branches of hair that kind of hang down, weighing her head down.
And her face?
Nick came to feel that, in her own way, the Princess Sakina was carrying on her mother’s legacy.
I felt that she was aware that she had taken the decision to ruin herself in this way, in order to try her ultimate best to get something of progress in what her mother had tried to do. But also knowing she was never going to get there. That’s the only thing that kept her going with it. I think without that, she would have died long ago. That was her mission, her entire objective. That was their focal point. That’s why she got up. They wanted their country back. They wanted the nation of Oudh back.
The princess had passed the years trying to preserve the history of Oudh. She’d spent her days inside the lodge, bent over a stone slab, writing the family’s story over and over and over. And she made a book, and asked them to read some of its passages aloud, which pleased Her Royal Highness.
And she smiled. I mean, there was no smile before. She smiled.
And then, the princess, with a kind of wave of her hand, indicated that Cyrus should take them on a tour of the lodge. They made their way to the roof.
We went down corridors. Many of these corridors had huge wasps’ nest.
Through wasps’ nests and bee stings.
I got stung several times. I was in quite a lot of pain.
We got onto the roof.
— Cyrus told them that this was his kingdom. And then he put his arms around the shoulders of both men as they stared out at it.
Nick described this as one of the most extraordinary days of his life.
So one day, at the very end of May, that time of year in Delhi when it just becomes dazzlingly, blindingly hot, I walked through the door of my office.
The news that morning was another border incident between India and Pakistan in Kashmir.
And I was trying to figure out how we would cover it, when I got that message from our office manager.
Ellen, have you been trying to get in touch with the royal family of Oudh? There was a call from Princes Sakina Mahal, or her secretary, I guess. The secretary left precise instructions on when you should call her — between 11:00 and 12:00 noon.
I was going into the forest in the middle of the city for an audience with the princess.
I think it’s an untold story, you know? I mean, I came to India first in 1995 or something. And what happened? What was the experience of removing the nation status of very tiny kingdoms and fiefdoms all across this massive, beautiful country? What was the human cost of taking away hundreds, and hundreds, and hundreds of incredibly rich kingdoms, and cultures, and peoples, and family? One point in Rajasthan, we were driving off the beaten track. And I saw that there was an old 13th-century fort, not dissimilar to Neemrana, but in ruin. So we somehow went up to there. And there was at the top of it a man sat there with a little fire, cooking up a little thing of chai. He was the maharaja’s direct descendant. And I just thought, if you were a tenacious journalist, there’s probably a hundred Cyruses still out in the regions on their little falling-apart temples and fortresses who — you just look, and you’ll see an 8-carat diamond or you’ll see a carpet or something like that. It’s just — it’s the in-between the cracks.
— and rang, and rang.  It was not an ordinary conversation. The person on the other end had a kind of quavering voice. I had no idea who I was speaking to. Princess Sakina? Her secretary? This is what they told me: that I should drive to the very end of the road into the forest and stop the car. Get out. Walk away from the car, so the driver wasn’t near me, and wait there alone. And someone would come and get me at exactly 5:30. I pondered that for a second as I held the phone up to my ear. A second passed, and I told the person on the other end, of course I would meet them alone in the woods. I said goodbye. And I hung up.
Two days later, I asked the driver to take me into the forest. We left the bustling, honking, sweaty neighborhood of Chanakyapuri and drove until the trees became denser and more tangled — almost enough to block out the light. I asked the driver to stop and got out of the car.
He waited at a distance, and I stood there awkwardly on the gravel road holding my notebook, wondering what would come next.
To the right and left of me, there were nothing but woods. It was totally quiet. All the sounds of the city — the traffic, the rickshaws — it had all fallen away. All I could hear were birds.
And so I stood there, and I waited.
Suddenly, the bushes started rustling, and a man appeared. He was an older man, kind of elfin.  But still handsome, pale, high-cheekboned, with a hawk nose. I instantly recognized him. I’d seen him in pictures. This was Prince Cyrus.
He wasn’t as imposing as I had expected. He was jumpy. He seemed nervous.
He introduced himself as Cyrus.
It was the high-pitched voice I had heard on the phone. Then he turned and led me into the woods, but it was not easy going.
There were thorns, vines, rocks, underbrush. You couldn’t say there was a path. I couldn’t see a palace. But he was moving fast. It’s all I can do to keep up with him. Then we finally reach a clearing, and I look up and see the palace.
It was a big, crumbling old hulk built of massive stones. It had been built in the 14th century as a retreat for an emperor, with handsome vaulting arches in four directions. But it was crumbling under its own weight. One portico had collapsed. And I wondered if it was safe to walk inside.
When we stepped inside, it was dim but grand. The entrance hall had been carefully arranged with palm trees and elegant brass pots. Hanging on the wall was a portrait of his mother wearing a sari, gazing off into the distance. From there, we walked into a high-ceilinged central atrium, which was empty except for a long marble slab they used as a table.
There was an eruption of moist, musty air and high-pitched squealing. Bats. I could almost feel their wings on my cheek.
I was looking for Princess Sakina, but there was no sign of her. Cyrus said she was away recuperating from an injury. Recuperating where? I wondered. He wanted to take me up to the roof, just as he had done with Nick 15 years before. The roof had become overgrown with grass and trees. And we stood up there, maybe 40 feet off the ground, so that we were looking down on treetops.
It was as if we were in the middle of an ocean of green. And Delhi, swimming in the heat, seemed miles away. Over our heads, there were evening migrations of green parakeets.
Cyrus showed it to me with a sweep of his arm as if it all belonged to him. I told him I felt like I wasn’t in Delhi anymore, and he said, no, this isn’t Delhi. He called it his seashore. He said people everywhere were jealous of him. They wanted his view. And at that moment, it was hard to argue with him. It was beautiful.
But when we went back down the stairs, I could see how meager his life was. There was no electricity, no running water, no doors or windows, no protection from the weather. In the monsoon season, water would run in rivulets down the walls, and snakes and scorpions would nest between the stones. Clouds of mosquitoes would feed on the royal family in their sleep.
Cyrus had carefully laid out a table with platters of apples and nuts. And he offered me wine, and vodka, and instant coffee, but I politely declined. I noticed that there were three places set at the table. One was at the head of the table, carefully arranged, with a fine mesh laid over a water glass to keep the bugs out. He told me he set that place every day for his mother.
When my eyes rested on him, in the open neck of his shirt, I could see practically every bone in his sternum. And I wondered how much he got to eat.
He told me that he was shrinking, that his sister was shrinking, that we were all shrinking.
I left that day without meeting the princess, but Cyrus assured me that I would. He told me this rather formally, that his sister had decided her last interview would be given to Ellen Barry of The New York Times. Sakina seemed to be the keeper of the family history. Cyrus had shown me the leather-bound book that she had put together after their mother’s death. It was an obsessive, stream-of-consciousness document that one friend who had seen it compared to “Finnegans Wake.” I could imagine her writing from morning to night, as imperious and single-minded as her mother. So I left, but I told Cyrus I would be back.
And I did come back.
One visit turned into two, then three, then four.
This is a very unusual selection of fruit. Usually you just have apples.
I kept stopping by, waiting for Princess Sakina to show up.
What do you mean, change?
But each time, Cyrus would politely explain that she was still in Lucknow. He said her injury was taking longer than usual to heal. So in the absence of the princess, Cyrus and I fell into this kind of rhythm.
Monotony, I don’t like it.
Well, if you didn’t like monotony, you wouldn’t have stayed in this place for the last 30 years.
Well, but that’s a very different story. Take the knife.
I would ask him questions about his past.
When you were in the railway station, were you physically attacked?
— but I found that they were not always enlightening.
You see this big dent? This big dent?
So I kept asking about the princess. She seemed to be the boss here. I asked if he could call her, and he said she didn’t use a telephone. That if he wanted to communicate with her, he would send a servant on the train up to Lucknow to whisper something in her ear. That seemed pretty strange, even for this family.
Is there anything I can bring you from Lucknow?
So I’ll be back on Friday.
— and leave for the day.
This went on for six or seven months. But then one night, he called me on the phone. He was howling unintelligibly. I remember lying curled up on my daughter’s bunk bed, listening to him. I couldn’t make out what he was saying at first. But then he confessed something.
 And that he told no one. And that he’d buried her alone. And that he was afraid the jackals would eat her.
This whole time I had been getting to know him, he’d been living in the lodge alone.
This was the kingdom of Oudh.
It was on the verge of extinction.
Have I my sandwich similar to you?
This is fish. That’s chicken.
I went by a couple days later just to make sure he was O.K. I brought him a bag of food from McDonald’s — a Filet-O-Fish and a chicken sandwich.
Take a saucer. Napkin I’ve given to you.
After that phone call, something changed in our relationship. We became more familiar. We talked less about Oudh.
Am I taller than you? Am I more tall than you?
Yeah, yeah. Although, maybe — maybe when you were younger, you were a little bit taller. O.K., I’m taller.
(SINGING) I’d build a big tall house with the rooms by the dozen — I like to be in America! O.K. by me in America!
I bought him a tarpaulin to hang over his cot, so that he could stay dry while he slept. Once, he asked me to kiss him on the cheek. And when I did, he said it was the first kiss he had had in 10 years. He said, when you come over here, my heart goes, doopity doo, Sophia Loren.
My heart goes doopity doo, Sophia Loren.
Why? Because — anyway.
[LAUGHS] You’re getting very sentimental, Cyrus.
Some of his ideas were fanciful. He thought, for instance, that he might want to make the hunting lodge into a bed and breakfast.
Please! 
— I told him I couldn’t supply it — and offered me his carpets, which I refused. He was really interested in food.
And, of course, I do love coffee.
He wanted to know what I’d eaten.
He wanted to tell me what he had eaten.
Oh, he must be a very heavy person. I am not.
He liked Ovaltine. He really wanted cheese. He liked to say that he fed himself almost entirely on minced meat and peas.
I brought my daughters over to meet him, and he served them bowls of melted chocolate ice cream, purchased for the occasion, and a glass of water, which contained a tiny, white, swimming spiral of a worm.
Why don’t you leave this place?
Go to a comfortable — a comfortable room.
Well, I think you could probably find someone to help you.
I really don’t know. This is a very big question.
If you had a chance to leave, would you?
If I have a very fine female, I will leave this place. I will leave this place.
You’re not going to find a fine female by sitting here. You have to go out.
You say everything is shrinking. Everything we have has shrunk down.
And now the cannon is gone. Your sister is gone.  The dogs are gone.
So it’s close to zero. And the thing between zero and now is you. You are that last thing.
Yeah, yeah, yeah — shrinking, last. Yeah.
You’ve accepted this.
I would love to be with someone.
It’s very different here during the night.
The crickets are very loud.
Are they crickets?
I was feeling more protective of him, but I was also working on a story. He was the last one left. With Princess Sakina dead, Cyrus no longer seemed bound by the family code. Maybe he could tell me more about his past. So I asked him questions whenever I could, guiding the conversation back to the kingdom of Oudh.
You were born in Lucknow.
No, I was not [INAUDIBLE] — I was born in England.
In England. I told you.
It all just seemed muddled. Where was he born? Who was his father? Didn’t they have any living relatives? When I asked him these questions, his response was often to deflect.
Leave that portion behind. Leave that.
Leave it, he’d say.
O.K., anyway, no, change the topic.
He talked about a house they’d lived in in Kashmir before coming to the train platform. He said someone had burned it down. But he didn’t want to say much more about it.
They wanted to burn us alive.
Were you in the house when it burned?
Yes. And everyone was viewing — the smoke is coming out. Nobody came to let us know. So I don’t want to — please, for god’s sake, do not recall this K-A-S-H-M-I-R again.
Please! And forget it.
The closer I got to him, the more I thought he was withholding. And the fonder I grew of him, the more I grew skeptical.
You’re just a very mysterious person, because I don’t know who you really are. Like, I don’t understand who you are.
Well, anyway, I’m just right sitting before you.
We never got anywhere. And anyway, I had to go. I had a new assignment in London.
So listen. When I go — I go in, like, six weeks.
Would you like someone else to come see you?
When I go, I’ll be away. Shall I send someone to come visit?
On the night of my flight, I went to see him, to say goodbye.
And then at 10:00 p.m., I’ll go to the plane. My flight leaves at 2:00 a.m.
O.K., but you have to be a little early — two hours or three hours before.
And he asked me this funny thing. He said, how do I get word to you if I die? And I asked him if he was planning to commit suicide.
No, I will not. But I have some other thing.
That runs in your family a little bit.
But you’ve never been interested?
No, I do not know about next step. But so far, I’m going to preserve myself.
But I’m disturbed that you think something might happen to you.
Yes, of course, of course, of course. But good that you have told me that. But it’s O.K. It’s O.K. 
I promised to call him.
Well, then, I’ll see you again.
But I think you’re going to be O.K.
And so I left. When I turned to look back at him from the path, he was replacing the iron bar that separated him from the outside world.
Months passed before I next heard about Cyrus.
I was on assignment, interviewing the Swedish foreign minister, when someone sent me a message. Cyrus’s body had been found in the hunting lodge.
I put down my bags and sat down on the floor of the airport.
I’d promised to call him.
So we’re driving into Malcha Mahal.
A few months later, I went back to India, back to the hunting lodge to see what was left. I talked to the guards at a nearby military installation, who sometimes would see Cyrus coming and going. And they said that in the days before he died, Cyrus had been seen shaking violently, apparently feverish, as he tried to ride his bicycle into town. They helped him make his way back to the hunting lodge and asked if he needed anything. He asked for lemonade and ice cream.
When night fell, the guard would call out, Rajah, are you O.K.? And Cyrus would respond, I’m O.K. Then, one night, there was no response.
And a few days later, when they went to check on him again, they found him curled on the stone floor naked, dead.
I asked the guard, how can this happen to someone from a royal dynasty?
He looked at me and repeated something that he said Cyrus used to say to him as if it explained his whole life — a couplet: We used to belong up there in the sky. Then we fell and got stuck in a date tree.
A woman’s shoe, big piece of broken pottery, carton of cigarettes.
When I went into the hunting lodge, the place was a shambles of discarded papers that had been tipped onto the floor.
It’s just a litter inside.
Everything was covered with a thick layer of dust. The carefully laid table — it was gone, smashed and upended.
Yeah, well, I don’t know if there’s anything else to see here. It’s just an empty cave.
It’s like none of it ever happened.
I sat down on a rolled carpet and began to go through the papers that were piled at my feet, hoping to find something that shed light on Cyrus’s life.
What I found were newspaper articles and letters from journalists.
Piles of them, carefully curated, going back to the 1970s. On this matter, the family had been meticulous.
This family had been keeping secrets.
That night, I wrote to my editor, if we can find Shahid, I think we’ll be able to answer all of our questions.
So I flew back to London and got on a train, and headed to Yorkshire.
So I kept hearing about about this family from a long time back. And they were kind of semi-mythical figures themselves. But I still don’t know the true story of what happened to them.
Chapter 3: A House in Yorkshire.
Please do not leave your luggage unattended in the station. Luggage left unattended may be removed.
A few days after I got back to London, I hopped on a train for Bradford in Yorkshire. It was farther north than I had ever been in England.
When I got off the train, it was a blustery, rainy day. I walked from the bus stop past takeout Chinese, betting parlors, vape shops, rows and rows of nearly identical brick houses.
Until I finally reached the address on the Western Union slips. The home of Shahid Butt, the man who identified himself as Cyrus’s brother.
In front of me stood a neat, small house with a trim patch of lawn. The yard was full of garden statues. There must have been at least 40 of them. There were gnomes, fairies, Buddhas, leprechauns. As I stood there, I realized how nervous I was. I paced in front of the house a little bit. It was just me and the gnomes.
Hey, look, it’s Ellen Barry from The New York Times.
Good luck in there, Ellen.
And then I finally worked up the courage to ring the bell and waited.
The door was opened by a big man in one-piece tiger print pajamas. He looked to be in his mid-80s. His eyes were cloudy with age. But he was still imposing, barrel-chested, with hands that seemed twice the size of normal hands. I could see that as a young man, he had been a giant.
But the thing that struck me most of all is that he had Cyrus’s face, the same jutting cheekbones, the same pale skin.
I introduced myself and told him why I was there. I had known his brother. I wanted to understand the story of their family. A little to my surprise, he stepped back from the door and gestured for me to come in. And I followed him into a small room at the front of the house. He laid down on a cot and motioned for me to sit.
Do you have the flu?
Pains and aches.
The TV was on, and he turned his head toward it. He didn’t seem particularly eager to converse. So here I was. I put down my bag and looked around. The room was narrow, crowded with furniture, and had a window facing onto the front yard. Beside his bed, I saw something — two framed photos of an imposing-looking woman in a sari.
It was Wilayat, the Begum of Oudh. I’d seen those pictures before. Cyrus had them.
We sat like this for a while, and I asked him about his health.
Is that from — did you get that joint pain from your work?
We always called him Mickey.
His name was Mickey, Mickey Butt.
I asked him about his mother’s claim to Oudh, but he was vague and trailed off.
I’ve got confused by my old age.
Saying he was confused in his old age. But I could tell that the subject made him uncomfortable.
I was very big for my age.
— where his enormous build helped him get work in an iron foundry.
I should have all women, beautiful women.
Every time I tried to steer the conversation back to the royal family of Oudh, he’d say some version of this.
This is what the main thing I’m saying. I don’t want to talk about it.
Because I want to forget what people are trying to remind me.
I want to forget what people are trying to remind me.
I’m like a bird, long, long lost bird, lost lamb. I don’t want to revise my past.
I don’t know how long I had been sitting there when his wife, Camellia, walked in, with a bustle of shopping bags and a yappy white dog.
I explained to her why I was there, to talk about Shahid’s family. And then Shahid said something about wanting to go feed his chickens, and left me alone with Camellia.

Those, the dogs?
No, all of them, because you have a huge collection of statues.
She was a brisk, chatty Lancashire woman.
Do you want a coffee or a tea?
Tea, sure. Tea would be fine. Why don’t you let me help you?
She made me a cup of tea, and we sat down to talk. I asked her about her life with Shahid.
Camellia and Shahid had met in 1968. She said, in those days, he could fight four men at one time.
And he would say, before I die, three of you will. He was a lunatic.
(LAUGHING) Was he?
He was a lion of a man.
She reported that he had a 46-inch chest and a 32-inch waist.
His arms were absolutely huge.
I was told that once, as a young man, Shahid had been run over by a car, then rose to his feet, pulled the driver out of the car, and punched him in the face.
The neighborhood kids used to call him Tarzan.
Very brave. There was no fear whatsoever in him.
I wonder what that’s like, to be a giant.
When Camellia and Shahid first married, she corresponded with her new mother-in-law, and was impressed by all the talk about Oudh.
She told me she was a direct descendant.
Yeah, that was her claim.
To this warrior queen.
But as time went on, she had become more skeptical, and Shahid didn’t have many answers.
I don’t know whether Shahid won’t have blocked this out.
It seemed that during their 48 years of marriage, Shahid had said very little about his mother’s claim. But she never stopped wanting to know more.
Is this something that you openly debate with him, or he just doesn’t want to talk about it?
No. He doesn’t want to speak about it, especially not about Sakina and Mickey. He did send money.
I told her everything, about how I had become friends with Cyrus, who they knew as Mickey.
And he would go so quickly through the forest that I almost had to run to keep up with him.
About how he had been living in the last years of his life, and about how confused I was by the story of their family. I took out some of the newspaper clippings to show her.
“A palace is all that they want,” The Statesman, 1978.
 A palace is all that everybody wants.
As we spoke, I realized that she was as perplexed by this whole thing as I was.
Where has he got this Cyrus name from?
I don’t know. Where did he get Cyrus?
And that [INAUDIBLE].
Do you think it could have been Wilayat’s invention?
It was definitely embellished. Yes.
Well, they said things like, her suicide was she crushed diamonds, and she drank the crushed diamonds. This is not — this can’t be true.
That hasn’t been proven.
But also, it sounds like a fairy tale.
Well, who was the fairy?
I had, at last, found someone who shared my fascination with the family, a co-conspirator.
It’s a very interesting story.
But neither of us knew quite what kind of a story it was.
What is true, and what isn’t?
Back in London, I spent most of my time in the parliamentary hamster wheel of Brexit.
But whenever I got the chance, I researched the family’s history.
Then, occasionally, I take the train to visit Shahid and Camellia.
I’ve got lots of things.
Shahid seemed increasingly worn down.
What should we ask him?

I have to go in 10 minutes.
No, you can’t go in 10 minutes. She’s come to talk to you. You have to go later today.
She would sit with me, gently prodding him to remember those early years with his mother.
She fished out old letters that they had received from Delhi, letters from years ago, when Mickey still called himself Mickey, and they referred to their mother as mommy.
They’re just bordering on the ridiculous.
So I’m on my way to Bradford. I guess Shahid is not well. He had a fall.
It was on my fourth visit to Bradford that something seemed to break loose for Shahid.
Shahid, which house burned down?
On that visit, he told me a story that was different from anything he had told me before. It was a story about his family’s experience of Partition.
First to hold the office was Viscount Canning in 1858.
This was right after World War II. Great Britain had mobilized India’s resources to fight that war and, in exchange, had promised the country full independence. So once the war ended, Britain had to make good on its promise.
At Delhi, Lord Louis Mountbatten arrives to take up his appointment as India’s viceroy and governor general.
The government instructed its new viceroy, Lord Mountbatten, to deliver India’s independence and get Britain out as quickly and smoothly as possible, to find the least worst way to retreat from India.
Religious violence was breaking out across the country, and Muslims were demanding a state of their own. And so the British decided to create not one country, but two. India would be majority Hindu. Pakistan would be majority Muslim.
Mountbatten had a year to divide things up, but he also had a promotion in the Navy that he wanted to get back to. He moved the deadline up by 10 months and appointed another official, a legal scholar who had never set foot in India, to carve up the territory instead. He gave him five weeks to do it.
So he drew the lines, and set in motion one of the largest forced migrations in human history.
For Shahid’s family, prosperous, educated Muslims, it meant the end of life as they knew it. Shahid’s father had a plum job as the registrar of Lucknow University in India. But he wanted to join the stream of Muslims headed for Karachi, Pakistan, where they would make up the government of a brand new country. But his mother, Wilayat, flatly refused to go.
All the relatives I spoke with remembered her as a fiery, forceful woman. Lucknow was her home. She didn’t want to give up her elegant house, which overlooked one of the palaces of the city’s great hero, the nawab of Oudh. The family was deadlocked. And then an event decided it for them.
Inayatullah Butt, Shahid’s father, was riding his bicycle home one day when he was stopped by a group of young Hindu men.  Someone drew a knife. And by the time he got home — this is what Shahid said — his hand was cut to the bone. As he described it, I could almost see it. This distinguished man, his spectacles askew, knocked to the ground. And so a decision was made. Shahid’s family was going to Pakistan.
They were among the 15 million who were uprooted from their homes by Partition. Muslims headed for Pakistan, and Hindus and Sikhs headed in the other direction.
Trains of refugees going to and from Pakistan arrived loaded with corpses, the passengers slaughtered by mobs along the way.
Partition has become a byword for horror.
In his book about Partition, Nisid Hajari described it this way.
An appalling slaughter ensued.
Unending waves of refugees washed over the east Punjab. They left grim reminders of their passage.
Trees stripped of bark, which they peeled off in great chunks to use as fuel. Dead and dying bullocks, cattle and sheep, and thousands and thousands of corpses lying alongside the road, or buried shallowly. Vultures feasted so extravagantly they could no longer fly.
So-called corpse trains rolled into Lahore Station dripping blood, their carriages filled with hacked-off limbs, and women without breasts or noses, and babies hacked to pieces. Fifteen million refugees. Infants were found literally — the conflagration stands as one of the deadliest and most brutal civil conflicts of the 20th century.
There are no good estimates of how many people died.
But Shahid and his family made it through. They set up a new household in Karachi. His older brothers joined the Pakistani Air Force. And his father, according to relatives, got a new job in the Civil Aviation Authority. But there was still no peace in the house. Shahid said his mother was angry. She was angry about what had been taken from her, what she was forced to leave behind in India. She wouldn’t accept it. She lobbied Pakistani officials for her lost properties. And then one day, Shahid said, she crossed a line.
I’ve heard versions of this story from almost everyone I’ve contacted. And I’m piecing it together. There was a scene in a public place. Wilayat confronted a government official, maybe even the prime minister, at a public event, and demanded the return of her property. Whatever the official said in response, it didn’t go well. She slapped him. And then this proud, defiant woman was arrested, confined for six months to a mental hospital. And, one relative told me, was treated with electroshock therapy.
Shahid was still young when this happened.
She was in the hospital? What was the hospital like?
On my last visit with him, as Camellia and I sat by his bed, he remembered visiting his mother in what was then known as the Punjab Mental Asylum. He recalled one girl who had been bound to the wall with four chains, two on her hands, two on her feet, spitting furiously at anyone who walked by.
— that she got electroshock therapy.
His mother was no longer fiery. She did not protest.
— other women. And what was her state?
Was she still as fiery? Or was she quiet, subdued?
Shahid said she just sat in a chair, quiet.
Did they put her there to teach her a lesson?
I think so. I think it was to quieten her.
It was clear from the look on his face that all these years later, he had not quite recovered.
What are you doing, Shahid?
He never told you about the mental hospital.
Never spoken about it to me before. Who was it?
It was sometime after she was released from the institution — Shahid couldn’t say exactly when — that she decided to return to India. She told relatives she was going back to retrieve her property. Some of them had the sense that she was going to pursue a career in politics. She packed her household belongings in trunks and gathered together her youngest children. Family said she smuggled them across the border illegally. Shahid was one of the children she took, the oldest. But somewhere along that journey — Shahid said it was in Bombay — he decided he couldn’t go along with his mother anymore. At one point, Wilayat asked him to go out and buy bananas. She gave him some money. And he took the money in his hand, walked out onto the street, and never came back.
He didn’t give them any explanation. And he never saw his mother again.
And it’s sometime after that that Wilayat Butt and her two youngest children, Mickey and Farhad Butt, appeared at the railway station and set up a home in the V.I.P. waiting room.
She was no longer the wife of a university registrar. Her children were no longer citizens of Pakistan. They had new names, new titles and a single impossible mission.
They were now the royal family of Oudh.
But I guess what I wonder is, do you think that it was Partition that ruined your mother’s life? Yes? Why? How?
Because she had to go to Pakistan.
Why did that ruin her life?
Well, we had to start all over again.
You had to start all over again.

We were all surviving. Who knows about happy and unhappy?
We were all surviving. Who knows about happy or unhappy?
Shahid wouldn’t say much more. His storehouse of memories seemed to shut just as quickly as it had opened.
He wouldn’t watch Partition, you know, last year.
I had every program on that was on about it. And I said, Shahid, come and look at — no, no, I don’t want to see. No, I was there. I don’t want to see it on TV. He just did not want to see it.
It’s not like Germany, where there’s been lots and lots of processing of, this is what the deaths were, and who killed them, and who’s responsible, and how we can deal with the history. It’s almost like it all just got papered over.
In some ways, you could understand Wilayat’s anger.
I find it very, very sad.
But it also consumed her children.
I think what started off as a ruse became too big for them.
Or became the reality for them? Or just was a ruse that they had to continue until the end?
Yeah, yeah. And then it became a way of life.
It can become part of your life then, and you can half believe it.
Do you live the life that long that you have to believe it, or what?
So he does all of the unclaimed bodies.
[SPEAKING HINDI] dead bodies.
After Cyrus died, I tried to find out where he was buried. The police who came to collect his body at the hunting lodge couldn’t identify any next of kin, or any friend, or even any acquaintance. So they assigned his body a number, DD33B, and sent it to a pauper’s graveyard on the edge of Old Delhi, an expanse of uneven, scrubby land beside a cricket stadium.
When an unclaimed body like Cyrus’s comes in, they bury them wherever there’s an empty space between other graves. The land is porous, so the bodies sink, and they bury other bodies over them. They mark these graves with a shard of pink rock, and that’s all. So there was no way to know where Cyrus was.
The story I had to tell about him was grim, as well. Not of a returning warrior queen, but of two children who followed their mother into the woods and never came out.
Cyrus would have hated that story. I was unraveling the central work of his family’s life.
I walked back to the entrance of the cemetery, and asked the clerk to look through his records of unclaimed bodies one more time, on the off chance that I could find him, and at least mark his grave.
And that’s when I noticed a man sitting in the room, listening to us intently. He was wearing a voluminous, cheap-looking tweed jacket. And he had a squiff of jet-black dyed hair bobbing over his forehead. He stood up and introduced himself rather formally. He handed me a plastic folder. It was filled with newspaper clippings about Cyrus’s death. 
In Old Delhi, he told me, this was the only topic of conversation from street to street, and from house to house. People were saying, such a big king passed away like this, in such a way that nobody knew him. How can the scion of such an illustrious royal family get lost in the darkness of oblivion? The man had become visibly distraught, and began to recite verses of Urdu poetry, asking God why he had done such a thing, brought low the rulers of Oudh.
Because they all knew the story. Fifty years ago, a woman appeared on a train platform. She had been dispossessed. Her family had been torn in half. She had come to reclaim what had been taken from her. The people who came to see her, they were also dispossessed. Their families had also been torn in half. And this man in front of me had revered the royal family for so long. The story had sounded a note within him. He would be telling it for years. It would be passed among tea sellers and autorickshaw drivers — the story about the prince who lived in a palace in the jungle in the middle of the city.
And they’ll be telling that story long after my story has come and gone.
I cannot forget you. You are most welcome whenever you feel like.
Well, I’m not leaving yet. I’m just thinking about the future.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, of course, future. But one more thing, I really want that it should crumble.
If it hasn’t crumbled for the last 600 years, it’s not going to crumble this week.
Yeah, yeah. Very true. Very true. Very true.
You’ve found yourself a very stable castle.
Yeah, yeah, of course. I have a roof, a very strong roof. That’s all. A pillar to hide, and a pillar to protect myself. And that’s all.
Well, it’s something to be proud of. Not everyone lives in a place like this.
You see a little light over there in the dark, just there?
I do. Where’s that from? Is it just a reflection?
That’s where the main candlelights. Wait, wait. I want to see whether it is still on or not. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
How often do you put on candles?
Candle always — there — you come and see what happens. It’s a very strong pillar over there. But I do place over there. That’s a natural one. So if I die, and I didn’t. want that anyone should come here. Come here.
It’s very romantic.
It’s very romantic. You can take it for a time.
Just try that on.
I think it is too dark.
Well, anyway, [INAUDIBLE].
I don’t understand. Since you stay up so late at night, how do you manage without light?
No. No, don’t think it that way.
“The Jungle Prince” was produced by Lynsea Garrison and Sindhu Gnanasambandan, edited by Wendy Dorr, Lisa Tobin and Mike Benoist. Original music by Brad Fisher and Dan Powell, mixed by Brad Fisher and Dan Powell. Special thanks to Jim Yardley, Michael Slackman, Christine Kay, Suhasini Raj, Stella Tan, Julia Simon, Shalini Venugopal, Supriya Sobti, Nisid Hajari, Saleem Kidwai, William Dalrymple, Leonie Broekstra and Michael Simon Johnson.
“The Daily” is off for the rest of the week. We’ll be back with a new episode on Monday, Dec. 2.
Ellen Barry, the New England bureau chief and formerly the South Asia bureau chief of The New York Times.
“The person on the phone had told me to leave the car at the end of the road, beside the high wall of an Indian military compound, and to come alone.” Read Ellen Barry’s story on the Jungle Prince of Delhi.
Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Follow Ellen Barry on Twitter: @EllenBarryNYT. And if you’re interested in advertising with “The Daily,” write to us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| “The Jungle Prince” was reported by Ellen Barry, produced by Lynsea Garrison and Sindhu Gnanasambandan, and edited by Wendy Dorr, Lisa Tobin and Michael Benoist. Original music and mixing by Brad Fisher and Dan Powell. Special thanks to Jim Yardley, Michael Slackman, Christine Kay, Suhasini Raj, Stella Tan, Julia Simon, Sam Dolnick, Shalini Venugopal, Jeffrey Gettlemen, Supriya Sobti, Nisid Hajari, Saleem Kidwai, William Dalrymple, Leonie Broekstra Pauw, Michael Simon Johnson, Julia Longoria, Austin Mitchell, David Botti, Doug Paul Alteen, Sameen Amin, Christiaan Triebert, Natalie Reneau, Deborah Basckin, Owain Rich and Ed Habershon.