John Bel Edwards of Louisiana, a rare Democratic governor in the South, was re-elected for a second term, beating back a challenger heavily supported by President Trump.
BATON ROUGE, La. — Gov. John Bel Edwards of Louisiana, the only Democratic governor in the Deep South, narrowly won re-election Saturday, overcoming the intervention of President Trump, who visited the state multiple times in an effort to help Mr. Edwards’s Republican challenger and demonstrate his own clout.
It was the second blow at the ballot box for Mr. Trump this month in a Republican-leaning state, following the Democratic victory in the Kentucky governor’s race, where the president also campaigned for the G.O.P. candidate.
Live results and detailed maps by precinct.
Republicans had succeeded during the state’s all-party jungle primary last month in forcing Mr. Edwards into a runoff against Mr. Rispone, who came in second. The race then narrowed into a virtual dead heat, as Mr. Rispone closed the gap with a flood of support from Republicans, who poured millions of dollars into the campaign and brought in prominent figures, including, most notably, the president and Vice President Mike Pence.
In a rally this week, Mr. Trump acknowledged the stakes, saying, “You’ve got to give me a big win, O.K.?” For Mr. Trump, the importance of the outcome grew considerably this week when his chosen candidate in Kentucky, Gov. Matt Bevin, conceded his race, which also hinged on whether he could depend on the president’s clout to win.
Mr. Trump had carried Louisiana by 20 percentage points in 2016, but his investment in the governor’s race was still regarded as an unusual expenditure of his political capital in a state that is unlikely to be competitive in the presidential election next year.
Republicans had viewed Mr. Edwards as vulnerable from the outset, and political analysts said that the governor was left in an even more precarious position as Mr. Trump leapt into the fray.
Mr. Edwards and Mr. Rispone entered the runoff after the state’s nonpartisan primary in October, where Mr. Edwards came up shy of the 50 percent threshold needed to assure his re-election, receiving 46 percent of the vote. Mr. Rispone, with 27 percent, came in second place by edging past the Republican congressman Ralph Abraham.
Throughout the campaign, Mr. Edwards, a rare Democrat holding statewide office in the South, shined a spotlight on his conservative bona fides, like his support for a state law barring abortion after the pulsing of what becomes the fetus’s heart can be detected. He also campaigned on his role in closing a $2 billion deficit he inherited from his Republican predecessor, Bobby Jindal, and has argued that Mr. Rispone, by pursuing aggressive tax cuts, would put Louisiana back in the same place.
Mr. Edwards has steadily refused to criticize Mr. Trump and indeed has seized every opportunity he could to visit the White House to burnish his image with conservatives. Yet he had no reservations about slamming Mr. Rispone for clinging to the president’s coattails.
Still, Mr. Rispone, who founded with his brother an industrial engineering, construction and maintenance company in Baton Rouge, considered his neophyte status as a benefit rather than a deficiency, casting himself as a Trump-like candidate for Louisiana, putting his business experience to use for the state.
Indeed, Mr. Rispone never passed on an opportunity to highlight his allegiance to the president. He opened his candidacy with an ad boasting of how he had a Trump bumper sticker on his pickup truck. He ran as much on the same national issues the president did, most notably illegal immigration, as he did anything connected to state government. And when Mr. Rispone addressed supporters at an election night gathering in October, he started his speech by saying he had just gotten off the phone with the president, leading the crowd to chant “Trump!” Mr. Rispone’s first two ads in the runoff showed footage of Mr. Trump but none of the candidate.
On Thursday, Mr. Trump traveled to Bossier City, La., near Shreveport in the northern part of the state, to renew his attack on Mr. Edwards and to urge the crowd to “send a message to the corrupt Democrats in Washington” by voting for Mr. Rispone. He reiterated his support for Mr. Rispone on Saturday with multiple tweets.
Mr. Trump’s support helped sway Michael Derouen, who works in seafood sales. He described both candidates as “pretty decent,” but ultimately, he sided with Mr. Rispone because he believed a change might jolt Louisiana forward and a strong relationship with the president would only offer more of a boost.
While many voters acknowledged the influence Mr. Trump has had in the race, they also noted that it had the potential to motivate his detractors as much as his supporters.
