Testimony from Fiona Hill, a former top White House adviser, showed that even the witnesses in the impeachment inquiry may only now be learning the full picture of the part they played in the Ukraine story.
It started with a whistleblower’s complaint about President Trump’s contact with a foreign leader.
Had a perfect phone call with the president of Ukraine. Like, I mean perfect.
Today, I’m announcing the House of Representatives is moving forward with an official impeachment inquiry.
I have no interest in advancing the outcome of your inquiry in any particular direction except toward the truth.
It’s Mike Schmidt in the Washington bureau of The New York Times. As we’ve talked about before, the whole point of these hearings for the Democrats is to create an “aha” moment for the American public, a moment that would help build support for impeachment. But the latest is that what we saw today is that there are also “aha” moments happening for the players in the story.
I believe it is now. Is that correct?
That as the witnesses are watching each other testify, they themselves are coming to understand what was going on around them during this saga, major things that they did not fully understand in the moment.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Nunes, and members of the committee, thank you for inviting me to testify before you today. I have a short opening statement.
So today’s witness was Fiona Hill, one of the top national security officials dealing with Ukraine.
I take great pride in the fact that I’m a nonpartisan foreign-policy expert who was served under three Republican and Democratic presidents.
She was part of team normal government foreign policy, meaning she was very upset when characters like Rudy Giuliani and specifically Gordon Sondland, the Trump donor turned EU ambassador that we heard from yesterday, showed up and basically started doing her job.
— very unfortunately I had a bit of a blow up with Ambassador Sondland, and I had a couple of testy encounters with him. One of those was in June ‘18 when I actually said to him, who put you in charge of Ukraine? And I’ll admit I was a bit rude. 
And she testified to that. She’s saying that at the time she experienced Gordon Sondland as this kind of rogue agent, as someone operating outside the normal channels of government.
I hate to say it, but often when women show anger, it’s not fully appreciated. It’s often pushed onto emotional issues and they perhaps are deflected onto other people. And what I was angry about was that he wasn’t coordinating with us. So I was upset with him that he wasn’t fully telling us about all of the meetings that he was having. And he said to me, but I’m briefing the president. I’m briefing Chief of Staff Mulvaney. I’m briefing Secretary Pompeo, and I’ve talked to Ambassador Bolton. Who else do I have to deal with?
And he’s telling her at the time, I’m not doing that. I’m telling everyone who needs to know.
And the point is we have a robust interagency process that deals with Ukraine. It includes Mr. Holmes. It includes Ambassador Taylor as the charge in Ukraine. It includes a whole load of other people.
But it struck me yesterday when you put up on the screen Ambassador Sondland’s emails, and who was on these emails? And he said these are the people who need to know, that he was absolutely right.
But her anger at Sondland was misplaced and kind of missed the point. From Sondland’s perspective, he’s the leader of the United States policy on Ukraine. He’s the normal channel. There’s nothing irregular about it. He’s just doing what the president told him to. He’s doing his job.
— because he was being involved in a domestic political errand, and we were being involved in national-security foreign policy, and those two things had just diverged. So he was correct. And I had not put my finger on that at the moment, but I was irritated with him, and I did say to him Ambassador Sondland, Gordon, I think this is all going to blow up, and here we are.
So it’s pretty remarkable. In her testimony today, Fiona Hill is saying that as she watched Gordon Sondland testify yesterday, she realized that Fiona Hill and the other career diplomats, they were the ones who were on the outside looking in. They had become the irregular channels.
Ambassador Sondland is not wrong that he had been given a different remit than we had been, and it was at that moment that I started to realize how those things had diverged. And I realized, in fact, that I wasn’t really being fair to Ambassador Sondland because he was carrying out what he thought he had been instructed to carry out, and we were doing something that we thought was just as or perhaps even more important, but it wasn’t in the same channel.
So it’s sort of this incredible image. You have all these characters in this drama. Some of them have worked closely alongside one another. Some of them briefly intersected. Some of them never even actually met before, but they are now forever linked because they’re witnesses in this impeachment inquiry. And what we saw, at least today, is that by bringing them all together in this forum, they are learning about their own shared story at the same time that Americans are learning about it themselves. It speaks to the complexity of this whole thing. If we are finding this hard to understand, we should be humbled by the fact that so are the people who were there.
So that’s the latest.
But Is It Impeachable?
Throughout the impeachment inquiry, an image has surfaced of the Trump administration’s two policymaking channels on Ukraine — one regular, one not. Today’s testimony from Fiona Hill, President Trump’s former top adviser on Russia and Europe, raised the question: Which was which?
“The Latest” is a new series on the impeachment inquiry, from the team behind “The Daily.” For more information, visit nytimes.com/thedaily.
Michael S. Schmidt, who covers national security and federal investigations for The New York Times.
Fiona Hill, the former top Russia expert on the National Security Council, and David Holmes, an aide at the United States Embassy in Kyiv, testified before the House Intelligence Committee.
Dr. Hill’s account of how Mr. Trump’s team carried out what she called a “domestic political errand” that diverged from his own administration’s foreign policy amounted to sharp — albeit indirect — criticism of the president she served.
Here’s what we’ve learned from today’s hearing.
“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Alexandra Leigh Young, Jonathan Wolfe, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges, Luke Vander Ploeg, Adizah Eghan, Kelly Prime, Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, Jazmín Aguilera, M.J. Davis Lin, Dan Powell, Austin Mitchell, Sayre Quevedo, Monika Evstatieva and Neena Pathak. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Stella Tan, Julia Simon and Lauren Jackson.