The strikes came a day after rockets were fired across the border into the Israeli-controlled Golan Heights.
Israel said it carried out airstrikes early on Wednesday against Iranian forces near the Syrian capital, in response to an Iranian attack on Israel a day earlier, potentially escalating tensions along Israel’s northeastern border. The strikes killed at least 21 people, according to a rights monitoring group.
There have been sporadic flare-ups across the old Israeli-Syrian armistice line. Israel has clashed there with Syrian and Iranian forces based in Syria as Iran’s influence has grown in the war-torn nation.
Benny Gantz, the chief rival of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, issued a statement affirming his support of the strikes, despite the country’s fraught internal politics. On Wednesday, Mr. Gantz failed to form a new government ahead of a looming deadline.
The British-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, which monitors casualties from the war in Syria, said that at least 21 people were killed on Wednesday, and most were believed to be Iranian fighters. One woman was injured by shrapnel.
Ofer Zalzberg, an Israeli analyst for the International Crisis Group, said Israeli officials had been concerned since an attack in September on Saudi Arabia’s Aramco oil facilities — which some blamed on Iran — that Iran could be preparing for something similar in Israel.
He said that it was hard to tell whether the current flare-up would lead to an extended escalation, but that the situation was a “renegotiation of several rules of the game” at a time when Iran’s leadership is struggling with major domestic issues. Large-scale protests have gripped Iran since last week in response to a sudden increase in gasoline prices, and the Iranian authorities have cracked down, with the government imposing a near-complete shutdown of the internet.
“Iran is doing something new from Israel’s point of view, and this changes the dynamic,” Mr. Zalzberg said of the four rockets fired into Israel on Tuesday.
He said that based on information from intelligence officials, the rockets might have been a response to an undisclosed Israeli operation in Syria over the weekend. The Israeli military rarely acknowledges operations in Syria, but is believed to have carried out hundreds of strikes in the country since Syria’s civil war began, aimed at curbing Iranian influence.
Hwaida Saad, David Halbfinger and Myra Noveck contributed reporting.