“I’m kind of embarrassed to admit that I voted for Donald Trump at this point,” a voter said in one of the ads, which will air in Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania, three key swing states.
After this article was published, local news media reported that Mark Graham, a voter featured in the American Bridge ad campaign and another article by The Times, did not vote in the 2016 election; The Times has confirmed those reports. While Mr. Graham acknowledged misspeaking about his voting record, he said the Times article and the ad campaign accurately reflect his feelings about the 2016 race and President Trump’s performance in office.
The group, American Bridge, will air commercials in Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania that are first-person testimonials from residents of each state explaining why they backed Mr. Trump in 2016 and why they will not do so again next year. While it’s not uncommon to spotlight voters in political advertising, these commercials feature no narration and are set, documentary-style, in the homes and towns of those on camera.
The voters featured in the commercials all focus on Mr. Trump’s record, and what they say is his self-focus and lack of accomplishments in their communities, while avoiding issues that often consume Washington, like impeachment or Mr. Trump’s inflammatory language. Speaking in personal terms, they acknowledge that they supported the president because they thought that, as a political outsider, he would be a more effective change agent than the elected officials who won the White House every four years, until him.
One participant, Lori Malburg from Romeo, Mich., was blunt about her feelings of regret.
The advertising campaign, which will include broadcast television, radio and online spots, comes at a moment when many Democrats have been expressing alarm that Mr. Trump’s heavy campaign spending on digital ads has been all but uncontested. But now, as the Democratic presidential primary appears as uncertain as ever, a handful of liberal groups are working to match the president’s re-election efforts.
American Bridge plans to eventually spend about $50 million in the coming year as part of this effort and hopes to feature new, local voices in each wave of ads. While the initial focus will be on Michigan, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania — each of which supported Mr. Trump by less than a single point — the group may add Florida to the lineup next year.
The commercials are plainly aimed at the white working-class voters who supported former President Barack Obama’s campaigns but shifted to Mr. Trump in 2016. It’s a constituency that is increasingly aligned with Republicans, leading some Democrats to question whether it’s worth the effort needed to win them back. But officials at American Bridge say they need to make only modest inroads with these voters to take back the Midwestern states they lost.
“We don’t necessarily think we can flip back all the Obama-to-Trump counties, but we do feel we can drive his margin down in them,” said David Brock, the group's chairman and co-founder.
Originally known as an opposition research firm, American Bridge is seeking to expand its footprint at a moment when Democrats are out of power in the White House and there is no clear party leader. The group has brought on a host of prominent Democrats, including former Gov. Jennifer Granholm of Michigan and Jim Messina, who ran Mr. Obama’s 2012 re-election.
He said the group may alter its message to correspond with the moment — spotlighting taxes during tax season or tariffs during harvest, for example — but that one element would remain the same.
“It has to be local, local, local,” said Mr. Beychok.