A raft of books, both fiction and nonfiction, examined women’s anger from personal and political angles — and suggested that the fire is just getting started.
But never in such numbers as now, and never have they prompted such protracted conversation about what we expect from female characters, and why. These are the seething women of Elena Ferrante’s Naples; the heartbroken and enraged in books by Claire Messud and Han Kang; the charming, sinister heroines in the work of Ottessa Moshfegh, Alissa Nutting, Jade Sharma and Danzy Senna — not to mention the warriors in a new wave of dark feminist dystopias. With their deep unconventionality, their ire, intensity and excess, they have spurred debates about the narrow roles allotted to women — fictional women at that — many of whom have faced criticism for being unlikable, even dangerous.
The word “anger” has a strange root: an old Germanic word for unbearable narrowness, the distress of painful constriction (it is etymologically related to “angina” and “hangnail”). Much of the work about women and rage in the last 10 years seems to bespeak a frustration with femaleness itself, as a condition of unbearable narrowness and painful constriction.
Much of the work about women and rage in the last 10 years seems to bespeak a frustration with femaleness itself, as a condition of unbearable narrowness and painful constriction.
In her memoir, “Know My Name,” Chanel Miller recounts the story of her sexual assault, and how difficult it was for her to summon up her rage in the aftermath; the workshops she required, the study. Writers like Leslie Jamison have also described trying to reclaim their anger, suppressed or turned inward.
But these books all share the backdrop of our age of rage: of far-right protesters marching with torches in Charlottesville, Va.; the massacre at Mother Emanuel Church in Charleston, S.C.; Christine Blasey Ford’s precision and reserve contrasted with Brett Kavanaugh’s suppurating anger and tears at the spectacle of the Supreme Court confirmation hearings.
