The damage from the destructive spring flooding in the Midwest has been followed in parts of the country by a miserable autumn that is making a bad farming year worse, with effects that could be felt into next spring.
A New York Times analysis shows how far this spring’s unprecedented floods spread.
The Agriculture Department tracks how many acres of insured farmland went unplanted, a statistic referred to as prevented planting, and this year’s figures are the highest since the agency started reporting the figures in 2007. Over all, farmers reported being unable to plant on some 19 million acres for all crops in 2019 with more than 70 percent of those acres occurring in the rain-soaked Midwest.
For the two most important Midwestern crops, corn and soybeans, the 2019 figures showed 11.4 million acres for corn and 4.5 million acres for soybeans that went without crops being planted.
That’s 13 percent of the total corn acreage in the United States that went unplanted, and nearly 6 percent of total soy acreage. By comparison, 2013 was another wet year but had just 3.9 percent and 2.3 percent unplanted acres.
According to the American Farm Bureau Federation, farm subsidies from sources like trade assistance, disaster assistance and federally subsidized crop insurance made up 40 percent of farm income in 2019, $33 billion out of an expected $88 billion total.
Want more climate news? Sign up for Climate Fwd:, our newsletter or follow @NYTClimate on Twitter.
“Almost all farmers agree that they’ve been dealing with much more volatile conditions,” said Mr. Lehman, the Iowa farmer.
Dr. Irwin of the University of Illinois said that the year’s planting had been further complicated by confusing messages from Washington, including an offer of aid to farmers from the Agriculture Department in May to help them deal with the effects of trade tensions with China with $16 billion in price supports if they planted crops. The announcement came later in the year than farmers in many areas usually plant, but hard-pressed farmers decided to try to get the benefits of the program and planted anyway. Dr. Irwin estimated that at least five million acres were planted under risky conditions. “It turned out to be a really bad bet,” he said.
A big reason for the bad outcome: Corn that got caught in the October rain and snow can’t be put in silos until it has been dried somewhat. Under good conditions, it dries in the field, but this year much of it has to be dried with heated air — something that cost farmers dearly, especially with spiking prices for propane. “This is adding stress to an already stressed community,” Dr. Todey said.
The year, as hard as it was for corn farming, does not mean shortages of food, feed, ethanol or exports. Farmers outside the worst-affected areas have been able to take up the slack to a degree, and stored corn can supplement much of the rest, Dr. Irwin said.
Financial woes translate into psychological stress for many in the agricultural community. “With all the economic stress going on, farmers and ranchers are at higher risk for suicide,” said David Brown, a behavioral health state specialist at Iowa State University who helped to start a mental health program this year to inform the farming community about risk signs.
For many farmers, the troubles of this year are likely to stretch into the next. Mr. McDougall, the North Dakota farmer, said the poor conditions in his area had kept him and his neighbors from much of the fall work that prepares the fields for spring planting. That will mean “round-the-clock work” in a few months if conditions are favorable.
