Scientists said an object four billion miles from Earth would be given a Native American name: Arrokoth. Its previous, informal name, Ultima Thule, had links to the Third Reich.
What does a small, icy world roughly four billion miles from Earth have to do with the Nazis?
The previous name was a Latin term that metaphorically means “a place beyond the known world.” When it was unveiled last year, NASA said the name was only temporary, but it still attracted criticism because the term has a historical association with the Third Reich.
What is Ultima Thule?
The object’s strangely shaped, rust-colored body is composed of two connected spherical lobes and measures just 21 miles across at its widest point. When it was photographed on New Year’s Day 2019 by NASA’s New Horizons spacecraft, it was the first object of its kind that planetary scientists had ever gotten to see up close.
The term Ultima Thule, however, has its origins much closer to home. It is a Latin term used in classical antiquity to denote distant and unknown lands, in particular ones that were cold, like the Nordic countries. That Northern European connection drew the attention of the Nazis.
“Thule was one of the names they gave to what they believed was the ancient Aryan homeland, a prehistoric Aryan utopia that collapsed because of racial miscegenation or a flood or what have you,” said Eric Kurlander, a professor of history at Stetson University in DeLand, Fla.
The name is also used by the Thule Society, a racist, occult group formed in 1918. The society gave birth the next year to the German Workers’ Party, which Adolf Hitler soon joined and used as the precursor to the Nazi Party.
How did that name end up on a space rock?
The connection between the object’s informal name and Nazi history was first reported by Newsweek. Mark Showalter, a scientist involved in the naming process, told the magazine in an interview that the name was suggested by roughly 40 people online.
The New Horizons team learned about the term’s Nazi connotation during the naming process but decided to move ahead with it anyway, he said. Mr. Showalter did not respond to a message seeking comment on Tuesday.
S. Alan Stern, the principal investigator for the New Horizons mission, which also did a flyby of Pluto in 2015, addressed the controversy earlier this year when scientists released the photographs taken by the spacecraft.
Why was the space object renamed?
The idea of the unknown is built into the name Ultima Thule, so it was always intended to be temporary. Now that scientists have become acquainted with the little world, they wanted to give it a name that celebrated its distance from the Earth, as well as the sheer feat of having gotten close enough to study it, they said.
The new name was proposed to the International Astronomical Union and Minor Planet Center and announced on Tuesday at a ceremony at NASA headquarters in Washington.
In an emailed statement, Lori Glaze, the director of the planetary science division at NASA headquarters, said the name was chosen to honor the heritage of the Chesapeake Bay region, where the New Horizons mission was based. She declined to comment on the controversy around the name Ultima Thule.
