U.S.|They Wanted to Save Their 119-Year-Old Village. So They Got Rid of It.
A feud over local taxes turned into a referendum on government itself. But Election Day left residents as divided as ever.
AMELIA, Ohio — There were allegations of suspicious political donations and rumors about fake social media accounts. Protesters wore T-shirts that said “Stop the tyranny!” At one point, a former official was escorted out of a public meeting in handcuffs.
For more than a year, the residents of Amelia, just outside Cincinnati, have been consumed by a fiery debate over a proposal to impose a new local tax of just 1 percent. This month, voters found a way around the problem — by getting rid of their 119-year-old village altogether.
But at a time when Americans’ trust in government is at historic lows, the fight in Amelia also shows what can happen when polarized voters decide that their government is so broken that it simply shouldn’t exist.
“This all got way out of hand,” said Todd Hart, the one-time mayor of Amelia, who lost his bid for re-election on the same night the village disbanded.
While there might be an argument that eliminating a layer of government could result in greater efficiency, the decision in Amelia represents a shift, said William Howell, a political-science professor at the University of Chicago.
While Ohio’s tax burden is moderate over all, experts say the local taxes are comparatively high. According to a calculation by the Tax Foundation in Washington, a conservative think tank, the average couple in Amelia was already paying about $1,400 in state income tax, $780 in state sales tax, $130 in local sales tax and $3,300 in property taxes. The new, 1 percent income tax worked out to about $615 extra a year.
“You have these different layers of taxation, and it is not always clear to individuals what they are getting for each layer they are paying,” said Greg R. Lawson, a research fellow at the Buckeye Institute, a free-market think tank in Columbus.
The mayor said the village had waited as long as it could, but needed the money to help pay for roads and other expenses.
Residents debated the village’s fate in dueling Facebook groups called “Wake Up,” “Free” and “Citizens to Save” Amelia.
A few doors down, Vickie Wenstrup, 60, a florist whose business sits just outside the town line, lamented the loss of the small touches that made the community feel like home. After Ms. Wenstrup was chosen to help decorate the White House for Christmas last year, the mayor issued a proclamation declaring a day in her honor. The proclamation hangs on the wall in her florist shop, next to a tile sign made by the local high school’s ceramics class.
That, she said, was the essence of “small-town America” and the kind of thing she feared would be missing in the new setup. Who would issue the next proclamation? Or hang military flags over the cemetery on Veterans Day? Would the annual toy drive for needy children at Christmas go on?
“I’m very sad about it,” she said.
