Politics|Michael Bloomberg Pushed ‘Stop-and-Frisk’ Policing. Now He’s Apologizing.
Michael Bloomberg Pushed ‘Stop-and-Frisk’ Policing. Now He’s Apologizing.
Ahead of a possible Democratic run for president, the former mayor of New York City reversed himself before an important party constituency: black voters.
The speech, Mr. Bloomberg’s first since he re-emerged as a possible presidential candidate, was a remarkable concession by a 77-year-old billionaire not known for self-doubt: that a pillar of his 12-year mayoralty was a mistake that he now regrets. It was also, in some ways, a last word on an era of aggressive policing in New York City that began a generation ago under former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani — though the fallout on neighborhoods is still felt to this day.
Mr. Bloomberg’s policing record negatively impacted huge swaths of people of color across New York, so much so that his support for “stop and frisk” is seen as one of his biggest potential vulnerabilities in 2020. During his 12-year tenure, there were millions of street stops heavily targeting black and brown young men. Few Democrats have such an indelible record on race in a party where black voters helped determine the winners of the last two contested presidential primaries, Barack Obama in 2008 and Hillary Clinton in 2016.
It is almost unheard-of for a former chief executive to renounce and apologize for a signature policy that helped define a political legacy. Even for a politician as dexterous as Mr. Bloomberg — who ran first as a Republican, then as an independent and now, possibly, as a Democrat — the reversal left his longtime observers astonished.
Though Mr. Bloomberg has now distanced himself, the policing approach has another prominent champion in President Trump, who called for it to be used nationwide in 2016 and praised the tactics again last year.
Proudly technocratic and data-driven, Mr. Bloomberg had resisted acknowledging what the numbers showed so starkly: First, that Latinos and blacks were disproportionately stopped, though only a tiny fraction had weapons. Second, even when stops were phased out toward the end of his administration and then decreased sharply under his successor, Mayor Bill de Blasio, crime rates continued to plunge to new lows unseen since the 1950s.
Though the police tactics had all but ceased in recent years, leaders in some communities of color were wary of quickly absolving Mr. Bloomberg.
Moments after services ended, Mr. Bloomberg called the Rev. Al Sharpton, who sparred with Mr. Bloomberg over stop-and-frisk during his mayoralty, from his car to ask if Mr. Sharpton had watched his speech.
At the program’s peak, the racial disparities in its enforcement were jarring. Of 575,000 stops conducted in 2009, black and Latino people were nine times as likely as white people to be targeted by the police (even though, once stopped, they were no more likely to actually be arrested). In 2011, police officers made about 685,000 stops; 87 percent of those stopped were black or Latino.
After Mr. Bloomberg stepped down from the pulpit and returned to his seat in the front row, the church’s pastor, the Rev. A.R. Bernard, a longtime ally and former adviser to Mr. Bloomberg, shook the former mayor’s hand.
For 2020, the critical question is whether Mr. Bloomberg’s reversal will be received among black voters as one of pure political expediency or genuine remorse.
In fact, Mr. Bloomberg had come to this very same church, located in East New York, in 2012 to defend stop-and-frisk and answer mounting criticism around it.
But on Sunday, he acknowledged that the community around the church had experienced the program very differently. The church is situated at the edge of the 75th Precinct in New York, which the New York Civil Liberties Union said led the city with 265,393 stops between 2003 and 2013. In the nearby 73rd Precinct, total stops in that decade were 237 percent of the population, according to the report.
Several Democrats already running for the 2020 nomination, including Mr. Biden, have also issued mea culpas on matters of criminal justice. Senator Kamala Harris of California has defended her record as a state prosecutor but said she regretted some of the positions her office took. Mayor Pete Buttigieg left the campaign trail and returned to South Bend, Ind., after a white police officer fatally shot a black man there, and admitted he had failed to diversify the city’s force.
The reversal on stop-and-frisk is the starkest in a series of steps that Mr. Bloomberg has taken in the last two weeks to lay the groundwork for entering the Democratic presidential primary himself, a step that appears increasingly imminent.
He has already filed to be on the primary ballot in two states, Arkansas and Alabama. His advisers have outlined a strategy to leverage his personal fortune by competing in the Super Tuesday states on March 3. And he announced plans to spend $100 million on digital ads criticizing President Trump — and not featuring himself — in general election battleground states, blunting criticism that he could spend his money better elsewhere.
Jeffery C. Mays and Katie Van Syckle contributed reporting.