The beleaguered office space company is said to be planning to cut its work force by at least a third in a bid to stabilize its business.
WeWork is preparing to cut at least 4,000 people from its work force as it tries to stabilize itself after the company’s breakneck growth racked up heavy losses and led it to the brink of collapse, two people with knowledge of the matter said.
The cuts are expected to be announced as early as this week and will take place across WeWork’s sprawling global operation. Under the plan, the company’s core business of subletting office space would lay off 2,000 to 2,500 employees, one of the people said. An additional 1,000 employees will leave as WeWork sells or closes down noncore businesses, like a private school in Manhattan that WeWork set up. Additionally, roughly 1,000 building maintenance employees will be transferred to an outside contractor. Together, these employees would represent around a third of the 12,500 people WeWork employed at the end of June.
But one of the people said the company could shed as many as 5,000 to 6,000 employees.
In an email to employees on Monday, the company’s executive chairman, Marcelo Claure, said, “We have to make some necessary job eliminations.” He said the cuts would begin this week in the United States but did not say how many people would lose their jobs.
“These actions will make us stronger and better able to generate even more opportunities over the coming months and years,” he said in the email.
Mr. Claure said that he would share his plans for the company’s future at an all-employees meeting that was originally scheduled for Tuesday but will now take place on Friday.
The layoffs represent the human cost of a remarkable reversal in WeWork’s fortunes. Under its co-founder and former chief executive, Adam Neumann, the company piled billions of dollars into an erratic expansion that included adding huge office spaces in the world’s most expensive cities, offering discounts to lure tenants and buying other businesses. WeWork, which leases office space from landlords, refurbishes it and rents it out to its customers, shelved plans for an initial public offering in late September after investors were put off by the company’s losses and had questions about its corporate governance.
SoftBank, the Japanese conglomerate that is WeWork’s largest outside shareholder, last month announced a plan to bail out the company and is now trying to stabilize the business. But it is not clear how far the plan, which rests on selling billions of dollars of new WeWork bonds to investors, has progressed. The prices of the company’s existing bonds have tumbled in recent days, a sign that investors are worried about its prospects.
WeWork last week reported that it lost $1.25 billion in the three months that ended in September, more than twice as much as the company had lost in the same period a year earlier. A corporate presentation provided to investors revealed that WeWork opened nearly half of its locations in the 12 months that ended in September. Many of these locations are losing money and are likely to be depleting WeWork’s cash, which stood at $2 billion at the end of September.
Mr. Neumann, who agreed to cede control over WeWork after stepping down from the chief executive post in September, stands to receive an exit package worth around $1 billion. As part of that, he will receive a $185 million consulting fee for four years and can sell nearly $1 billion of his shares in the company to SoftBank. The soft landing for Mr. Neumann deepened anger among employees as the layoffs loomed.
He sold a utopian vision that ultimately left a company in shambles. Then he walked away with more than $1 billion.
Today: It was the most valuable start-up in the United States, with plans to revolutionize how and where people around the world worked. Amy Chozick on the spectacular rise and fall of WeWork and the story of the man behind it all.
It’s Monday, November 18.
Amy, I wonder if you could read this letter that WeWork employees sent to their bosses.
It’s a pretty grim letter.
So how did WeWork get to this point? What’s the story here?
Co-founder and C.E.O. of WeWork, Adam Neumann.
So the story of WeWork really starts with a man named Adam Neumann.
Growing up in Israel, watching American television and movies, I believed that the American dream is get a degree, get a great job, have lots of fun, make lots of money.
He was born in Israel. He moved to New York.
I majored in entrepreneurship and marketing.
This genius idea was going to be a women’s high-heel shoe with a collapsible heel.
No, because it’s uncomfortable, Michael, to walk around in heels all day. So you collapse them when you’re going down subway stairs.
And this is definitely not my passion. And I came up with my second great idea — Krawlers, with a K. Krawlers was baby pants with kneepads on them to protect the babies’ knees for the crawling age.
Knee pads for crawling babies.
Just because they don’t tell you doesn’t mean they don’t hurt.
Of course, the business was a tremendous failure.
So he settles on co-working.
— they were sleek. They had community space, sofas all over the place for team-building. There was cold brew, kombucha, taco Tuesdays. There was beer and wine on tap. Instead of going out for a drink, you’d stay at the office. It really came to symbolize the kind of start-up entrepreneurial hustle of millennials.
In other words, this kind of space was perfectly timed for a generation of people who didn’t see themselves as office workers, but as individual businesses and entrepreneurs who needed a place to do that.
WeWork is the office space of tomorrow. The future is about light, innovation, creativity. It’s going from me to we. We give you space that will inspire you, uplift you and help you innovate the products of tomorrow.
So in Adam’s mind, this was a community company. His mission was to elevate the world’s consciousness. He would talk about this. So he grew up partly on a kibbutz in Israel, and he would talk about it as a capitalist kibbutz. It was this mix of, like, capitalistic hustle with this yearning for communal meaning. Adam Neumann would say that he wanted WeWork to create a world where people don’t just make a living, they make a life.
And they make a life in these WeWork offices.
The thing is, you know, I have a vision.
— called Masayoshi Son. Everyone calls him Masa.
We go and change the world together.
Masa’s company oversees something called the Vision Fund.
— thinking about what is the future? What is the — how we can change the life of people for the better humanity.
This is the largest tech investment fund in the world. They have $100 billion dollars to play with, largely from the Saudis who want to diversify away from oil and invest in tech. And Masa is this very interesting character who’s always trusted his gut.
One of the investments you made is considered by many people to be the most successful investment in the history of mankind. You invested roughly $20 million in Alibaba. And at the time it went public, it was worth roughly $90 billion. What is it that made you feel this was worth putting in $20 million.
Well, he had no business plan.
But his eyes was very strong — strong eyes, strong, shining eyes. I could tell.
And so he meets Adam Neumann. Adam Neumann gives Masa a tour of his offices. This includes the right soundtrack in the background and all the sleek office space and virtual-reality renderings of WeWork office space in the future. So you could wear these glasses and feel like you’re standing in Tokyo or Shanghai, right down to looking out the street and seeing the scene that you would see from the offices. And this really blows Masa’s mind. He loves this vision. He loves Adam’s energy.
— basically both willing to make humongous bets, and they’re sort of enabling one another.
— Masa Son invests over $4 billion in WeWork.
And by the way, I work in a WeWork, so WeWork’s good.
This is an enormous investment. And he doesn’t say, Adam, I need you to be a very careful steward of this extremely important investment. Be careful with my money. Instead he says, I need you to go crazier. I need you to do more. I need you to explore your wildest visions.
He says that?
He says, go as far as you can with this. And there’s more money where this came from.
So just how wild does Adam Neumann go with this $4 billion investment?
So we’re at WeWork in Austin, Texas, right now.
He started opening WeWorks all over the country.
I’m in my new office at the Crystal City WeWork that just opened up today.
Every major American city had a WeWork.
— my new office space, which is in the WeWork in Long Beach, California.
And then he expanded massively abroad.
I feel like I remember this moment, because I woke up one day and had a long walk around Manhattan, and there was a WeWork at every single turn.
The Lord & Taylor building. Absolutely, they became ubiquitous. WeWork now is 45 million square feet of real estate. It’s the largest private landlord in New York, Washington, and London.
And then, giant companies started also moving their employees into WeWork offices, thinking it’s a draw for employees to work in these spaces.
Like which companies?
Verizon, Salesforce, IBM all moved a lot of employees into WeWork office spaces.
And this is the point when Adam really leans into Masa’s advice, which is to go wild. Pursue your craziest dreams. He opens a WeLive apartment building and wants to expand that. He says these are places that will have community and cut down on the suicide rate because people never feel alone. He was talking about WeGrow, and he and his wife opened a school in downtown Manhattan. There was WeBank, there was WeSail. There was WeSleep. There was talk of an airline.
WeFly, presumably. There was talk of WeMars, even putting office space on the red planet.
That really is wild.
It was wild. So Adam Neumann becomes fantastically rich. He also indulges his eccentricities. I mean, he was known to walk around the office barefoot. But now, he’s installed a private plunge pool in his office — a cold plunge, an infrared sauna in his office. He has a white Maybach. He’s, like, blaring hip-hop as this chauffeured white Maybach takes him all over Manhattan. He also convinced the company to buy a $60-million private plane, which he and other executives hotbox.
That’s, you know, getting high in a confined space with the marijuana smoke filling the cabin. Tequila — Adam Neumann loved his Don Julio tequila. He would even get people who didn’t seem the tequila type, like Jared Kushner, to take tequila shots at 9:00 in the morning while they were scoping out some real estate in Philly.
— and other sort of “Animal House” antics, but always infused with this, like, larger purpose. Adam would get on stage with, like, Deepak Chopra and address employees. And it was this culture of WeWork that was very specific to Adam’s vision for the company.
So Amy, as Adam Neumann becomes this larger-than-life character, as WeWork is opening offices all over the United States, all over the world, and as this term “We” starts to get applied to all areas of life, are people starting to question whether this is getting just a little too big and whether it’s all kind of adding up?
By and large, people looked at what Adam had accomplished, WeWork on every corner, as you said, taking over iconic buildings, and they believed in what he was selling. And then on top of that, you throw in Masa, this Japanese tycoon, who had made a fortune investing early on in these founders — Alibaba, Yahoo, Uber — just based on gut instincts. And if he believed in Adam, why shouldn’t everyone else?
So WeWork does what successful start-ups do. They prepare to go public, meaning they can sell their shares to the public. There’s a valuation on the company of $47 billion. That makes it the most valuable start-up in the country. And part of going public, they have to disclose everything in paperwork. And that’s when things start to unravel.
WeWork just unveiling its I.P.O. filing.
So why did things start to unravel when WeWork files all this paperwork to go public?
Do we have any numbers in terms of how much money they’re making or losing right now?
— and it’s not pretty.
Net losses were just under a billion dollars, $904 million.
The company had lost $900 million in the first half of 2019 alone.
They had rapidly expanded into markets that weren’t necessarily friendly to WeWork. And there had also been some kind of questionable financial dealings between Adam and the company that he started.
Well, he had trademarked the word “We” and sold it back to the company for $5.9 million dollars. He ended up returning that money, but that certainly raised eyebrows. He had bought a lot of the buildings that WeWork was now leasing, so the company had paid him millions of dollars for space in the offices that he owned.
So this is all very unconventional and potentially even self-dealing.
Right. But then there’s the text of the I.P.O., the legal document that they filed with the S.E.C. The word “community” is listed more than 150 times. And there was all of this kind of propping up what we now know is a very unprofitable business with this lingo of self-help and creating community. And people just started to see it as selling air, you know, couching this unprofitable business in language that made people feel good. So this paperwork filed with the S.E.C. really sets off an implosion unlike any other in start-up history.
The value of WeWork plummets. So this is when discussion starts to spread of, well, should there even be an I.P.O.? Is this company ready to go public? And people start to turn on Adam pretty quickly at this point.
WeWork C.E.O. Adam Neumann is facing new pressure from some of his top investors following the company’s decision to postpone the I.P.O.
Some board members and large investors in the company are privately discussing whether they could replace C.E.O. Adam Neumann and how they would do it.
They think he should be removed. He should not be the C.E.O. of WeWork. Not only should he not be the C.E.O., but he should have no involvement in WeWork anymore.
Yeah, this is now official. WeWork has officially come out saying that Adam Neumann is stepping down as C.E.O.
Eventually, Adam is forced to step down.
So they decide that even getting rid of Adam does not save this effort to go public, and they have to pull the IPO. I mean, this is hugely embarrassing, this company that had been valued at $47 billion, the most valuable start-up in the country, is suddenly valued at a tiny fraction of that. And this Japanese investor, Masa Son, who had been such a visionary, it’s extremely embarrassing for him. Ultimately, he has to apologize to investors, specifically for putting so much faith in Adam Neumann.
So what becomes of Adam Neumann at this point? He has been pushed out of his company. In a way, he has been exposed as someone who is a better salesman than operator of a company. And it becomes pretty clear that he has built something that is not all that revolutionary but is a little bit of a financial house of cards.
Well, here’s what’s so interesting about what happened to Adam Neumann. He walked away from the company he founded with over a billion dollars.
SoftBank bought his shares in WeWork. And they also agreed to pay him $46 million in consulting fees for four years.
SoftBank would say that this was the cost to get Adam out and start to clean up the mess, which includes laying off potentially thousands of employees. You know, in this letter the employees call it “graft.” Here he was walking away with over a billion dollars, I mean, generational wealth as they faced layoffs, losing their health care, getting nothing.
Amy, how do we explain what’s happened here, the pretty sad saga of WeWork and this situation that has ended with all these workers waiting to be laid off?
So the story of WeWork and Adam Neumann is essentially a story of his exploitation of two phenomenon. The first is this kind of late-stage tech capitalism, when investors really want to believe in these start-up founders who have businesses that are essentially sort of traditional businesses with tech layered on, and Uber is a perfect example of that — calling a taxi with your phone — and in turn, give these companies enormous valuations when the business underpinnings are not necessarily there. So the irony, of course, was that Adam Neumann tapped into this tech vernacular about changing the world, about revolutionizing office space, but his company had really nothing to do with tech. It was a commercial real estate company.
But people believed that.
But it had a tech valuation because investors believed it. The second thing he quite brilliantly exploited was this yearning of millennials having this capitalist ambition and hustle, but also this yearning for community, this “we” generation, as he called it, that it’s not about you or me, it’s about we. And in the end, it essentially was about him.
It is us who will blaze the path forward, paved not with algorithms, not with software, but with values, with friendship, with common goals, and most importantly, with humanity. [APPLAUSE] Thank you.
And I think that’s been particularly hard for WeWork employees to stomach. It’s not just that the business turned out to be not as profitable as they thought it was, and their CEO walked away with a giant golden parachute. It was that they believed that it was bigger than that. They believed it was a community. And now they’re saying that it wasn’t.
And the we revolution is going to be led by the we generation, and it will restore in each one of us the sense of dignity and community without which braveness cannot be achieved. The we generation knows that you must treat other people the way you want to be treated.
On Sunday night, The Times reported that WeWork is preparing to lay off at least 4,000 employees. Those layoffs are expected to be announced as early as this week.
Thank you! What a great night it is for Louisiana. [APPLAUSE] And to God be the glory!
— Governor John Bel Edwards of Louisiana, the only Democratic governor in the Deep South, narrowly won re-election on Saturday, defeating a Republican supported by President Trump. It was the second time in two weeks that a Republican candidate for governor backed by Trump has been defeated. After the defeat of Kentucky’s Republican governor, Trump had told Louisiana voters that he needed them to deliver him a victory.
So Trump took a loss, so you’ve got to give me a big win please, O.K.?
On Saturday, during his victory speech, Louisiana’s governor gently teased Trump about the outcome.
During the recent tumult at the company, employees formed a group, the WeWorkers Coalition, that, among other things, is pressing for severance packages for departing employees that it considers equitable.
Starting on Dec. 9, cleaning and facilities jobs at WeWork will be outsourced to JLL, a real estate services company, or one of its partners, according to an email sent to affected staff members last week that was reviewed by The New York Times. WeWork has assured employees that every member of its cleaning and facilities teams will keep their jobs and receive the same level of pay and comparable benefits. But employees who choose not to transfer will lose their jobs and receive no severance, according to a document provided to employees that was reviewed by The Times.
The changes have unnerved many employees, according to interviews with workers and Slack messages reviewed by The Times, stirring fears that some staff members will eventually lose benefits or be forced to work different schedules.
In the Slack messages, one WeWork facilities staff member said that hearing about the outsourcing was like being informed of a death in the family. Another employee said the decision showed that management was unconcerned about the workers’ welfare and was making decisions based on what would save the company the most money.
David Yaffe-Bellany contributed reporting.