With nationally televised hearings set to begin, Democrats described the president’s actions in the starkest terms yet, echoing the constitutional definition of behavior that warrants impeachment.
WASHINGTON — Democrats will begin building a public case on Wednesday that President Trump committed extortion, bribery or coercion by trying to enlist Ukraine to help him in the 2020 elections, as they open the first presidential impeachment hearings in more than two decades.
With a bitterly divided nation watching with anticipation, Democrats will gavel open a nationally televised hearing that features two veteran diplomats as star witnesses, and seeks to breathe life into their allegations that Mr. Trump’s dealings with Ukraine constitute high crimes and misdemeanors for which he deserves to be removed.
On the eve of the session, which will unfold across from the Capitol in an ornate wood-and-plasterwork room adorned with blue and gold, Democrats leading the impeachment investigation described Mr. Trump’s conduct in the starkest terms yet, signaling a new, more aggressive approach.
A top Democratic official said the witnesses — William B. Taylor Jr., the top diplomat in Ukraine, and George P. Kent, a senior State Department official — would lay out a timeline of serious misconduct by Mr. Trump and describe how the president sought to “bribe, extort, condition or coerce” the leader of another country. The official spoke on condition of anonymity without authorization to publicly describe internal strategy, but the language echoed the definition in the Constitution of behavior that warrants impeachment and removal from office.
We spoke with one third grader obsessed with the impeachment inquiry to answer all the questions you’ve been too afraid to ask.
So, Bianca you’re a new journalist at The Times.
So it feels like people have been getting a little bit exhausted from all the impeachment coverage, and the hearings haven’t even begun.
But I actually found someone this week who was excited to hear more.
Yeah. And I recorded a call with him, so let me play it for you.
Hey, Leo. Can you hear me O.K.?
So I heard that you are interested in the impeachment. Is that true?
Yes. I’m trying to figure out a lot more about it, so I can — yeah, I’m very interested in it.
So on Monday, I went to Leo’s house and we talked a bit more. Where are you with understanding the impeachment now? 
Most of it. Most of it.
No, Macy. Stop, stop, stop.
Leo doesn’t really have other kids he can talk about the impeachment with.
I was thinking that since you have more questions, you could come to The New York Times and talk to one of our political reporters.
I can ask my mom about that.
I talked to her, and she said it’s O.K.
Yeah? O.K. Then, yeah.
I was thinking the person you could talk to is this political reporter named Mike Schmidt.
And we started doing research.
Mike Smich, S-M-I-T-C-H. The New York Times.
We were checking out his accomplishments.
Pul — Pulitzer — Pulitizzer.
We spent 45 minutes coming up with his top questions.
What is “quid pro quo?” How many people are listening when the president makes a phone call? What are the hearings?
And then we spent another 45 minutes picking out his outfit.
What’s the temperature out tomorrow?
Expect a high of 50 and a low of 21.
And what did he ended up going with?
I’m gonna wear long sleeves with long pants.
Hi, Leo. Welcome to The New York Times.
I practiced them once.
Great. Well, so Mike is on a train from Washington, D.C. that gets in right at 10:00, and he’s going to rush here. And so yeah, do you want to come in? Great. O.K., this is us. So are you feeling nervous?
You remember the name of the host?
it starts with a B. Michael — I forget. Bar-barb?
From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.” Today, the House of Representatives begins public hearings this morning in the impeachment inquiry against President Trump. Before those hearings get underway, Mike Schmidt sits down with someone who’s unafraid to ask all the questions we’ve been too embarrassed to ask.
It’s Wednesday, November 13th.
Do you feel like you’re at the right height? Do you want anything?
No, I’m O.K.
O.K. You’re a very unfussy guest. So how is it that you got interested in the impeachment?
Well, I was in the car with my mom, and I was driving to my grandma’s house, and she was listening to the radio, and I heard them talking about it on the radio.
I asked my mom about it, and I think I asked, like, can you explain what’s happening to me is? Because I don’t really understand it.
There were a lot of words I didn’t really know.
At first I didn’t know what the whistleblower was.
Yeah. She explained it in a really good way, so now I know.
Mm-hm. What’s your understanding of what a whistleblower is?
It could be anyone. Whistleblower can be anyone, who was either in the room or doing something that let him hear what the president was saying to the president of Ukraine.
And he knew it’s very bad. He can’t threaten another president to help him win the next election. So he reported it to the House of Representatives.
Do you know where that phrase comes from, whistleblower?
They would m you can’t do that. That’s wrong.
Hey, knock it off.
I was at Delaware Beach once, and we saw dolphins. Someone tried to go swim after them, and he had to blow his whistle and say, you can’t go that far. Come back.
Right, same concept. Do not chase after dolphins. Do not ask the president of Ukraine to do you a political favor. Right.
Leo, do you want to show Michael the drawings of the impeachment you made?
Yeah, what do you have in this bag?
There’s all of this.
Hey, can you tell me what this is from your backpack?
It’s a book about the parts of the government.
What Are The Parts of Government.
Was it in high demand? Was there a competition to get it?
Barely anyone who was even in the aisle.
Do you have other people in your life friends, classmates, who are also interested in the impeachment?
No. Like your brother, right?
Yeah, he doesn’t really care.
He really likes animals, especially reptiles.
Hmm. Which is why this is exactly the right place for you to be. Because we are very interested.
Yeah. Yeah, if you want to like at — do you want to look at that questions?
Yeah, sure, let me review them for you.
These are questions for Mike.
These are questions for Mike Schmidt?
This was the original one, but then I typed it.
Great. These are great questions.
So I think Mike is close. So maybe we’ll have you do the “we’ll be right back” thing. Do you want to try that?
Hi. What’s happening? How are you?
Thanks for waiting for me. I’m sorry I’m late.
Welcome. Leo, Mike. Mike, Leo.
What grade are you in, Leo?
Third? What do you learn in third grade?
Division, as in math?
Not the division of the country.
Leo, you have these questions for Mike. Do you want to read some of them?
So first, how many presidents have been impeached? I think it’s three.
So it’s two. It’s Clinton.
Oh, yes. Bill Clinton.
Bill Clinton. And it’s Andrew Johnson.
He quit before he could even get impeached.
Right. 
Yeah, it’s the Latin.
Yeah, it’s in Latin.
Favor for a favor.
I don’t really think it is, because the president of Ukraine is really just doing a favor for Trump. He just said that if you don’t, then he’ll stop giving you money. So he’s basically threatening the president.
So you don’t — it’s interesting, Mike. I wonder if you’d agree with this. It feels like what Leo is saying is, I’m not so sure this is a quid pro quo, because it’s more like a threat without a favor back to Ukraine.
No, you hit on one of the biggest criticisms of how this thing is described. Which is essentially that a quid pro quo doesn’t really capture what it’s all about.  This is not that good of a deal. This is more like, I’ve been giving you lunch money every day. But if you want me to keep giving you lunch money, you have to go throw this banana peel on the ground, so this person I don’t like will come along and slip and fall.
Yes, it’s not fair to the president of Ukraine.
And when you heard about it, what was your first reaction to it? What did you think?
I thought that, well, it’s a bad thing to do, what Trump’s doing. And also, I thought about who the whistleblower was, if it’s a boy or a girl, or who or what.
No, that’s actually one of my questions.
But you do know?
Yeah. It’s a boy.
The whistleblower worked for the C.I.A., and at one point worked inside the White House.
Yeah, Mike, one of my questions was, does the whistleblower work for government?
He does. So Leo, why do you think that it is that Ukraine isn’t saying they’re upset with Trump?
Well, the president of Ukraine might be kind of scared, because they need the money. And when Donald Trump threatens the Ukrainian president that he’s not going to give them money anymore, they get kind of scared. If he says that and reports it and Trump gets in trouble, he’ll get really mad, and he can say — while he’s still in office, he can say I’ll stop giving you money. Which I think the president of Ukraine is scared of, because he wants the people in Ukraine to be safe and feel safe there.
That’s really smart analysis, Leo.
But this is a question. Does other countries, other than America, Ukraine, and Russia, do they know about this, that they could also go to Trump and do what Ukraine could do?
Totally. It’s almost certainly being heard around the world by other countries. But you raise a good question, which is, hey, if this is going on with Ukraine, why wouldn’t it go on with any of the other dozens or hundreds of countries in the world?
And also, has this happened to other countries before?
We don’t know. I mean, the funny thing is that we even forget that in the middle of this whole story. Donald Trump came out and basically said that the Chinese should do the same thing that he wanted the Ukrainians to do. But I had forgotten about that.
Which is to investigate connections between Joe Biden and China.
And Hunter Biden.
He said it right outside the White House.
I didn’t know. That’s new to me. I didn’t know that yet.
So he’s trying to get China to do what he tried to get Ukraine to do?
Investigate Joe Biden?
Joe Biden’s son.
All right. When and why did America start giving Ukraine money? And all the other countries, too.
So a few decades ago, there was this big thing called the Cold War. And the United States wanted to help the Ukrainians. Ukraine had been part of the U.S.S.R., which was the old version of Russia. And the Ukrainians were sort of going out on their own and trying to become their own country. And the United States went to them and said, hey, we can help you. We can help create a democracy in your country, and we can give you money to get off the ground to sort of build yourself up as a country.
And protect yourself from Russia.
Correct. Well, it was to strengthen the country. It’s not until many, many years later that we start giving them military aid, this whole thing that’s come up in the quid pro quo call. But we were becoming friends with them. We thought if we could create more democracies in Europe and next to Russia. we could contain the Russians and help people have the same freedoms that we do.
All right, what are the hearings? The next one’s good.
So the hearings start today. And the hearings are these public events, where the Democrats are going to bring different witnesses, people that were working in the government on Ukraine issues. The Democrats are going to bring them forward in public on TV and ask them questions. so they can say what they knew what was going on with Ukraine and the aid and Trump pressuring them. Does that make sense?
Why are they public? And why is that important?
The Democrats are trying to build an argument for the country that there is a good reason to impeach the president. And they think doing it in public where we can all watch on TV will have a greater impact.
I get confused, too. I get confused, too. What do you think about the fact that the Democrats think they need to have public hearings to convince people that what Trump did was wrong, that a lot of people in the country don’t think that’s a problem?
Because they think that it’s just doing like one thing. They know it’s bad, but they don’t think it’s bad enough for him to get kicked out of office.
They know it’s bad. They definitely know it’s bad, but I don’t think they don’t think it’s bad enough.
I think the most recent argument from Republicans would be that simply doing what he did is not enough to remove him from office.
Do you have any more questions for Mike?
Uh, all right. So when will we know if the president gets impeached? If he does get impeached, when will the public find out?
My editors ask me this question every day. I think we may have an answer by December or January. So just a couple of months away. And if he’s impeached, then this would be sent to the Senate, where there would be a trial, six days a week, national television, the senators deciding whether to take out Trump.
And when would that be decided by?
Well, early next year. But the problem, Leo, is, in Washington, everything always takes longer than we think it’s going to. So maybe it’s the spring when we get some clarity.
Leo, I want you to ask this question, which I think might be one of our last questions in this conversation with Mike, do you mind asking that?
What are we going to see this week, in the coming weeks?
We’re going to see hearings. We’re going to see the first one on Wednesday, where a senior State Department official, who had big concerns about what Trump was doing, is going to testify publicly. And then on Friday, another State Department official who was involved in all this stuff is going to testify in public again. And then next week, we’ll see the same thing but with different witnesses. And this will be the Democrats trying to argue to the country why this is so important and why the president should be impeached.
Leo, I have to leave and head to Washington to cover the first hearing that Mike just described, but I’m curious, what has been the most interesting thing that you have learned here today from Mike Schmidt?
I think it’s — I learned this, and I didn’t know it until today. I didn’t know about the Cold War.
Between America and Russia. I found that really interesting.
Yeah, it’s a big part of the story, actually.
Leo, what’s your prediction about what’s going to happen at the hearings?
Yeah, I think he’s going to get impeached in the House, but he’ll be O.K. He won’t — not enough people will vote in the Senate.
So you think he’s going to end up staying in office?
So that’s your prediction?
That’s what I think, too, unless something big changes.
Leo, I think you know as much as I do now. So I think we’re done here. You say some of this stuff in a clearer way than anyone else I’ve heard.
Do you want to show Mike the impeachment drawing?
That’s a person. It’s a person in a suit blowing a whistle.
With Donald Trump’s hair.
That’s Donald Trump’s hair?
I don’t know. I thought so at first. So this is the whistleblower, and he’s blowing his whistle.
Anonymous no more.
Mike, thank you very much. Leo, thank you so very much. It was a pleasure to meet you, and I look forward to some day coming on your podcast. Get it. [CHUCKLING] We’ll speak soon.
The first public hearing of the impeachment inquiry is scheduled to begin at 10:00 a.m. with the joint testimony of Bill Taylor, the top US diplomat in Ukraine, and George Kent, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Europe, both of whom observed the president’s pressure campaign against Ukraine.
Here’s what else you need to know today. The Times reports that President Trump has repeatedly discussed the possibility of firing the Inspector General of the intelligence community, Michael Atkinson, out of frustration that Atkinson found the whistleblower’s complaint to be credible and then reported its existence to Congress. Such a move would be reminiscent of the president’s decision to fire F.B.I. director James Comey, whom he judged to be disloyal during the Russia investigation, and if carried out could be viewed as an attempt to obstruct the impeachment inquiry. And during oral arguments on Tuesday, in a case about DACA, the Supreme Court’s conservative majority appeared ready to side with the Trump administration in its effort to shut down the program. The conservative justices indicated that they were reluctant to second guess the president’s reasoning for terminating the program, and considered the president’s explanation for doing so to be sufficient. The case before the Supreme Court revolves around whether the White House acted legally when it shut down DACA, since it provided no policy reasons to justify the decision.
In a taste of the epic partisan battle to come, Republicans readied their arguments that the president did nothing wrong — and certainly nothing impeachable — and raged against a process they have denounced from the beginning as unfair and illegitimate.
House investigators have spent seven weeks methodically assembling evidence through closed-door interviews that Mr. Trump used security aid as leverage to force President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine to publicly announce investigations into former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and debunked claims that Democrats conspired with Ukraine to interfere in the 2016 election.
Mr. Taylor and Mr. Kent will be the first of several witnesses to testify publicly. The next is Marie L. Yovanovitch, the former United States ambassador to Ukraine, who is to appear Friday and is expected to tell her story of being smeared by Mr. Trump and his allies based on lies and conspiracy theories, and abruptly removed from her post.
Late Tuesday, the committee announced three more days of public hearings next week involving eight witnesses, signaling Democrats’ intent to accelerate the public phase of the inquiry ahead of the Thanksgiving holiday.
Four current or former officials will testify next Tuesday, including two requested by Republicans: Tim Morrison, a former Russia expert on the National Security Council, and Kurt D. Volker, who was the president’s special envoy to Ukraine. Jennifer Williams, a national security aide who worked for Vice President Mike Pence, and Alexander S. Vindman, a decorated lieutenant colonel in the Army who worked at the National Security Council, will also testify.
Gordon D. Sondland, the ambassador to the European Union, will be the most prominent witness next Wednesday. Other witnesses have testified that he helped lead the rogue effort to pressure Ukraine. He will be joined that day by David Hale, a top State Department official, and Laura K. Cooper, a senior Defense Department official.
Democrats will close out next week by hearing testimony from Fiona Hill, a former top national security aide in the White House, who testified in a closed-door session that John R. Bolton, the former national security adviser, had told her to report concerns about the activities of the president’s political appointees to the National Security Council’s lawyers.
In an interview on Tuesday, Mr. Schiff told NPR that he believed Mr. Trump had committed “bribery” and “high crimes and misdemeanors,” both listed in the Constitution as impeachable offenses.
Republicans pledged to aggressively defend Mr. Trump against the charges by arguing that his efforts to push Mr. Zelensky to announce investigations into his political rivals were legitimate attempts to root out corruption. The president did it, they plan to concede, but for innocent reasons.
According to a memo circulated on Tuesday by their top impeachment investigators, Mr. Trump’s Republican defenders on Capitol Hill plan to raise doubts about the witnesses who have testified in the Ukraine affair, questioning the knowledge and judgment of the diplomats and national security officials who have expressed concern about Mr. Trump’s July 25 telephone call with Mr. Zelensky.
According to the memo, Republicans will insist that the president had a “deep-seated, genuine and reasonable skepticism” about Ukraine given its history of corruption, and that his decision to withhold security aid was “entirely reasonable.” The detailed description of the strategy was distributed to the party’s members in the House late Monday night by the Republican staff of the committees conducting the impeachment inquiry.
Wednesday’s session in the vaulted, columned chambers of the Ways and Means Committee — the House’s grandest meeting room — will be only the third time in modern American history that lawmakers have convened a public hearing to consider the impeachment of a president.
Democrats promised to conduct a sober, dignified inquiry, but the vast potential consequences of their endeavor promised to turn the process into an ugly partisan fight that is all but certain to eclipse the facts.
Lawmakers from both parties on the Intelligence Committee spent hours Tuesday sequestered in separate rooms of the panel’s secure bunker beneath the Capitol, ironing out scripts for proposed questioning.
Democratic officials acknowledged that Wednesday’s hearing was unlikely to produce new, blockbuster revelations that go beyond what witnesses have told investigators behind closed doors. But they said their main goal was to allow Americans to hear the evidence for themselves.
A Democratic aide working on the inquiry said it would be up to Republicans to provide evidence that would clear Mr. Trump of the accusations against him.
Representative Jim Jordan, Republican of Ohio, emerged from his party’s strategy session in the secure Intelligence Committee rooms surrounded by a cadre of aides toting fat legal briefing books and what appeared to be blown-up printouts of exhibits for Wednesday’s hearing.
Here are the lawmakers to watch as the process unfolds.
The people closest to Mr. Trump, including Mr. Bolton and Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff, have refused to testify so far in the inquiry. The White House says those aides are covered by “absolute immunity,” which Mr. Trump’s lawyer argues allows them to ignore congressional demands for testimony.
On Tuesday, Mr. Mulvaney said he would follow the directive from Mr. Trump and refuse to testify, abandoning an attempt to join a lawsuit that could have clarified whether he was legally compelled to obey the president or Congress.
Republicans have signaled that they intend to use the hearings as a platform to shift the discussion away from Mr. Trump and toward a series of largely debunked conspiracy theories about Democrats, including the business dealings of Hunter Biden while his father, who is now a Democratic candidate for president, was vice president.
But the memo circulated Monday night indicates that the president’s allies will try to defend the president’s actions toward Ukraine as well. It urges lawmakers to argue that Mr. Trump’s July 25 call with Mr. Zelensky shows “no conditionality or evidence of pressure” on the president of Ukraine. That is at odds with a reconstructed transcript of the call, which shows that when Mr. Zelensky brought up his desire to purchase defense weaponry, Mr. Trump said he wanted the Ukrainian president to “do us a favor, though” and then mentioned the investigations into the Bidens.
The memo also makes a broader case that there was no pressure on Mr. Zelensky because the Ukrainians were not aware that the United States was withholding promised security assistance, and that the aid was ultimately released without Ukraine committing to the investigations that Mr. Trump wanted.
In fact, officials have testified that some Ukrainian officials were aware that the aid had been frozen by the Trump administration, and were eventually told by a top American diplomat that they would probably not receive it unless the investigations were publicly announced. The release of the aid occurred only after the Trump administration knew that a whistle-blower had filed a confidential complaint about the July 25 call. That complaint alleged that the freezing of the aid was part of a broader abuse of power by Mr. Trump in an effort to better his political chances in 2020.
Hours after the Republican memo was made public, Democrats released to their members a memo of their own calling Republicans’ assertions “patently false” and challenging them point by point.
“The American people will hear firsthand from these witnesses beginning this week,” the memo to Democratic members said.
