After finding the strip club next door closed, judges who were in Indianapolis for a conference got into a fight that left two of them hospitalized.
According to police reports and the opinion issued by the Supreme Court, the drinking began early in the evening of April 30 for Judge Jacobs, who had a scotch in the hotel lobby after checking into his room for the conference. At 7 p.m., Judge Bell kicked things off with a couple of Seagram’s Escapes. Sometime after 10 p.m., Judge Adams started drinking beers at an Irish pub. Around 12:30 a.m., all three were drinking with a court magistrate at another bar, throwing darts and playing cornhole.
About 3 a.m. they headed for the strip club, which had just closed for the night. The four officers of the court then walked to a nearby White Castle. The magistrate went inside while the three judges waited in the parking lot.
At that time two men, Alfredo Vazquez and Brandon Kaiser, drove by in a blue S.U.V. and “shouted something out the window,” according to the Supreme Court opinion. With no gavel to register her displeasure, Judge Bell extended her middle finger instead.
The dispute quickly escalated into a brawl — at one point Judge Adams kicked Mr. Kaiser in the back — but it appeared to have ended when Judge Jacobs had Mr. Kaiser pinned down, with his fist raised to strike.
If only it was: Mr. Kaiser pulled out a firearm, shooting Judge Adams once and Judge Jacobs twice, according to the police.
Judge Adams needed two emergency operations, including to repair damage to his colon. Judge Jacobs, who was shot twice in the chest, had two operations during a 14-day hospitalization.
Medical workers also recorded the men’s blood alcohol levels: 0.13 for Judge Jacobs, and 0.157 for Judge Adams. (The legal limit for drivers in Indiana is 0.08.) The report says Judge Bell did not have her blood alcohol level tested, though she later said she had no memory of what would seem to have been a memorable encounter.
The report does not indicate how Judge Bell finished that thought, but it does detail the punishments adjudicated to the three justices.
Judge Adams, a Democrat elected to the Clark County court in 2014, was charged with felony battery and multiple misdemeanors; he pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor for kicking Mr. Kaiser, and was sentenced to a year in jail with all but two days suspended. He was also suspended from his job without pay for 60 days.
Though a grand jury declined to indict Judge Jacobs, a Republican who has also been on the Clark County court for five years, the Indiana Supreme Court suspended him for 30 days without pay. Judge Bell received an identical suspension.
Mr. Kaiser, who is accused of firing on the judges, faces eight felony and six misdemeanor charges in a jury trial set to begin on Jan. 13. His lawyer declined to comment on Friday.
Court records show that Mr. Vazquez pleaded guilty to one misdemeanor battery charge, and received a yearlong sentence that was mostly suspended. His lawyer could not be reached.
A lawyer for Judge Adams declined to comment, though the judge has previously released a statement expressing regret for his actions. Judge Bell, a Republican who began her tenure in Crawford County in 2017, represented herself in the disciplinary proceedings. On Friday, she declined to comment on the case.
As circuit judges, they hear all kinds of cases — small claims, felonies, misdemeanors — though Judge Jacobs’s office said about 90 percent of the cases his court hears are drug-related.
