My faith shapes my progressive politics. I wish this were true of more liberals.
I remember the first time I encountered God.
It was 2002 and my mother, with three small children in tow, had just arrived at the doors of the Cathedral of the Holy Spirit in Atlanta, Ga. She was not seeking salvation from sin, but homelessness. For months we had been living in a domestic violence shelter in North Carolina, and when my mother got word of a church support group called Overcomers that helped women in similar circumstances, she drove deeper into the Bible Belt to enlist their help.
And help they did: In a matter of weeks, the church secured us housing in an apartment complex directly across the street, which they filled with donated furniture. We were assigned a “church mother,” an elderly black woman I would come to know as Nana Clara, who cooked us regular meals, watched my sisters and me after school, and gave me my first lessons in proper Southern etiquette. This experience instilled in me not only a belief in God, but my earliest memory of a belief in myself — my ability to overcome.
Years later, when I began to hear the phrase, “I’m spiritual, not religious,” I did not think much of it. After all, I know firsthand how deeply personal religion is. For every story of fraternity and mercy like my own, there is one of rejection, abuse or outright condemnation. Still, when I think back to those days in church, I cannot help but wonder if as a generation we will lose something more than Sunday service with the decline of organized religion.
According to a new Pew Research survey on American religion, as older Americans die, “they are being replaced by a new cohort of millennials who display far lower levels of attachment to organized religion than their parents’ and grandparents’ generations did when they were the same age.” When measured by religious affiliation, millennials are the most secular in modern American history.
Today, the decline of organized religion is having a particularly pronounced impact on the Democratic Party. A FiveThirtyEight analysis of data from the General Social Survey revealed that over the past two decades, the number of Democrats who don’t identify with any religion doubled, from 14 percent in 1998 to 28 percent in 2018.
What do we relinquish as a society when a cooperative faith dissipates? Beyond spiritual guidance, the church was my earliest exposure to effective social organization, people rallying around collective belief to create lasting material change in the lives of those who needed it most. Collective belief demands social cooperation and interdependence bound to a principled obligation with expectations of self-sacrifice.
These values have been the foundation of many previous American progressive social movements. Though the civil rights movement had clear legislative aims, it was a deeply religious movement, sustained by the spiritual empowerment and social organization of Southern black churches. The church served not only as a place to worship, but also as a community support group, regular meeting space and bulletin board; a place to solve disputes and center political organizing.
The motto of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, over which the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. presided, was, “To Save the Soul of America.” When their faith in the American government dwindled, black Americans relied on a unified faith in God to deliver them from the sin of racism. This hope was not a passive acceptance that their collective lot would be improved in the next life, but instead a critique of the status quo that moved them to political action in this one.
Black Lives Matter has intentionally positioned itself outside of organized religion in an attempt to challenge the norms of religious institutions, particularly concerning issues of sexuality and male-centered leadership. But the embrace of the secular seems to be a failure on the part of the movement — despite small wins in cities that are mostly liberal, the most lasting impact has been a change of conversation. And even then, the Black Lives Matter mantra has been co-opted by liberals as a political slogan rather than a pointed ideological conviction. Without the centralized leadership, oratorical strength and widespread influence organized religion has historically provided to black liberation struggles, it has been difficult for the movement to sustain itself on a national front.
I fear that absent the structural and rhetorical power offered by organized religion, it will become increasingly difficult for the left to fight the growing ideology of right wing extremism, an ideology that has always been heavily undergirded by its own religious dogma. Religion has long been crucial to the right wing in pushing its legislative agenda. In the early 1960s, for instance, the Supreme Court decisions restricting teacher-led prayer and Bible reading in the public schools helped ignite the religious right to political action, and their influence within the Republican Party has grown steadily ever since.
White evangelical support for President Trump exceeded 80 percent in the 2016 election, and they remain critical to his base. The Trump administration has often cited religious freedom in its efforts to allow medical providers to deny reproductive health care and empower anti-LGBTQ discrimination by federal contractors.
Beyond politics, perhaps what we lose with the decline of collective belief more than anything is this notion of radical love, one that extends beyond identity politics or civic obligation. As I consider the generational decline of organized religion, I imagine the good collective faith can still achieve. These days, when I participate in a climate march or donate money to organizations like the Trans Women of Color Collective, I do so as much out of religious obligation as a political one. Beyond a tendency toward compassion and empathy, religion has ingrained in me the notion that I am indeed my brother’s keeper; that another’s well-being is inextricably bound up with my own.
I think often of that morning 17 years ago, waiting alongside my mother and sisters at the doors of the church, standing in the need of more than prayer. That day I came to know the God of Love only through the Love of God, a love that was extended by strangers beholden to me only by a system of collective belief. If anything has the potential to “Save the Soul of America,” surely that love can.
Bianca Vivion Brooks is a writer based in Harlem.