Synika Gardner has struggled with her mental health since she learned she had bipolar disorder in 1996. Now she is making up for lost time with her three daughters.
For more than two decades, Synika Gardner’s struggle with bipolar disorder has interfered with her education, her work and her relationships, particularly when it came to her three daughters.
Ms. Gardner, 43, received the bipolar diagnosis in 1996, when she was 20 and feeling pressure to excel in her pre-med studies at Hunter College. She lived in denial for a time, and when she finally opened up about the condition to her friends and family, she ended up feeling misunderstood and isolated.
It didn’t help that the medication she was taking “made me feel like a zombie,” she said. She had trouble concentrating, and was academically dismissed from college in 1998 after she was hospitalized several times.
She moved in with her mother in East Elmhurst, Queens, but their relationship became strained.
Two years later, she reached out to Community Access, a nonprofit organization that provides housing and support to people with mental illness, and moved into a supportive housing apartment on the Lower East Side. “I left with the clothes on my back,” she said.
Eventually, Ms. Gardner returned to her studies, graduating from LaGuardia Community College in 2003 with an associate degree in human services before enrolling at York College in Queens. Her long-term goal, she said, was to become a health educator in a women’s clinic, teaching patients about preventive care and wellness.
Ms. Gardner’s path changed when she became pregnant not long after her arrival at York and stopped taking her medication. Just before she gave birth to her oldest daughter, she had a manic episode while she was hospitalized with pre-eclampsia — a condition characterized by dangerously high blood pressure during pregnancy that disproportionately affects African-American women.
A social worker at the hospital reported the episode to the Administration for Children’s Services. Ms. Gardner said her mother was granted custody of her daughter after she was born in September 2004.
For a time, Ms. Gardner was in and out of hospitals as she continued to struggle with her mental health. Her mother was granted custody of her second daughter, who was born in 2007. Ms. Gardner has full custody of her youngest daughter, born in 2013. The two now live together in Astoria, Queens.
“It’s rough being a mom when you have this condition,” Ms. Gardner said. At times, she would be hospitalized for up to three months, causing her to miss significant milestones in her children's lives — a baby’s first steps, for instance, or the loss of a first baby tooth.
Her illness forced her to take extensive medical leaves from school, and she eventually dropped out.
Mental health issues prevented Ms. Gardner from maintaining a steady employment history for much of her adult life. In 2017, she started working as a direct support professional, preparing meals for developmentally disabled adults and helping them with daily tasks, like cleaning and bathing.
Last year, she was feeding a client who had a broken shoulder when a colleague noticed that Ms. Gardner’s mouth was twitching and contorted on one side. Ms. Gardner feared that she might be having a stroke and called for an ambulance. She learned she had bradycardia, or a slow heartbeat, and arrhythmia, and was given a pacemaker.
“I was a little nervous and scared, because I have children,” Ms. Gardner said.
Afterward, she was out of work for seven months, until September 2018. She had another health scare on the job just a month later, when “the room started spinning,” Ms. Gardner said. She received a vertigo diagnosis and was forced to stop working again.
She struggles to get by without a regular income to supplement public assistance. Each month, Ms. Gardner receives $848 in Social Security Disability Insurance benefits and $215 in food stamps.
This year, she decided she wanted to start working again. In June, she signed up for a CPR training program at Urban Upbound, a nonprofit organization that provides economic and educational resources to people in public housing and low-income neighborhoods.
Community Service Society, one of the seven organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, paid for the $175 class.
Ms. Gardner, whose CPR certification had expired, said being recertified would help her if she returned to work as a direct support professional. She also wants to finish school, and she still hopes to become a health educator.
She and her mother have worked on their relationship. “We came a long way,” she said. Together, they are raising Ms. Gardner’s three girls. Now 15, 12 and 6, they love TikTok, dancing and singing. Amid her challenges, Ms. Gardner strives to set a good example for them.
