When we are reduced to pixels or poll numbers, wars, discrimination and other forms of brutality become easier to justify.
Ms. Wampole is an associate professor of French literature and thought at Princeton University.
This was how Senator Elizabeth Warren, in September’s Democratic presidential debate, described the appeal she has made “every time one of the generals come through” as she sought to understand by what measure our military intervention in Afghanistan could be considered a success. In place of an abstraction — “success” — she wanted something concrete. Ms. Warren’s plea, startling in its simplicity, highlights the perilous nature of abstraction and invites us to study the various ways in which it may be deployed to control, cancel or kill people.
In the social and political realms, an abstraction is an idea — love, liberty, Leninism — that has no palpable form. When we speak about something in the abstract, we take concrete instances and average them into generalized — and necessarily reductive — concepts. Through this process, things, events and people lose their visibility and density. The world becomes a series of signs and numbers standing in for things themselves.
Among the thinkers of the past century, the French philosopher Simone Weil stands out as a powerful analyst of the many ways in which abstraction could damage our politics and our soul.
Weil saw in her historical moment a loss of a sense of scale, a creeping ineptitude in judgment and communication and, ultimately, a forfeiture of rational thought. She observed how political platforms being built upon words like “roots” or “homeland” could use more abstractions — like “the foreigner,” “the immigrant,” “the minority” and “the refugee” — to turn flesh-and-blood individuals into targets. Finally, she understood how central abstractions were in legitimizing unwarranted authority, in pitting people against one another, and in justifying indefensible wars, discrimination and other forms of brutality.
While Weil was describing Europe on the verge of catastrophic war, this insight can also help us understand the demoralizing reality of contemporary American politics.
There is no doubt that driven by the explosion of new and more accessible technologies, our world has become more and more abstract: from the advent and expansion of cyberwarfare, through demographic research and online banking and trading, to algorithmic commerce and the move toward cashless societies. The tendency toward abstraction, though, is not merely restricted to the realm of technology. It extends to our social, intellectual and political lives — including the various isms (feminism, racism, colonialism, nationalism and so on) that we use to sum up human systems and behaviors.
Abstractions often arise when there is too much to know and too little time in which to know it. Submerged in a superabundance of information, abstractions — in the guise of statistics or stereotypes — seem to act as valuable timesavers. But what we save in time, we lose in nuance and exactitude. And there is a greater danger: When the world grows more complex, as it has in our age of global technocracy, specialists begin to monopolize information and use it as a tool of control.
It would serve each of us well to make a collective effort to inventory our beliefs, assess how much they rely on abstractions, and consider how a move away from the abstract and toward the concrete might bring us all closer to understanding what winning looks like.
