Television|How Do I Fill the ‘Succession’-Size Hole in My Sunday?
How Do I Fill the ‘Succession’-Size Hole in My Sunday?
A TV critic offers a suggestion, as well as answers to other questions from readers.
To everyone who misses “Succession”: Watch “BoJack Horseman.” Really!
“BoJack” is a cartoon on Netflix, and it’s about depression, addiction, show business and disappointment. BoJack is haunted by the hole in his life where his parents’ love was supposed to be, and he deflects this pain with glibness. You want stories of mergers? There are stories of mergers! You want rich people being petulant but also underneath it all to be truly suffering? And how. You want season-long B-stories that add up to shocking results?  Silly names? Criticism of the media? Skepticism toward anyone who seems happy or fulfilled? Slick, quick dialogue from characters who are being funny on purpose? I swear that even the opening title music sounds similar.
I get that “BoJack” might be a tough sell for people who typically avoid animation, and I’ll also tell you that the first several episodes might seem like just a smart, punny spin on an antihero comedy. But the show is laying groundwork, and the seeming superficiality is part of a bigger plan.
If you’re on the fence right now and don’t mind spoilers, I’m going to be sacrilegious and tell you to watch Season 5, Episode 6, “Free Churro,” in which BoJack delivers a eulogy lasting the show’s entire 26 minutes. It’s the most dramatic episode, and among the most impressive, and if that doesn’t sell you on it, maybe nothing will.
The loveliest, most earnest and arguably best food show is “Salt Fat Acid Heat,” on Netflix. Samin Nosrat is a chef and author (and a New York Times contributor) who travels the world to teach viewers about flavors and techniques. Unlike most other food and travel shows, though, this isn’t aggro or show-offy, nor is it exoticizing. It’s thoughtful, it’s educational, it’s beautifully shot — and, most important, it’s fun. Nosrat’s expertise and enthusiasm make the show feel like the best class you’ve ever taken. There’s less fretting than you’d get on “Baking Show,” but that might be a good thing.
If you require a contest format, though, and “Top Chef” is too mean — which it often is — you might like “Food Network Star” (originally “Next Food Network Star”), in which contestants compete not just on cooking skills but on telegenic skills, too. There’s also “Zumbo’s Just Desserts,” another dessert-contest show, which has a slightly zany spin but is still good-natured and supportive.
While I’m astounded to hear that you did not like the pilot of “Friday Night Lights” — one of my favorite pilots ever — I can at least give you this: Set yourself free. If you don’t like the first few episodes, you’re not going to like the rest of it.
Go seek Spanish historical dramas. (These are all on Netflix, and they’re all in Spanish with subtitles, or dubbed.) Start with “Cable Girls,” which kicks off in Madrid in 1928. Everyone wants to work at the telephone company, and our four heroines are among the lucky few; one also commits crimes. Then there’s the slightly more sophisticated “The Time in Between,” which starts in the 1930s and follows a seamstress who falls into a life of adventure and espionage. The costumes are great, and the romances are a blast. Finally, try “Velvet,” set in a department store in the 1950s, when cross-class romances are verboten and thus flourish. It’s quite glam and total catnip to those of us who wanted Rachel Menken to have a “Mad Men” spinoff.
Send your questions to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Questions are edited for length and clarity.