The musician and poet released “You Want It Darker” 19 days before his death in 2016. His son, Adam, finished more songs from those sessions for a posthumous album.
It seems to have been his will. “Listen to the Hummingbird” is the final track on Cohen’s posthumous new album, “Thanks for the Dance,” which will be released on Friday. The raw audio of that passage from the news conference was tracked down by Adam Cohen and the engineer Michael Chaves, who mixed out the buzzing tone of the room’s halogen lights and composed around it a gentle, unobtrusive piano melody. Adam had already done the same for many of the other vocal takes and half-finished songs his father left behind.
In the last days of his life, the ever-meticulous Cohen was determined to bring his final poems and songs up to his exacting standards; “it was what he was staying alive to do,” Adam wrote in the foreword to “The Flame,” a book collecting this work that was published in 2018. He would sometimes send “do not disturb” emails to loved ones, in an effort to eke out precious writing time.
What is remarkable about “The Flame,” “You Want It Darker” and now “Thanks for the Dance” is the clarity and self-awareness with which Cohen wrestles with his own impending death. “I’m leaving the table, I’m out of the game,” he sang with a low, deliberate finality on the 2016 record.
In his final creative period, Cohen continued to look to younger artists for inspiration, and was particularly impressed by the lyricism he heard in rappers like Kendrick Lamar. “I remember him once trying to soothe his pain while we were working with medical marijuana, and him putting on FKA twigs and ranting for a good 45 minutes about what a genius she was,” Adam said.
That liveliness permeates the record. The spry opening track “Happens to the Heart” follows the classic Cohen tradition of undercutting the classically romantic with modern banalities (“There was a mist of summer kisses/Where I tried to double-park”), while the wistfully sensual “Night of Santiago” finds an aged man reflecting back on a vivid memory of passion. One of the most elegiac songs, “Moving On,” is a tribute to his former lover and muse Marianne Ihlen; Adam said his father recorded the vocal take heard on the album in late May 2016, just after he learned that Ihlen had died.
After Cohen died on Nov. 7, 2016, after a fall in the night, Adam could not bring himself to listen to the unfinished songs. But around seven months later, he “got a tiny bit of courage” and opened up the sessions.
One of the first people he asked to help was Javier Mas, the renowned Spanish laud player and guitarist who had accompanied Cohen on tour since 2008. Their bond was deep: Cohen was known to take off his hat and bow at Mas’s feet while he soloed; the guitarist had taught himself English partly by translating the singer’s lyrics.
On the road, Cohen had often spoken reverentially to Mas about an old Spanish guitar he had back home, and how its cedar fragrance was still as strong as the day he’d acquired it some 40 years before. “You know that wood never dies,” Cohen once said. These sessions gave Mas his first opportunity to play his departed friend’s guitar. Between takes, Adam would sometimes see Mas sticking his nose near its sound hole and inhaling deeply.
The most moving one on the new record is the title track. Cohen had written an earlier version of it for his former partner Anjani Thomas’s 2006 album “Blue Alert.” Her voice was softly alluring, but his version is transformative. “One-two-three/One-two-three-one,” he counts off in a sprightly croak. You can hear in the delivery an exhaustion, a heaviness of the body. But somehow in the movements of that golden voice, he’s still dancing.