Six children were among the victims of a massacre attributed to organized crime, relatives said. Other children hid by a roadside and survived.
MEXICO CITY — Three women and six children from a prominent local Mormon family were killed on Monday in northern Mexico, family members said, when gunmen believed to be members of organized crime ambushed their vehicles on a desolate road.
The attack alarmed a nation already reeling from record violence this year, and though its details remained murky it fueled criticism of the government’s strategy against the power of criminal groups.
Members of the LeBarón family, dual Mexican and American citizens who have lived in a fundamentalist Mormon community in the border region for decades, were traveling in three separate vehicles when the gunmen attacked, several family members said. They described a terrifying scene in which one child was gunned down while running away, while others were trapped inside a burning car.
Two of the children killed were less than a year old, the family members said. The car they were in with their mother was set ablaze.
David Langford, whose sister Christina died in the attack, said that eight children had survived, including his sister’s 7-month-old infant. Several of the children survived after hiding by a tree, and one, about 12 years old, hiked several miles to get help, Mr. Langford said.
Mexico has suffered a string of violent episodes in the past month, each as devastating and infuriating for citizens as the last.
Alfonso Durazo, Mexico’s security minister, said Tuesday that “there were serious advances in the investigation” and that the women’s sport utility vehicles could have been confused by criminal groups operating in the area.
Among those groups is a cell linked to the Sinaloa Cartel, which was led by Joaquín Guzmán Loera, known as El Chapo. When security forces tried to arrest one of his sons last month in Culiacán, in Sinaloa State, almost 400 gunmen swarmed the city and forced the government to withdraw.
Other groups are trying to seize the region where the attack took place, Mr. Durazo said.
Fourteen police officers were killed in Michoacán State last month, in an ambush stemming from violent clashes there. Days later, cartel gunmen laid siege to Culiacán.
In both cases, the stark challenges of public security were revealed, raising questions about the government’s capacity to combat the spiraling violence.
But Monday’s killings seem to have hit a new low, with infants, children and their mothers massacred in the road. It threatened to become a galvanizing moment for citizens frustrated with violence and the government’s efforts to stop it.
Mr. López Obrador said it was up to Mexico to deal with the matter. “We appreciate and thank very much President Trump and any foreign government that wants to help, but in these cases we have to act with independence,” he said.
Later Tuesday, a White House spokesman, Hogan Gidley, said the presidents had discussed violence and cooperation in the border region. Mr. Trump offered assistance “to ensure the perpetrators face justice,” Mr. Gidley said.
At least publicly, many details of the attack remained unclear Tuesday, as the state and local authorities struggled to piece together what happened and why.
At the heart of the mystery was motive. It was unknown whether the attackers deliberately targeted the family, which has historically spoken out about the criminal groups near the American border, or whether it was a case of mistaken identity.
Julian LeBarón, a cousin of the women who were driving, said that they and their children had been traveling from La Mora, in Sonora State, to Colonia LeBarón, in Chihuahua State.
One of his cousins, Rhonita LeBarón, was traveling to Phoenix to pick up her husband, who works in North Dakota and was returning to celebrate the couple’s anniversary. Her car broke down, Mr. LeBarón said, and the gunmen started shooting, causing the vehicle to explode.
He said she was killed with her four children: an 11-year-old boy, a 9-year-old girl and twins who were less than a year old.
About eight miles ahead, the two other cars were also attacked, and the two other women, Christina Langford and Dawna Langford, were killed. A 4-year-old boy and a 6-year-old girl were also killed, Mr. LeBarón said.
The children were taken to hospitals, and several or all of them were airlifted to the United States, David Langford said.
Family members expressed bewilderment over what could have precipitated the attack.
One of the women even got out of her car, he said, and put up her hands. “They shot her point blank in the chest,” he said.
The massacre came a decade after two other members of the LeBarón family were kidnapped and murdered after they confronted the drug gangs that exercise de facto control over the borderlands south of Arizona.
The family’s religious community is not affiliated with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the mainstream church with 16 million adherents that is headquartered in Utah.
Their community began in the early 20th century, when members of the LeBarón family moved to Mexico and practiced polygamy, which was forbidden by the Latter-day Saints. Polygamy has largely faded from the community.
Religious communities that date themselves to Joseph Smith, the founder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, often call themselves Mormon. The mainstream church has abandoned the moniker.
It was not immediately clear if their religious beliefs were a factor in their deaths.
Family members on social media implored the governments of Mexico and the United States to do something about the intensifying violence in Mexico, in particular in the areas along the northern border, where Mormons and Mennonites have lived for decades despite the threat from organized crime.
Azam Ahmed, Elisabeth Malkin and Elda Cantú reported from Mexico City, and Daniel Victor from Hong Kong. Elizabeth Dias contributed reporting from Washington, and Julie Turkewitz from Denver.