HONG KONG — Hong Kong was a city on edge on Monday following escalating violence, in which one demonstrator was shot point blank by a police officer and one man was doused with a flammable liquid and set on fire after he scolded protesters.
At nightfall, both men were fighting for their lives in a city seething with resentments.
Protesters have voiced outrage at police officers they see as increasingly resorting to force, and at a government they say has allowed them to act with impunity. Government supporters are embittered over the protesters themselves turning to violence and the damage it has done to their city.
Months of unrest have thrown the Chinese territory into its worst political crisis in decades, and if Monday was any indication, there is no end in sight.
The shooting of the protester set off outrage among many Hong Kongers.
The young man was shot as commuters, snarled by roadblocks set up by demonstrators, looked on in disbelief. One moment, he was standing on a corner staring into the end of the police officer’s handgun. The next, after several shots rang out, he lay crumpled on the ground in the middle of an eerily deserted intersection.
As blood pooled on the asphalt, a crowd of angry citizens surrounded riot police officers who had arrived as reinforcements. “Murderer!” some of them cried.
An officer doused the crowd with pepper spray.
Anger quickly unspooled across several districts in the city of more than seven million people, and the protests drew in both suit-clad office workers in the central business district and residents in working-class neighborhoods.
The other spasm of violence Monday took place on an overpass across town from the shooting. There, a middle-aged man reprimanded a group of protesters, accusing them of lacking patriotism for the Chinese motherland. He was set ablaze.
“Go back to the Greater Bay Area!” protesters shouted at him, using Beijing’s term for the region of southern China that includes Hong Kong and neighboring cities.
Ms. Ortagus also suggested the United States may no longer grant Hong Kong a favorable trade status different from that of mainland China: “Hong Kong’s autonomy, its adherence to the rule of law, and its commitment to protecting civil liberties are key to preserving its special status under U.S. law,” she said.
Tensions in Hong Kong had been building for days, following the death of a student who fell from a parking garage amid demonstrations.
Many protesters see the student as a martyr, casting his death as more evidence of excessive use of force by the police. They called for citizens to join in a strike on Monday, and to disrupt transit en masse during the morning commute. Events across the city, including classes at most of its universities, were canceled.
The scale of the transit disruptions was not as large as a citywide strike that protesters staged on a weekday in early August. But the clashes between protesters and the police were intense by any measure; it was only the third time the police have shot a protester since the demonstrations began.
Notably, some clashes occurred on the fringes of university campuses that have in recent months generally been off limits to such violence. Protesters threw Molotov cocktails and glass bottles at police lines, while officers responded by firing tear gas and rubber bullets.
Thousands of black-clad protesters also turned up for a flash mob-style demonstration in Hong Kong’s central business district around lunchtime, creating a starkly surreal scene in an area filled with luxury malls. Some used orange traffic cones, bricks and wooden poles to set up barricades on main roads.
Protesters, some of them office workers in full face masks, yelled insults at police officers along the same lines.
Marcus Lee, a 26-year-old lawyer in a charcoal gray suit with a blue face mask, stood with a group of protesters who were shouting at the police.
In the Kwai Fong district, one video showed a police officer on a motorcycle swerving into a crowd of protesters, clipping at least one of them. The police later said the officer had been suspended from front-line duties.
The months of protests started as a fight over an extradition bill that many residents of the onetime British colony feared made them too vulnerable to mainland China, which resumed control over Hong Kong in 1997. The protests morphed into a broader call for democracy and police accountability.
Now, neither side seems to agree on what the future should look like — and neither seems willing to compromise.
On Monday afternoon, the police urged protesters to stop threatening public safety. And they defended their actions.
The authorities said that the officer who fired the three live rounds in the Sai Wan Ho area had acted in self-defense against protesters who had been trying to steal his revolver.
“We certainly believe our officer did not have bad intention to hurt anyone,” John Tse, a top police official, told reporters.
Mrs. Lam, the city’s leader, said the protesters were engaging in “wishful thinking” if they thought they could pressure the government into making concessions with violence.
