U.S.|They Spent 36 Years Behind Bars for Murder. Someone Else Did It.
They Spent 36 Years Behind Bars for Murder. Someone Else Did It.
Three men were imprisoned as teenagers for the shooting of a middle school student over his jacket. That was 1983. Now prosecutors say they didn’t do it.
The three teenagers were arrested on Thanksgiving Day, 1983, and deemed the perpetrators of a brazen crime: They had shot and killed a 14-year-old boy as he walked down the hallway of his junior high school to lunch. They wanted the boy’s jacket, a popular Georgetown Starter style, the authorities said, and that motive — chilling and petty — drew outrage in Baltimore, where a jury soon convicted the teenagers of murder and sent them away for life.
As part of a series of recent examinations of old, questionable cases, a unit of the Baltimore prosecutor’s office found numerous errors in the investigation of the school shooting case. The new review concluded that a different student, now deceased, actually shot DeWitt Duckett, the junior high school student who was killed as he walked through Harlem Park Junior High School in Baltimore.
On Monday, Charles Peters, a Baltimore circuit court judge, accepted the state’s attorney’s request to exonerate the three men.
Around the country, it has become increasingly common for prosecutors’ offices to assign investigators to re-examine convictions when evidence suggests an error might have been made.
From San Francisco to Brooklyn, prosecutors now have teams of specialized investigators who sift through old evidence. Dozens of people have been freed every year because of findings of significant errors or evidence of police or prosecutorial misconduct. In Baltimore, Ms. Mosby’s office has cleared six other people of serious crimes since she took over.
Ms. Mosby’s office said that the case against the three men was plagued with misconduct, including lies told by Jonathan Shoup, the state’s attorney at the time, that unfairly tipped the case in prosecutors’ favor. Mr. Shoup died in 2016.
Among failings of the earlier investigation, Ms. Mosby’s office said, were denials by Mr. Shoup that his office possessed evidence that might cast doubt on the guilt of the three. Yet multiple witnesses at the time, Ms. Mosby’s office said, had actually identified a different person, Michael Willis, then 18, as the gunman.
