Witnesses testified that President Trump pressured a foreign power to help him win re-election during historic hearings that previewed an intensely partisan battle.
William B. Taylor Jr., the top U.S. diplomat in Ukraine, and George P. Kent, a senior State Department official in charge of Ukraine policy, are testifying before the House Intelligence Committee for the first public hearing of the impeachment inquiry into President Trump.
Taylor revealed he was told that Trump was more concerned about investigations of Biden than Ukraine.
Kent said efforts to ‘gin up politically motivated investigations’ were ‘infecting’ U.S. policy on Ukraine.
Republicans called the testimony unreliable hearsay.
Adam Schiff invoked Mick Mulvaney’s ‘Get over it’ admission as he opened the hearing.
Republicans leaned on unproven allegations that are favorites of the president.
Trump called impeachment a ‘new hoax,’ as aides insisted he isn’t watching.
Follow our live coverage of the Trump impeachment hearings.
William B. Taylor Jr., the top United States diplomat in Ukraine, offered a new detail in his testimony to the House Intelligence Committee on Wednesday about how Mr. Trump’s preoccupation with investigating the former vice president and his family had affected his actions toward Ukraine.
He was referring to Rudolph W. Giuliani, the president’s personal lawyer, whom Mr. Taylor described as the leader of an “highly irregular” policymaking channel on Ukraine that ran counter to goals of longstanding American policy. The episode was not included in Mr. Taylor’s interview with impeachment investigators last month because, he said, he was not aware of it at the time. Representative Adam B. Schiff, Democrat of California and the chairman of the Intelligence Committee, quickly seized on it to put the president’s concern with the investigations into context.
“I take it the import of that is he cares more about that than he does about Ukraine?” Mr. Schiff asked.
“Yes, sir,” Mr. Taylor responded.
Much of the rest of Mr. Taylor’s testimony was consistent with what he told the panel previously, an account that included vivid details of how he discovered that Mr. Trump was conditioning “everything” about the United States relationship with Ukraine — including needed military aid and a White House meeting for Ukraine’s president — on the country’s willingness to commit publicly to investigations of his political rivals. His testimony made it clear that the Ukrainians were well aware of the prerequisite at the time.
The revelation came as Democrats opened the first public impeachment hearing in more than two decades, moving into the public’s direct glare a historic clash between President Trump and Democrats that has so far unfolded in private.
Mr. Taylor and George P. Kent, a senior State Department official who is also testifying, were seated next to each other at the witness table. Both men received subpoenas Wednesday morning to appear.
Sign up here for the Impeachment Briefing newsletter, which explains the latest developments every weeknight.
Mr. Kent also assailed what he called a “campaign to smear” American officials serving in Ukraine, which succeeded with the ouster of Marie L. Yovanovitch, the former United States ambassador to Ukraine.
When it was their turn to ask questions, Republicans on the Intelligence panel peppered the witnesses with rapid-fire questions, working to undercut their accounts as hearsay and supposition, and noting that neither had interacted directly with Mr. Trump.
Representative Jim Jordan of Ohio, a fiery inquisitor who was temporarily moved to the Intelligence Committee to play that role in the impeachment hearings, repeatedly challenged Mr. Taylor’s version of events, which he dismissed as secondhand at best.
After Mr. Taylor testified that military aid for Ukraine was withheld and conditioned on Ukraine launching the investigations that Mr. Trump wanted, Mr. Jordan jumped on him, noting that the military aid eventually was delivered.
The aid was released in September, after the White House had become aware that an intelligence whistle-blower had filed a complaint alleging that the freezing of the money had been part of a scheme by Mr. Trump to enlist Ukraine to help him in the 2020 election.
Representative John Ratcliffe of Texas demanded that Mr. Taylor and Mr. Kent weigh in on whether the president should be impeached for what he said on the July 25 call with Mr. Zelensky.
Mr. Taylor reiterated a statement he had made earlier, saying he was not there to take sides, but to share what he knew.
Mr. Schiff, the Intelligence Committee chairman, opened the hearing by summarizing the damning facts about President Trump’s conduct that have been laid out privately by witnesses thus far, asking, “If this is not impeachable conduct, what is?” He zeroed in on the public admission by Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff, that Mr. Trump tied aid for the Ukrainians to their willingness to announce investigations into his political rivals.
Mr. Schiff described the statement as breathtaking, and cast the hearings now underway as a referendum on Mr. Mulvaney’s assertion that Americans should accept Mr. Trump’s actions as proper and befitting a president.
Mr. Schiff said the questions at issue in the hearing on Wednesday are about whether Mr. Trump’s abuses of power are compatible with the office of the presidency.
“The matter is as simple, and as terrible as that,” he said.
Republicans sought to defend Mr. Trump at Wednesday’s impeachment hearings by repeatedly raising unproven theories about Mr. Biden’s son and allegations that Ukraine conspired with Democrats to interfere in the 2016 election on behalf of the president’s rival.
His allegations were part of the Republican strategy to defend Mr. Trump by attempting to shift the conversation away from the mountain of evidence that Democrats have assembled about the president’s conduct, and instead focus on his grudges.
Democrats have so far refused requests for witnesses who Republicans claim would bolster their theories, including Hunter Biden, but Republican lawmakers did not let that stop them from pressing Mr. Taylor and Mr. Kent to back them up. Both of them largely declined, saying they knew little about any allegation of corruption involving Hunter Biden’s service on the board of Burisma, a Ukrainian energy company.
Asked by a Republican lawyer about Mr. Biden’s qualifications to serve on the company’s board, Mr. Kent demurred.
Mr. Trump fired off several tweets about the impeachment hearing as it got underway Wednesday even as his press secretary said Mr. Trump was not watching the drama play out on Capitol Hill.
Moments after Ms. Grisham said that, Mr. Trump retweeted several posts from House Republicans attacking the hearings. Earlier, the president tweeted: “New Hoax. Same swamp” shortly before the hearings opened.
As the hearings unfolded, Mr. Trump was scheduled to host President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey at the White House for a daylong visit. Mr. Trump is scheduled to hold a joint news conference with Mr. Erdogan at about 3 p.m.
Mr. Trump has repeatedly shown his willingness to use such appearances with foreign leaders to engage directly with reporters, especially at moments when his administration is engulfed in controversy. The news conference with Mr. Erdogan could provide him with an opportunity to rail against the impeachment hearings, setting up the possibility of a compelling split-screen moment from both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue.