Demonstrators disrupted the transit system, part of a broader call for action after the death of a student and the arrest of six pro-democracy lawmakers.
HONG KONG — A Hong Kong police officer shot an antigovernment demonstrator on Monday, an escalation that quickly inflamed tensions in the city already jittery over the recent death of a student involved in the protests.
The officer fired several shots on Monday morning toward two black-clad protesters in a neighborhood where traffic had been snarled by roadblocks. One of the protesters crumpled to the ground after being hit at point-blank range, video footage from the scene shows, and appeared conscious afterward.
The shooting on Monday came as pro-democracy activists in Hong Kong blocked roads and scuffled with riot police officers across the city as part of what had been billed as a citywide general strike.
It has been 23 weeks since protests began in the semiautonomous Chinese city over a contentious, but since-withdrawn, extradition bill. The demonstrations have since morphed into calls for greater democracy and police accountability.
After opening fire, an officer tackled a wounded protester.
The video shows a police officer in a white shirt and neon vest pulling his gun on a group of protesters surrounding him at an intersection in the Sai Wan Ho neighborhood. He fires several live rounds.
“One round hit a man’s body, and he immediately fell to the ground, and there was blood on the ground,” Chan Cheuk-hin, a reporter for Cupid Producer who shot the video, told The New York Times. He said the shooting took place after 7 a.m. as the protesters blocked roads.
The police confirmed the shooting and said that front-line officers followed strict guidelines when discharging their firearms. The man who was shot was in critical condition, the city’s hospital authority said.
Office workers joined the protesters in anger over the shooting.
Police officers were also out in force in the central business district, as protesters angry over the morning’s shooting snarled traffic on streets near City Hall. Some officers fired tear gas, sending pedestrians fleeing into luxury malls, gasping for air.
Marcus Lee, a 26-year-old lawyer in a charcoal gray suit with a blue face mask, stood outside a Giorgio Armani store with a group of protesters who were shouting at the police.
Later, thousands of protesters and office workers set off on a march around the business district.
Protesters disrupted traffic to pressure the government.
Antigovernment demonstrators blocked roads in several districts and appeared to force the suspension of some light rail services and delays on subway lines. The protesters had said that the demonstration was aimed at paralyzing public services to express their anger over the death of a student last week from a fall at a parking garage near a protest.
The disruptions on Monday appeared to have less of an impact than a citywide general strike in August that sank the city into chaos. The actions were also timed to coincide with “Singles Day,” an annual shopping event in mainland China that generates billions of dollars in sales. The protesters urged a boycott of online shopping.
The protests quickly descended into clashes.
There were clashes across the city on Monday, including on some leafy university campuses, where protesters threw Molotov cocktails and riot police officers fired tear gas and rubber bullets.
In Ma On Shan, a rural part of northeastern Hong Kong, video footage circulating on Monday showed a man who appeared to be a government supporter being doused with flammable liquid and set on fire after arguing with a group of critics.
“Go back to the Greater Bay Area!” the crowd shouted, using Beijing’s term for the region of southern China that includes Hong Kong and neighboring cities. The Hospital Authority later said that the man was in critical condition.
Farther south, in the Tseung Kwan O neighborhood, police officers in black uniforms and black masks chased activists from an intersection. The officers were carrying weapons marked with neon orange — presumably rifles loaded with sponge grenades.
One officer raised his gun and fired at the back of a protester he was chasing. Onlookers started shouting at the officer. “Don’t open fire! You’re actually firing on people?” they said.
Nathan Tam, 53, a businessman who lives in Tseung Kwan O and was driving to Hong Kong Island on Monday morning, said he was commuting despite the disruptions because he had an afternoon meeting he couldn’t afford to miss.
Mr. Tam said he was thankful that his son was studying abroad in Britain. “Otherwise, with his personality, he would probably be protesting and getting shot at right now,” he said.
A police officer on a motorcycle swerved into protesters.
Video footage circulating on social media Monday showed a police officer on a motorcycle swerving into a crowd of protesters on an otherwise deserted street, clipping at least one of them.
In the video, which local news outlets said had been recorded on Monday morning in the Kwai Fong district of northern Hong Kong, a crowd of black-clad protesters were seen retreating as the motorcycle wove through them at a slow speed.
A student’s death provoked outrage and questions.
On Saturday, tens of thousands of people gathered at a park outside the Hong Kong government headquarters in memory of Chow Tsz-lok, 22, who died after falling from a parking garage amid protests last Monday. A constant stream of people left paper cranes and white flowers at a stage where speakers gave emotional addresses.
Mr. Chow, a student at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, suffered head and pelvic injuries when he fell one story. Some protesters have blamed the police for his death, but the circumstances of his fall remain unclear.
