Love|The Bro-dal Shower. Good, Clean Fun for Grooms.
The Bro-dal Shower. Good, Clean Fun for Grooms.
Not just for brides anymore, grooms are getting in on the pre-wedding celebrations with more subdued parties. They are not to be mistaken for something they make movies about.
Man-showers or bro-dal showers, events that celebrate a man’s first step into marriage, are increasing in popularity. If the future bride can have a shower, why not the groom, too?
But do not mistake these for bachelor parties.
That means they won’t be keg chugging or other forms of debauchery.
These milder ways of celebrating might include a catered lunch, golf outing, scotch tasting, pickup basketball, shooting pool or a poker game, Mr. Dulac said.
Lauren Grech, the chief executive of LLG Events, a destination wedding planning company, based in New York, which she owns with her husband, Paul Grech, sees these parties as modernized versions of the farewell dinner. Ms. Grech said those dinners were popular in the mid-1900s.
Two years ago, Douglas Baumann, 30, and 11 other men celebrated their friend’s engagement by playing golf and then lunching at the Atlantic City Country Club. “It was his fiancée’s idea, which was smart because it gave him something special to do at the same time that she was having her shower,” he said.
The bride and mother of the bride planning team has lost some of its grip in wedding culture, and often decision-making is being replaced by the couple.
It was that thinking that led John Berno and Christian Zavala, who met on the gay dating app Scruff in May 2017 and were engaged a year later, to plan two separate showers to celebrate their upcoming nuptials.
Mr. Zavala, who owns Zavala Interiors, an interior design company in New York, had his shower, a brunch, on Nov. 17, with 15-plus guests at his best friend’s home in Murray Hill.
The pair, who are to wed May 16, 2020 at the Jane Hotel in New York, both decided not to invite each other to their showers.
Aside from wanting the same experiences women have customarily received, Dr. Lara Friedrich, a licensed psychologist in New York who specializes in couples therapy, said some wedding planners and therapists attribute the bro-parties to embracing a man’s readiness to be vulnerable and the thought — What about me? I’m getting married, too!
