In the world of e-commerce, the online review is king, the internet’s answer to walking into a store and trying out a product for yourself.
An increase of just one star in a rating on Amazon correlates with a 26 percent increase in sales, according to a recent analysis by the e-commerce consulting firm Pattern.
But while online reviews have become powerful sales tools, the ecosystem is relatively crude. Reviews can be easy to manipulate, and the operators of sites with the most reviews are not always motivated to crack down on fake ones planted to promote products. That leaves many consumers wondering what to believe.
The state of the system was highlighted last month in a proposed settlement between Sunday Riley Skincare, a popular seller of items like $55 night oils and $85 brightening serums, and the Federal Trade Commission, which found that the company had posted fake reviews of its products on Sephora’s website for years. Allegations that the brand directed employees to write fake reviews emerged on Reddit last year, but the F.T.C. complaint was far more detailed and said the company’s chief executive, Sunday Riley, had been directly involved in the scheme.
The complaint included a July 2016 email from Ms. Riley that told employees to create three Sephora accounts each with different personas and Gmail addresses. In addition to posting praise, she wrote, employees should “dislike” negative reviews.
Ms. Riley said she was disappointed that the brand’s Tidal Brightening Enzyme Water Cream and Good Genes All-in-One Lactic Acid Treatment were rated 4.2 out of 5, and wanted at least a 4.8.
The agency found multiple fake reviews between 2015 and 2017. When Sephora removed some of them, the F.T.C. said, Sunday Riley started to use technology that obscured locations and IP addresses. Interns were asked to post from fake Sephora accounts as recently as April 2018.
Ms. Riley and her company did not respond to email and LinkedIn messages seeking comment for this article. Two public relation firms that previously worked with Sunday Riley said they no longer represented the firm.
Sephora still promotes Sunday Riley products in its stores. The retailer said in an email to The New York Times that it did “not believe the actions at Sunday Riley are representative of our brands or the countless hours our clients have spent sharing their authentic product experiences with us.” The company said it vetted and had removed certain Sunday Riley reviews from its website, particularly if reviews were left the same day the account was created.
Sephora has a new system for verifying the source of reviews and added badges to highlight reviews tied to purchases, the company said. It did not address questions about any punitive action it took against Sunday Riley.
Two of the F.T.C.’s five commissioners, Rohit Chopra and Rebecca Kelly Slaughter, objected to the proposed settlement. Mr. Chopra said in a statement that it was “unlikely to deter other would-be wrongdoers” and that the agency should impose financial penalties for the growing problem of fake review fraud.
Amazon said that last year it prevented more than 13 million bogus reviews and “took action” against more than five million accounts.
The schemes can be complex. BuzzFeed News recently detailed how one woman had bought hundreds of cheaply made products on Amazon and given them five-star reviews in exchange for reimbursement from sellers, whom she often connected with through Facebook. Her fraudulent reviews, which are given credibility through the “verified purchase” label and can include photos and videos, have gone undetected by Amazon, BuzzFeed reported.
Consumers should be aware of how reviews can be manipulated but may not be able to avoid them entirely, said Rob Gross, Fakespot’s chief operating officer. He advised sorting reviews by “most recent,” which can help illuminate any issues. He also said he tended to ask family and friends about products and checked with independent resources like Consumer Reports.
