The Huntsman family just made a $150 million gift for mental health research and care. The father had concentrated his donations on cancer research.
This week, the Huntsman family — one of the most philanthropic in the United States — made a $150 million gift to the University of Utah to establish the Huntsman Mental Health Institute.
The gift was a continuation of the large-scale charitable giving by the family’s patriarch, the billionaire industrialist Jon Huntsman Sr., who died last year, and his wife, Karen. Mr. Huntsman was one of the most philanthropic men of his generation. He was among the first to give away over $1 billion in his lifetime — long before Warren Buffett and Bill Gates created the Giving Pledge to induce billionaires to commit to donating at least half of their fortune to charity.
This week’s donation continues the family’s legacy of giving to health-related charities in Utah, but it also signals a subtle shift in their philanthropy, reflecting a new generation’s priorities.
Jon Huntsman Sr. gave hundreds of millions of dollars to cancer research, including $650 million to the University of Utah, where the cancer research center is named for his family. His son Peter R. Huntsman, who has assumed leadership of the family’s charitable arms, said the family would continue to donate to cancer research but was also adding mental health research and care.
All parents hope their children are going to know how to handle money, and families in a position to leave an inheritance want to make sure that their money isn’t squandered or doesn’t cause problems in their children’s lives.
But when it comes to a charitable bequest — money that is sitting in a private foundation or a public charity like a donor-advised fund and must be given away — transferring those family values can be trickier. If the children don’t want to give to the same organizations as their parents, is that all right? Parents may try to make sure that particular areas or institutions are earmarked for donations, but are their children obligated to follow their lead? Is it better if parents let their children give as they wish?
In the case of the Huntsman family, with two charitable arms under the control of the next generation, change was inevitable.
Jon Huntsman Sr.’s philanthropy started early. As he recounted in a 2013 interview, he began giving to charity before he had much money to give.
He started when he was making $320 a week as a naval officer in the late 1950s. By the time he had made his first $1 million, he said, he had given a quarter of it to charity.
As he accumulated wealth, he said, he began to narrow his charitable giving. Cancer became his focus when he survived a bout in 1992. “My wife and I determined that it was better to select a fewer number of charitable organizations and make a bigger difference,” he said.
Peter Huntsman said he and his siblings had adopted that strategy.
Mr. Huntsman, who is one of nine siblings and is the chief executive of the company his father created, said the family had decided to continue with the focused, or rifled, approach to giving that his father and mother had practiced. But the family broadened out the health category to mental health.
Personal reasons motivated Jon Huntsman Sr. and, now, his children. He survived multiple bouts of cancer, and several members of his family died of it. His son Peter said mental health issues had affected the broader family.
He said a study showing that Utah ranked last for adult mental health care among the states and the District of Columbia accelerated the family’s donation to a mental health cause. He would consider the $150 million gift a success if people in Utah and the surrounding states began to look to the Huntsman Mental Health Institute for care, the way they do with the cancer center.
While he has taken the lead among his eight surviving siblings, Mr. Huntsman said they were very much involved. Their opinions on philanthropy also sometimes differ from their father’s approach.
The risk in just following parents’ lead, he said, is that family members won’t be engaged and will feel as if they’re being controlled from the grave, as it were.
After the 1988 earthquake in Armenia, for example, Jon Huntsman Sr. said he was moved by what he had seen on television and began donating to aid groups there. He eventually gave more than $50 million to help rebuild the country’s infrastructure. He also gave scholarships to bring Armenian students to the United States to study.
Mr. Huntsman said he was making sure proper processes were in place. The siblings, for example, are seeking advice from the foundation’s board of directors, something his father didn’t do.
Yet the family foundation was set up with flexibility built in. The second generation was able to donate to mental health because the mandates included donating to causes in the Western United States and helping the needy — in addition to continuing to finance cancer research.
