The Learning Network|Should Sports Journalism ‘Stick To Sports’?
Should Sports Journalism ‘Stick To Sports’?
Are you all about the drama, heroism and entertainment value of games? Or are you also interested in “outside the lines” issues like concussions and politics that affect athletes, leagues and fans?
Recently, the acting editor in chief of Deadspin, a popular sports website, was fired for his refusal to “stick to sports” in deciding what his staff covered. Following his dismissal, almost the entire staff resigned in protest.
What do you think? Should sports journalists stick exclusively to sports — box scores, highlights, stories of heroic achievement? Or should they also cover “outside the lines” issues like concussions, domestic violence, racism and politics? Is it possible to separate the rest of the world from sports?
Why do you read and watch sports news and commentary — whether it’s in Sports Illustrated or Bleacher Report, or in TV shows like “SportsCenter” or “Fox NFL Sunday”? Do you care only about the entertainment value of the games? Do you see sports news as an escape from other kinds of news? Or are you also interested in the broader societal issues that affect athletes, leagues and fans?
Two weeks ago, I was fired as acting editor in chief of Deadspin, where I’d worked since 2009. The entire staff resigned, following me out the door after we had refused a new company mandate to “stick to sports.” Jim Spanfeller, installed as chief executive of G/O Media by the private equity firm that bought the company seven months ago, called me into his office, pointed to some offending stories on our home page and had me escorted from the building. This is the first time that I’m speaking up about my firing, and my stance remains the same as in the countless meetings with management where I explained and insisted that sports don’t end when the players head back to the locker room.
Reporting sports with integrity requires knowing that there’s no way to wall off the games from the world outside. To anyone who knows anything about sports or cares about the world outside the arena, the notion that sports should or even can be covered merely by box scores and transaction wires is absurd.
From the moment Deadspin was founded in 2005, the website took for granted that what happened off the field was at least as important as the goings-on between the lines, and that there was no way to unravel the two. Deadspin’s approach was a reaction to the predominant strain of sportswriting at the time, which treated athletes as either Greek demigods unconcerned with the dealings of the world or spoiled millionaires playing children’s games.
Should sports reporting “stick to sports”? Should coverage focus more on scores and highlights? Or are broader societal issues an integral part of sports too? Why or why not?
Do you agree with Mr. Petchesky that “sports is everything, and everything is sports”? Which aspects of his argument that sports doesn’t “take place in a vacuum” resonate most?
Where do you get your sports news and why? Do you have a favorite sports reporter or sports news venue? On the whole, would you say that you prefer a “stick to sports” approach or the kind of broader sports coverage that Deadspin offered?
What kinds of sports stories are you interested in most? Is there a recent story that stands out? If yes, tell us why.
