From across the nation, private planes and commercial airliners ferry veterans to the capital to see the monuments honoring them.
In 2004, shortly after the national World War II Memorial was completed, Earl Morse, a retired Air Force captain working at the Department of Veterans Affairs clinic in Springfield, Ohio, realized that many of the veterans he knew would never get to see it.
So he persuaded pilots at his local flying club to ferry a handful of veterans to Washington on small planes, and accompany them to the National Mall.
Jeff Miller, who owns a dry cleaning company in Hendersonville, N.C., soon added chartered commercial jets to the impromptu enterprise.
From there blossomed an entire organization, known as the Honor Flight Network, which since 2005 has carried nearly a quarter-million veterans of World War II and the Korean and Vietnam Wars to Washington.
“Our mission is to transport our veterans to visit the memorials that are dedicated to honoring their sacrifice,” said Meredith Rosenbeck, the chief executive of the network, which now has 120 hubs nationwide.
Each hub relies on donations and operates independently — with some chartering planes, others getting space on commercial flights — to ferry veterans free of charge to visit the three main memorials as well as a few other sites. “Eventually it is our hope we will expand into Desert Storm and gulf war veterans,” Ms. Rosenbeck said.
Last month, a group of 85 veterans from central Illinois, most from the Vietnam era, arrived at Ronald Reagan National Airport. Other travelers were encouraged to gather from nearby gates, their hands clutching roller bags and Starbucks cups.
Volunteers, including Ken Seroka, who has met 30 flights over the years, had joined them. “The military has always been in my heart,” said Mr. Seroka, 69, as the plane cut through the clouds.
The caravan was accompanied into downtown Washington by a police escort, to the delight of the passengers — but not so much rush-hour commuters.
The veterans wore T-shirts with colors that identified them by their conflict. Tourists stopped them to shake their hands or take photos. Sometimes, school-age children stared at them with slight confusion.
This trip, like most, included a stop at Arlington National Cemetery, with a chance to watch the changing of the honor guard at the Tomb of the Unknowns.
Three Marines who served in Vietnam made the trip together, and stared intently at the Marine Corps War Memorial’s depiction of the raising of an American flag over the Japanese island of Iwo Jima.
While women are an increasingly large cohort among veterans, only two were on this trip. Marti Williams, 64, who served in the Air Force in the Vietnam era, said her family did not approve of her joining the service, assuming she was in search of a husband.
After an exhausting day visiting the memorials, a flight museum and Arlington cemetery, eating a box lunch on the bus and grabbing a dinner back at the airport, it was time to go home. Cookies from a hometown baker were served aboard the flight, and each veteran received a swag bag, delivered via “mail call” as their names, service branch, conflict and awards were read over the plane’s public address system.
Even on a cold night in the driving rain, hundreds of local residents — at least one dressed in full Revolutionary War regalia — greeted the old warriors as they deplaned, led by a local bagpipe player.
