It can be hard to find straightforward content about pregnancy (and avoiding it). Jessica Grose and Amber Williams wanted to change that.
Fertility is a complex, often overwhelming topic. Searching for explanations — about how to get pregnant, how to avoid it or even how the term is defined — yields a mixed bag of heart-wrenching personal essays, dense research and opaque laws. And few clear answers.
That’s why Caitlin Roper, the editorial director of New York Times Magazine Labs, and Jessica Grose, the lead editor of NYT Parenting, thought fertility would be the perfect topic for a special section. Ms. Grose then partnered with Amber Williams, an editor on the Labs team, to figure out how to distill the various components of such a complicated subject.
The result: “Your Fertility Now,” a detailed (but by no means comprehensive) broadsheet special section that takes readers through the history, current state and future of fertility. Ms. Grose and Ms. Williams recently discussed how they assembled the section, their favorite stories and their hopes for readers. Their conversation has been lightly condensed and edited.
The section is organized into three parts — the past, present and future. Can you explain the thought process behind this decision?
AMBER WILLIAMS I spent two to three days reading for hours — materials that Jess’s team sent me from their weekly roundup of fertility coverage, as well as my own research about what other magazines, online publications and blogs were doing. Many of those pieces are personal essays that had similar narrative arcs, and my big challenge was: How do we create a varied experience of what you are reading? That ended up being past, present and future, because then you can have distinct pieces on different timelines.
Do you have a favorite piece in the section?
WILLIAMS One of my favorite is called “My Embryo Dilemma,” which is a personal essay by Anna Hecker that weaves in a ton of reporting. She has embryos that are on ice, and she has to choose what she’s going to do with them. It was a really moving piece because she talks about donating her embryos, which is an option, but obviously it’s almost as if they’re allowing someone else to adopt your kids, which feels weird. She wonders if she should save them in case a disaster happened, where one of her kids died and she wanted to have another kid. And she is one person who has to grapple with these existential and practical problems. I thought that was a really good piece that brought all these issues together in 800 words.
JESSICA GROSE I really like Jyoti Madhusoodanan’s piece about the birth control of tomorrow. The mind-blowing thing for me was how new all of these technologies are, and yet they seem kind of far-fetched. But everything seems possible once you’ve seen how quickly we’ve come in such a short period of time.
Fertility is an issue that affects nearly everyone. How did you address that in the section?
WILLIAMS The more pieces I could fit in, the more layered and nuanced we could be — there are pieces that are just about the trans pregnancy experience, there are pieces just about male infertility, there are pieces just about female infertility. But I hope that readers will notice that there are inclusive terms. In the period stigma piece, sometimes Chris Bobel says “women,” but sometimes she says “menstruators,” and there are also places where you will see “people with eggs” or “people with sperm.” The idea is that we are weaving it all together.
GROSE Any time you are dealing with medical things, there is an opportunity to ask, “O.K., is this advice really only going to apply to one set of people?” We’ve heard about getting it wrong, and we are always striving to do better, but I think within each piece you can always put that thought into it.
What are your goals for this section — on its own and as it relates to the Parenting vertical?
WILLIAMS One thing that is important to me is the idea that every person deals with fertility. A goal of the section is for any breadth of our readers to feel engaged; to not feel ostracized; and to learn about things that affect their decisions now, things that might affect their decisions in the future and things that might affect their children or grandchildren. It should be accessible to everyone — to have you think about the ways in which we talk about it, how laws have stigmatized it, how society has defined it and science has revolutionized it.
GROSE In terms of Parenting, one of the things that was really important to me when I started this was that I felt that most parenting stuff I read on the internet made me feel worse about myself. Either because it was just a random person on a forum saying terrible things, or it was information that, while accurate, was framed in a way to shame. Having this section and having the product also be as inclusive and nonjudgmental as possible as a founding idea was really important to us. The last thing that I ever want is for people to read the product and feel worse about themselves or their parenting afterward.
How can readers engage with this content in the future with The Times? What are your plans, if any, for the future life of this section and topic?
GROSE We’ve actually been following this couple, Nikki and Brittany, throughout their fertility journey. They describe the process of going through IUI and then IVF, and it’s a conversation between the two of them. In January, we’re going to have a collaboration with the National section where we spend time with women across the country in the month after they have a child and see how that experience is different for different people. This is based on only one set of data, but there is a statistic out there that a quarter of American women go back to work within two weeks of giving birth, which is wild and awful. We will continue to be a place where we are not only talking about these issues, but we also have really vetted research and up-to-date service.
