A great-grandson of a New York governor, he hosted an annual fund-raising dinner that draws the state’s power elite and White House hopefuls.
Alfred E. Smith IV, who sustained the legacy of his great-grandfather, Al Smith, the New York governor known as “the Happy Warrior,” by good-naturedly ribbing presidential aspirants and other potentates as the master of ceremonies at an annual white-tie charity dinner, died on Wednesday at his home in New Canaan, Conn. He was 68.
The cause was apparently a heart attack, his son, Alfred V, said.
Mr. Smith was the chief executive of A.E. Smith Associates, a business consulting firm he founded in 2009, and a director of the Alfred E. Smith Memorial Foundation. Cardinal Francis Spellman established the foundation in 1946 to memorialize Alfred E. Smith, the four-term Democratic governor of New York and the first Roman Catholic candidate nominated by a major party for president.
Mr. Smith was a vice chairman of the foundation and master of ceremonies of what became known as the Al Smith dinner, a New York political institution hosted by the Roman Catholic archbishop of New York and highlighted every four years by a much-anticipated roast of the two major-party presidential candidates in what is often their last face-to-face encounter before the November election.
For Mr. Smith and his team, arranging the five-tiered wedding cake dais at the Waldorf Astoria without bruising egos was an annual logistical nightmare.
‘’Seventy-three people on the dais — it’s like tryouts for ‘Ben Hur,’” Mr. Smith once said.
Intentionally or not, you were where you sat or where you were seen sitting.
In 1982, when Mario M. Cuomo was the Democratic candidate for governor, running against Lewis E. Lehrman, he felt he had been banished to Siberia because he favored abortion rights. “They had Lehrman and Bush lined up with the cardinal, and they had me with the waiters,” he recalled.
In 2013, Mr. Smith acknowledged the presence of Gov. Andrew Cuomo, Mario’s son, who was said to be mulling a presidential bid in a field that included Hillary Clinton and, it was further said, was planning to publish a campaign autobiography.
In 2016, during what is traditionally a display of self-deprecation, Donald J. Trump delivered a blistering barrage against Mrs. Clinton and compared himself to the son of God — in his youth, he said, he has been just another “carpenter working for his father.” He was heckled, as President Jimmy Carter and Mayor John V. Lindsay had also been when they appeared.
As a New Yorker familiar with Mr. Trump, Mr. Smith had anticipated this tone the year before. (“Donald Trump is devout,” he said; “he worships Donald Trump.”) He acknowledged it again in his introduction in 2016.
Alfred Emanuel Smith IV was born on May 24, 1951, in Brooklyn, the oldest of seven children of Walter J. and Helen (Conroy) Smith.
Raised in Rye, N.Y., he graduated from Iona Prep in New Rochelle and Villanova University in Pennsylvania, where he majored in finance. He inherited his father’s seat on the New York Stock Exchange when he was 21 and later worked as a broker in Chicago; a partner of CMG Partners, a business consulting firm, in New York; and managing director of Bear Wagner, which assists companies with investor relations and stock exchange listings.
He was the chairman of Hackers for Hope, which he helped found to raise money for cancer research. Mr. Smith was treated for throat cancer in his 30s.
In 1975 he married Nan Moore. She and his son survive him, as do a daughter, Catherine Smith Totero; six grandchildren; two brothers, Christopher and Timothy; and four sisters, Kathleen Smith Murray, Susan Smith Joyce, Helen M. Smith and Ann Smith Konopka.
Governor Smith served from 1919 to 1920 and from 1923 to 1928, when he was the Democratic nominee for president. (He lost to Herbert Hoover.) He eventually broke with his successor as governor, Franklin D. Roosevelt, and endorsed Roosevelt’s Republican rivals for president in 1936 and 1940. He died in 1944, shortly before Election Day.
Alfred Jr., who was elected to the New York City Council as a Democrat in 1939 and served one term, also supported Republicans for president after 1936. Alfred III was a priest.
Alfred IV, an enrolled Democrat, was grand marshal of the 2013 St. Patrick’s Day Parade in New York. (He first marched as a student at Iona Prep and, as grand marshal, wore the top hat that Governor Smith wore when he led the 1925 parade.) He served on the foundation dinner board for about 30 years, resigning after the 2016 dinner, which raised more than $6 million, a record.
Alfred V lives near Santa Monica, Calif., and is a managing director of Hartford Gold Group, which advises clients on precious metals. Also an enrolled Democrat, he said he had no immediate plans to succeed his father at the foundation.
There is no Alfred VI, at least not yet. Alfred V said the title sounded a little too much like a king or pope.
