The White House said that the president wanted to get a head start on portions of his annual physical exam and that he was in good health.
President Trump underwent a two-hour doctor’s examination on Saturday at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, which the White House said was part of a routine annual physical and included lab work.
The appointment was not on the president’s schedule, in contrast to a previous physical that Mr. Trump had in February, also at Walter Reed outside Washington.
In a statement, Stephanie Grisham, the White House press secretary, said Mr. Trump, 73, was taking advantage of a free weekend to begin portions of his annual physical, and was anticipating a busy schedule in 2020. She did not specify what types of tests Mr. Trump had.
“The president remains healthy and energetic without complaints, as demonstrated by his repeated vigorous rally performances in front of thousands of Americans several times a week,” Ms. Grisham said.
It was Mr. Trump’s ninth visit to Walter Reed as president, Ms. Grisham said, adding that Mr. Trump met with the family of a special forces soldier who was injured in Afghanistan while he was at the hospital.
“The President also stopped by to say hello to the medical staff of Walter Reed, to share his thanks for all the outstanding care they provide to our Wounded Warriors, and wish them an early happy Thanksgiving,” Ms. Grisham said.
But Dr. Sean Conley, a Navy officer who is the president’s physician, released scant details about the physical examinations that Mr. Trump underwent, or their results, as a White House physician did for President Barack Obama.
Mr. Trump’s weight was listed at 243 pounds after his last physical, a four pound gain since his 2018 physical. At 6 feet 3 inches tall, Mr. Trump had a body mass index of 30.4. Anything over 30 is considered obese.
While there is no requirement for presidents to publicly release their medical records, many have over the years as a reassurance that they are up to the rigors of the job.
Mr. Trump, the oldest president to ever take office, had been taking rosuvastatin, a lipid-lowering drug, daily to control his cholesterol, according to a memo describing some of his previous physical results.
At the time, the president’s cholesterol was elevated, at 196, with an LDL measurement of 122 and an HDL level of 58.