General Motors sued its rival Fiat Chrysler on Wednesday, asserting that it bribed United Auto Workers officials in contract negotiations to get a leg up on G.M. over the course of a decade.
Hours after G.M. filed the lawsuit, in federal court, the union’s president resigned as the U.A.W. took steps to oust him.
The day’s events embroiled two of the country’s three biggest automakers and the union that represents their workers, a controversy the likes of which the industry has rarely experienced. The lawsuit and the turmoil at the top of the union stem from long-running Justice Department investigations into financial wrongdoing at the union and Fiat Chrysler.
Three former Fiat Chrysler executives and several U.A.W. officers have already pleaded guilty in cases that revealed a cozy back-scratching culture. Corporate and union leaders siphoned off millions of dollars — some of which was meant for a training center — to pay for Rolex watches and lavish personal travel and meals.
In its lawsuit, G.M. claims that the corruption went far beyond garden-variety embezzlement and personal enrichment. The company argues that the illegal activity was authorized by Fiat Chrysler’s chief executive at the time, Sergio Marchionne, and helped Fiat Chrysler win union acceptance of cost concessions that were denied to G.M. in labor contracts in 2011 and 2015. The suit also contends that Fiat Chrysler executives bribed union leaders to win support for Fiat Chrysler’s highly public effort to pressure G.M. into a merger in 2015.
The suit is not the first legal battle in the auto industry, or even the first one between G.M. and Fiat. In the 1990s, G.M. tangled with Volkswagen after that company hired a key G.M. executive, who took confidential cost-cutting data with him. In 2005, after a legal battle, Mr. Marchionne, who died in 2018, forced G.M. to pay Fiat $2 billion after a partnership in which the companies jointly produced engines and transmissions in Europe soured.
Mr. Marchionne later engineered Fiat’s merger with Chrysler and in 2015 publicly announced he wanted Fiat Chrysler to merge with G.M., an offer G.M.’s chief executive, Mary T. Barra, rebuffed.
Here’s the lawsuit G.M. filed in federal court.
G.M. said on Wednesday that it would seek billions of dollars in damages, without giving a specific amount. The suit names Fiat Chrysler and the three convicted former executives as defendants, but no current Fiat executives.
Fiat Chrysler “was able to obtain unique advantages, different and distinct, and in fact denied to G.M.,” Craig Glidden, G.M.’s general counsel, said during a conference call with reporters.
In a statement, Fiat Chrysler said it was “astonished” by the lawsuit and suggested that it was timed to disrupt the company’s contract negotiations with the U.A.W. and a proposed merger with Peugeot SA, the French automaker. “We intend to vigorously defend against this meritless lawsuit and pursue all legal remedies in response to it,” the company said.
G.M.’s complaint, filed in the United States District Court in Detroit, is based on findings from a broad investigation into corruption at the U.A.W. In 2017, federal investigators revealed that Fiat Chrysler’s head of labor relations, Alphons Iacobelli, had allowed union officials to put personal expenses and travel on credit cards linked to a training center funded by the company. Those union officials included General Holiefield, who led U.A.W. negotiations with Fiat Chrysler from 2008 until 2015. Prosecutors said Mr. Iacobelli approved $1.2 million in spending by Mr. Holiefield and his wife.
Mr. Iacobelli used training center funds himself, including to buy a $350,000 Ferrari and pay for renovations at his home in Rochester Hills, Mich., an affluent Detroit suburb. Mr. Iacobelli pleaded guilty in 2018 and was sentenced to five and a half years in prison. Mr. Holiefield died in 2015 before any charges were filed in the case. His wife, Monica Morgan, pleaded guilty in 2018 and received an 18-month prison sentence. Mr. Holiefield’s successor, Norwood Jewell, was sentenced in August to 15 months in prison in connection with the case.
Mr. Iacobelli, and two other Fiat Chrysler executives who pleaded guilty to charges connected to the corruption inquiry, Jerome Durden and Michael Brown, were named as defendants in the G.M. suit. In his plea agreement, Mr. Iacobelli said he authorized $1.5 million in spending by U.A.W. officials in an effort to curry favor from the union in contract negotiations.
G.M.’s lawsuit claims the improper use of union money influenced contract negotiations between Fiat Chrysler and the U.A.W. in 2009, 2011 and 2015. It contends the union allowed Fiat Chrysler to hire more new and temporary workers at entry-level wages than it allowed G.M., giving Fiat Chrysler a cost advantage. The union also helped Fiat Chrysler cut costs further by supporting an overhaul of its manufacturing process, and backed Mr. Marchionne’s plan to merge with G.M., a deal that would most likely have resulted in the loss of thousands of union jobs.
G.M. did not sue the union, which recently reached a new agreement with G.M. after a 40-day strike and is in the middle of negotiating a new contract with Fiat Chrysler. But the union has been thrown into turmoil by the broader federal investigation of corruption by its top officials. The cases brought by the Justice Department have angered many union members who feel that some of their leaders have forsaken workers’ interests and are only looking out for themselves.
But a lawyer for Mr. Jones, J. Bruce Maffeo, said in a statement that Mr. Jones had decided to resign as president and retire from the union before he learned that the U.A.W. board was seeking his ouster.
Mr. Jones has not been charged by the Justice Department but has come under scrutiny as federal prosecutors have found union officials from a regional office he previously headed charged more than a million dollars in luxury travel and personal spending to the union. Mr. Jones went on a leave of absence this month after the Federal Bureau of Investigation raided his home in August. The Justice Department charged Mr. Pearson with conspiring to embezzle U.A.W. funds.
For the auto industry and for autoworkers, this is already a precarious moment. After several years of strong growth, sales are slowing in the United States and China and automakers need to invest billions of dollars into electric cars and autonomous vehicles, widely viewed as the industry’s future. G.M.’s recent agreement with the U.A.W. allows it to permanently close three idled plants in the United States.
Barring a settlement, G.M.’s lawsuit against Fiat Chrysler could take years to resolve and could reveal details about the inner workings of both companies.
The lawsuit could represent a significant challenge for Fiat Chrysler, said Erik Gordon, a business professor at the University of Michigan who follows the auto industry. “This is not just G.M. trying to throw a log into the works of a competitor,” he said.
G.M. might find it hard to prove that it has suffered from Fiat Chrysler’s actions because G.M. has done quite well financially over the last 10 years. The company has often reported higher profit margins than Fiat Chrysler in North America, where the companies are direct competitors. In several recent quarters, however, Fiat Chrysler has reported North American profit margins of more than 10 percent, about the same as G.M.
Shares of G.M. fell about 3 percent on Wednesday, and Fiat Chrysler stock ended 3.7 percent lower.