It’s Wednesday. More than 5,000 public housing residents lost heat and hot water for about six hours yesterday. Services were restored by around 10 p.m., according to a spokesman for the mayor.
Weather: It’ll be cold in New York and across much of the country. By midafternoon, winds here will start slowing down and temperatures will reach the mid-30s.
Alternate-side parking: In effect until Nov. 28 (Thanksgiving).
Generally in New York City, immigrants are welcomed, entrepreneurs are celebrated and food from around the world is savored.
All of that may help explain why there was a backlash when images surfaced of the police handcuffing two women in recent days for selling churros inside subway stations in Brooklyn.
The police identified the woman as Elsa Morochoduchi, 43, of Brooklyn. At a news conference on Monday, Ms. Morochoduchi, a native of Ecuador, said she had sold churros for three years but had been too afraid to try to get a permit, citing what she perceives as anti-Hispanic bias among city officials.
Hours before that news conference, the second woman was arrested. The police said that woman had outstanding warrants for prior summonses for selling unlicensed food.
To operate legally, food vendors in New York need two documents: a mobile food vending license for themselves, which costs $50, and a mobile food vending permit for each cart or truck, which costs $200.
According to my colleague Sharon Otterman, the city limits the number of mobile food vending permits to 2,900. That cap has remained unchanged since 1983.
Because of the permits’ scarcity, the market for them operates a bit like the taxi medallion market, said Mohamed Attia, executive director of the Street Vendor Project, which supports lifting the cap.
Owners sometimes lease their permits to other vendors for upward of 125 times the price, which can drive the vendors into debt, he said. Kabir Ahmed, a halal cart vendor profiled by The New York Times in 2017, for example, said he had paid $25,000 to lease his license.
In 2007, the city capped its wait list for citywide permits when there were 2,500 names on it, Mr. Attia said. So vendors who have gone into business since then are most likely leasing permits.
The Street Vendor Project estimates that about 20,000 vendors work on city streets, and that more than half of them sell food.
Who is penalized?
It’s hard to determine the exact number of unlicensed food vendors operating in the city. But the penalties for operating carts without a license seem to disproportionately affect women.
In 2018, 57 percent of the tickets for unlicensed mobile food vending were issued to women, according to data from the city.
Of the 46,000 people who received mobile food vending licenses from 2000 to 2018, only 22 percent were women, the Street Vendor Project found.
The City Council is considering legislation to gradually increase the number of mobile food vending permits. Councilman Rafael L. Espinal Jr. said on Monday that 29 Council members had signed on.
Opponents of issuing more permits, which include the restaurant industry and various business improvement district groups, say the changes would hurt brick-and-mortar storefronts and congest sidewalks. They want robust enforcement of the existing rules and more regulations dictating where vendors can operate.
There are young men living in the shadow of a wall. And somehow, they seem to fly.
They are Palestinians in the West Bank practicing parkour, an acrobatic style of moving over obstacles.
The documentary is called “Hurdle,” and it has its New York premiere tonight at the IFC Center in Manhattan. The screening is part of DOC NYC, a documentary film festival that is in its 10th year.
Other documentaries in the festival, which ends tomorrow, include “Stay Close,” about a fencer from Brooklyn, and “The Apollo,” about the theater in Harlem.
“The Capote Tapes,” which is closing out the festival, focuses on Truman Capote’s unfinished novel, “Answered Prayers,” in which he “set out to expose Manhattan’s social aristocracy after he befriended them,” according to the event’s organizers.
It appears that Mr. Capote, who died in 1984, still has a story to tell. Because stories, like people, have a way of leaping forward unexpectedly.
It’s Wednesday — go see a documentary.
I was at an artists’ colony in upstate New York. It was so quiet, I had to run a white noise machine at night to block out the silence. At home, I run it to block out the rattle and hum of the subway train crossing the Manhattan Bridge.
The path didn’t get much traffic, but I thought the snail might be in danger. I bent down close to encourage it to speed up, but it froze. Nothing I did — waving my hands, blowing in its direction — made the snail move.
I decided to pick it up and put it in the grass on the side of the path. Very slowly, I reached down to pick the snail up — I didn’t want to startle it — and gingerly picked up … an acorn.
Yes, an acorn. Not a snail.
I may need to get out of the city more often. Or maybe I’m just not cut out for all that nature.
