On Friday, officials ended a search-and-rescue operation off the coast of Romania. Crews are preparing to remove thousands of carcasses from the vessel.
BUCHAREST, Romania — After five frantic days of searching, there are no more living animals.
The president of a Romanian animal welfare organization made the grim announcement on Friday, ending an effort to rescue more than 14,000 sheep trapped on a cargo ship that overturned after leaving port, an episode that has raised fresh questions about transporting live animals by sea.
The sheep had been destined for a buyer in Saudi Arabia when the vessel, the Queen Hind, partly capsized on Sunday. The ship’s crew of 21 was quickly rescued, but thousands of animals remained on board.
For days, rescue workers searched for surviving sheep. On Sunday, they were able to pull 33 living animals from the waters. Over the following days, as they searched the vessel, more were found alive among piles of sodden carcasses.
“It was kind of a nightmare, but otherwise we didn’t have any chance to reach the live animals,” said Kuki Barbuceanu, the president of the animal welfare organization, known as ARCA.
“We’ve checked all of the ship, and unfortunately there are no more,” Mr. Barbuceanu concluded Friday, saying the rescue operation had saved 254 sheep out of 14,600 aboard. The General Inspectorate for Emergency Situations confirmed the end of the rescue effort.
The operation had been made difficult by the unstable conditions onboard, officials said, and by the fact that the animals, which can weigh upward of 130 pounds, had to be brought out of the ship, one by one, through a single point.
On Tuesday, rescuers started cutting holes in the sides of the vessel to reach less accessible areas after receiving permission from the vessel’s owner. This allowed the crew to find more animals, but the number of rescues dwindled as the days wore on. On Thursday, just 24 were found alive.
Rescuers halted their efforts on Thursday evening, but the search resumed on Friday after officials decided to go ahead with a dangerous cut into a compartment.
“The rescue mission wasn’t a simple one, or a risk-free one,” said Raed Arafat, head of the Department of Emergency Situations under the Romanian Ministry of Internal Affairs. He said that more than 100 people a day were involved in the operation, including members of the water rescue agency.
The ship is registered in Palau, and news reports have said it was managed by a Romanian company, but officials have not confirmed the ownership.
The disaster has raised fresh questions about transporting live animals by sea. An estimated two million sheep and one million cattle are transported each year from European Union member states to the Middle East, North Africa and Turkey. Romania is one of the main exporters.
Animal rights advocates say that the journeys are often too long, regulations aren’t up to scratch and the rules are often flouted.
“The vast majority of journeys, despite what the European Commission says, involve breaches of the law,” said Peter Stevenson, a veteran lawyer and chief policy adviser at Compassion in World Farming, an animal welfare organization based in Britain.
“Enforcement of regulations is terrible,” Mr. Stevenson said, adding that he had written to the Romanian agricultural minister asking for details about the pre-loading inspection of the ship.
“That a ship should capsize quite near to the port suggests that the inspection was not carried out properly,” he added.
Francesca Porta, the farm animals program officer at the advocacy group Eurogroup for Animals in Brussels, said that one of the main problems was that vessels were often not built for the journey.
“They are old vessels that are converted to transport animals,” Ms. Porta said. The Queen Hind, she added, had been built in 1980 and reauthorized by Romanian officials in March.
The vessel had suffered engine failure in the Sea of Marmara near Turkey in 2018, news reports said.
Days before Sunday’s accident, Eurogroup issued a report laying out a strategy to reduce and replace the transportation of live animals with a meat-and-carcass-only trade.
“In the end, we believe that this trade must be stopped,” the group’s director, Reineke Hameleers, said on Thursday.
Romania clashed with Brussels once this year on the issue of live animal transportation. In July, the European commissioner in charge of health and food safety called on Romania to halt the export of 70,000 live sheep to the Persian Gulf because of concerns that high temperatures could cause the animals to suffer in transit.
Romania allowed the export to proceed, nonetheless.
“Utter disasters like we saw a few days ago are not common, but just the day-to-day suffering of animals being transported these long distances is huge,” said Mr. Stevenson, the lawyer with Compassion in World Farming.
Now that rescue attempts on the Queen Hind have concluded, the next issue will be righting the ship so that crews can remove the carcasses and incinerate them, Mr. Arafat said.
“This will be a very hard operation, to clean the ship of thousands of dead sheep inside that drowned and have started to decay,” he said.
There is also the question of the surviving animals, which had been destined for the dining table.
Mr. Barbuceanu, of the animal welfare organization, said its officials had contacted the Saudi buyer to ask him to donate the sheep to an animal welfare organization, but have not received a reply.
He envisions the few hundred remaining sheep spending the rest of their lives on a farm.
