Travel|Help! Renting a Vehicle Through Europcar Drove Me Crazy!
In this week’s Tripped Up column, Sarah Firshein investigates multiple complaints with the rental car company Europcar.
When we first solicited reader stories of travel disasters, we immediately received four individual emails concerning Europcar, the rental car company that operates in 140 countries. Although anyone renting a car from any rental company on Earth might find themselves in the situations below, we felt that strength in numbers might be valuable here, so we packaged the disasters as a quartet and sent them to Europcar for comment.
Like most car rental companies, though, Europcar overbooks to offset potential no-shows. Combine that with what the company cited as “high demand and some customers not returning vehicles as expected,” and it’s no surprise that you arrived to a nonexistent car, especially on one of Calgary’s busiest weeks of the year.
Europcar’s Reservation Guarantee Policy is meant to bulwark against scenarios like yours; if you are forced to rent a car elsewhere because of a lack of inventory, Europcar pledges to reimburse you. But these consumer protections are nonstandardized non-laws, leaving it up to the renter to advocate for recourse either in person, at peak exasperation, or after the fact, through a dizzying maze of emails and phone calls that go unanswered. Not exactly a winnable game.
I advocated for you and had some luck. Europcar issued you a refund of 983.29 dollars: the exact difference between the car you ostensibly rented and the red Mustang you drove away with, James Bond-style. However, the company was unwilling to refund the additional fees that amounted to the full 2,000 dollars overage.
That pain point is exactly what has prompted the Audi-owned rental car company, Silvercar (available in various cities in the United States, largely at airports), to rethink the traditional car-renting process by eliminating surprise fees and other hassles. And, as luck would have it, the company has a foothold in Denver — should you ever be inclined to attend another rodeo, say, in the American West.
You’re right: All American Express cards have Car Rental Loss and Damage Insurance, secondary collision damage waiver coverage for rental-car damage or theft, which is applicable worldwide in most countries, including Mexico.
You were also correct to assume that Amex C.D.W. coverage kicks in only when cardholders decline the insurance offered by the rental car company: exactly what you attempted.
Either the Puerto Vallarta agent was trying to pull a fast one or he was genuinely confused about the policies. Regardless, Europcar has issued a refund for the extra insurance.
Because currency conversion rates vary daily, Europcar Chile sets a fixed rate based on the exchange rate on the first day of the month, plus 2 percent to account for the rate variance through the month. That’s generally industry standard. Acknowledging that you might not have had full access to the terms and conditions when you booked through a third-party site, Europcar has refunded your $194.
Europcar confirms that its 24-hour roadside assistance for a flat tire should have been free, and that “it is not the company’s policy to ask a customer to drive with a blown-out tire.” (Amen to that.) In order to resolve what it has called “an honest misunderstanding,” Europcar has refunded you for the cost of the replacement tire. Here’s hoping that your next trip to Rome won’t be such a … Roman holiday.
The Oct. 27 edition of Tripped Up, in which a woman unsuccessfully tried to travel internationally with a passport set to expire four months, inspired all sorts of reactions from Times readers. Kate R. got right to the point: “Wouldn’t it make life easier if the powers that be just put that info on their websites instead of folks having to guess? That’s a problem with many government websites.” Agreed!
