Good morning. I was in London a few years ago to watch Yotam Ottolenghi make a feast for a bunch of friends. I wrote about it for The Times, and every time I cook a big meal I come back to the opening scene in the article. That is: How before cooking anything, Yotam hauled out the china he would be using to serve the food and determined which recipes were destined for which platter, which bowl.
That’s one thing you could do today, in advance of next week’s Thanksgiving. Find all your serving dishes, and label the ones you’re going to use: mashed potatoes in the blue earthenware crock; schmaltz-roasted brussels sprouts on the slate-hued platter; dressing in the copper roasting pan. It’s not cooking. But it’s preparation — and preparation is going to be a big part of your coming week.
Accordingly, you could make stock today. You could shop for some of the hardgoods and perishables that you’ll need at the end of the week: sparkling cider for the kids; new kitchen towels so you don’t need so many paper ones; compostable takeout containers so you can send people home with leftovers; lots of potatoes and onions and leeks and brussels sprouts and carrots. You might even pick up your bird. It’ll hold in the fridge, first in its wrapping, and then on Tuesday in its cloak of salt.
For dinner tonight, the opposite of feasting: a simple dish of Japanese oyakodon (above), a soupy rice bowl with chicken and egg, sweet and salty and easy-delicious.
On Monday night, roast a bunch of your carrots under a lot of salt, pepper and warm spices: a blend like ras al hanout, or baharat, would work. Make a five-minute hummus while the vegetables cook and, when they’re done, make the hummus a bed for the crisp-soft roots. What a meal!
Tuesday: risotto with sausage and parsley. Wednesday: beef and broccoli.
And then you can revel in leftovers on Friday and through the weekend, ideally including this turkey tikka masala from the sublime Samin Nosrat.
Come see us on Facebook for free, however, and maybe join our NYT Cooking Community while you’re at it. There’s a good scene brewing over there. We are on Instagram, as well, and on YouTube. Like and subscribe!
And if anything should go wrong along the way, with your cooking or our material, please write right away |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| We will get back to you.
Now, it’s really nothing to do with kitchens or pantries, but I told you a while back that I was looking forward to Jad Abumrad’s podcast “Dolly Parton’s America.” Now that I’ve started listening to it, though? Man. It will absolutely be on the final exam.
Here’s Wes Enzinna in Harper’s with a Letter From California that’s about the cost of living in the Bay Area. It’s high.
Finally, let this go on a while, so you can get to Jack Cole and Chita Rivera. And then you’ll want it to go on forever: “What Is Jazz?” I’ll be back tomorrow.