Book Review|Phoebe Waller-Bridge Loves Antiheroines. Of Course.
George Saunders’s “CivilWarLand in Bad Decline” and “Three Women,” by Lisa Taddeo.
“So the Wind Won’t Blow It All Away,” by Richard Brautigan.
Wine. Armchair. Raining. Or reading in the same room as someone else who’s reading. It’s rare, but there’s a particular sort of peace to it.
“I Saw Esau: The Schoolchild’s Pocket Book,” edited by Iona Opie and Peter Opie with illustrations by Maurice Sendak. It’s a collection of chants and rhymes for children that I was given by my very conservative grandmother. She didn’t realize what kind of subversive, morbid glory was in there. It haunted her for years as I learned everything by heart and recited it to her endlessly.
Which playwrights and other writers — novelists, critics, journalists, poets — working today do you admire most?
There are so many, but I’m perpetually in waiting — and I’m not alone — for Donald Glover’s next work. Kim Addonizio’s poetry gives me physical energy, particularly “For Desire” and “What Do Women Want?” Kate Tempest is our modern philosopher, Carole Cadwalladr changed the world and Natasha Gordon is one of the most exciting playwrights out there right now.
You were brought in to work on the latest James Bond script. Have you read the original Bond books by Ian Fleming — and if so, what do you think are the best and worst?
I hadn’t read them, but started while I was working on the movie. I don’t want to say which ones I was inspired by just yet.
Daphne du Maurier’s “The Blue Lenses” would be a trip. You’d have to be high.
Cathy Ames in “East of Eden,” by John Steinbeck, although Jodie Comer is perfect casting for her. I actually opened the pitch document for “Killing Eve” with Steinbeck’s description of his monstrous beauty. It’s a passage that stopped me in my tracks when I first read it. I’d never come across such a twisted female character. It was electrifying to read. Even her author was obsessed by her.
What writers are especially good on frustrated love?
Ernest Hemingway, Ernest Hemingway, Ernest Hemingway.
I am always drawn to people who love “The Master and Margarita,” by Mikhail Bulgakov.
When someone finds a new way to describe love or grief.
Or when you realize that the storyteller has been doing something to you without you realizing. Sometimes just the artistry of the writing can move me! I love being manipulated!
Agh, if I had to choose, I’d say emotionally. But ideally there’s both.
I don’t! They are all over the place!
I’m a big fan of Charles Bukowski. He was an old dog, but I love how visceral his writing is.
Have you ever changed your opinion of a book based on information about the author?
“Frankenstein” took my breath away, but when I discovered Mary Shelley was 19 when she wrote it my head blew off.
I do have a penchant for an antiheroine/hero. I prefer not to know exactly how I feel about a character. I definitely started walking like a badass while reading Lisbeth Salander. I was horrified yet set alight by the brutal amorality of Sebastian Dangerfield from J. P. Donleavy’s “The Ginger Man,” and I’ll never quite shake the impact of Cheryl Glickman from “The First Bad Man,” by Miranda July. Humbert Humbert in “Lolita” was the most unforgettable, uncomfortable relationship I’ve had with a character I can remember. There are so many!
I was obsessive about particular books. There’s no cool way of saying this but I was really into irreverent poetry for my first decade and a half. Most likely set off by my poor grandmother. I never went anywhere without my copy of “Thawing Frozen Frogs,” by Brian Patten. The Point Horror books were a feature, Roald Dahl was a champion, but Philip Pullman’s “His Dark Materials” trilogy defined me as a young reader. I lived between those pages. I remember the physical ache of wanting to be deep in those worlds. I even wrote to Pullman asking if I could play Lyra. Still waiting.
I don’t really know. I just want to be transported. I’m still intimidated by massive tomes. Looking back, I started out feeling reading was an escape, then a chore, then a habit, then a luxury. Only now I’ve realized what a necessity it is, and how easily it’s taken for granted.
Well, of course the sexy ’70s classic “Forever,” by Judy Blume, was banned from my school because a Certain Page was getting the students all sweaty. But any number of detentions were worth being caught with it and I had … one or two detentions. Not dissimilarly, years later, I picked up Anaïs Nin’s “Little Birds” while browsing Waterstones and stood frozen there, entranced, for about an hour until an employee had to remind my flushed face that Waterstones isn’t a library and I had to remind myself that erotic short stories should be read in private.
Ha. I’m not going to tell you that.
“Ghost Wall,” by Sarah Moss, and “Fleishman Is in Trouble,” by Taffy Brodesser-Akner.