She does well before late-night TV audiences. And her joke about ex-boyfriends is a crowd-pleaser in Los Angeles and the Midwest too.
Senator Amy Klobuchar has increasingly become known for her one-liners during her run for president.
There were three hours to go before Amy Klobuchar would take the stage with Trevor Noah on “The Daily Show,” and she had no jokes prepared. After several late night appearances she had learned one thing: It’s the host’s job to bring the comedy, not hers.
But from the moment she sat down on the set to tape her appearance, she did not stop herself. At the top of the show, Mr. Noah ripped off his shirt to reveal a leopard print leotard, a crowd-pleasing reprise from his long-ago appearance on “Dancing With the Stars.” Then, when the senator joined him, he grew more serious.
There was a half second pause before she began.
In the end, there was no dancing and no trophy for Ms. Klobuchar. But her late night TV appearances, including on “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert,” on Tuesday, last month’s debate and time out on the trail all point to a different kind of bragging right: Ms. Klobuchar is funny.
Wry, wholesome, self-deprecating, sometimes hokey funny, but funny. She has comedic timing, occasional deadpan delivery and a more than occasional wink to reveal just how hilarious she thinks she is.
This is all part of Ms. Klobuchar’s approach: She sees humor as a strategy, a way she can disarm an opponent, charm a voter and, she hopes, undercut President Trump on the debate stage. “When things are so divided in politics it helps to warm things up a little bit and find something that people agree on,” she said in an interview.
Sitting with her daughter over plates of dumplings and sweet potato fries before her “Daily Show” appearance, Ms. Klobuchar spoke in great detail about the way she thinks about her own humor and power.
Do not call it “mom humor,” a term Ms. Klobuchar disdains because, she said, it implies she is not actually funny. Never mind the fact that Ms. Klobuchar poked fun at her own mothering during a nationally televised debate, describing herself “meddling” in her daughter’s weekend social life. “In my mind as a mom, it’s not lame at all,” she quipped.
Ms. Klobuchar’s brand of comedy is a clean, “aw, shucks” approach that conveys her own background as a Midwesterner, a mom and a slightly exasperated politician. She laughs easily, at herself and others, and can recall dozens of her successful zingers.
At a campaign stop in Virginia last week, she recounted her personal favorite: On her first Senate race, scrounging to find money any way she could, she started calling up men she once dated.
The first time she delivered it, she said, was in liberal Los Angeles, during a fund-raiser at Danny DeVito’s home. Initially, she presumed it was the kind of racy humor that could only go over well in Hollywood. But slowly, she began trying it out on Midwestern crowds and found that it got peals of laughter there too. When she delivered the monologue in 2009 at a Gridiron Club dinner in Washington, D.C., the $17,000 ex-boyfriend fund made its way into her remarks there too.
President Barack Obama would later joke at then-Senator Al Franken’s expense, saying that the professional comedian was the “second funniest” senator from Minnesota.
There’s an addition to the joke now: Ms. Klobuchar declines to say how many boyfriends chipped in.
“I wonder how your hair would fare in a blizzard?,” she wrote back on Twitter.
The campaign has provided plenty of fodder for new material. On “The Late Show” Tuesday she said the backstage atmosphere at the debates was more friendly than competitive. So much so, she joked, that she’s passed notes on the edge of the stage, where the lower polling candidates are placed.
“We were kind of down there in the corner,” she added, referring to the candidates, herself included, who are largely stuck in the single-digits. And she had no problem laughing during a clip Mr. Colbert played showing a cartoon version of Ms. Klobuchar screaming at other candidates.
Like any comic, Ms. Klobuchar said she is constantly looking for and testing out new material, learning quickly what works and what doesn’t. Her daughter often provides suggestions that Ms. Klobuchar accepts, though the opposite almost never happens, the two said.
Another recent favorite is one comparing herself to Melania Trump, at her own expense.
“She was born, it’s true, an hour away from where my relatives were from in Slovenia. And every time I look at her, it’s like looking in the mirror,” the joke goes, which reliably gets laughs.
Many of her jokes are so goofy the listener just has to laugh. When three campaign volunteers in New Hampshire recently lined up each holding a letter of her name, Ms. Klobuchar reacted with some glee.
Later that evening, she stepped into a hotel conference room, where a Halloween-themed wedding was set to take place. She took in the scene of black tulle and pumpkins, wondering aloud whether a witch was getting married. Then she began, unprompted, to talk about her own personal favorite Halloween costume: when she dressed up as “Purple Rain” in law school.
But asked whether she was taking any advice from the thesis, the answer was a firm no. She would not, she said, be hiring any joke writers, as other candidates have done. Still, knowingly or not, she is taking a page from her daughter’s research.
