The announcement proved to be the breaking point for Mx. Zilles (who is gender nonbinary and takes the gender-nonspecific honorific).
Mx. Zilles, who worked from their home in Seattle, went public with their discontent, posting on Twitter that the new fees would leave the average transcriber with $4.50 for an hour of work, and also called for customers and contractors to voice discontent.
With that Mx. Zilles, a 29-year-old former graduate student, was suddenly the leader of the newest revolt against the gig-economy start-ups that govern the lives of more and more people around the world.
The next day, he held a live-streamed question-and-answer session, with angry questions filtered as politely as possible through one of Mr. Chicola’s deputies.
Mr. Chicola said that Rev was lowering the pay for some contractors so that it can pay other contractors more for harder jobs.
Rev workers are also more aware than drivers and couriers of the cold breath of artificial intelligence creeping up behind them. There are already start-ups that will transcribe your documents for free using speech recognition technology.
Rev started its own competitor in this realm earlier this year. In Friday’s Q. and A., contractors asked if they were being kept around just to train the company’s artificial intelligence — something Mr. Chicola vehemently denied.
Paula Kamen, who runs Transcription Professionals from her home near Chicago, said that when she began her company in 1995, she was convinced that Dragon — the buzzy speech recognition software of that time — would soon make her business obsolete.
But she said she has continued to grow at a steady rate because the advances in speech recognition technology have come alongside the proliferation in recording devices and people wanting to see their words turned into text. Much of the work that Ms. Kamen farms out to her contractors today involves correcting bad transcriptions from automated services.
For Ms. Kamen, the most remarkable discovery to come out of the Rev controversy was just how little the company is paying its contractors, which she described as “Dickensian,” and how much Rev is taking for itself.
Ms. Kamen generally keeps around 20 percent of what she charges clients to cover her overhead, compared with the 50 to 70 percent that Rev is generally keeping. The amount that Rev is taking off the top is big even compared with other gig economy companies like Uber, which takes about 25 percent of each dollar paid by a customer.
Mr. Chicola said in an interview that Rev requires more for overhead because of the company’s quality control and investments in technology to help freelancers.
Even with all the complaints about Rev, the boycott may not have caught on if Rev wasn’t a service used by the people best placed to pay attention get the message out — journalists — and Mx. Zilles’s decision to appeal on Twitter to some of the media companies that are listed on Rev’s website as clients.
Journalists, including Jelani Cobb, a writer at The New Yorker, weighed in to amplify Mx. Zilles’s message and said that he would stop using Rev.
A spokeswoman for The New York Times, which Rev lists as a client, said on Friday: “We’re aware of the concerns and are currently reviewing our use of the vendor."
Mr. Chicola said that the hackers did not gain access to any customer transcripts.
None of this has been enough to get Mr. Chicola to back down on the pay changes. He said that the latest changes are necessary to free up money for the harder jobs on the site.
The post was quickly met with 55 responses on the forum, all of which were critical of Mr. Chicola.
One contractor set up a poll on the forum, in which 95 percent of 221 respondents said they were unhappy with the changes. That is in line with the poor scores that Rev has received from its transcribers on career sites like Glassdoor and Comparably.
Mx. Zilles is now working on creating a website, transcription.network, to directly connect unhappy Rev workers with some of the better-paying clients and transcription companies that have reached out over the last week.
Given that there are now nearly 6,000 responses to the messages on Rev’s internal forum announcing the pay changes, it’s likely there is no shortage of people looking for new opportunities.
Mr. Moore, who began working for Rev while touring as a standup comedian, said that the events of the last week have given him courage to begin looking elsewhere after watching his pay at Rev fall by about 30 percent in recent months, which he attributed to previous rate changes made by the company.
