Moscow has run a yearslong operation to blame Ukraine for its own 2016 election interference. Republicans have used similar talking points to defend President Trump in impeachment proceedings.
WASHINGTON — Republicans have sought for weeks amid the impeachment inquiry to shift attention to President Trump’s demands that Ukraine investigate any 2016 election meddling, defending it as a legitimate concern while Democrats accuse Mr. Trump of pursuing fringe theories for his benefit.
Russia has engaged in a “long pattern of deflection” to pin blame for its malevolent acts on other countries, Dr. Hill said, not least Ukraine, a former Soviet republic. Since Ukraine won independence in 1991, Russia has tried to reassert influence there, meddling in its politics, maligning pro-Western leaders and accusing Ukrainian critics of Moscow of fascist leanings.
“The Russians have a particular vested interest in putting Ukraine, Ukrainian leaders in a very bad light,” she told lawmakers.
But the campaign by Russian intelligence in recent years has been even more complex as Moscow tries not only to undermine the government in Kyiv but also to use a disinformation campaign there to influence the American political debate.
Listen to ‘The Daily’: Why Trump (Still) Believes (Wrongly) That Ukraine Hacked the D.N.C.
The president is promoting a conspiracy theory — one that may have originated with the Russian government.
Today: In the phone call at the center of the impeachment inquiry, President Trump asked Ukraine for two different investigations. Scott Shane on the unexpected story behind one of them.
It’s Tuesday, November 26.
We are joined right now — it is our great pleasure to welcome the president of the United States, Donald Trump, calling in. Mr. Trump, good morning to you.
So on Friday, President Trump called in to “Fox & Friends,” one of his favorite shows on Fox News, and what ensued was, really, a 53-minute stream of consciousness.
This was spying on my campaign, something that has never been done in the history of our country. They thought I was going to win, and they said, how could we stop him? You know, a lot of people say, deep state. I don’t like to use the word deep state. I just say they’re really bad, sick people.
And one of the things he talked about was a theory that’s really at the heart of the impeachment inquiry.
It’s very interesting, they have the server, right, from the D.N.C., Democratic National Committee.
Who has the server?
The F.B.I. went in, and they told him, get out of here. You’re not getting it. We’re not giving it to you. They gave the server to CrowdStrike or whatever it’s called, which is a company owned by a very wealthy Ukrainian.
And it was the same theory that he brought up with the president of Ukraine, President Zelensky, in this famous phone call on July 25. The theory, the false theory, is that Ukraine, and not Russia, was responsible for the hacking of the 2016 election, and that Ukraine was assisted in this by a company called CrowdStrike.
Scott, what would make the president believe this theory and mention this company by name?
Well, let’s start with the undisputed facts. Back in the spring of 2016, of course it was the middle of the presidential race, and the Democratic National Committee discovers that its computers have been hacked. So they call their cybersecurity contractor, CrowdStrike. And CrowdStrike is a California company that was co-founded by a fellow who immigrated as a child from Russia, and, really, one of the top cybersecurity companies out there. And the Democratic National Committee asked them to come to Washington and examine these computers and basically do what any cybersecurity company does, which is kick out the hackers, kind of clean up the computer servers, and make sure the organization can keep functioning. So essentially, CrowdStrike and the D.N.C. report this to the F.B.I. Hacking is, of course, a crime, so the F.B.I. begins its own investigation. And CrowdStrike is in communication the whole time with the F.B.I. And so they’re essentially working alongside each other and zeroing in, in part, on who did it by looking at, essentially, the fingerprints of the burglars who broke into the computer system, the sort of telltale signs that particular hacking groups leave behind. And all those telltale signs were pointing to Russia, and, in particular, to hackers who work for the Russian government. And they did it, American intelligence agencies conclude, to assist Donald Trump and especially to damage Hillary Clinton in this presidential race.
So where does this Trump theory that he talks about on Fox News, that becomes part of impeachment inquiry, where does that intersect with the story that you just laid out, the undisputed fact story?
Well, President Trump takes the players that exist in real life, but in each case sort of distorts the facts. And the main purpose of the distortions seems to be to bring Ukraine in at each point. So he says that CrowdStrike, this California company, is Ukrainian, owned by a rich Ukrainian. Not true. He says the F.B.I. dropped the ball on this investigation and turned everything over to CrowdStrike and let them essentially take over. Not true. And he says that as a result of CrowdStrike taking over, because he thinks CrowdStrike is a Ukrainian company, the server, the D.N.C. server that he’s very focused on, has somehow ended up in Ukraine. It’s hidden in Ukraine. So the gist of what he’s saying to the American public is, you can’t believe what the F.B.I. told you about the hacking of the 2016 election. In fact, the F.B.I. messed up this investigation, and all signs point not to Russia, but to Ukraine.
So this is a pretty unified theory that CrowdStrike is Ukrainian, CrowdStrike gets the computer servers, CrowdStrike places them in Ukraine. But none of it is true.
Why does Trump want Ukraine to be involved and not Russia?
So in this theory, which, as you just said, is not true, but in this theory, he’s not the beneficiary of an election surreptitiously aided by Russia. He is the victor over an obstacle course laid out by Ukraine?
So Scott, what have you found out about where this theory actually came from?
So Trump’s false theory came, it turns out, not from some wacky website or from Twitter. It may have actually originated with the Russians.
Wow. How would that have worked?
So we learned this new information from F.B.I. documents obtained by BuzzFeed, the news organization, under the Freedom of Information Act. And it turns out that Trump heard from his campaign chairman, Paul Manafort, that Ukraine and not Russia might be responsible for the hacking. And Manafort, apparently, according to these new F.B.I. documents, heard this from Konstantin Kilimnik, who was an associate of his, who was a dual Russian-Ukrainian national with very close ties to Russian intelligence.
So a man with ties to Russian intelligence who works closely with Paul Manafort, Donald Trump’s campaign manager in 2016, gives the information to Manafort, and, our understanding goes, Manafort would have then passed that on to Trump. And if what we know about Russia and the way it handles information is true, this would have potentially been a deliberate misinformation campaign?
That’s right, because it was certainly in Russia’s interest to shift the blame for interference in the 2016 election away from its intelligence agencies — to anywhere, but to its enemy, Ukraine, that’s all the better.
And why would Manafort believe this man who’s telling him that it’s Ukraine, not Russia, behind this meddling?
Well, Manafort, folks might remember, was a longtime political operative in Ukraine, but he was working Ukraine on behalf of a pro-Russia political party. So his political sympathies were on the Russian side. So in that sense, it would make sense for him to try to turn the Ukrainians into a scapegoat for Russia’s hacking.
So everyone in this chain of information has some motivation to support this theory. The Russians, of course — they want to distract from what they’ve just done. This man who gives it to Manafort, because he works with the Russians. Manafort, because he works for Ukrainian businesspeople who support Russia, and, finally, Donald Trump, who wants anyone other than the Russians to be responsible for this.
Exactly. I think we don’t know whether any of these parties actually believes any of this stuff in their heart of hearts. But it’s certainly in their political interest to pass it along.
Scott, were you surprised that two years after President Trump first publicly raises this theory about Ukraine, he brings it up in a phone call with a foreign leader, despite all of the evidence that it wasn’t true?
Yes, I was, because there had been a very important development.
Good afternoon. Today, a grand jury in the District of Columbia returned an indictment presented by the special counsel’s office. The indictment charges 12 Russian military officers by name for conspiring to interfere with the 2016 presidential election.
And that was the indictment by Robert Mueller’s investigators of a number of Russian military intelligence officers.
The defendants worked for two units of the main intelligence directorate of the Russian general staff.
And this indictment was exquisitely detailed, down to the point of, like, what they googled before they carried out the hacking.
First, they used a scheme known as spear phishing, which involves sending misleading email messages and tricking the users into disclosing their passwords and security information.
And it had their names, it had their ranks, it had their locations.
And we need to keep moving forward to preserve our values, protect against future interference, and defend America.
So it seemed to remove all doubts about the role not only of Russians, but of specific Russian intelligence officers and the Russian state in carrying out that operation. And nevertheless, here the president was, once again reviving the notion that somehow Ukraine had carried out the hack, and presenting this theory of his not just to anyone, but to the president of Ukraine, and essentially trying to pressure the president of Ukraine into launching an investigation into this completely baseless theory.
So of course, this pressure that the president puts on Ukraine’s president becomes central to the impeachment inquiry. So how has this theory factored into and been talked about in the public hearings of the impeachment inquiry?
Today, we are joined by Dr. Fiona Hill and David Holmes.
So there was really a standoff between the diplomatic professionals and the real experts on Russia and Ukraine and the Republicans on the committee.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Nunes, and members of the committee, thank you for inviting me to testify before you today. I have a short opening statement. Based on questions and statements I’ve heard, some of you on this committee appear to believe that Russia and its security services did not conduct a campaign against our country, and that perhaps, somehow, for some reason, Ukraine did.
This is a fictional narrative that has been perpetrated and propagated by the Russian security services themselves.
— were emphatic that there was absolutely no truth to the idea that Ukraine was somehow responsible for the hack.
[GAVEL BANG] Committee will turn to order. Mr. Jordan, you’re recognized for five minutes.
But the Republicans on the committee, while not entirely embracing Trump’s theory, kept trying to open the door to it.
Ambassador, should ambassadors ever try to influence host country elections?
Wasn’t it true that there were some Ukrainian politicians who had criticized Trump? In other words, isn’t it possible that some Ukrainians were trying to, as the president said, take him down?
You see why maybe, maybe the president was a little concerned about what went on in Ukraine?
They weren’t completely embracing his theory, but they were bolstering it as well as they could.
Louisiana Senator John Kennedy, a Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee, and Senator, welcome back to Fox News Sunday.
Senator Kennedy, who do you believe was responsible for hacking the D.N.C. and Clinton campaign computers, their emails? Was it Russia or Ukraine?

Let me just interrupt to say, the entire intelligence community says it was Russia.
Right, but it could also be Ukraine. I’m not saying that I know one way or the other. I’m saying that Ms. Hill is entitled to her opinion. But no rebuttal evidence was allowed to be offered.
He continued to insist that it’s all a little bit fuzzy, it’s a little murky, we don’t really know.
In other words, we’ve left behind the crystal clarity of the Mueller indictment last year that said exactly who was responsible for the hacking, and we’ve entered this sort of twilight zone, where we don’t really know what’s true and what’s untrue. And that sort of is a license for President Trump to say whatever he wants.
Scott, what have we learned from the journey of this conspiracy theory? And just how many people seem to be willing to tolerate it?
Well, I mean, first of all, this conspiracy theory concerns something of really the utmost importance, which is the biggest interference by a foreign power in American democracy in history. And so it would seem very important that we get the facts straight and keep them straight. But what we’ve learned from the durability of this conspiracy theory is that when false beliefs arise and linger, not on the fringes of the internet but right inside the Oval Office, and you have the president of the United States repeatedly stating them from the biggest bully pulpit in the world, it becomes a sort of force field that warps everything around it.
Scott, thank you very much.
The only evidence I have, and I think it’s overwhelming, is that it was Russia who tried to hack the D.N.C. computer. I’ve seen no indication that Ukraine tried to do it.
On Monday night, during an interview on CNN, Republican Senator John Kennedy backtracked on his comments about Ukraine, saying he was wrong to suggest that Ukraine might have hacked the D.N.C. servers.
Let me stop you for a second. You just did something we’ve never heard this president do, which was say, hey, I know I said that. I was wrong. So good, let’s check a big honking box. You don’t think Ukraine was the one to look at the server. Then why do you think the president keeps saying something that he also knows is not true?
But Kennedy insisted, without evidence, that Ukraine tried to interfere in the 2016 election.
Well, here’s why. There is a lot of evidence, proven and unproven, everybody’s got an opinion, that Ukraine did try to interfere, along with Russia and probably others in the 2016 election.
Here’s what else you need to know today. On Monday, in a closely watched case, a federal judge ruled that former White House Counsel Don McGahn must testify before House impeachment investigators, despite the White House’s attempts to bar him from testifying. McGahn is expected to testify about President Trump’s efforts to obstruct the Mueller investigation. The judge in the case rejected the administration’s sweeping claims that presidential advisers are immune from discussing their official duties before Congress, opening the door for House Democrats to demand testimony from several additional White House officials, including former National Security Adviser John Bolton and Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney. And President Trump has ordered that the military not remove Edward Gallagher from the Navy SEALs, delivering the final word in a case that has pitted the president against his own commanders. Gallagher was at the center of a high-profile war crimes case in Iraq, but was acquitted of the most serious charges. After the trial, his superiors sought to expel him from the unit as punishment for his conduct. Trump has repeatedly intervened in the case, each time seeking to protect Gallagher from losing his status as a Navy SEAL.
The accusations of a Ukrainian influence campaign center on actions by a handful of Ukrainians who openly criticized or sought to damage Mr. Trump’s candidacy in 2016. They were scattershot efforts that were far from a replica of Moscow’s interference, when President Vladimir V. Putin ordered military and intelligence operatives to mount a broad campaign to sabotage the American election. The Russians in 2016 conducted covert operations to hack Democratic computers and to use social media to exploit divisions among Americans.
Russia’s operation to blame Ukraine has become more relevant as Republicans have tried to focus public debate during the impeachment inquiry on any Ukrainian role in the 2016 campaign, American officials said.
Republicans have denounced any suggestion that their concerns about Ukrainian meddling are without merit or that they are ignoring Russia’s broader interference. “Not a single Republican member of this committee said Russia did not meddle in the 2016 elections,” Representative Elise Stefanik, Republican of New York, said Thursday.
Indeed, Ms. Stefanik and her Republican colleagues on the Democratic-led House Intelligence Committee, which is conducting the impeachment hearing, have also steered clear of the fringe notion that Mr. Trump mentioned to Mr. Zelensky, which is pushed by Russian intelligence: the so-called CrowdStrike server conspiracy theory, which falsely suggests Ukraine, not Russia, was behind the breach of Democratic operatives’ servers.
Mr. Trump repeated the baseless claim on Friday in an interview with “Fox & Friends,” laying out the narrative and doubling down after a host gently pressed him on whether he was sure of one aspect of the debunked theory, that the F.B.I. gave a Democratic server to what Mr. Trump had inaccurately described as a Ukrainian-owned company.
“That is what the word is,” Mr. Trump replied.
Some Republicans have also focused on Hunter Biden, raising questions about whether his hiring by the Ukrainian energy company Burisma was corrupt. Burisma hired Mr. Biden while his father, former Vice President Joseph Biden Jr., a potential rival of Mr. Trump’s in the 2020 election, was leading the Obama administration’s Ukraine policy. On the July 25 call, Mr. Trump also demanded Mr. Zelensky investigate Burisma and Hunter Biden.
Moscow has long used its intelligence agencies and propaganda machine to muddy the waters of public debate, casting doubts over established facts. In her testimony, Dr. Hill noted Russia’s pattern of trying to blame other countries for its own actions, like the attempted poisoning last year of a former Russian intelligence officer or the downing of a passenger jet over Ukraine in 2014. Moscow’s goal is to cast doubt on established facts, said current and former officials.
“The strategy is simply to create the impression that it is not really possible to know who was really behind it,” said Laura Rosenberger, the director of the Alliance for Securing Democracy, which tracks Russian disinformation efforts.
Although American intelligence agencies have made no formal classified assessment about the Russian disinformation campaign against Ukraine, officials at several of the agencies have broadly agreed for some time that Russian intelligence services have embraced tactics to shift responsibility for the 2016 interference campaign away from themselves, officials said.
Russia has relentlessly tried to deflect attention since the allegations of its interference campaign in the 2016 election first surfaced, one official said.
Mr. Putin began publicly pushing false theories of Ukrainian interference in the early months of 2017 to deflect responsibility from Russia, said Senator Angus King, independent of Maine and a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee, who declined to answer questions about the briefing.
During a news conference in February 2017, Mr. Putin accused the Ukrainian government of supporting Hillary Clinton during the previous American election and funding her candidacy with friendly oligarchs.
It is not clear when American intelligence agencies learned about Moscow’s campaign or when precisely it began.
Russian intelligence officers aimed part of their operation at prompting the Ukrainian authorities to investigate the allegations that people in Ukraine tried to tamper with the 2016 American election and to shut down inquiries into corruption by pro-Russian politicians in Ukraine, according to a former official.
One target was the leak of a secret ledger disclosed by a Ukrainian law enforcement agency that appeared to show that Paul Manafort, Mr. Trump’s onetime campaign chairman, had taken illicit payments from Ukrainian politicians who were close to Moscow. He was forced to step down from the Trump campaign after the ledger became public in August 2016, and the Russians have since been eager to cast doubt on its authenticity, the former official said.
Intelligence officials believe that one of the people the Kremlin relied on to spread disinformation about Ukrainian interference was Oleg V. Deripaska, a Russian oligarch who had ties to Mr. Manafort. After his ouster from the campaign, Mr. Manafort told his former deputy later in 2016 that Ukrainians, not Russians, stole Democratic emails. Mr. Deripaska has broadly denied any role in election meddling.
