Mr. Obama, in his latest remarks about the Democratic primary race, said the party should focus less on differences among the candidates and more on defeating President Trump.
Mr. Obama’s comments on Thursday appeared at times aimed more at Democratic officials, activists and donors than at the candidates themselves. Democrats should focus less on the “tactical disagreements” among the candidates, Mr. Obama said, and avoid making false choices between appealing to white working class voters or minority voters, or between energizing the party’s base or reaching out to independents and Republicans.
“Everybody needs to chill out about the candidates, but gin up about the prospect of rallying behind” a candidate, Mr. Obama said.
With Democratic activists and voters now weighing the different policy ideas and positions of the candidates, Mr. Obama also warned against demanding that the party’s hopefuls meet inflexible standards.
Mr. Obama spoke to a group of about 100 donors in Los Altos Hills, Calif., during an interview with Thomas E. Perez, the Democratic National Committee chairman, at a fund-raising event for the Democratic Unity Fund, which will be used to help the party’s eventual nominee. Aides to Mr. Obama say that it is the last time he plans to speak this year about the 2020 race.
Mr. Obama did not single out any candidates by name, and said he was encouraged that they are proposing “bolder” ideas and expanding on policies that he tried to “push the envelope” on during his administration, such as criminal justice reform.
Still, he seemed to caution against pushing for too much change.
“When you listen to the average voter — even ones who aren’t stalwart Democrats, but who are more independent or are low-information voters — they don’t feel that things are working well, but they’re also nervous about changes that might take away what little they have,” he said.
At the same time, Mr. Obama said he was open to the idea of higher taxes for the wealthy, adding that the conversation around the country has changed dramatically since his campaigns.
The remarks come less than a week after Mr. Obama warned against Democratic presidential candidates moving too far to the left, jockeying to win over “left-leaning Twitter feeds” rather than appealing to voters in the middle.
In recent weeks, Mr. Obama has repeatedly said that the presidential candidates should stop being concerned with debates over ideological purity and instead focus on beating President Trump.
Mr. Obama tried to “ease people’s anxieties” about his confidence in the field, saying that whoever emerges from the primary process will be a stronger candidate.
Many Democratic voters say they are looking for a candidate they believe is most likely to win during the general election, and there have been extensive discussions about whether that means winning over white working class voters who voted for Mr. Obama and then Mr. Trump, or turning out voters who sat out the 2016 election. Mr. Obama told donors he believed that debate was a false choice.
Mr. Perez pointed out that Mr. Obama won Iowa in 2008, suggesting that his winning coalition included both white voters as well as black and Hispanic voters.
“There aren’t a lot of black people in Iowa,” Mr. Obama said, prompting loud laughter from the donors in the room.
