The mayor called for a state of emergency after the Italian city was submerged under “acqua alta,” an exceptionally high tide — the worst in 50 years.
Outdoor restaurant tables and chairs could be seen bobbing in the waters, and tourists were forced to clamber through the windows of high-end hotels as the water rose to about six feet before 11 p.m. on Tuesday.
As dawn broke on Wednesday, the authorities began to survey the damage.
The flooding was the second highest in the city’s history, after the disastrous flood of 1966, which peaked at 6.3 feet. Last year, as severe weather in Italy killed 11 people, ferocious winds drove the high tide in Venice to more than five feet above average sea level.
Famous tourist spots like St. Mark’s Square were under several feet of water by Wednesday. The crypt of St. Mark’s Basilica was flooded by more than three feet of water, the Italian news agency ANSA reported. Almost exactly a year ago, after a violent storm had swept the city, concerns were raised about the basilica’s ability to withstand the effects of the changing climate, the growing number of days in which the city was under water, and the onslaught of tourists.
Italian news outlets reported that at least one man had died by electrocution while trying to pump water from his home in Pellestrina, an island that borders on the Venetian lagoon and forms a barrier against the Adriatic Sea. The body of another man was found in his home, according to local news outlets.
Mr. Brugnaro said the situation in Pellestrina was critical because the water had overwhelmed sea walls.
Luca Zaia, the president of the Veneto Region, said that Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte would arrive in the city shortly and spend the night.
Though Venetian residents have gotten used to wading through flooded streets, strong winds on Tuesday coincided with the high tide, submerging the city.
Mr. Brugnaro, the mayor, said a completed MOSE project could have averted the disaster — it is scheduled to be operative from 2022 — but that flood barriers were just one element of a complex system. And other elements necessary for the health of the lagoon, such as for the navigability of the canal, were still incomplete.
