For Representative Jim Jordan, acting as President Trump’s chief defender in the impeachment inquiry is a chance to redeem himself with Republican leaders.
WASHINGTON — Representative Jim Jordan, a scrappy former wrestler and firebrand founder of the conservative House Freedom Caucus, has always relished a fight. So it was no surprise this week when, as President Trump’s chief defender in the impeachment inquiry, he interrupted the staid tone of the first public hearing and let it rip.
For Mr. Jordan of Ohio, it was both an attention-grabbing moment and a chance to redeem himself with Republican leaders after years of being on the outs. The party is relying on him to frame the narrative Republicans offer to the public as Mr. Trump faces the gravest threat yet to his presidency.
It is one in which the president is a victim, witnesses are trafficking in hearsay at best, and working to undercut the duly elected president at worst, and Mr. Trump’s campaign to press Ukraine to investigate his political rivals was a perfectly appropriate exercise of executive power.
Mr. Jordan, apparently working to avoid appearing to bully her, treaded relatively lightly in addressing Ms. Yovanovitch. He reserved his tart tongue for the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, Representative Adam B. Schiff, who tried to force the Ohio congressman to wrap up his questioning as he blew through the five-minute limit.
“My indulgence is wearing out,” Mr. Schiff said.
Mr. Jordan was installed on the intelligence panel at the last minute by Representative Kevin McCarthy, the Republican leader, so that he could take a prominent role in the public questioning. He and other Republicans on the panel spent part of Thursday in “murder boards” — mock hearings — to prepare.
“It’s just like adding a pinch-hitter or a relief pitcher,” Mr. McCarthy said in an interview.
With polls showing the public deeply split on whether Mr. Trump deserves to be impeached, and views hardening along party lines, Mr. Jordan is unlikely to change any minds. But for now, his presence on the panel is assuaging the Republican base, which is looking for someone tough to go up against Mr. Schiff, Democrat of California, a strait-laced former federal prosecutor.
Technically, Representative Devin Nunes, the ranking Republican on the intelligence panel, is Mr. Schiff’s counterpart. But during weeks of closed-door depositions, Mr. Jordan, the top Republican on the House Committee on Oversight and Reform, took the lead in questioning witnesses.
“If you didn’t know better, you would think he was a prosecutor,” said Representative Steve Scalise, the No. 3 House Republican.
A former state legislator and law school graduate who never took the bar, Mr. Jordan is a two-time N.C.C.A. Division 1 wrestling champion in the 134-pound (lightweight) class. He rarely wears a suit jacket, and his failure to don one on Wednesday drew the attention of Robin Givhan, the fashion critic for The Washington Post.
But Mr. Jordan seemed unable to rattle Mr. Taylor, a seasoned diplomat with a full head of gray hair and a stentorian voice that evoked memories of Walter Cronkite.
Reading Mr. Taylor’s own testimony back to him, Mr. Jordan reminded the witness that he had said it was his “clear understanding” that Ukraine would not receive nearly $400 million in military aid from the United States until Mr. Zelensky announced the investigations. That is the essence of Democrats’ case that Mr. Trump abused his power.
“So I’m wondering, where’d you get this clear understanding?” Mr. Jordan said, wrapping up. Mr. Taylor was unbowed: “As I testified, Mr. Jordan, this came from Mr. Sondland,” he said, referring to Gordon D. Sondland, the ambassador to the European Union and an ally of Mr. Trump.
Mr. Jordan, in a brief interview, said he was simply trying to get at the truth — at least as Republicans see it.
Many of the wrestlers who accused him argue the congressman, then in his early 20s, should not be blamed because he could not have done much to protect them. One outspoken wrestler, Dunyasha Yetts, said that Mr. Jordan in fact did the right thing and confronted the doctor about being too hands-on with the students.
But they were privately disappointed that Mr. Jordan sought to deflect any accusations of wrongdoing by arguing that wrestlers who came forward were politically motivated and part of the so-called deep state — a defense that sounds much as if it could have come from the president he is defending now.
That Mr. Jordan is in his current role reflects how the once-fractured Republican conference has come together in the Trump era. When Republicans were in the majority, Mr. Jordan and his fellow conservatives made trouble for the Republican leadership, often balking at their legislative agenda.
After Republicans lost the majority last year, Mr. Jordan challenged Mr. McCarthy for the top leadership spot — and lost. That generated what another member of leadership, Representative Patrick T. McHenry of North Carolina, called “bad blood” between them.
Despite that, Mr. McCarthy gave Mr. Jordan the ranking position on the oversight panel, a plum job. The two men were freshmen lawmakers together — both were elected in 2006 — and Mr. McCarthy said he admired Mr. Jordan’s “work ethic” and tenacity. He gave Mr. Jordan the job, he said, over the strong objections of others in Republican leadership who warned him that he would regret it.
He said he has not.
Catie Edmondson and Nicholas Fandos contributed reporting.