Joe Iconis’s new musical celebrates women’s prison flicks and girl group harmonies. But his teen rebels could use a cause.
RED BANK, N.J. — The composer and lyricist Joe Iconis roots for the underdog, the oddball. His shows like “Be More Chill” and “Broadway Bounty Hunter” turn minor characters — the teen loser, the superannuated chorus girl — into main ones, shoving outcasts into the spotlight.
So it makes sense that “Love in Hate Nation,” Iconis’s peppy, pally, perfunctory new musical, set at a girl’s reformatory in the early 1960s and directed by John Simpkins, embraces as many misfits as the Two River Theater stage will hold. That’s about seven, give or take.
Iconis styles himself as a musical-theater renegade, but his pop-rock songs aren’t Broadway outliers, and building musicals around old movies, like Iconis does, isn’t an insurgent move. Which could explain why a show about delinquents and headcases feels so toe-tappable and tidy, with an anarchy that minds its manners and respects a verse-chorus-verse.
Our heroine is Susannah Son (Amina Faye, just terrific, who created the role last year at Penn State University), an aspiring songwriter from Connecticut who is also a suicide risk. After she overdoses on pills, her dad hauls her off to the National Reformatory for Girls, Nation for short, a small and underfunded juvie hall under the direction of Miss Asp (Lauren Marcus, frenetic), a warden who combines the best qualities of Nurse Ratched and Phyllis Schlafly.
 Mostly true.  Life in Nation is predictably a hard-knock one, with a lot more cigarettes and the looming threat of electroconvulsive therapy.
A song later, another inmate arrives: Sheila Nail (Kelly McIntyre), fresh out of solitary. Unapologetic, irredeemable and as tough as the name suggests, Sheila has a black leather jacket and an attitude to match. Susannah falls for her as they hide out in the john — this is Iconis’s second show to feature a heartfelt ballad in a bathroom. With a bop-she-bop and a sha-la-la, the girls scheme to bring down Nation.
Iconis doesn’t apologize for his enthusiasm for pop culture and pastiche. His musicals borrow, liberally and with love, from B-movies and Top-40 radio. “Love in Hate Nation” pirates its plot from women’s prison flicks — with a hefty dollop of “Annie” and “Hairspray” — and its sound from ’60s girl groups, plus a riff lifted from Joan Jett. If the drum pattern that opens “Be My Baby” thrills your soul (and if it doesn’t, do you even have a soul?), this is possibly the show for you. But if you need your characters to have appreciable depth or want problems of race and sex to feel considered or dare to hope that a musical inspired by shocksploitation might read as more dangerous than “The Prom,” possibly this isn’t.
In “Love in Hate Nation,” the staging is fleet and the performances frisky, the choreography by Mayte Natalio eager, if unambitious. The show doesn’t suffer the protagonist problem of “Be More Chill”; that show’s teen hero was an underdog who probably deserved to stay down. Susannah, as played by the sweet and splendid Faye, with her wide-open face and clarion, cane-sugar voice, is immediately lovable. The trouble is, she’s not much more than that.
Other characters keep telling us that she’s a weirdo, and she tells us the same thing. But except for an occasional stutter and a ukulele as her instrument of choice, she’s very much an everygirl. She is the black child of white adoptive parents, which she knows, and a lesbian, which she quickly discovers, but except for a throwaway lyric (“I’m too black to be indifferent”), the musical never reckons with that experience of difference or with her attempted suicide. The psychology, like the delinquents, is juvenile.
Iconis’s shows assume that not fitting in is a universal phenomenon, but I’d argue there are many ways to be excluded, dismissed or misconstrued, and that Susannah’s feelings and desires are particular, not generic. Maybe it’s a lot to expect complexity from a musical that can likely cite “Caged Heat” among its influences, but I do. And I wish Susannah’s romance with Sheila and the girls’ revolution (against sexism, racism, conformity, electroshock, etc.) felt more definite, too.
“Love in Hate Nation” will find its fans. (At intermission in the ladies’ room, I heard two women mangling a song they had learned online.) It has flashy roles for young women and catchy choruses. If the lyrics are predictable, the book is more idiosyncratic. Here’s Ya-Ya: “I can make Molotov cocktails with a can of hair spray, a Charleston Chew, and a cigarette. And I have all of those things!” But if you are going to give us a stage full of rebels, go ahead and give us a cause.
Through Dec. 1 at Two River Theater, Red Bank, N.J.; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , tworivertheater.org. Running time: 2 hours 30 minutes.