Byron Allen, an African-American entrepreneur, says the cable giant discriminated against his company, Entertainment Studios Networks.
WASHINGTON — A cautious Supreme Court on Wednesday seemed to be looking for a narrow way to rule in a racial discrimination case against Comcast, the nation’s largest cable company, by a black entrepreneur who contends his race played a role in the company’s decision not to carry programming from his network.
Civil rights groups have said they feared the court might use the case by Byron Allen and his company, Entertainment Studios Networks, to limit the reach of anti-discrimination laws, but there was little evidence at Wednesday’s argument that the justices were inclined to make a sweeping ruling.
In its lawsuit, Entertainment Studios said Comcast had expressed interest in its programming but never closed a deal, reversed its position on what Entertainment Studios needed to do to secure carriage, carried every network that its main competitors did except Entertainment Studios and offered space to “lesser known, white-owned” networks even as it said it lacked capacity to carry Entertainment Studios.
In a Supreme Court brief, Comcast said its decision not to make a deal with Mr. Allen’s company was prompted by ordinary business calculations, “including bandwidth constraints, a preference for sports and news programming” and insufficient demand for Entertainment Studios’s offerings.
In a statement on Wednesday, a Comcast spokeswoman said Entertainment Studios was one of 16 networks whose offerings were carried by Comcast’s main competitors but not by Comcast.
Several justices indicated that they were prepared to rule only on what plaintiffs were required to say at the outset of lawsuits. The question of what plaintiffs had to prove at trial, after the parties had exchanged information, was a separate one, several justices said.
That left open the possibility that plaintiffs may be required to assert only that race was a motivating factor when they file suit but have to prove it was a determinative factor at trial.
A unanimous three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, ruled last year that Mr. Allen’s accusations were serious enough to avoid dismissal at an early stage of the litigation.
“That seems wrong, right?” Justice Kagan asked Erwin Chemerinsky, a lawyer for Entertainment Studios. Mr. Chemerinsky did not give a direct answer.
Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh suggested that the Supreme Court could return the case to the Ninth Circuit for another look.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor said it would be unfair and impractical to require plaintiffs to give a detailed account of every possible reason for a defendant’s decision just as a lawsuit is getting underway.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg was missing from the bench on Wednesday. Chief Justice Roberts said she was “indisposed due to illness” and would participate in the case, Comcast Corporation v. National Association of African American-Owned Media, No. 18-1171, by reading the briefs and a transcript of the argument. A court spokeswoman said Justice Ginsburg had a stomach bug.
Until this year, Justice Ginsburg had not missed a Supreme Court argument because of illness. In January, though, she was absent from the bench for two weeks after surgery for lung cancer.