Mr. Bloomberg brings a huge personal fortune and moderate views to an increasingly fluid race, but issues like criminal justice and his late start loom as vulnerabilities.
Mr. Bloomberg’s successor in City Hall, Mayor Bill de Blasio, predicted on Sunday that Mr. Bloomberg would have a “glass jaw” in the Democratic race once his record drew sustained scrutiny. Much of Mr. Bloomberg’s background would be “anathema to the Democratic Party electorate,” Mr. de Blasio said, pointing to Mr. Bloomberg’s opposition to a paid sick-leave law and the former administration’s relationship with the real estate industry.
“This is stuff that if it all gets laid out — and it will — people are going to say this is not even a Democrat, let alone a Democrat they can support,” said Mr. de Blasio, who ran in the primary himself for several months this year.
Mr. Bloomberg, who was elected mayor in 2001 as a Republican, repeatedly explored running for president as an independent candidate but eventually concluded that a candidate from outside the two-party system could not win. After registering as an independent in 2007, during his second term as mayor, Mr. Bloomberg again embraced the G.O.P. in 2009 when he persuaded the New York City Council to give him an exception to the city’s term-limits law and allow him to seek a third term, which expired in 2013.
Mr. Trump’s rise to power, however, helped push Mr. Bloomberg fully into the Democratic fold. Mr. Bloomberg spoke at the Democratic convention in 2016 to endorse Hillary Clinton, then formally registered as a Democrat during the 2018 midterm elections and spent more than $100 million that year to help Democrats take control of the House of Representatives.
Although Mr. Bloomberg ruled out challenging Mr. Trump last winter, in recent months he began to reconsider as Mr. Biden struggled to take control of the Democratic primary.
At several points this year Mr. Bloomberg voiced public criticism of some of the most progressive candidates’ policies, like proposals by Ms. Warren and Mr. Sanders to impose a new tax on the country’s largest private fortunes. On Saturday, Ms. Warren pointed to Mr. Bloomberg’s television advertising as proof of the need for a wealth tax.
Since signaling his revived interest in the presidential race, Mr. Bloomberg has made few public appearances, including a brief trip to Little Rock, Ark., in early November to file paperwork to appear on the primary ballot there. Advisers say he is likely to make a campaign trip of some kind before Thanksgiving, but no firm plans have been set.
At 77, Mr. Bloomberg is one of the oldest candidates in the race, and like Mr. Biden and Mr. Sanders he would become the oldest person ever to assume the presidency if elected. Mr. Bloomberg is also, with Mr. Sanders, one of two major candidates for the nomination who are Jewish, and either would be the first Jewish president if elected.
Should Mr. Bloomberg become the Democratic nominee, it would set up a general election between two party-switching moguls from New York City, though Mr. Bloomberg’s fortune is larger than Mr. Trump’s many times over.
Reid J. Epstein and Shane Goldmacher contributed reporting.