As Marie Yovanovitch testified, President Trump tweeted insults at her, drawing charges of witness intimidation.
WASHINGTON — The former United States ambassador to Ukraine told the House impeachment inquiry on Friday that she felt threatened by President Trump and “shocked, appalled, devastated” that he vilified her in a call with another foreign leader, as Mr. Trump attacked her in real time on Twitter, drawing a stern warning about witness intimidation from Democrats.
Shortly after Ms. Yovanovitch finished speaking, another witness revealed a potentially crucial episode in the impeachment inquiry. An official from the United States Embassy in Kiev told investigators in a private interview that he overheard a call in July between Mr. Trump and Gordon D. Sondland, a Trump ally and the ambassador to the European Union, in which the president loudly asked about “investigations” he sought from Ukraine, according to three people familiar with the closed-door session.
The official, David Holmes — who worked for Ms. Yovanovitch in Kiev — overheard Mr. Sondland telling Mr. Trump that President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine “loves your ass,” and would conduct the investigations and do “anything you ask him to,” according to two of the people, all of whom spoke on the condition of anonymity because they did not have authorization to describe the testimony. Mr. Holmes testified that Mr. Sondland told him afterward that the president cared more about the investigations, which affected him personally, than he did about Ukraine.
Ms. Yovanovitch’s public testimony, which played out over more than five hours in a packed and hushed House Ways and Means Committee Room, was an indictment of foreign policy in the Trump era, outlining the harm to American diplomacy and national security by a president who embraced false claims to target his own officials representing the United States overseas.
Representative Adam B. Schiff, Democrat of California and the chairman of the Intelligence Committee, interrupted his counsel’s questioning to read the president’s words aloud to Ms. Yovanovitch and to ask for her reaction. There were audible gasps in the room as he did so.
“It’s very intimidating,” she replied, taken aback.
Democrats said Mr. Trump’s comments were clear attempts by the president to intimidate a crucial witness in the impeachment inquiry and do the same to others who might yet come forward. They argued that the comments could constitute grounds for an article of impeachment against Mr. Trump.
At the White House, Mr. Trump angrily denied the charge.
“I want freedom of speech,” he told reporters, lashing out at Democrats for conducting what he called an unfair impeachment process.
Determined to avoid looking as if they were bullying Ms. Yovanovitch, Republicans gave the lone Republican woman on the committee, Representative Elise Stefanik of New York, a prominent role in questioning her. Unlike the president, they refrained from attacking Ms. Yovanovitch, even as they dismissed her as irrelevant to the allegations at the heart of the impeachment inquiry.
Representative Devin Nunes of California, the ranking Republican on the committee, called her removal an “employment disagreement.” Other Republicans argued that her removal did not change American policy, that her career was not permanently damaged and that the president had well-founded reasons to be concerned about corruption in Ukraine.
Still, the session was tense at times, as Republicans — who have for weeks accused Mr. Schiff of running roughshod over them — made parliamentary points that the chairman, banging his gavel, repeatedly ruled out of order. And Ms. Yovanovitch, soft-spoken and calm, showed little hesitation in challenging her Republican interrogators.
“I do wonder why it was necessary to smear my reputation,” she said at one point, addressing Representative Brad Wenstrup, Republican of Ohio, noting that Mr. Trump had the authority to remove her at will.
Ms. Yovanovitch’s testimony did not go precisely to the heart of the Democrats’ case against Mr. Trump; she had left Ukraine by the time Mr. Trump asked Mr. Zelensky in a phone call on July 25 to “do us a favor” and look into Mr. Biden and his son Hunter Biden. But Democrats argued that there was a direct line between Ms. Yovanovitch’s ouster and Mr. Trump’s Ukraine pressure campaign.
Mr. Trump, they noted, brought up Ms. Yovanovitch himself during the call — shortly after he praised a corrupt Ukrainian prosecutor who had balked at her efforts to root out corruption, and shortly before he raised the Bidens. The president told Mr. Zelensky that she was “bad news,” and said that she was going to “go through some things,” a comment that Ms. Yovanovitch told the committee had taken her breath away when she read a reconstructed transcript of the call.
“It sounded like a threat,” Ms. Yovanovitch added.
Ms. Yovanovitch was recalled from Ukraine abruptly in May. She told lawmakers that she learned she was being pulled back two months earlier than planned from the deputy secretary of state John J. Sullivan, who called her while she was hosting an “International Women of Courage” event honoring a Ukrainian anticorruption activist who died after having acid thrown at her.
“That was a terrible thing to hear,” she added.
In an impassioned defense of the State Department and the career Foreign Service officers who work — and sometimes give their lives — to advance the interests of the United States, Ms. Yovanovitch recounted the months that preceded her ouster. During that time, she became the target of a smear campaign led by Mr. Giuliani, two of his associates — Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman, who have since been indicted on a scheme to violate campaign finance laws — and the right-wing news media.
She spoke of her astonishment at how the men, working with a corrupt Ukrainian prosecutor who opposed her efforts to promote the rule of law in the country, were ultimately able to turn Mr. Trump against her.
And when her State Department colleagues pressed for Secretary of State Mike Pompeo to issue a statement defending her, she testified, they were rebuffed because of “concerns on the seventh floor” — the floor where Mr. Pompeo has his suite of offices — that it could be undermined by Mr. Trump in a tweet.
But Ms. Yovanovitch cast her own personal ordeal as far less important than the sweeping implications Mr. Trump’s actions had for the United States’ national security and the delicate balance of geopolitical forces operating in and around Ukraine, a struggling democracy and “battleground for great power competition” ever since the Russians invaded five years ago.
With the right support from the United States, Ms. Yovanovitch testified, Ukraine “could move out of Russia’s orbit.” But she said it was even more critical that Ukraine root out the lasting Soviet legacy of corruption, which undercuts the country’s reliability as a strategic and trading partner of the United States — and only strengthens the hand of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.
Known as Masha to her friends, Ms. Yovanovitch, a Canadian immigrant whose parents fled the Soviet Union and Nazis, was known as a vigorous fighter against corruption in Ukraine. She has become a hero to her colleagues in the diplomatic corps, and the hashtag #GoMasha has sprung up on Twitter.
Republicans did not try to undercut her credibility, but they did try to prove an unsubstantiated theory that Ukrainian officials conspired with Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign to interfere in the election at Mr. Trump’s expense.
Ms. Yovanovitch pushed back on the assertion.
Peter Baker and Nicholas Fandos contributed reporting.