A select group of 11 executives and activists struggled to tackle the role of the corporate world in combating one of the most polarizing issues in the United States today: guns.
They didn’t solve the problem. No one has yet. Which is why they were there.
At the head of the table sat two fathers of students who died in the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School massacre in Parkland, Fla., on Feb. 14, 2018. At one corner next to them sat two staunch defenders of the Second Amendment who were worried about having to relinquish their firearms.
Understandably, the two parties clashed. Tensions sizzled and tempers briefly blew. In the end, they committed to continuing the urgent conversation.
“If you, as businesspeople, don’t think as we go forward that you won’t find yourself having personal connections to gun violence, you’re wrong,” said Fred Guttenberg, the father of 14-year-old Jaime Guttenberg, who died in Parkland.
Momentum to help find a solution has been growing in the corporate world since 17 people were killed in Parkland. Companies like Dick’s Sporting Goods stopped selling assault rifles, while Walmart also tightened their buying policies.
Prompted by the mass shootings this summer in El Paso and in Dayton, Ohio, 145 chief executives, including those from Levi Strauss, Twitter and Uber, wrote to the Senate urging stricter background checks and laws to prevent people who pose a threat from buying guns. The number of signatures continues to grow.
A number of his employees, he said, had children at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School.
But what of Citigroup, which does not underwrite gun manufacturers like other global banks do, and which has no obvious connection to the gun violence epidemic? The banking company, according to Edward Skyler, the vice president of global public affairs, has employees in Florida and in Las Vegas who were affected by mass shootings there. They asked Citigroup to take a stand.
A little more than a month after the shooting in Parkland, Citigroup said it would require retail clients not to sell firearms to customers who had not passed a background check or who were under 21. It also barred the sale of bump stocks and high-capacity magazines.
That’s not at all how the defenders of gun owners’ rights in the room saw it. Dianna Muller, a former police officer from Tulsa, Okla., now runs the DC Project, which appeals to state legislators to protect the rights of legal gun owners.
These entrenched positions amount to a “zero-sum game,” said David Gelles, a reporter from The New York Times who was moderating the discussion.
“It’s like a Knicks game,” said Erica Ford, a Queens native, lightening the mood. Ms. Ford founded LIFE Camp in Jamaica, Queens, a community organization focusing on gun violence prevention and intervention.
As the only black woman in the group, she pleaded for the corporations not to ignore communities of color.
The Rev. Jeffrey L. Brown founded a national faith and community-based organization in Boston, Rebuilding Every Community Around Peace, that works to reduce gang violence.
He said company leaders needed first to understand the systemic problems in the inner city — poverty, housing and failures of education — that have led to gun violence. And they need to “embrace” just how emotional an issue this is.
According to Kathryn Yontef, the director of corporate initiatives for Everytown for Gun Safety, the issue is personal: 58 percent of people in the United States say they or somebody they love has been affected by gun violence. Every day, 100 people in this country are killed by guns.
She said corporations needed to take a stand, in the least by offering employee assistance.
But Chris Cheng, a former Google employee who won the 2011 “Top Shot” competition for the History Channel, said that it was not appropriate for businesses to set gun policy. He said he did not think that individual businesses should declare open-carry, conceal-carry or gun-free zones because it would be a confusing “patchwork” for gun owners. He also did not want companies imposing morality on his consumer habits.
The tension escalated. Mr. Cheng, who is gay, said he wanted to be able to defend himself as a member of a group often targeted by hate. He referenced the 2016 shooting at Pulse, a gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla., where 49 people were killed.
Mr. Guttenberg told Mr. Cheng that he had talked to Pulse survivors who told him that more guns in an already chaotic situation — heavy smoke and panicked club-goers — would have led to more deaths.
“How do you know that?” Ms. Muller, the gun rights activist, said in a challenge to Mr. Guttenberg.
“I don’t, the same way you don’t know that having a gun would have saved lives,” Mr. Guttenberg responded tersely.
Anna Walker, the vice president of public affairs for Levi Strauss, disagreed.
“It’s not anti-gun organizations, it’s organizations working in communities on safety and reducing violence,” she said. In 2018, Levi Strauss committed $1 million to support such organizations.
More than halfway through the session, Tim Armstrong — a former chief executive of AOL and the founder and chief executive of the dtx company, directly connecting consumers and companies — brought the conversation to a consensus.
All parties agreed with him that more data on gun violence and ownership was necessary.
But then Mr. Armstrong explained the reason for the lack of government data: a little-known bill in 1996 — the Dickey Amendment. Jay Dickey, a Republican congressman from Arkansas, had effectively blocked $2.6 million toward the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to research gun violence as a public health threat. Then Congress added a provision in the bill that prevented any funds for the C.D.C. that would promote or advocate gun control.
His new company recently ran a survey as a pilot program that drew from 2,000 respondents in Jacksonville, Fla., and San Francisco, asking people on billboards, Reddit and other online platforms to answer three questions. The results: 48 percent said they wanted to increase gun regulations; 30 percent wanted to protect gun owners’ rights; 22 percent wanted to ban guns altogether.
The issue of gun control is growing only more pervasive because one activist group has been relentless.
