Once Labourites practically by birth, they are feeling an anti-Semitic chill, leaving many stuck with a choice among lesser evils in the election.
And on the eve of a recent Shabbat at Alyth, another north London congregation, a rabbi closed his sermon by marveling at how Jews, once just a small constituency, had suddenly become “a talking point” in this race.
As Britain prepares for its most seismic election in decades, one that will decide its relationship to Europe and place in the world, few voters face such an anguished choice as the country’s 300,000 Jews. With anti-Semitism surging in Europe and the United States, the debate over how to vote in Britain’s election has already rattled rabbinical conventions, strained friendships and started a war of letters in the left-wing press, as many Jews wrestle with nerve-racking options.
Jews overwhelmingly opposed Brexit, the main plank of Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s campaign, dreading an emboldened far right and the splintering of a European project at the root of post-World War II peace.
But they also flinch at handing power to Mr. Corbyn, seen by many as the only person who can stop Brexit, pained as they are by an avalanche of anti-Semitism accusations against the party.
The quandary has consequences far beyond the .5 percent of Britons who are Jewish. Labour’s hopes of unseating Mr. Johnson hang on its appeal as the gentler and more upstanding of Britain’s main parties, a case that Mr. Corbyn made to great effect in the 2017 election and that should have been bolstered by Mr. Johnson’s hardball tactics as prime minister.
But the anti-Semitism scandal is “gravely damaging Labour’s reputation as the nice party,” said Glen O’Hara, a historian at Oxford Brookes University. And it has frustrated voters already dubious of Mr. Corbyn’s anti-Brexit bona fides.
Rabbis used to joke that when young Jews became a bar or bat mitzvah, tradition held that they be given lifelong membership in the Labour Party. But no longer. Many Jews now feel sharply at odds with Labour, and politically homeless in Britain.
A number of Labour lawmakers have quit the party over the issue since February. The Jewish Labour Movement, a 100-year-old socialist group, decided not to campaign nationally for Labour for the first time in its history. And the Jewish Chronicle, Britain’s most influential Jewish newspaper, ran a front-page editorial beseeching non-Jews to heed the paper’s fears of a Corbyn government.
The dread felt by British Jews reflects wider alarm over a rise in anti-Semitism on the hard left and the hard right in Europe and the United States. Britain’s Conservative Party, pulling a page from Republicans in the United States, has tried to capitalize, courting Jews angered by the anti-Semitism scandal within Labour.
But some British Jews are wary of seeing the cause weaponized in the heat of an election. Distrustful of Mr. Johnson’s own record of racist and Islamophobic remarks, and fearful of far-right violence against Jews in the United States, they are trying to persuade people to consider how a Johnson government could hurt not only Jews but other vulnerable groups.
Labour said in a statement that it was “taking robust action to root out anti-Semitism” in the party.
“Jeremy Corbyn is a lifelong campaigner against anti-Semitism and other forms of racism, hatred and bigotry,” a party spokeswoman said.
But British Jews, some of whom were already drifting rightward in recent decades, have accelerated their retreat from Labour since Mr. Corbyn became leader in 2015.
An ardent anticapitalist and anti-imperialist, Mr. Corbyn once defended a mural featuring grotesque caricatures of hooknosed Jewish bankers. He accused longtime Britons who were Zionists of failing to “understand English irony.” And several whistle-blowers have accused Corbyn allies of interfering in the party’s anti-Semitism complaints process.
Labour is now under investigation by Britain’s Equalities and Human Rights Commission.
Scholars say certain strains of anticapitalism have historically risked casting Jews as a class of rich conspirators oppressing working people. Some of Mr. Corbyn’s supporters also stridently oppose Israel, occasionally resorting to anti-Semitic tropes to make their points.
But many others chafe at Labour’s attempts to deflect criticism, and say arguing that the stakes are too high to send the party a message on anti-Semitism belittles a core moral obligation.
The issue is particularly vexing for younger voters, who make up Mr. Corbyn’s core vote.
The exodus of Labour lawmakers this year has extinguished some Jews’ hope that the party could change. But with political allegiances shifting on all sides, Labour stands a chance of cobbling together a minority government, a prospect that strikes fear in Jews worried about Corbyn allies downplaying, for instance, anti-Jewish hate crimes.
Online and over Shabbat dinners, arguments about the election have grown bitter. Those grudgingly planning to vote for Labour have been called traitors to the community and self-hating Jews. Anti-Corbyn die-hards, on the other hand, have been branded the handmaidens of a hard Brexit.
The conundrum facing British Jews owes in large part to the country’s winner-take-all voting system, which renders many votes for smaller parties useless.
In a heavily Jewish north London seat, though, the Liberal Democrats, a centrist anti-Brexit party, have stormed into the lead in some polls by running Luciana Berger, a Jewish, ex-Labour lawmaker who has faced a raft of anti-Semitic abuse.
The election has even thrown rabbinical conventions into turmoil.
Rabbi Jonathan Romain, for one, took the extraordinary step recently of telling his congregants to vote for whichever party would keep Labour out of power, shattering a long-held tradition in British synagogues that rabbis stay strictly out of party politics.
But other rabbis disagree, making the case that being Jewish is more about showing solidarity with all marginalized people than protecting Jews. “If we turn away from these values, turn inward, we will betray our purpose and our destiny,” Howard Cooper, a rabbi in north London, said in his Rosh Hashana sermon.
In the back of some Jews’ minds is another dread: that if Labour loses the election, strengthening the right’s grip on power and ushering in a hard Brexit, an aggrieved pro-Corbyn left will unjustly turn on Jews for raising a ruckus over anti-Semitism.
