There were severe public transit disruptions a day after demonstrators staged a fiery standoff against the police.
HONG KONG — Two Hong Kong university campuses cut their semesters short on Wednesday because of widening unrest, as residents navigated severe transit disruptions and office workers brawled with the police in the heart of the financial district.
This week’s disruptions are notable because they have strained the city’s infrastructure for three straight workdays, forcing commuters to choose whether to venture outside and risk being caught up in clashes and tear gas. The protests started in June over an extradition bill that has since been withdrawn, and have morphed into broader demands for democracy and police accountability.
Schools and universities have become flash points. A day after young demonstrators staged a fiery standoff against the police on the fringes of a university campus, classes were called off there on Wednesday for the remainder of the fall semester.
Here’s the latest on the Hong Kong protests.
Protesters have barricaded campus entrances.
Student demonstrators with umbrellas, masks, bricks and shields geared up on Wednesday at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, a campus that has become a focal point of the confrontation between protesters and the police.
CUHK also became one of at least two Hong Kong universities to announce that on-campus classes would be canceled for the remainder of the fall semester. The other, Hong Kong Baptist University, said in an email to students and staff that on-campus classes would be postponed or conducted online.
At the fringes of the CUHK campus on Tuesday night, police officers in riot gear on the fringes fired hundreds of rounds of tear gas at demonstrators who set a giant blaze and threw gasoline bombs. The clash lasted for hours and left dozens injured.
Student activists at CUHK and other universities say they are defending their campuses from police intrusion. The police assert that they have to stop demonstrators from blocking roads, throwing bricks or trying to disrupt rail services.
John Tse, a top police official, told reporters on Wednesday that the police force believed CUHK was being used as a “factory” to manufacture gasoline bombs, bows and arrows, and other rudimentary weapons for use against officers.
“This necessitates police response and the use of force, including rubber bullets, bean bag rounds and tear gas for dispersal,” he said.
Since the protests began, the movement has been driven in large part by high school and university-age students. But until recently, campuses were a relative safe zone from violent clashes.
The government drew criticism for saying children could still go to school.
The Education Bureau said on Wednesday morning that it was up to parents whether their children attended school, and that schools should keep their campuses open regardless. The statement immediately prompted criticism from unions on opposite sides of the city’s political spectrum.
The bureau later said that all classes at Hong Kong kindergartens, primary and secondary schools would be suspended on Thursday.
Clashes erupted in the financial district.
Large groups of riot police officers disrupted a rally in the city’s financial district around lunchtime on Wednesday, making multiple arrests and beating protesters with batons.
Many of the protesters were there to support the students who had been battling the police at the Chinese University of Hong Kong on Tuesday. Office workers in suits and ties formed a human supply chain to move water and umbrellas to front-line protesters.
When the police swooped in and started beating protesters, the crowd fought back, and a brawl erupted outside a luxury mall that houses an Apple store.
By early afternoon, the streets around the mall had the feel of a militarized zone, and were deserted except for a handful of officers, workers and tourists taking pictures. After the police retreated, protesters spent much of the afternoon sprinkling the financial district with stone-and-bamboo barricades.
The police began clearing those barricades in the evening, crushing some with an armored vehicle. But in other parts of town, protesters set fires, built more barricades and clashed with officers into the night.
The most likely scenario now is that the Hong Kong government will more broadly invoke the city’s emergency regulations ordinance, said Lau Siu-kai, vice chairman of the Chinese Association of Hong Kong and Macau Studies, a semiofficial advisory body set up by Beijing.
The Hong Kong government invoked the colonial-era ordinance last month to ban face masks at public gatherings. In an interview on Wednesday, Mr. Lau said it might be used again to enact a curfew, although the question of how the police would enforce it remained unclear.
Mainland students are leaving Hong Kong.
The Hong Kong police said on Wednesday that some of the city’s marine police officers had been deployed to help evacuate mainland Chinese students who attend CUHK.
China’s Communist Youth League, the youth division of the ruling Communist Party, offered the students seven days of free accommodation at its lodgings in Shenzhen, a mainland Chinese city that lies just over the border from Hong Kong.
Young protesters’ grievances run deep.
The police force said it had arrested 142 people across Hong Kong on Tuesday, and that officers fired 1,567 rounds of tear gas, 1,312 rubber bullets and 380 bean bag rounds.
Tensions had been building after the death last week of a student who fell from a parking garage amid demonstrations. Many in the protest movement now see the student, Chow Tsz-lok, as a martyr.
Hong Kong’s youth are angry over what they see as a steady erosion of civil liberties under Chinese rule as well as the city’s sky-high cost of living. They also fear that their city’s unique culture and identity will be gradually subsumed by growing mainland Chinese influence.
The morning commute was disrupted, again.
There were widespread transit disruptions across the Asian financial center Wednesday morning, marking the third straight day that protesters had impeded some of the city’s essential infrastructure.
Tiffany May, Keith Bradsher, Ezra Cheung, Austin Ramzy, Alexandra Stevenson contributed reporting from Hong Kong, and Chris Buckley from Beijing.