Colombia, Rwanda and Croatia were seen as dangerous and conflict-ridden. Now they top travel bucket lists. How other countries can follow their lead, in seven steps.
Five years before that, a 1994 Washington Post article grappled with the question of whether people would want to visit war-torn Croatia. “Only the more intrepid will consider a trip,” the article stated.
“Throw in the fact that there’s only been one major Hollywood movie about Rwanda, which fuels the negative perception of this small African country that’s kind of unknown already, so even if you know a little about Rwanda it’s probably in the prism of ‘Hotel Rwanda,’” Mr. Ntayombya said.
“The way we’ve tackled that is not by running away from our past, but rather by telling the world that Rwanda is not just one thing, not one event, not one series of events — it’s a story of the depths of humanity, if people work together and are disciplined,” Mr. Ntayombya said.
Although Colombia’s conflict was vastly different from Rwanda’s, the idea that drugs were everywhere and that a Communist insurgency also stoked violence have been fueled by popular shows like Netflix’s “Narcos” and the Colombian telenovela “Pablo Escobar, The Drug Lord.” Much like in Rwanda, those charged with promoting the country could not ignore the past.
“We didn’t want to hide away from the fact that, yes, there was violence in the country and a guy like Pablo Escobar is associated with the country,” said Julian Guerrero, vice minister of tourism for Colombia. Until this summer, Mr. Guerrero was vice president of ProColombia, a government agency in charge of promoting Colombian exports, international tourism and foreign investment to Colombia.
Colombia began its rebranding efforts in 2008 with a series of videos that showcased the country’s beaches, jungles, cities and mountains. Each video included the phrase “el riesgo es que te quieras quedar” — “the risk is that you’ll want to stay” — a play on the country’s image as a haven of drugs and violence.
“We’re not hiding away from the fact that Colombia has problems, but we want to tell the good news, too,” Mr. Guerrero said.
The answer: birds. The country is home to nearly 2,000 bird species, the most of any country in the world. In a 2018 marketing campaign that included sponsored press trips to Colombia, journalists last year were not only shown the diverse types of birds in the country, but ways for travelers to connect with nature. The campaign took some time to gain traction, but soon flattering articles with headlines like “No longer ruled by drug cartels, the wild West of Colombia is a bird-watching paradise reborn” and “Can bird watching help save Colombia’s forests?” began popping up.
“Most people know his name, most people know his books and he is, in a way, a celebrity,” said Mr. Guerrero. The most recent campaign, called “Colombia, feel the rhythm,” is based on the idea that Colombia is home to 1,000 rhythms.
Last year, players for Arsenal, the English Premier League soccer team, began taking to the field in uniforms that said “Visit Rwanda” on the T-shirt sleeves. As part of the $39 million marketing campaign, Arsenal players will visit Rwanda and coach at soccer camps. The Rwandan government received backlash from people questioning the government’s financial priorities.
When HBO began filming “Game of Thrones” in Dubrovnik in southern Croatia, most Americans probably couldn’t pick out the sites that later became known as King’s Landing. But eight seasons and a contentious series finale later, the show’s fans are a “significant” part of the country’s tourism market, Mr. Stanicic said.
