The founder of Carolines on Broadway and the New York Comedy Festival is always up for a laugh (and some unfussy coffee).
In 1982, Caroline Hirsch opened Carolines on Broadway, a comedy club where the likes of Robin Williams, Jerry Seinfeld, Sandra Bernhard and Chris Rock honed their stand-up skills.
Although the club still nurtures young talent — and draws headliners like Ronny Chieng and Tiffany Haddish — Ms. Hirsch has branched out. In 2004 she started producing the New York Comedy Festival. Now in its 16th year, it will take place from Nov. 4 to Nov. 10 and will include appearances by more than 200 late-night hosts, podcasters and comedians, including Stephen Colbert, Nicole Byer and Trevor Noah.
Ms. Hirsch, who lives with her partner, Andrew Fox, and their bearded collies, Stella McCartney Fox and Sybil Crawley Fox, splits her time between Midtown Manhattan and Water Mill, N.Y.
DREAM COME TRUE I go to bed at night thinking about coffee. In the morning, that’s the first thing I do. I kiss the dogs and have coffee. A very unfussy coffee, like Maxwell House. Then I hang around the kitchen and read Sunday Styles and The New York Post, then other sections of The Times.
REPS During the week I have a trainer — that’s really important to do — but on the weekends I’m on my own. So I go to the gym in our building and do weight training.  After that it’s off to the dog park, which is just across the street.  It’s boring, yes, but watching them puts a smile on your face. Their personalities are so different: Sybil minds her own business, but Stella always wants to be in your face.
BELLINI-FREE BRUNCH Possibly, I’ll go out to brunch at the Smith. The owner is a friend of mine, and there’s a lot of young people there. It’s a happening kind of place. I’ll have the eggs Benedict and coffee. We go out so much at night that I like to keep Sunday alcohol-free.
SCOUTING Back at home, I’ll go on the computer and see if there’s anything I’m supposed to watch workwise. Right now Caroline’s is doing the New York’s Funniest competition, so I need to see the highlights. It’s standup routines. It’s semi-work but it’s fun work. I get to laugh. And it’s a great competition. Michelle Wolf came out of that competition. Ricky Velez was on it. He’s great. You will start to see a lot more of him.
COMEDY BOOM Overall, there’s much more interest in comedy today than there was years ago. I was just reading about Eddie Murphy, and he was talking about how, when he started, there were maybe 26 headliners. Now there are 200 headliners. And of course there are many more women. Netflix and YouTube have helped. They make people want to go out and see the comedian. An analogy is a hit album: You want to go out and see the band.
NICE THINGS I take a walk over to the club, just to see what’s happening or to get an update on what happened Saturday night. When I do that I’ll go into Saks on my way and see what I want or don’t want on the second or third floor. I wear a lot of Dolce & Gabbana and Prada. I’ll also go into Christie’s, the auction house, because they have the most fabulous art. Not that you’re buying anything, but if you stop there you can see museum-quality sculpture and painting. I like nice things.
GOOD TIMES WITH ANTHONY I spend Sunday nights at home. I make dinner, usually either pasta with meatballs or eggplant parmigiana. I could eat Italian food every night of the week. My brother Anthony comes over and has dinner with us. He’s developmentally disabled, and he lives near me, and I’m kind of his caretaker. He’ll walk over, and we’ll have dinner, and then what he likes to do is watch a lot of TV. He likes “The Jeffersons” and “Good Times,” and you can see all the reruns of those old shows now on MeTV. I have to tell you: “The Jeffersons” holds up so well. Sherman Hemsley was hilarious.
SUNDAY SPORTS DIN It’s football season, and I don’t have the patience to watch any of that. So on Sunday nights I’ll watch one TV and Andrew will watch sports on a different TV, maybe in the bedroom. You know that din you hear with football games? It so reminds me of when I was younger and it was Sunday night and you had to do your homework. He can’t be too loud with his sports while I’m watching what I call my femme shows. Right now I’m in the middle of watching “Succession” and “The Affair.” Then I’ll put on the local news. I’m out by 11 or 11:30.