After all, it celebrates the better angels of our nature.
So the imaginary “war on Christmas” wasn’t enough. Donald Trump and Fox News are now accusing progressives of waging a war on Thanksgiving, too, based on, well, nothing. But do Trump and his band of bigots even understand what Thanksgiving is about? If they did, they would hate this most American of holidays.
Finally, Thanksgiving is thoroughly nondenominational. Lincoln’s proclamation gave thanks to Almighty God, but was vague about the Almighty’s nature. There’s nothing about the holiday that reserves it for believers in any particular religion, or in fact any formal religion at all, and it’s open to all cultures. The Times recently reported on the growing popularity of Thanksgiving turkey prepared in the style of Chinese roast duck; nothing could be truer to the holiday’s spirit.
True, all too often we pay only lip service to these values; there have been many dark chapters in our nation’s history. But we’ve always managed to emerge from the darkness. Sometimes that emergence took generations; the Jim Crow era in the South lasted close to a century, and isn’t entirely gone even now. Still, time and again, from the abolitionists to the civil rights movement, from women’s suffrage to L.G.B.T.Q. rights, America’s ideals have eventually prevailed, and we have returned to the nation’s core values.
We are now living through another of those dark chapters. Trump and company are, without question, white nationalists whose values are far closer to those of European blood-and-soil authoritarians than they are to the American tradition. And the entire Republican Party appears ready to back Trump no matter how completely he betrays not just American values, but American interests.
Furthermore, there’s no guarantee that we will emerge from this dark chapter as the nation we used to be. It’s true that Trump is an unusually unpopular president; but his approval rating, at around 40 percent or a bit more, is if anything higher than the approval Viktor Orban commanded as he dismantled Hungary’s democracy. And Trump, like European white nationalists, is doing his best to remove all the guardrails that were supposed to limit abuse of power, while delegitimizing all opposition.
But while an alarming number of Americans seem O.K. with this authoritarian program and embrace of intolerance, the rest of the nation seems reassuringly committed to an open society.
