One year into the job, Max Hollein shows that art shouldn’t be seen solely through a Western lens.
When the curator Denise Murrell was looking for a museum a few years back to help her develop an exhibition about black models who influenced art history, she struck out at one institution after another. The Metropolitan Museum of Art, she recalled, never even responded.
Dr. Murrell ultimately presented her show — “Posing Modernity: The Black Model From Manet and Matisse to Today” — at the Wallach Art Gallery at Columbia University, where it opened to rave reviews last year and was hailed for its scholarship on African influences in modern art.
This week the Metropolitan Museum of Art will announce that it is hiring Dr. Murrell, who is African-American, for the newly created full-time position of associate curator for 19th and 20th century art. Her appointment is noteworthy, and not only because the Met has been historically lacking in curators of color. She is also one of the first hires made by the Met’s director, Max Hollein, who is now one year into his tenure — and emblematic of the multi-discipline, multiethnic direction he is steering one of the world’s largest, most entrenched museums.
Mr. Hollein’s efforts include his commission of two contemporary exhibitions by people of color that he has placed in prominent spaces. Starting Dec. 19, two monumental paintings by the Cree artist Kent Monkman, including one that reimagines the iconic 1851 oil painting “Washington Crossing the Delaware” with indigenous people steering the vessel — among them, the artist’s gender-fluid alter ego — will go on view in the Great Hall, its majestic main entry. In September, the Met opened its Fifth Avenue facade niches for the first time with a series of bronze sculptures inspired by African women, by the Kenyan-born artist Wangechi Mutu.
Such initiatives speak to Mr. Hollein’s emphasis on manifold ways of looking at art and his determination to break down boundaries between the museum’s traditionally siloed departments. As the Met prepares to celebrate its 150th anniversary next year, Mr. Hollein is expanding the definition of contemporary art to include work from all over the world, and activating public areas in the Fifth Avenue building to show it.
The hiring of Dr. Murrell, who starts in January, represents one step in that direction. She will work jointly with the Met’s modern and contemporary department, led by Sheena Wagstaff, and with the European paintings department, led by Keith Christiansen, while reporting to Andrea Bayer, the deputy director for collections and administration.
That complexity is evident in the current show, “The Last Knight: The Art, Armor, and Ambition of Maximilian I.” Previewing the loans — like multiple square sandstone reliefs —- before the exhibition opened in October, Mr. Hollein urged the curator in charge, Pierre Terjanian, to make a show about a Renaissance emperor feel modern and nuanced.
Art world denizens have been struck by how easily Mr. Hollein moves among them — down the aisles of the Frieze Art Fair on Randalls Island; shaking hands at the High Line annual gala; previewing the auctions; attending Rosa Barba’s electronic music concert at the Armory; celebrating the artist Sarah Sze at her gallery opening dinner.
Some expected the Vienna-born Mr. Hollein, 50, to be something of a Eurocentric outsider, given that he spent much of his career as director of the Schirn Kunsthalle Frankfurt, the city’s Städel Museum, and the Liebieghaus sculpture museum. But for two years, before coming to the Met, he was director and chief executive of the Fine Arts Museums in San Francisco, overseeing shows by artists like Julian Schnabel and Sarah Lucas, which connected him to this country’s white-hot world of contemporary art.
And New York represents something of a homecoming: Mr. Hollein cut his teeth at the Guggenheim, working under Thomas Krens — first as a 21-year-old intern and later as Mr. Krens’s chief of staff. So Mr. Hollein arguably fits more comfortably into the city’s art world than did his two predecessors, given that Thomas P. Campbell was a tapestry curator before becoming director and Philippe de Montebello specialized in European paintings.
To be sure, Mr. Hollein has had a learning curve since arriving at the Met. He came from smaller institutions and a European tradition of government support for museums, which requires less private fund-raising. Now he has to contend with a staff of 2,200, an annual operating budget of $320 million and 17 assertive curatorial departments.
Acknowledging “there is always the risk, and maybe the tendency, to do too much,” Mr. Hollein said he has been mindful of trying to concentrate on a few clear priorities, namely exploring different ways to tell stories — in part through commissioning works like Mr. Monkman’s. “He certainly advances an alternative narrative about the development of America,” Mr. Hollein said of the artist.
While Mr. Hollein’s beginning at the Met appears to have been relatively smooth, he has nevertheless encountered bumps along the way. The typically vigorous director was visibly depleted from an illness early in his tenure, a matter he said he preferred to keep private, since his health has improved and there was no interruption of his Met activities.
In addition, Mr. Hollein has had to adjust to sharing the helm with Daniel H. Weiss, the Met’s president and chief executive, to whom he is technically subordinate. Each has his distinct turf — Mr. Hollein oversees the artistic and programmatic side of the operation, Mr. Weiss the business and administration. But Mr. Hollein was accustomed to running his own show in his previous director positions.
Similarly, Mr. Weiss, who led the Met solo after Mr. Campbell was forced to resign amid financial mismanagement in 2017, had grown used to being the only guy in charge. It was Mr. Weiss, for example, who greenlighted the curator Carmen C. Bambach’s recent presentation of Leonardo da Vinci’s “Saint Jerome Praying in the Wilderness,” a special loan from the Vatican Museums to commemorate the 500th anniversary of the artist’s death.
But both said they valued the partnership. “The challenge is, how do you build an integrated team among two people who are fully formed on their own?” Mr. Weiss said.
They have the wind at their backs, now that the Met has managed to extricate itself from a downward deficit spiral and to move forward on more solid financial ground. The museum is on track to break even this year, Mr. James said, having built up a new reserve for deferred maintenance; lowered the endowment spending to 5 percent; and stopped regularly dipping into its “quasi endowment,” or rainy day fund. In August, Moody’s Investors Service revised its outlook on the Met to stable from negative.
No lead gift for that project has yet been announced. A person close to the fund-raising process said that the Met is being cautious to ensure that a donor is not vulnerable to political objections.
The Met’s $70 million renovation of the Rockefeller Wing, with art from Africa, Oceania and the Americas is to begin late next year. Emphasizing the importance of having collections in dialogue with social, political and cultural shifts, Mr. Hollein noted that “the Ancient Near Eastern galleries have not been changed since the 1980s,” and need updating. “So much has happened in that area and our understanding has evolved,” he said.
Ian Alteveer, a curator of modern and contemporary art, said the variety of works in Mr. Hollein’s office reflect the new director’s ecumenical tastes. They include Warhol’s “Mona Lisa,” a Madonna and Child painting from the Verrocchio workshop, a bronze from the Chola period and an Egyptian female head. “There’s clearly a deep interest besides the contemporary,” Mr. Alteveer said.
Mr. Hollein has an opportunity to shake things up with the Met’s 150th anniversary. The main celebratory exhibition, “Making the Met, 1870—2020,” will look at how the museum’s collection developed over the course of its history. This will include some exploration of the Met’s role as an active excavator of cultural artifacts — which has been an ethical challenge for museums like the Met, which recently returned an ancient coffin to Egypt that after learning it had been looted.
Mr. Hollein is also thinking seriously about the visitor experience — namely making it easier for newcomers like himself to navigate the often-overwhelming museum, with better directional signage. He admits that he only recently mastered finding his way around.
