PHILANTHROPISTS have poured millions of dollars into improving education in the United States — paying for new buildings, buying new computers and even creating new charter schools.
After examining hundreds of applications, she picked eight organizations to support and study as part of what she called the Susan Crown Exchange.
The organizations each received $100,000. In return, she asked them to gather three times over the two-year period of the grant to dissect what they were doing and why it had proved successful. Her goal was to find the secret sauce and reveal it to other organizations trying to do similar work.
The organizations selected for the program do not offer typical after-school programs. One brings teenagers together to create, write, produce and act in musicals with themes like sexual abuse, bullying and urban violence. Another teaches inner-city students how to build wooden boats.
Yet these programs seemed to be improving the lives of the small number of participants they served. How were they doing it, and could it be replicated?
Brett Hart, executive director of the Philadelphia Wooden Boat Factory, grew up in the same neighborhood and has seen the decline in the education and opportunity there firsthand.
He said the funding from the Susan Crown Exchange allowed the organization to bring on a social worker to deepen the work it was doing in helping high school students regulate their emotions and focus on the positive and constructive aspects of their lives. But the meetings with the other organizations and the experts Ms. Crown brought in gave Mr. Hart the perspective to incorporate more academic research into what his organization had been doing intuitively, he said.
Similarly, Jennifer Freed, executive director of AHA in Santa Barbara, Calif., was proud of the success the organization had in helping local teenagers, with programs reaching nearly 3,000 people a year. The group’s name stands for Attitude, Harmony, Achievement.
One criticism of these programs is that they need many well-trained counselors and mentors to work in small groups with students, and that makes them expensive to run and replicate. At AHA, there is a six-to-one student-to-mentor ratio. The Philadelphia Wooden Boat Factory program is limited to 36 students a year.
Bringing the ideas behind these programs to more people was one reason Ms. Crown wanted to create what is essentially a how-to guide for other groups.
Titled “Preparing Youth to Thrive: Promising Practices in Social and Emotional Learning,” the guide was produced with the David P. Weikart Center for Youth Program Quality, which has a system to measure the effectiveness of youth programs.
“We came up with a set of S.E.L. skills that we found could be built up,” Ms. Crown said, referring to social and emotional learning.
The major skills that needed to be developed, she said, were emotion management, empathy, teamwork, responsibility, initiative and problem solving. If there was one superskill, she said, it was “agency,” another way of saying drive.
Yet success can also radiate down to the individual groups. Paul Griffin, founder and president of the Possibility Project, which teaches high school students in New York how to create and perform in a musical based on difficulties in their lives, said he hoped that participating in the Susan Crown Exchange would help other philanthropists see how to support organizations like his.
And this is where these programs can succeed on a smaller scale. Next fall, Mr. Jackson-Adens will be attending Colorado State University to begin studies that he hopes will lead to becoming a veterinarian.
