Say this for Monday’s episode: It ends with cliffhangers.
Jimmy McGill has an appointment in the morning with the partners of Davis & Main, who will decide whether his TV ad — an appeal for clients that was never approved by the firms’ mandarins — will get him fired. And Mike has been summoned by Nacho and asked if he will take a job as a hit man.
This is more suspense than we saw at the end of either of the first two episodes, which seemed completely uninterested in leaving behind a bit of viewer bait. That said, I found myself only intermittently gripped by “Amarillo,” as the episode is titled. What’s clear now is that “Better Call Saul,” at least for the time being, is mostly a law-firm drama with psychological wrinkles and a hearty helping of fraternal intrigue. In the spectrum of entertainment, the show is currently closer to “L.A. Law” than “Breaking Bad.” Not that it lacks for tension. But the tension isn’t of the “Is that dude going to get shot in the head in the desert?” variety, as it was briefly in Season 1.
No, the big, drawn-out question of “Amarillo” is whether Jimmy’s ad is going to work, and light up the phones at Davis & Main. It does, and I credit the writer (Jonathan Glatzer) for making that moment resonate; I felt palpable relief when the geriatrics started dialing in.
But it still feels like a letdown that the decision hangs on a matter as mundane as the success of a TV ad. A few readers in the comments section have urged that “Better Call Saul” be judged on its own terms, rather than be constantly compared to “Breaking Bad,” and that is a fair point. The problem is that “Better Call Saul” invites the comparison because the tone and plot of the show occasionally flirt with the atmosphere of dread and danger that gave “Breaking Bad” its very particular frisson.
In “Amarillo,” that was most apparent during Mike’s visit to the veterinarian who doubles as a clearinghouse for underworld jobs. I love this guy. In part it is because he’s played with just the right dollop of sleaze by the comedian Joe DeRosa, and in part because he’s such a great concept — a man who can patch up your pooch and find you part time work as a killer.
Poor Mike. He spends most of this episode fretting over his daughter-in-law, Stacey, who believes her home is being shot at, perhaps by allies of the corrupt Philadelphia police officers who used to work with her now-deceased husband. Then again, it might be a figment of Stacey’s imagination. Mike suspects the latter after he spends a sleepless night in a car across the street and hears nothing resembling gunshots, other than the nighttime thud of delivered newspapers.
Nonetheless, he decides that he needs money to move Stacey and his granddaughter into another home. And that leads him to a clandestine meeting with Nacho, who apparently is about to chaperone him to the world of professional killing.
But a soloist to the core, Jimmy doesn’t ask for approval from the conductor. He just plays. We can predict Main’s outrage because we’ve been shown another of the firm’s ads, which, we are told, is bland because the partners demanded blandness. Jimmy’s ad — which Jimmy wrote and directed, and which stars the Hummel lady, a.k.a. Mrs. Strauss of Season 1 — is a two-hanky soap opera in miniature. It is unlikely to win after-the-fact plaudits from Davis & Main’s partners, even though it is a wild success.
Maybe this will end Jimmy’s career. If not, there is the (potential) problem that Jimmy created when he broke ethical rules by recruiting clients on a Sandpiper Crossing bus that had pulled over for a brief stop. (The driver of the bus had been bribed and gave Jimmy a few minutes to make his pitch.) At a subsequent meeting of lawyers on the Sandpiper case, Chuck fricassees Jimmy when he asks how, exactly, he signed up so many people, so quickly, from one assisted living facility in Texas. Jimmy lies and suggests it was the magic of a direct-mail solicitation, plus word of mouth.
As much as we hate Chuck, we must admit, he has a point. Jimmy may well have jeopardized the case by breaking guidelines for soliciting clients, proving yet again that he isn’t built for the rule-bound life.
For further proof, there is Jimmy’s unwillingness to deal honestly with Kim Wexler. She wants him to be someone he isn’t. He is trying to be that person and keeps failing. This relationship seems doomed.
“Amarillo” moved along the arc of the story, and it had some fine dialogue. I especially liked Jimmy’s speech to Clifford Main about the benefits of a TV ad, which managed to include both “Murder She Wrote” and Mussolini.
Other highlights included Kim’ssmart, pithy lecture to Jimmy about ethics, and Jimmy’s heckling of “Ice Station Zebra,” the Rock Hudson movie he watched with Kim. (“Is this before or after he made ‘McMillan & Wife’?”) My favorite moment was the opening 30 seconds or so, with Ernest Tubb’s enchanting “Waltz Across Texas” playing, and Jimmy framed against a Texas flag, dressed as a Lone Star smoothie.
The pitch on the bus didn’t work as well, however. It badly needed a moment of incredulity from at least one of the senior citizens — just someone to ask an obvious question like “What’s in this for you, mister?” Or maybe, “How come you happened to be standing near our bus just at the moment it broke down?” These people seemed a little too pliant, and Jimmy’s tone a bit too patronizing.
Overall this episode felt mostly like a segue into whatever lies on the other side of those two cliffhangers. Is Mike’s career as a heavy about to get started? (Remember, he is Gus Fring’s go-to muscle in “Breaking Bad.”) Are Jimmy’s days at Davis & Main are coming to an end?
I’ll end with a couple more questions. Please share your guesses in the comments.
1) What are the Davis & Main partners going to say about Jimmy’s ad? One problem might be the voice-over that has Ms. Hummel stating that her nest egg has vanished. The actual gist of the case, as Jimmy says on the bus, is that Sandpiper management has nibbled away at the savings of its residents, which he likens to a mistake on a dinner bill. That’s a far cry from taking every last dime.
2) Who will Mike be asked to kill? Personally, I’m hoping it’s a gruesomely tattooed meth dealer we have never laid eyes on.