Within two weeks, Paramount Pictures optioned the book for Fey. The movie, called “Whiskey Tango Foxtrot,” comes out on March 4, and my book — also now called “Whiskey Tango Foxtrot” — has been republished, with a photograph of a bemused Fey on the cover, an explosion behind her.
As I write this essay, I’m getting ready for the press junket. I will have an assigned groomer. I will be on the other side of the notebook. I have mixed feelings about all of this. My lack of control over the movie is both liberating and frightening. I did not write the script, although the screenwriter met many times with me and others who were in Afghanistan. Nor did I read the script — a copy was sent to me once it was finished, with the caveat that I couldn’t make any changes. Why read what I couldn’t edit? This was Hollywood’s show, I figured.
Fey and I first met in the late summer of 2014, for lunch in Midtown Manhattan. I know we talked about specific things, although I was so full of adrenaline and a desire to be funny, I could hardly remember anything afterward. I know we both complained about high heels. I know she asked me about Afghanistan. We made no future plans; I had no certainty that this movie would actually happen. It felt like an awesome first date that went nowhere.
The movie didn’t seem real until I visited the film set in New Mexico for two days last spring. The first morning, a van drove a few of us on a bumpy dirt road for several minutes, until popping over a hill. The scene below looked like Afghanistan, with its beige terrain, onslaught of dust and scrubby gray vegetation. Then there was a military Humvee, with men dressed as Marines hanging out nearby. I sucked in my breath. My handler asked if I had PTSD or flashbacks. Not exactly, especially once I caught sight of the extras playing Taliban members. They seemed to be mostly of Mexican heritage, their turbans were tied like Christmas bows and they were eating Kind bars. This was definitely not Ghazni Province.
What I did have was PMSD, Pre-Movie Stress Disorder, because this was actually happening. One fear loomed: What if the movie about my life stank? In early February, I sat down in a screening room, between my brother and my publicist. One thought repeated itself as I watched the film for the first time: “Please let it be over.” I could barely breathe. I worried about all the things I had no control over — that my character would look stupid, that the filmmakers were going to fictionalize the book too much. I felt responsible for whether the film was good or bad. My story was my story, after all.
Creative liberties were certainly taken. In the movie, my name is Kim Baker, and I’m a television reporter. (Sorry, print journalism.) I have a made-up frenemy who is much hotter than any of my actual friends from Afghanistan. (Sorry, actual friends.) I’m also only in Afghanistan — there’s no shuffling to Pakistan involved. (Apologies, Pakistan.) It’s Hollywood. But it took Hollywood’s exaggeration to accurately evoke the absurdity of our lives in Kabul — the Kabubble. It is funny, but not overly so, which seems fitting. I wrote “The Taliban Shuffle” as a comedy precisely because we witnessed so much tragedy, and the only way to bear it was with a dose of dark humor. I knew people who were killed, who were kidnapped. We all did. The longer I was there, the more times I had to wash blood and whatever else off the bottom of my shoes, the more I felt parts of myself slipping away.
