KALAMAZOO, Mich. — An Uber driver admitted his involvement in a Saturday night shooting rampage that left six people dead and two others injured, the county prosecutor said on Monday as the driver was formally charged with murder. But the motive of the man, who had no criminal history, remained a mystery.
Wearing an orange jail jumpsuit and heavy glasses, the suspect, Jason B. Dalton, 45, sat expressionless throughout a brief hearing held via video conference, his gaze downcast as a District Court judge read the charges against him: six counts of murder, two of assault with intent to commit murder and eight felony firearms violations. Mr. Dalton told Judge Christopher T. Haenicke that he understood the charges, but declined to say more before the judge ordered him held without bail.
“I would prefer just to remain silent,” Mr. Dalton told the judge.
Jeffrey S. Getting, the prosecuting attorney for Kalamazoo County, said Monday that after his arrest, Mr. Dalton “made a statement to law enforcement admitting his involvement in each of the shootings.” But Mr. Dalton, Mr. Getting and the police offered no insight into what might have prompted the attacks, which occurred even as Mr. Dalton continued to ferry passengers for Uber.
Police officers testifying at an initial hearing in the case said evidence against Mr. Dalton included the account of an eyewitness who had picked him out of a photo lineup, as well as surveillance video footage.
Video from the vigil to remember the victims of shooting in Michigan at the Centerpoint Church in Kalamazoo on Feb. 21.
President Obama weighed in, as he has many times after mass shootings, arguing in a White House appearance that it should be harder for troubled people to obtain guns. “I’ve got to assume all of you are just as tired as I am of seeing this stuff happen in your states,” he said.
Left dead or dying were Mary Jo Nye, 60; her sister, Mary Lou Nye, 62; Barbara Hawthorne, 68; and Dorothy Brown, 74. A 14-year-old girl was pronounced dead and placed on a ventilator while plans were made for organ donation, Lieutenant Hinz said, but more than an hour later, she squeezed her mother’s hand. She remained in intensive care on Monday.
Mary Jo Nye had devoted much of her life to children who struggled in school; until she retired in 2012, she taught English and other skills at an alternative high school, and later she was a tutor. “There’s probably 2,000 kids who would say she was a mother figure to them,” said Tara Egnatuk, the assistant director of Calhoun Community High School.
Mary Lou Nye, a former manager of a state motor vehicle office who retired in 2010, was remarkably upbeat, even in the face of hardships, like the death of one of her sons, said Mary Shafer, a longtime co-worker.
Prosecutors on Monday charged Jason Dalton with six counts of murder in the shooting spree in Kalamazoo, Mich.
The shooting at the restaurant came after two other assaults. Shortly before 6 p.m., a woman was seriously wounded outside her suburban townhouse. And just after 10 p.m., a father and son were fatally shot in the parking lot of a Kalamazoo car dealership.
Tyler Smith and his father, Richard Smith, had stepped out of their vehicle to look at a blue truck when Mr. Dalton approached and fatally shot them, Chief Jeffrey Hadley of the Kalamazoo Department of Public Safety said Monday. He said Mr. Dalton apparently had not seen a young woman, believed to be the girlfriend of the younger Mr. Smith, who was sitting in the Smiths’ vehicle.
Mr. Dalton had been an Uber driver for less than a month, and passengers had given him an average rating of 4.73 out of 5, a fairly typical score, company officials said Monday. On Saturday, several passengers complained that he drove erratically or dangerously — one called 911 — but the company said there had been no serious complaints about him before.
The officials defended Uber’s background checks, which include looking at driving records and criminal offenses, but not in-person interviews or checks of fingerprint databases.
“No background check process would have made a difference in this case because this person didn’t have a criminal history,” said Joe Sullivan, the company’s chief security officer.