ORURO, Bolivia — President Evo Morales, facing mounting pressure to concede defeat in a referendum that would have allowed him to run for a fourth term, accepted the loss Wednesday but said he would use the remaining years of his presidency to advance his Socialist-inspired agenda.
Yet Mr. Morales, whose term does not end until 2020, reminded supporters and opponents alike that he remained their president — and would vigorously promote his left-wing movement that since 2006 has transformed the country by redistributing its natural gas wealth and seeking greater inclusion for its indigenous majority.
“We still had half of voters supporting us,” he said.
Still, the results mark a shift in the political fortunes of Mr. Morales, Bolivia’s first indigenous president, who won three previous elections by large margins.
On Sunday, voters were asked to approve changes to the Constitution that would allow him to stay in office until 2025 if he kept winning elections.
With 99 percent of ballots counted by Tuesday, Bolivia’s election officials said the measure had failed by 51 percent to 49 percent.
President Evo Morales of Bolivia accepted his defeat on Wednesday in a referendum that would have let him run for a fourth term.
Leading up to the vote, Mr. Morales found himself on the defense over multiple issues, including a scandal involving a child born out of wedlock and accusations of corruption at a fund for development of native communities. And some of the indigenous groups that had secured his rise turned against him.
Mr. Morales had been known for traveling on foot and playing soccer with voters, but more recently that Everyman image seemed to be fading.
On a visit on Tuesday to Sica Sica, a small town in western Bolivia, to dedicate a sports arena, the president arrived by helicopter guarded by scores of soldiers. Afterward, guards rushed him to a waiting S.U.V., knocking over two indigenous women who were trying greet him.
In the vote, Mr. Morales lost support among young people like Braulio Laura García, a 20-year-old industrial engineering student who remembers no president before Mr. Morales.
“I don’t like that he’s created a monopoly on power; he controls everything,” said Mr. García, who lives in El Alto, a large city that city that sits above the administrative capital, La Paz.
Mr. García said many of his friends who were looking for work in the government, a large employer in Bolivia, had been pressured to join Mr. Morales’s Movement Toward Socialism, or been asked if they carried identification cards the group issued.
Though the referendum represents a rejection of Mr. Morales, no one else on Bolivia’s political stage has anything approaching his high profile.
