Credit...Animation by Jessica Tang. West: GVK/Bauer-Griffin/GC Images via Getty Images. Tweets: New York Magazine and Twitter.
Welcome to Social Capital, a series devoted to analyzing the social-media presences of celebrities.
You may have heard the news about Kanye West. He absolutely, positively does not want … um, how can I say this? This is awkward in a family newspaper that my mom reads. But I have to say it — sorry, Mom – because it’s momentous and so revealing of where we are as a zeitgeist. It’s essentially the modern-day version of “Frank Sinatra has a cold,” for it, too, is a deceptively simple declarative sentence about one of the biggest cultural forces of our era.
Here it is: “Kanye West does not want his salad tossed.” Once upon a time, Gay Talese wrote about The Chairman of the Board being such a big deal that a minor ailment impacted the lives of several people. Now, we have West petulantly ensuring that everyone knows he’s a real man because of what he won’t do.
We know this because, recently, West tweeted that he stays away from “that area all together.” He was responding to his ex-girlfriend Amber Rose’s assertion that she did, indeed, go back there when they were dating. Rose’s comments came in the midst of a Twitter battle between West, Rose and her ex-husband, the rapper Wiz Khalifa, the silliest and most sordid celebrity scandal in recent memory. But all of that has propelled the Internet to buzz loudly about West’s Twitter feed, because it feels as though the old Kanye, the Kanye who’d say any crazy old thing at any time, might be back.
See, West’s Twitter feed has two fairly distinct eras, demarcated by a mass tweet deletion in 2012. Let’s call these two eras Before Deletion, or B.D., and A.K., After Kim. I’d thought that West, once the enfant terrible of pop culture but now a married father of two, had finally become mature. But now I’m not so sure.
Before Deletion, West’s Twitter personality was sometimes unbecoming. It was hard to tell whether he was being genuine or self-parodying — a not-unfamiliar question about his public persona in general. Maybe, deep down, he wanted everyone to think that he’s a little off, a little unhinged — that he’s a man who will actually say and do things that no one else would admit to doing. Playing crazy can be very empowering: It gives you the room to say and do anything.
Wait a minute. We’re talking, after all, about someone who can walk into any Hollywood studio or Silicon Valley office, someone who is friends with Marc Jacobs, Paul McCartney and Takashi Murakami. It’s a weird sort of false humility. Or a fantasy.
West is a new man, most of the time. It feels as if few people are willing to give him credit for it, but that’s partly because he keeps reminding them of the divisive person he’s always been. People joke that they want to find someone who loves them the way Kanye loves Kanye, but if West is his own greatest fan, he’s also his own worst enemy. No matter how much West grows, there’s always Kanye there to get in Kanye’s way.