So we’re stuck lying in bed thinking about this dilemma: We know we need the insurance, but it’s the last thing we want to think about. So let me get to the point here and just give one very simple way to check life insurance off you mental checklist.
My goal is to give you a “good enough” plan that you’ll actually take action on, rather than spending time in the pursuit of the “perfect” plan you will never find. We want you to sleep at night, and this good enough plan will do that.
Step 1: Take your salary and multiply it by 20. First, you have to decide how much life insurance to buy. This is where most people get stuck. You’re not going to get stuck. Just take your income and multiple it by 20. For example, let’s say your income is $50,000. Take $50,000 times 20 and you get $1 million. This is the amount of life insurance coverage you’ll buy. This goes a long way toward replacing the economic loss that will result if you’re no longer around.
Step 2: Buy a 20-year term policy for that amount. Term life insurance is the cheapest policy you can buy, and it’s not complicated. As long as you pay the premiums each year, and your insurance company stays in business, you will be insured for the full 20-year term, and your premiums will not go up. 
At the end of 20 years, you no longer have insurance and the insurance company keeps the premiums you paid each month. Still, term insurance is the cheapest way to replace an economic loss, which is the purpose of life insurance. It’s not an investment or savings account. It’s clean, simple insurance.
All of these are valuable questions. But none of them matter if you don’t have a life insurance policy.
It reminds me of what John Bogle, founder of the Vanguard Group, said about his simple plan of index mutual fund investments. “There might be advice that’s better than this, but the amount of advice that’s worse is infinite.” And worst, by far, is having no policy at all.
Call it the 20-20 plan. All you have to remember is 20 and 20. Set aside 10 minutes, multiply your salary by 20 and buy a 20-year term policy in that amount. Cross this item off your list of things to do and stop losing sleep over life insurance.