When the three rabbis and a judge walk onto the court at a Manhattan tennis center on Wednesday nights, it is no joke.
There is, however, plenty of joking around during the weekly tennis sessions, shared by a group with four octogenarians at its core who have played together for more than 45 years.
The judge is Alvin K. Hellerstein, 82, who still oversees federal court cases. The three rabbis are Dr. Michael Shmidman, 82, and Haskel Lookstein, 83, and Jonah Kupietzky, 81, who is an ordained rabbi but a kosher caterer by vocation.
“Retired caterer,” said Bob Rothman, 63, a relative newcomer and junior member of the group, which was taking a break one recent evening at the Dick Savitt Tennis Center at the northern tip of Manhattan.
“Fabulous caterer,” Rabbi Shmidman said.
“Oh, the best,” Rabbi Lookstein said.
Mr. Kupietzy is spending this month in Florida, and Mr. Rothman, who owns property in New Jersey, was on the court with the older players.
The group has been playing since at least 1970 — collective memory on this is as fuzzy as a tennis ball — when the game was first convened on the courts at the Schwartz Chemical building in Long Island City, Queens. The weekly games bounced from one court to another for about 15 years before settling into the Savitt center for the last 30 years or so.
“It’s like the Bible, we wandered from place to place,” said Rabbi Schmidman, the senior rabbi of Congregation Orach Chaim on the Upper East Side.
“We were Wandering Jews,” added Rabbi Lookstein, rabbi emeritus at Kehilath Jeshurun, a synagogue on the Upper East Side, one of the most influential congregations in New York City.
“We weren’t terribly good then, and we’re not terribly good now,” Judge Hellerstein said during a rest between games.
“Speak for yourself,” said Rabbi Shmidman, engaging in the playful banter that mirrors the volleys on the court.
The sideline chat often delves into spiritual and legal topics.
“So this gives us a level playing field,” he continued.
Rabbi Shmidman can put some serious spin on his serve and hits whistling groundstrokes. The surprisingly spry Rabbi Lookstein is a beast at the net. Mr. Kupietzky possesses a devastating drop shot. And the judge, well, he is streaky, “but when he’s on, he’s on,” said Rabbi Lookstein. Mr. Rothman, of course, has youth on his side and can hold his own at the baseline.
Of course there are the ailments, like Rabbi Lookstein’s bursitis, Mr. Kupietsky’s leg pain, and Judge Hellerstein’s sciatica, which can affect his toss when he is serving.
Judge Hellerstein, a senior judge for the Federal District Court in Manhattan, has issued rulings related to the Sept. 11 attacks, the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, the controversy over Barack Obama’s “Hope” campaign poster and other prominent cases.
But long stretches in the courtroom have left him with “judge’s disease,” he said.
“You’re sitting so much, as all these cases are coming in, and it all gathers in your lower back and can get painful, so this is liberating,” he said.
Off the court the men are good friends, and have been guests at many of each other’s family functions.
Five years ago, they lost another longtime member, Dr. Moses Nussbaum, a former chairman of the surgery department at Beth Israel Medical Center, who continued to play, even after he had a lung removed, until shortly before he died.
Now the match was underway, as Mr. Rothman and Rabbi Lookstein faced off against Judge Hellerstein and Rabbi Shmidman. At one point, Rabbi Shmidman rushed the net; he winced after flubbing an easy put-away.
“Missing that ball, there is no forgiveness for that, in the Scripture or all the other holy works,” he said.
When the judge failed to return a shot that landed close to the baseline, the other players waited for his decision. He paused and ruled against himself.
“In,” declared the judge, who later hit a shot that eluded Mr. Rothman but was also a close call. Mr. Rothman ruled against himself as well.
He joked that he was not about to rile a man of such stature. “I call everything in that’s close to the line,” he said.
The players’ off-court lives make for a bit of on-court joking, said Rabbi Lookstein.
The game satisfies an athletic itch for the players, each of whom was active in sports in his youth. Rabbi Shmidman said he was a talented baseball player but could not play games on Saturdays, lest he violate Sabbath rules.
