BANGKOK — A prominent member of the governing coalition in Malaysia who has been removed from a top party job lashed back on Saturday with a strongly worded Facebook post saying he had seen “proof” that Prime Minister Najib Razak committed a crime in his dealings with the country’s sovereign wealth fund.
Muhyiddin Yassin, who was ousted as deputy prime minister last year and suspended on Friday as deputy president of the ruling party, called on Mr. Najib to step down over the “dark episode” of his financial dealings involving the 1Malaysia Development Berhad fund, or 1MDB, whose advisory board is headed by the prime minister.
Mr. Najib has been embroiled in a scandal after the revelation last year that nearly $700 million landed in his personal bank account. He has said that the money was a donation from Saudi royalty and that he returned $620 million. The Saudi government has contradicted that account. It is unclear what happened to the remainder of the money. Mr. Najib has said he did nothing wrong.
There are also allegations that at least some of the money the prime minister received was diverted from the 1MDB fund through other companies. One alleged transfer was about $13 million through SRC International, a former subsidiary of 1MDB now owned by the Finance Ministry, which Mr. Najib controls. Mr. Najib has not commented on that transaction.
Mr. Muhyiddin said in his statement that the former attorney general had shown him evidence of criminal conduct in the transfer of money from SRC International.
“The scandal surrounding Najib has tarnished the image of the party as well as the government and embarrassed the people — particularly as I had been briefed on the issue of funds from SRC International by the former attorney general, who also provided proof that it was indeed a criminal act,” he said.
The former attorney general, Abdul Gani Patail, could not be reached for comment. The decision by the governing party, the United Malays National Organization, or UMNO, to suspend Mr. Muhyiddin as deputy president of the party, leaves Mr. Najib fully in control of the party.
Mr. Najib is the president of UMNO, which has long dominated Malaysian politics, and Mr. Muhyiddin’s removal means he has no strong rival in a key party position.
The party’s Supreme Council decided on Friday to suspend Mr. Muhyiddin effective immediately on the grounds that he had not performed his duty to help Mr. Najib bolster the party. Last year, Mr. Najib ousted Mr. Muhyiddin as deputy prime minister for questioning the bank deposits. The prime minister also removed Mr. Abdul Gani before he could complete an investigation into the transactions.
Mohamed Apandi Ali, who took over as attorney general, announced in January that he had found no evidence of a crime and closed the investigation.
Mr. Najib’s office countered with a harsh statement accusing Mr. Muhyiddin and Mr. Abdul Gani of acting inappropriately in discussing the purported evidence.
“This is an admission that there was a high-level conspiracy to topple the Prime Minister, in what would have been a coup against democratic process,” said Azalina Othman Said, a minister in the Prime Minister’s Department.
Mr. Najib, in addition to removing officials who were critical of him, has sought to control the growing scandal by putting a lid on investigations into his actions and clamping down on media outlets that looked into the case.
Last week, the government blocked the news website Malaysian Insider after it published a report saying there was sufficient evidence for the Malaysian Anti-Corruption Commission to bring charges against Mr. Najib. The report was based on the comments of an unnamed official and was denied by other government officials.