Borrowing from his playbook in Italy, where he has chastised the Mafia and other criminal groups with equally fiery words, the pope has sought to leverage the religiosity of Roman Catholics in Mexico to drive a wedge between youth and the cartels that use them to fill their ranks. Yet his speech was also notable for what he did not say, but alluded to: the government failures that let the drug trade persist.
The narcotics trade and the violence, corruption and chaos associated with it have left more than 100,000 people dead or missing in the last 10 years, despite huge government campaigns.
While Francis chose Michoacán to make his statement, there are at least half a dozen states that would also have suited his purpose, places where the rule of law is scarcely visible. In Mexico, some 98 percent of murders are never solved, and crimes are seldom reported. Young people are easily lured into wrongdoing.
A look at the Mexican government’s decade-long effort to break up drug cartels by targeting their leaders.
But the festive atmosphere gave way to a speech packed with somber observations. It offered a nuanced glimpse at the psyche of many Mexicans, who feel a deep cynicism in daily life that can border on apathy.
Entering another stadium on Tuesday evening, he was greeted by thousands waving flags and singing, with shouts of “Olé, olé, olé, Francis” echoing through the arena. Perhaps catching that enthusiasm, he offered a message of hope along with his warnings, and urged everyone to continue dreaming because they were the wealth of the country.
Whether the pope’s campaign will have an effect remains to be seen. Some analysts doubted there would be any change. Pope John Paul II also spoke about the ills of narcotics trafficking.
As archbishop of Buenos Aires, Francis bluntly criticized human trafficking, singling out not only smuggling networks, but also the Argentine government for failing to protect victims. As pope, he condemned Mafia activity during a ceremony in Rome and listened to a recitation of the names of 800 people killed by organized crime. He has rebuked Italy’s two most violent syndicates, the Camorra in Naples and the ’Ndrangheta in Calabria. His outrage has spilled out with a biblical fury.
