Were more hateful words ever howled by a mob in New York history?
This was one of the cries taken up by a crowd that descended on the Colored Orphan Asylum during the first night of the draft riots in July 1863. The sentiments left no doubt about the attackers’ goal: to kill African-American children.
Providence and quick thinking spared the 233 youths from death or injury, though the riots would claim more than 100 lives. But the asylum, a Greek Revival building that sat prettily atop a hillock off Fifth Avenue, between West 43rd and 44th Streets, was destroyed by the mob.
It has always been painful to contemplate the sack of the orphanage. It is difficult even to picture it, at what is now a busy intersection in Midtown Manhattan, next to the Century Association clubhouse and across West 43rd Street from a Joe Fresh store and an Elie Tahari showroom in the former Manufacturers Hanover bank, a landmark of the International style.
For now, however, the south half of the asylum site is vacant, nothing more than a 10,625-square-foot lot strewn with rubble, including brick fragments. Many brick fragments. So many brick fragments that you begin to wonder: Could any of these have been used to build the asylum?
If so, could there be artifacts strewn among them, plowed under the charred rubble long ago?
A broken hair comb?
An inky pen nib?
A small shoe buckle?
The moment has come to ask such questions because the developer Louis Ceruzzi plans to redevelop the site with a tower more than 70 stories tall that will certainly have retail space at the base and is likely to include a mix of hotel rooms and apartments above.
An opportunity is at hand to examine the site closely in the hope of finding some tangible remnant of the asylum. Even if there are no archaeological finds, there is certainly a chance to commemorate the asylum and memorialize its pillage in some form at the new building.
The New-York Historical Society has a trove of documents from the Association for the Benefit of Colored Orphans, founded in 1836, including admissions records that would make it possible to create a roster of the children who were living in the asylum at the time of the draft riots.
There was, for instance, Lucinda Ann Brown, 7, who had been brought to New York from New Orleans by one Catherine Flint. Lucinda’s father was dead at the time. Her mother, though alive, had remained in Louisiana. Lucinda was admitted on May 16, 1863.
Sarah Jones was admitted to the asylum 13 days later, on her seventh birthday. Because her adopted mother was working as a stewardess aboard the steamship Ocean Queen, which traveled to Colón, Panama, Sarah was institutionalized by the Commissioners of Public Charities.
Nine-year-old Irving R. White; his younger sister, Martha Ann White; and their younger brother, Robert Cooper White, were all admitted on June 2. Their mother was dead and their father was in a temperance house in Albany run by Edward C. Delavan.
Then, on July 6, just a week before the riot, came William H. Judson, age and circumstances unrecorded.
Lucinda, Sarah, Irving, Martha, Robert and William were all presumably there when mobs protesting the inequitable military draft began to vent their fury on any African-American unlucky enough to be in their way. Soon enough, the rioters chose a target where they must have known resistance would be unlikely: an orphanage.
All that is believed to have survived intact is a Bible that an 8-year-old girl rescued by returning to the burning building. It, too, is in the hands of the New-York Historical Society.
Having been sheltered in a police precinct house, the children were removed safely to Blackwells Island (now Roosevelt Island). Though the institution’s mission, name and location have changed since the Civil War, its work is continued today by the Harlem Dowling-West Side Center for Children and Family Services.
To judge from his blog, Mr. Ceruzzi is fascinated by New York City history. Whether that translates to support for an archaeological dig and permanent memorial at 520 Fifth Avenue is another question. He did not respond to emails for comment.
But 35 years of covering — and uncovering — the layers of New York City history have taught me that traces of the past are seldom eradicated entirely. And the story of the Colored Orphan Asylum seems too important to forget.