Numbers are often misreported, which can undermine popular understanding of risk. Over 5,000 cases of microcephaly had been reported in Brazil since January 2015. That sounds scary. But a deeper look tells a more complex story. The government investigated 1,345 of those cases, and found 837 were misdiagnoses. That means incidences of microcephaly are maybe a third of what is largely being reported, and it is unknown how many would have occurred without Zika. And Zika cases as a whole have been mostly concentrated in a few states of northeast Brazil, far from Rio de Janeiro’s Olympic venues, and anecdotally at least, mostly in poor neighborhoods where the Aedes aegypti mosquito thrives and repellent use is less common. That is a public health crisis and perhaps a social justice issue, but a far lesser risk to most travelers, especially nonpregnant ones.
Here we also have a deafening silence. Unmentioned in much of the coverage of Zika is that last year, 1.5 million Brazilians caught dengue fever, which is transmitted by the same mosquito but causes far more serious symptoms: over 800 died. This year has seen new outbreaks. So if you’re a man or nonpregnant woman more scared of Zika than dengue, it’s too late: You’ve already been infected by the news media.
If that is the case and you decide to stay home, keep in mind that carries its own risks. “We are more scared of the unfamiliar than the familiar,” Mr. Ropeik said. Yet we run long- and short-term risks every day: eating fast food, walking under a crane and crossing busy streets, not to mention drinking water tainted with lead.
Some Americans would argue that the United States is in fact safer because of the wide presence of guns; they might logically choose to defer travel to Australia.
Instead of holding off on a trip — or becoming a hermit — the best way to stay safe is to reduce risk on the road. That may be by using mosquito repellent religiously at the Olympics, taking public transport in New Zealand, and spending less time in big European cities and more in small towns. Another way to knock risk down a notch is to mitigate the impact of potential crises by, say, buying medical evacuation insurance. Keeping a list of top hospitals and emergency numbers at the ready helps as well. Allianz’s free TravelSmart app puts that information in your phone, though in developing countries I would check JustLanded.com for the number of a private ambulance service as well.
Once you have assessed potential travel risks, you should compare them with potential travel rewards. That can vary greatly among individuals. Exhibit A: “Travel to me is too vital, too important a part of civilized life that I feel we would give up too much by not traveling for fear of terrorism to France, Belgium and other destinations,” Mr. Frommer said. But for less gung-ho travelers, any added risk could tip the scales and land them at the municipal pool or on the local golf course.
The final thing you have to fear is fear itself. If after careful deliberation you’ve decided that the risks are slim, but you’re still terrified, then consider staying put. Not because of the risk to your health, but the certainty that you’ll be too nervous to appreciate your travels.