GAZIANTEP, Turkey — The United States and its allies have spent many millions of dollars backing Syrian opposition fighters they deem relatively moderate and secular, and civilian groups whose work on small businesses and local councils they billed as the cornerstone of Syria’s future.
Now they fear that the United States and its allies may actually let them lose. Many of the rebel leaders who have received Western support were headed Tuesday night to meet with American officials and others in Istanbul and Ankara, but they were not hopeful for game-changing developments.
The Obama administration has said for months that there is no military solution to the conflict in Syria, and that its plan for confronting the chaos inside the country was to try to forge a political transition through United Nations-led talks that would ultimately lead to Mr. Assad’s departure. But as those negotiations faltered last week amid heavy bombings by the Syrian government backed by Russia, it was clear that the strategy was doing nothing to change the dynamic on the ground.
Secretary of State John Kerry was left berating Russia publicly for failing to live up to its commitments to pursue a cease-fire and allow humanitarian access inside Syria, while making a frantic round of phone calls to Sergey V. Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, to try to salvage the political talks.
Mr. Kerry has been subject to increasing criticism, after an incident last week in which Syrian civil-society workers buttonholed him at a London cocktail party thrown by Prince Charles after an international donors’ conference on Syria. According to one of the Syrians who was there, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to protect her organization, the Syrians asked the secretary to put more pressure on Russia and the Syrian government to stop attacks and sieges on civilians.
The Syrian said Mr. Kerry seemed to blame the opposition for refusing to participate in United Nations-led talks in Geneva, and when the Syrians mentioned that 230 barrel bombs had fallen on Aleppo that day, he corrected them, saying it was 180.
As this story rocketed around social media, the State Department spokesman, John Kirby, declared on Monday that Mr. Kerry was “making no predictions about three months this or three months that.” On Tuesday, Mr. Kirby told reporters that “there’s been no badgering of the opposition,” and that Mr. Kerry simply objected to the rebel groups’ placing “preconditions” on the negotiations.
“If you put preconditions on it, you make it too easy, certainly for the regime and its supporters, to use that as an excuse not to talk and not to sit down and not to begin any dialogue,” Mr. Kirby said.
Opposition representatives say they are not imposing preconditions but asking for the implementation of existing U.N. Security Council resolutions to end starvation sieges and indiscriminate bombings, tactics forbidden under international law, and that access to aid should not be subject to negotiations.
Here in Gaziantep, the rebel representative, Mr. Malahifji — whose group’s Koranic name translates to Go Straight as You Were Commanded — was one of several Syrians worried that the government and its allies could fight all the way to the Turkish border within weeks. Asked about the chance of retaking areas lost over the past week in Aleppo Province, Mr. Malahifji, who is originally from Aleppo’s old city, gave a deep sigh.
Along parts of Syria’s frontier with Turkey, aid agencies reported a drastic increase in the number of people fleeing the Aleppo area, where there have been more than 200 airstrikes a day.
Doctors Without Borders, a medical charity, said roughly 23,000 Syrians were massed near the border town of Azaz, adding to the pressures created by tens of thousands of displaced Syrians already encamped in the region. “There is an urgent need for shelter, water access, sanitation and showers, and specific nonfood items such as blankets and insulating mattresses for displaced families,” the charity said in a statement.
Huddled in restaurants and offices around Gaziantep, Syrian and international development workers were more bereft than ever.
Dahham, who uses a nickname to protect family back in Syria and to avoid jeopardizing aid by criticizing the West, said programs he had worked on, to build up village economies, were now in jeopardy.
Aside from the blow to the villages, he said, “It’s a waste of money” for the backers.
A group of international aid workers sat in a cafe discussing what they called “the million-dollar question”: how to respond to Syrian partners who were calling in despair and asking if their work had been in vain.
Their projects with refugees in Turkey and with communities inside Syria, they said, were predicated on the idea that one day, the refugees would return and the towns would govern themselves. Now, they said, those Syrians would be more likely to think of joining the flow of refugees.
