The visits can be fraught. “Sometimes people say: ‘The Germans have all our heritage! They stole it!’” said Razan Nassreddine, who led the Arabic-language tour that afternoon at the Museum of Islamic Art, which is part of the Pergamon Museum and filled with treasures from empires past. Often, the visitors say the art is probably better off in Berlin because so much in Syria has been destroyed by the war and the Islamic State, Ms. Nassreddine said.
Ms. Nassreddine is not a refugee — she grew up in Damascus, a child of Syrian and Lebanese parents, and moved to Europe to study in 2010, before Syria fell into civil war. She is one of 19 guides — 18 from Syria and one from Iraq — who are part of a program, called Multaka, or “meeting point” in Arabic, which began in December and is aimed at training refugees to become museum guides.
The program is largely financed by the German government, including the Culture Ministry, which answers directly to the office of the chancellor, Angela Merkel. It also draws on some private foundation funding. It offers two Arabic-language tours a week at each of four Berlin museums: The Islamic Art Museum and the Museum of the Ancient Near East (which are both inside the Pergamon); the German Historical Museum; and the Bode Museum, including its collection of Byzantine art.
The Islamic Art Museum — which in recent years has also been involved in helping to track artifacts under threat in Syria — was founded in 1904, among the first of its kind. Most objects came from lands then under Ottoman control in an era when Western collectors bought (some critics say plundered) artifacts. The first fragments of the Ishtar Gate came to Berlin in 1903 after negotiations between Germany and the Ottoman Empire. Over the years, Iraq has called for the work’s return.
On a recent afternoon, Ms. Nassreddine’s group included a dozen young teenagers from Neuköln, a Berlin neighborhood known as a melting pot, who arrived with the teachers of their intensive German-language course. They raced through the galleries and peppered their guide with questions.
