A work crew pulled up to the northwest corner of West End Avenue and 101st Street on Wednesday morning and approached an oblong glass box that looked so anachronistic that a passer-by might have wondered if it simply had dropped out of the sky.
It was a walk-in phone booth, of the sort that Clark Kent might have dashed into, only to come out dressed as Superman.
Even with its graffitied glass, rusted metal panels and a missing door long ago ripped off its hinges, the booth’s pay phone still functioned.
“A lot of people still use it,” said Igor Gakh, the longtime daytime doorman at a building that stands steps away.
The crew removed the pay phone and unbolted the booth from the sidewalk, then lifted a replacement booth, slightly larger and sleeker in design, from a truck.
While some enclosed indoor booths are still sprinkled here and there, only four old-style sidewalk phone booths of this type are left in New York City, and they are all on West End Avenue, at 101st, 100th, 90th and 66th Streets, according to the technology company that operates them.
The boxy, glass-enclosed phone booths that were once ubiquitous on city sidewalks and a staple in films and on television are all but a memory now.
Glass booths were steadily replaced in the 1970s by the now familiar pedestal-style pay phones, which are cheaper to buy, easier to maintain and less vulnerable to vandalism.
As the proliferation of cellphones has helped make the roughly 8,000 pay phones on city streets all but obsolete, there is an extensive plan underway, called LinkNYC, to convert street pay phones into at least 7,500 sidewalk Wi-Fi kiosks, called Links.
The Links would provide high-speed Internet service across much of the city, said officials from Intersection, a technology company that is undertaking the project, along with two other companies, Qualcomm and Civiq Smartscapes.
Despite this, Intersection officials decided to keep the four walk-in booths on West End Avenue and had the replacement booths installed this week.
Scott Goldsmith, the president of media at Intersection, watched the replacement underway on Wednesday and said he felt an obligation as a historically minded New Yorker to keep the booths as a tribute to their past status.
“I grew up in New York and remember using pay phones, and I thought it was important to keep nice historic aspects like this,” Mr. Goldsmith said. A local phone call costs 25 cents, but Mr. Goldsmith said that within a few days those calls would become free, as an amenity at the booths.
One reason the booths have survived is, arguably, the persistence of one man, Alan Flacks, a self-described pay phone buff who lives on West 100th Street.
Mr. Flacks has been tenacious. Protecting the booths has involved constant calls to officials from Verizon, which has been maintaining the booths, to report problems.
When the West 100th Street booth was temporarily replaced in 1996 with a pedestal-style phone, Mr. Flacks kept calling company officials until they replaced it with a glass booth.
His preservation tactics have included gathering signatures on petitions and lobbying local elected officials about the importance of the booths, which he considers every bit as worthy of protection as any other New York landmark.
“There’s the obvious reason that these are the iconic New York City phone booths, but also, listen: Sometimes you just need a hard-wired pay phone. Cellphones don’t always work,” said Mr. Flacks, who got a cellphone only recently, after his cousin bought him a calling plan.
The booths themselves are not so easy to find. In 2003, when the 100th Street booth needed replacing, Verizon had only two glass phone booths left, both of which they rented out to film companies.
They used one to replace the battered 100th Street booth; the other was destroyed during the filming of “Phone Booth,” the 2002 thriller.
Intersection’s decision to keep the four booths also led to difficulty. The company contacted Clark Specialty, a company in Bath, N.Y., which manufactures and refurbishes phone booths, but there were none left.
“They’re hard to come by, these days,” said the company’s owner, James Presley, who had sold the last of his glass booths over 10 years ago to military bases and novelty collectors.
Building the booths from scratch would be too expensive, he said, so he began calling around and found a warehouse in Canada that had several, though they were in poor condition.
“They had been beat around because they had been sitting in the warehouse for 15 years,” Mr. Presley said. He bought the booths and refurbished them.
“We tore them apart, took the glass out, the dings out, and reassembled them,” he said.
“The Lonely Phone Booth,” written by Peter Ackerman, is now in its second printing. In the book, a glass phone booth grows lonely as people transfer their allegiances to cellphones.
Intersection’s preservation of the booths might seem curious given its project to install kiosks as free public Wi-Fi hubs, but some kiosks have already been installed along Third Avenue north of 14th Street.
The Links have tablets and a keypad for making free domestic phone calls, as well as a USB charger for electronic devices, advertising screens and a 911 emergency call button. Intersection says it will have about 4,000 of them running by 2020, with 500 completed by July.
The replacement of the booths on Wednesday attracted a crowd of passers-by, most of whom reacted happily.
“You’d have some angry people around here, if you removed these,” said Aaron Frucher, a local resident, who asked Mr. Goldsmith if he could buy the one on 101st.