He was in Asheville, working on “The Legacy of a Whitetail Deer Hunter,” his first project since “Hail, Caesar!,” Ethan and Joel Coen’s new satire of the 1950s Hollywood studio system. But the weather had stalled shooting, and Mr. Brolin had exited the Blue Ridge Mountains like a slab of feral Americana: 40 extra pounds of what he called bear weight packed on his rugged handsomeness.
“‘The Revenant’ is such a crock” he said, using some colorful language and adding, “compared to what we’re going through — I heard they had hot tubs on the set!” Arriving in October, he hiked woods and swam rivers while temperatures dropped into the low single digits.
That day may come. Mr. Brolin, who turns 48 on Feb. 12, already has an Oscar nomination for his portrayal of Dan White, a former San Francisco city supervisor who assassinated the gay rights activist Harvey Milk and Mayor George Moscone, in “Milk” (2008).
It arrived — a kind of clarion call — near the end of a 20-year dry spell during which Mr. Brolin lived in a state of perpetual panic, never knowing when or if the next project would come along.
Hate no more. Mr. Brolin has churned out three films in each of the last three years — among them, Paul Thomas Anderson’s “Inherent Vice,” Denis Villeneuve’s “Sicario” and Spike Lee’s “Oldboy” — becoming in the process a critical darling and go-to guy for auteurs who entrust him with their singular visions.
Now comes “Hail, Caesar!” and the role of Eddie Mannix, a religiously befuddled fixer at a 1950s Hollywood studio rife with moral miscreants whose biggest star, played by George Clooney (getting second billing to Mr. Brolin), has been kidnapped.
And he was willing to play the straight man to a menagerie of outsize personalities.
That insecurity endured for another decade, until David O. Russell — against Miramax’s wishes, Mr. Brolin said — cast him as a bisexual federal agent in “Flirting With Disaster.” And then another decade until, during shooting on “Grindhouse,” he heard that the Coens were turning a Cormac McCarthy novel into a movie, and Mr. Brolin sent them a tape.
The joke goes that Mr. Brolin’s audition might have been just any other had the Coens not been transfixed by the lighting, courtesy of Quentin Tarantino and Robert Rodriguez, who’d shot it.
When the Coens offered him the role of Llewelyn Moss, a welder trying to abscond with $2 million from a drug deal gone bad in “No Country for Old Men,” “I was stunned, truly stunned,” he said.
After watching Mr. Brolin in “No Country,” Mr. Villeneuve longed to work with him. So when he offered Mr. Brolin the role of an undercover C.I.A. officer hunting a Mexican drug lord in “Sicario,” he wasn’t willing to take no for an answer.
Mr. Brolin turned him down twice — wary of taking on a character thinly fleshed out in the script and a director whose vision he was unsure of — and yet Mr. Villeneuve kept pushing, even flying to Los Angeles to court him.
“My instinct was that he would be able to create something not on paper, that he would not be afraid of going into the dark,” Mr. Villeneuve said.
And yet Mr. Brolin’s art still doesn’t come naturally.
Instead, he finds acting to be much more a construct.
“You show up, you do your work, you give 1,000 percent, and you try to give as much variation as you can,” he said.
It’s a simplification he seems to apply to his personal life as well, after being picked up on a public intoxication charge around New Year’s 2013 and after a high-profile divorce from Diane Lane (whom he spoke of warmly while refusing to offer details) that turned his life into tabloid fodder.
The key to contentment is to treat your family with the same respect with which you’d treat the public, Mr. Brolin summarized three days later in the Baccarat Hotel in Midtown.
If he looked seductively menacing with his camouflage hunter’s hat, hulking girth and 1970s “porn star ’stache” (his words), the impression he gave was that of a man in love — with his children, Trevor, 27, an electrician, and Eden, 22, an actress, and with his fiancée, Kathryn Boyd. Had he, at last, banished the demons from his tender core?
No more Mr. Tough Guy affectations, he said. Not in his personal life and not in his acting.
