ZURICH — A day before he was to relinquish his title as the most powerful man in sports, Sepp Blatter already had his final morning as FIFA president planned. He said he would wake up and dance a little, as he always does (Frank Sinatra’s “My Way” is a favorite). He would monitor the election, he said. But he turned down several offers from friends, journalists and, he said, even a priest, to give him company while his FIFA career was to officially come to a close.
In an interview Thursday, Mr. Blatter, the president of world soccer’s governing body for 18 years and a central cog in its operation for more than four decades, was alternately upbeat and reflective, wistful and whimsical, spiritual and — perhaps most of all — unbowed regarding how he will remembered.
Casually dressed and at ease at a table at Sonnenberg, the restaurant and private club near FIFA’s headquarters that features a FIFA salad on its menu, Mr. Blatter ranged widely as he talked about the scandal that led to his suspension and the arrests of many of his colleagues, as well as who will win Friday’s election to replace him and how his life has changed as he is now just two weeks from his 80th birthday.
Like many people approaching retirement, Mr. Blatter seemed conflicted about finding the balance between withdrawing from the professional life he has known for so long and the day-to-day existence of his future. He has avoided making a public endorsement of any candidate in Friday’s election for his successor, but on Thursday he defended the candidacy of Sheikh Salman bin Ebrahim al-Khalifa, who is a member of Bahrain’s royal family and has faced questions about human rights violations in his home country.
Mr. Blatter dismissed such allegations, saying they were being highlighted only to “discredit” Sheikh Salman.
Of course, Mr. Blatter is dealing with judgments on several fronts. In addition to the continuing Swiss corruption probe of his actions as FIFA president, a separate United States investigation is open; he is not among the dozens of former colleagues charged in the case. On Wednesday, FIFA’s appeals committee reduced Mr. Blatter’s suspension to six years from eight, citing his long service to global soccer. Noting that Michel Platini, the president of European soccer’s governing body who was suspended along with Mr. Blatter over what FIFA has called an improper payment of about $2 million, also had his suspension similarly reduced, Mr. Blatter laughed and shook his head.
Who’s Running for FIFA President?
Five candidates are on the ballot this week for the election to replace Sepp Blatter as FIFA president. Who will win the vote at the special FIFA Congress on Friday in Zurich?
Mr. Blatter was not downbeat, though. He variously discussed his interest in music (he enjoys playing a set of Caribbean drums he has in his apartment), his appreciation for American professional baseball stadiums (“the catering is amazing”), and his delight over reconnecting with his longtime girlfriend (“I have found love”).
Mr. Blatter often returned to his legacy, however, and said that he believed that his time as FIFA’s president may best be defined by how he helped make soccer a universally beloved institution.
Since returning to good health — he is 93 percent well, he said — Mr. Blatter has spent his days balancing enforced retirement with obsessive politicking. He watches soccer matches on one of the five televisions in his apartment here, and he has conducted frequent meetings with soccer officials, his finger every bit on the pulse of international sport as it was when he had an office in FIFA.
Indeed, on Thursday he had a tight calendar, sitting down with soccer officials from Palestine to handicap who would succeed him. Overlooking a snow-dusted vineyard in a mostly empty restaurant that has served as a sort of new headquarters for him, he rattled off the latest counts of how many votes he believed each candidate had accumulated.
Some observers have noted that Mr. Blatter’s six-year suspension would expire in time for him to play a role in the staging of the 2022 World Cup in Qatar — a tournament that was awarded controversially during his tenure — but Mr. Blatter said he had no interest in returning to soccer as anything more than a spectator.
