Indiana University Bloomington will review the handling of 18 sexual misconduct cases after the associate dean who led hearings on the cases was publicly accused of sexually assaulting a woman.
Jason Casares, who is in charge of the university’s office of student ethics, was put on paid administrative leave after the accusations surfaced in an open letter published online this month by his accuser, Jill Creighton, who is the assistant director for global community standards at New York University.
In her letter, Ms. Creighton says Mr. Casares assaulted her while they were at a convention for the Association of Fraternity/Sorority Advisors, in Fort Worth in December.
“Jason took advantage of me after I had had too much to drink,” Ms. Creighton wrote.
Mr. Casares could not be reached for comment. But Tony Paganelli, a lawyer who has said he is representing Mr. Casares, told The Chronicle of Higher Education in a statement that he “categorically denies” the accusations.
Indiana University is investigating Ms. Creighton’s accusations, which it learned about when her letter was published online on Feb. 3, said Mark Land, the university spokesman. The cases being reviewed date back to the beginning of the current academic year, in August 2015.
Mr. Casares, who also serves as a deputy Title IX coordinator, joined the university in 2011 and has been leading the three-person panels that review sexual misconduct cases since then, Mr. Land said. The university said it was limiting its review to the current academic year because that is when the accusation against Mr. Casares emerged.
Mr. Casares and Ms. Creighton are both members of the Association for Student Conduct Administration, a group for higher education professionals, where he was slated to start a term as president this month and she was to begin as president-elect.
Mr. Casares resigned from his position as president-elect for the A.S.C.A. on Jan. 29, but he remains a member of the group. Ms. Creighton has taken a leave of absence from her role.
A law firm hired by the association to investigate the incident could not substantiate Ms. Creighton’s claims, the A.S.C.A. said in a statement, adding that the complaint has been resolved.
In a telephone interview, Ms. Creighton declined to speak on the record about her accusations against Mr. Casares but said she was disappointed with the association’s handling of the case.
“I have not been treated fairly,” she said in the interview.
Ms. Creighton said in her letter that she had filed a criminal complaint against Mr. Casares. A spokesman for the Fort Worth Police Department said the case was being investigated.
The association didn’t help matters when, at a conference two days after her letter was published, Ms. Creighton’s name was rendered incorrectly during a presentation in front of an audience of colleagues — her last name was replaced by Casares, the name of the man she accused of assaulting her.
The association apologized.
The United States Department of Education is also investigating Indiana University for possible violations of Title IX, the federal law that prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex. Mr. Land said one of those cases was a compliance review opened in 2014 and the other was an individual complaint from last year.
“We’ve been cooperating fully with them on that,” Mr. Land said.