This four-bedroom stone villa, with two full and three half baths, is in Attard, part of a cluster of old communities in central Malta known as “The Three Villages.” About a 10-minute drive from the medieval walled city of Mdina, one of Malta’s biggest tourist attractions, Attard is home to San Anton Palace, the official residence of the president of Malta, and the surrounding San Anton public gardens.
This three-story farmhouse was originally built in the 17th century. The current owners bought the parcel of nearly 0.25 acre and the house, then vacant and derelict, in 1994. They renovated every aspect of the home, adding modern elements while maintaining the original features.
The house, with about 5,800 square feet of living area, is designed around a central courtyard, in a traditional Maltese style. The thick limestone walls and small exterior windows are also typical of old homes in the area. A hallway leads around the edges of the house, connecting the rooms. The main living areas are accented with stone arches. The floors are Maltese flagstone coated with honey-colored linseed oil.
One of the living areas on the ground floor was originally used as the farm’s “mill room,” where livestock was housed and fed. This room features two distinctive stone arches and a log fireplace; two stone tie rings for animals remain from the original mill room.
A short stone staircase in the old mill room leads to a long rectangular dining room that can seat 20. Another staircase leads to a loft with a parquet floor, which can be used for a gym or a living area. A doorway from the mill room leads to the kitchen, which is equipped with modern appliances and includes a small dining area.
The ground floor also has a room currently used as a library and study, a TV room and two half-bathrooms. The loft, TV room and mill room have broad windows with views of the gardens. The furniture is not for sale, said Francis Spiteri Paris, the managing director of Perry Estate Agents, which is listing the property.
The four bedrooms are upstairs, including a master bedroom overlooking the garden with an en-suite bathroom and a walk-in closet. Two bedrooms face the courtyard; another overlooks the road. One bedroom served as the farmhouse’s original living quarters, known as the “l-ghorfa,” the owner said. There are two terraces, one overlooking the garden and one overlooking the interior courtyard.
The property features more than 5,000 square feet of garden, including a 36-foot pool, a lawn, a barbecue area and fruit trees. The property includes a one-car garage and a large carport at the end of the garden.
The home is a short walk to markets, schools and small cafes. It is about a 20-minute drive to the port city of Valletta, Malta’s capital, a Unesco World Heritage site. Malta International Airport is about a 15-minute drive from Attard.
Malta’s business-friendly tax structure and sunny Mediterranean climate have attracted international property buyers for many years. Demand for homes often outpaces the limited supply on the island, which is only 121 square miles.
Prices have been rising steadily by more than 10 percent annually for the past two years, agents say. Demand is particularly strong for traditional homes and newer homes in the countryside.
In recent years there has been a wave of new construction, particularly in apartments along the coast. The new apartment developments are attracting more international investors, many looking to offer the property as a rental.
“The rental market has exploded,” Mr. Casolani said.
Malta is also benefiting from the Individual Investor Program inaugurated in 2014, which offers a path to Malta citizenship to investors willing to make a minimum contribution and investment totaling 1.15 million euros, or about $1.28 million, including buying or leasing property. That also means full European Union citizenship, since Malta is a member.
In the first year of the program, Malta processed about 100 applications, according to Henley and Partners, the British-based group that helped to implement the program.
Malta has been a favorite of British second-home buyers for many years, but the island also attracts Scandinavians, Germans, French and other E.U. citizens, agents said.
In recent years there has been an increase in buyers from Asia and the Middle East, according to Mr. Casolani, who estimates that 40 percent to 50 percent of his business comes from foreign buyers.
Malta is a member of the European Union and follows many aspects of the British legal system, making buying property a relatively straightforward transaction, agents say. Documents and contracts are typically prepared in English. Escrow accounts are common to safeguard deposits, and titles are tracked by a public land registry.
There are a few restrictions on foreign buyers, including a limit of one property per foreign owner, except in projects in Special Designated Areas (SDAs). In the SDAs, which are primarily mixed-use residential and commercial projects, foreigners typically have the same rights as Maltese citizens and can buy several properties.
A notary typically oversees the transaction process, confirms ownership status and records all documents.
There is a 5 percent stamp duty on home purchases. The notary typically charges a fee ranging from 1.5 percent to 2.5 percent of the purchase price. There are no annual property taxes in Malta. The seller usually pays a fee of 5 percent to the agent handling the sale.
While there is no tax on profit when a home is sold, the seller typically pays a tax of 5 percent to 8 percent of the sales price, depending on the type of property and length of ownership. But the seller may be exempt from the tax if he has used the property as a main residence for at least three consecutive years.
