SETTING: This contemporary sits on top of nearly 27 acres overlooking the countryside and mountains, three and a half miles from Jiminy Peak ski resort. The property backs up to conservation land; the area is quiet and rural. Hancock has about 720 residents and is on the Massachusetts-New York border. Shopping, theater, museums and other amenities are in the Berkshires towns of Pittsfield and Williamstown, Mass., both within 15 miles.
INDOORS: The three-story house was built in 2005 by the original owner, a carpenter, using locally milled wood. It was updated over the past five years. The foyer opens to a great room that takes up the entire first floor, with walnut floors, a wide brick fireplace and chestnut ceiling beams salvaged from an old mill. Track lighting was designed to highlight artwork. The living room gives way to a den. Walls of glass throughout the house face the countryside, while decks and sunrooms double as heat sinks and sources of passive solar energy.
The kitchen is organized around a central island with a five-burner BlueStar cooktop. Other appliances include a Sub-Zero refrigerator and Wolf double ovens. Both the kitchen and the adjoining dining room have heated marble floors and open to a three-season sunroom. A deep ipe-wood deck extends along the full width of the entry level and connects to another, similar deck on the lower level.
Bedrooms are on the second floor. The master suite has cherry floors, a vaulted ceiling with exposed beams, a walk-in closet and a private bathroom. A sitting area with windows on three sides juts out from the face of the house toward the mountains. Also on the second floor are a bathroom with a jetted tub, and an enclosed balcony, accessible from two of the bedrooms. The third floor is a large open loft with walls of windows on all sides, used as an office. There’s also a walkout lower level with an exercise room and a game room opening to the lower deck. 
OUTDOOR SPACE: The landscaping around the house includes a rock garden and a cubist-inspired pavilion for outdoor dining. A stone-lined path leads from the house to a meadow with apple trees and a swimming pond.
SETTING: This midcentury modern is in a residential area in northeast Seattle called Maple Leaf. The house is one of a handful in the neighborhood set along Thornton Creek, which runs through the yard. The lot is buffered by wooded lots owned by the city; migratory herons visit the property on occasion. The nearby Northgate neighborhood has a mall, a light-rail station under construction, international grocers and light commercial development; Interstate 5 is close by the mall.
INDOORS: The two-story cedar clapboard house was built in the early 1950s and renovated within the past year. It was designed by Alfred Fenwick Simonson, an architect whose postwar projects ranged from high-end houses to banks and beauty salons. Renovations were done by House Healers.
The exterior is gray, with a ceramic tile roof and walls of windows facing the creek and the woods. The interior blends Mr. Simonson’s original design with new and cleverly repurposed materials, creating a look at once clean and rustic.
Set on a slope, the house opens on its top floor. The pitched ceiling in the living room is paneled in the original cedar. The floors are oak with slate accents. Recessed lighting and walls of windows create an airy space, while a large brick fireplace with a copper hood and a mahogany mantel gives the room an anchor, and separates the living room from the kitchen.
The kitchen island is made from a cross-section of a Washington sequoia tree with a live edge, and has a built-in four-burner Wolf range. Other fixtures include concrete countertops and LED lighting. The dining room has a tile floor and walls of glass on three sides, with sliding glass doors that open to a deck cantilevered over the creek.
A pair of black steel doors from the Palladian Hotel in Seattle open to the entry-level master suite. The room has a wood window seat and a sliding door to a deck. A midcentury Brutalist mosaic sideboard by Lane Furniture was repurposed as a bathroom vanity; the cast concrete tub is set under walls of glass.
The entry level and the lower level are bridged by a mezzanine with slate floors, rough-cut cedar paneling and a creekside entryway. An industrial door from an old Filson clothing factory is now used on the coat closet; a chandelier, also salvage, was fashioned from copper tubes, each with its own electrical cord.
In addition to the second and third bedrooms, the lower level has a den and a study. Floors here alternate between bamboo and polished concrete, with the original wood-paneled ceilings and a stone fireplace in the den. The bathroom’s vanity is a cabinet salvaged from an elementary school in Tacoma, Wash., while two wall cabinets are from a West Seattle high school. A bathroom connects the downstairs bedrooms, both of which face the creek. The property also has an attached two-car garage with cedar walls and a vaulted ceiling.
OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is about a third of an acre, thick with Douglas fir.
SETTING: This house is on a quiet dead-end road in an older residential neighborhood called Ridglea, inside the main highway loop of Fort Worth. The road the house is on winds into the Ridglea Country Club, which has two golf courses. Neighbors are on acre-plus lots. Supermarkets and shopping centers are along Vickery Boulevard, a couple of miles away; museums, theaters, gardens and zoos are in the city’s cultural district, about five miles away; downtown is a few miles beyond that.
INDOORS: The low-lying ranch was built in 1950 and last updated about 10 years ago. A circular driveway leads to a courtyard with a wrought-iron gate, rose bushes and a water fountain. The large living room and adjoining sunroom form an open-plan space totaling nearly 750 square feet, with walls of windows facing the yard and pool.
The brick floors in both rooms are original, as are the living room’s white brick fireplace and unusual copper wall. The sunroom has a wall of cabinets and entertainment storage. Glass doors in the living area open to a fire pit and outdoor kitchen with a sink and a grill; the pool, patio and hot tub, off the sunroom, are fenced.
The kitchen was updated with granite surfaces, stainless-steel appliances and plenty of storage, both overhead and under counters. An island separates the kitchen from a family room with a gas fireplace and walls of glass facing the front courtyard and a large Japanese maple.
There is a butler’s pantry with mirrored walls and glass shelves. A hallway leads to a suite with its own living area, bedroom and bathroom.
The rest of the bedrooms, including the master suite, are at the other end of the house. The master suite has an office, and opens to a side yard and a flagstone patio. The suite includes a walk-in closet and a bathroom with double vanities, three sinks, a soaking tub and a steam shower. Floors in the bedrooms are the original hardwood, while custom storage, for books, entertainment and clothing, was installed during renovations. There’s also a library.
OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is just over an acre, with front, back and side yards beyond the patios and pool. The outdoor kitchen area has built-in seating.
