Deputy Prime Minister Numan Kurtulmus of Turkey confirmed that several people were killed, both civilians and soldiers, when a car bomb exploded in the capital, Ankara.
ISTANBUL — Turkey reeled on Wednesday from a deadly bombing of a military convoy in the capital, plunging its leaders deeper into crisis mode and underscoring the country’s vulnerability to the Syrian war and revitalized Kurdish insurgency.
The bombing in the capital, Ankara, made President Recep Tayyip Erdogan even more combative; he vowed to strike at enemies in Syria or anywhere else.
The blast hit a convoy of buses filled with soldiers as it was stopped for a traffic light near the Parliament building. Officials said the explosion killed at least 28 people and wounded more than 60. No group took responsibility immediately, but some officials said Kurdish militants might have been responsible.
An explosion near government buildings in Ankara, Turkey, killed dozens of people.
Hours later and more than 2,000 miles away in what may have been a sympathy attack, an explosion severely damaged a Turkish cultural association building in a Stockholm suburb. Swedish police officials said there were no suspects.
Mr. Erdogan is growing increasingly exasperated over changes wrought by the war in Syria, where Kurdish rebels, whom he considers terrorists, have gained territory along the Turkish border in the chaos created by advancing Syrian forces backed by Russian airstrikes.
The Turkish armed forces have been shelling Kurdish positions in Syria since last weekend, and Mr. Erdogan’s aides have said a ground invasion of Syria is the only way to stop the war, but the message is not resonating with Turkey’s NATO allies — especially the United States, which has angered Mr. Erdogan.
He and Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu canceled foreign trips after the bombing.  As many as 30 ambulances were dispatched, the Health Ministry said.
Four months ago, the capital was rocked by the deadliest terrorist attack in the country’s modern history, when two suicide bombers believed to be linked to the Islamic State struck a peace rally, killing more than 100 people.
In recent months, Turkey has stepped up cooperation with the American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State in Syria, and has been attacked. Last month, a suicide bomber killed at least 10 tourists in Istanbul.
The Kurdish insurgency is a separate conflict, but it has become increasingly intertwined with the Syrian war.
The Turkish military has been waging a counterinsurgency against Kurdish militants in the southeast, after the breakdown of a fragile peace process in July. Since December, many towns have been under round-the-clock curfews as Turkish forces have clashed with militants from the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, known as the P.K.K., who have been fighting for autonomy and more rights for three decades.
“The chosen target for this attack, which is our military, suggests the P.K.K is behind this attack,” a Turkish government official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity in line with government protocol.
Analysts also said the assault echoed past P.K.K. attacks on off-duty officers.
“This attack demonstrates the growing linkage between Turkey’s own Kurdish problem and the Syrian war, and vice versa,” said Soner Cagaptay, a senior fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. As Turkey shells Kurdish fighters in Syria, he said, they may be responding in part by effectively opening a second front against Ankara.