With the conviction of Sheldon Silver, the former speaker of the State Assembly, all that seemed left for the judge was a defense motion for a new trial and Mr. Silver’s sentencing, both of which are pending.
But there has long been an aspect of the case that Mr. Silver’s lawyers have strenuously fought to keep secret.
From the tidbits of information gleaned at a hearing on Thursday in Federal District Court in Manhattan, it appeared that prosecutors had argued last fall — in a closed hearing and in sealed court papers — to be able to use certain evidence against Mr. Silver at trial. His lawyers appear to have vigorously objected and the matter ultimately did not surface at trial.
Mr. Silver, 71, a Democrat, was convicted on Nov. 30, 2015, of charges that included honest services fraud, extortion and money laundering.
Federal prosecutors showed at trial that he had obtained nearly $4 million in illicit fees in return for taking official actions that benefited a Columbia University cancer researcher and two real estate developers in New York.
The judge, Valerie E. Caproni, had indicated that she would revisit the issue of the secret information after the trial was over, and more recently asked the parties to file motions on the issue. The sealed materials appear to include documents and a transcript of a pretrial hearing that was held on the issue.
The government and defense each filed motions that are still secret. The New York Times and NBCUniversal, citing the First Amendment right of access to the courts, filed papers arguing that the materials should be made public.
In court on Thursday, Judge Caproni first held a public session limited to legal arguments, and indicated she favored the release of the materials, with redactions to protect the identities of people who are mentioned in the documents but are not parties to the case.
“The public has an interest in what goes on in criminal trials, which includes both the evidence that’s admitted and the evidence that’s excluded, for whatever reason,” she said.
Justin V. Shur, a lawyer for Mr. Silver, asked the judge to maintain the confidentiality of the materials until after Mr. Silver had completed his appeal. The implication was that the material might be so inflammatory to Mr. Silver that it would be hard to find unbiased jurors.
But Judge Caproni said she was comfortable that were Mr. Silver to be granted a new trial, by her or an appeals court, a rigorous questioning of prospective jurors could screen out bias.
A prosecutor, Andrew D. Goldstein, citing the First Amendment, made it clear the government felt the materials should be released expeditiously, and he suggested that prosecutors might want to use the information at Mr. Silver’s sentencing, which is scheduled for April 13.
The judge then asked reporters and other members of the public to leave the courtroom, so that the prosecution, defense and lawyers for one or more of the non-parties could discuss the matter freely.
After the judge reopened the courtroom, she said that she planned to unseal the materials but with redactions, apparently to protect the identities of the non-parties. She would also issue an opinion explaining her analysis — all of which would be kept confidential for another week to allow for any appeals.
If there were no appeals, or if appeals were unsuccessful, she indicated she hoped to release the redacted materials and her opinion, at the earliest in two weeks.
