Elizabeth L. Eisenstein, a historian best known for her work on the seismic effect of printing on Western civilization — a novel contention when she began her research more than 40 years ago — died on Jan. 31 at her home in Washington. She was 92.
Her daughter, Margaret Eisenstein DeLacy, confirmed the death.
A retired faculty member of the University of Michigan, Professor Eisenstein was renowned for “The Printing Press as an Agent of Change: Communications and Cultural Transformations in Early Modern Europe,” first published in 1979. Spanning two volumes and nearly 800 pages, the work has been translated into many languages and remains in print.
“Whether you agree with her conclusions or not, we wouldn’t think about print in the ways that we think today had it not been for her work,” Sabrina Alcorn Baron, an editor of “Agent of Change: Print Culture Studies After Elizabeth L. Eisenstein,” said in a telephone interview on Tuesday.
Professor Baron’s book, edited with Eric N. Lindquist and Eleanor F. Shevlin and published in 2007, was undertaken to celebrate the silver anniversary of Professor Eisenstein’s magnum opus.
In “The Printing Press as an Agent of Change,” Professor Eisenstein argued that the development of movable type by Johannes Gutenberg in the mid-15th century helped inaugurate a set of sweeping social changes thanks to the authoritative, widely tangible dissemination of information it allowed.
Among the sea changes ushered in by the proliferation of print shops throughout Europe, Professor Eisenstein maintained, were no less than the Renaissance, the Protestant Reformation and the scientific revolution of the 16th century and afterward.
In the 1960s, when she began researching printing history, Professor Eisenstein found — to her considerable surprise — that while there were many studies of scribal life in the Middle Ages before Gutenberg, and of literary life in the Renaissance after, little had been written about the watershed years in between, when the printing press first made its mark.
The coming of print, Professor Eisenstein wrote, fundamentally altered the occupational landscape of Europe, over time creating a cohort of out-of-work scribes. What was more, as she observed in later work, the transition from scribal culture to print culture prefigured the present-day shift from print culture to digital.
Some scholars took Professor Eisenstein to task for what they deemed her overstatement of print’s transformative power. But her work remains no less seminal for that, Robert Darnton, a retired historian and librarian at Harvard, said on Tuesday.
The third of four daughters of Sam A. Lewisohn and the former Margaret Seligman, Elizabeth Ann Lewisohn was born in Manhattan on Oct. 11, 1923.
Hers was an eminent family: Her paternal grandfather was the industrialist and philanthropist Adolph Lewisohn, for whom Lewisohn Hall at Columbia University and Lewisohn Stadium in Upper Manhattan were named. Her father was prominent in business and civic affairs, her mother active in the education reform movement.
Reared in a mansion on Fifth Avenue, Elizabeth Lewisohn attended Vassar College, from which she received a bachelor’s degree in 1944. She went on to earn master’s and doctoral degrees in history from Harvard.
Professor Eisenstein taught at American University in Washington before joining the faculty at Michigan, where she was the Alice Freeman Palmer professor of history, in 1975. She taught there until her retirement in 1988.
Besides her daughter, Professor Eisenstein’s survivors include her husband, Julian Calvert Eisenstein; a son, Edward Lewisohn Eisenstein; a sister, Virginia Kahn; three grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren. Her first child, a son, died at birth in 1949; another son, John Calvert Eisenstein, died in 1974.
The recipient of Guggenheim and Rockefeller Foundation fellowships, Professor Eisenstein was appointed, in 1979, the inaugural scholar in residence at the Center for the Book in the Library of Congress. Her laurels also include the Gutenberg Award from the International Gutenberg Society in 2012.
Among her other books are “The First Professional Revolutionist” (1959), about the utopian socialist Philippe Buonarroti; “Grub Street Abroad: Aspects of the French Cosmopolitan Press From the Age of Louis XIV to the French Revolution” (1992); and “Divine Art, Infernal Machine” (2011), which charts the public reception of the printed word in its various incarnations from the age of Gutenberg to the present.
This article is set in 8.7 point Imperial and was printed on one of several presses, including the Goss Colorliner. It is also published, permanently if intangibly, at nytimes.com/section/obituaries.