CHICAGO — The state-appointed emergency manager of the Detroit Public Schools, who had also managed the city of Flint and oversaw its decision to draw its water from the Flint River, resigned on Tuesday, the day before a congressional committee hearing in Washington on Flint’s water.
Michelle Zdrodowski, a spokeswoman for Detroit Public Schools, said the manager, Darnell Earley, had declined to testify before a panel investigating the widespread contamination of Flint’s tap water after the city switched its water source, which led to elevated blood lead levels throughout the city.
On Tuesday evening, the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee issued a subpoena for Mr. Earley to testify on Wednesday, but his lawyer, A. Scott Bolden, said Mr. Earley would not be able to appear.
Mr. Earley was appointed to the Flint and Detroit management positions by Gov. Rick Snyder, a Republican. His oversight has come under scrutiny, both for his support of switching water sources, which triggered its current public health crisis, and for the condition of the Detroit Public Schools, which have been hit by a series of teacher “sickouts” in protest of the district’s conditions.
In a letter to Governor Snyder dated Tuesday, Mr. Earley wrote that his resignation will be effective Feb. 29. “While there is still much work yet to be done,” he said, he believed his work had helped lead the school district to long-term financial health.
Mr. Earley also said he had developed a plan that would eventually help the district return to “some form of local control” — a sore point with many residents, who unwillingly surrendered that control.
Mr. Earley inherited a school system already suffering from low academic achievement, declining enrollment, crumbling buildings and in financial distress. The system is in so much debt it could be insolvent by spring.
His appointment as the Detroit school system’s emergency manager in January 2015 followed two years in which he played a similar role in Flint at the behest of Mr. Snyder.
“He restructured a heavily bureaucratic central office, set in place operating and cost-containment measures, and has taken steps to stabilize enrollment,” he said.
Mr. Snyder said he would appoint a transition leader by the end of the month.
Mr. Earley’s departure was announced on the same day that federal officials said the F.B.I. was investigating how Flint, a city of nearly 100,000 people, had failed to provide clean water. Failure to treat the water from the Flint River caused the pipes to corrode, leading to the leaching of lead and other toxic chemicals into the system. Residents are using filters and bottled water for drinking, cooking and, in some cases, bathing.
The United States attorney’s office, the Postal Inspection Service, the Environmental Protection Agency and a task force appointed by the governor have already started investigations. The F.B.I.’s involvement could indicate that criminal acts are suspected.
On Tuesday, Karen Weaver, the mayor of Flint, called for the lead pipes in the city’s water system to be removed immediately, starting with the homes that have the highest recorded levels of lead.
Ms. Zdrodowski, the Detroit schools spokeswoman, said Mr. Earley was not available for an interview.
Mr. Earley was the fourth emergency manager for the school system since 2009. His resignation was hailed as a victory for Detroit teachers..
“He was a very tight-lipped agent of the governor,” said Steve Conn, a former president of the Detroit teachers’ union.
