The Kansas Supreme Court on Thursday gave the state until June 30 to fix its system of financing public schools, or face a court-ordered shutdown before the next school year begins.
Rather than improve the way it doled out state money, the court ruled, the Republican-controlled Legislature has failed to cure inequities between rich and poor school districts.
“The legislature’s unsuccessful attempts to equitably, i.e., fairly, allocate resources among the school districts not only creates uncertainty in planning the 2016-2017 school year but also has the potential to interrupt the operation of Kansas’ public schools,” the court said.
The decision is the latest blow to Gov. Sam Brownback, a Republican, and the state Legislature, which will probably have to find tens of millions of dollars in its budget for additional education funding.
Kansas is already facing deep fiscal woes in the wake of Mr. Brownback’s decision to cut taxes, which he predicted would help bolster the state economy. Revenue has fallen short of projections and he and lawmakers are scrambling to fill a roughly $200 million budget gap before the close of the session.
John S. Robb, a lawyer for the school districts and parents who are suing the state, estimated that the Legislature would have to add $73 million to the system to satisfy the court.
The Legislature’s “chosen path during the 2016 session will ultimately determine whether Kansas students will be treated fairly and the schoolhouse doors will be open to them in August,” the ruling said.
Democrats and moderate Republicans say that the failure to provide enough money for schools is more proof that Mr. Brownback’s tax-cutting experiment has failed.
In Topeka, the state capital, Republican lawmakers accused the court of judicial overreach.
“The court has once again demonstrated no misgivings on interjecting itself in legislative proceedings and holding Kansas taxpayers and Kansas schoolchildren hostage,” Ray Merrick, the Republican speaker of the House, said in a statement.
The ruling extends a longstanding battle in Kansas over public education. A similar showdown between the Legislature and the Kansas Supreme Court in 2005 resulted in lawmakers agreeing to increase per-pupil spending in schools, but the additional funding stopped amid the national financial crisis.
In 2014, in response to a lawsuit arguing that schools were underfunded, the Kansas Supreme Court ruled that the Legislature was obligated to equitably fund school districts. The Legislature passed a new law, but fearing that the costs had run too high, eventually cut back on aid that was intended to go to the poorer districts.
Their temporary solution was to pass a bill that replaced a previous formula with one that used block grants to allocate funds. Supporters of block grants say that they give school districts flexibility to spend where they need it most. But the plan was immediately criticized by education advocates for essentially cutting money intended for poorer districts.
Tom Burroughs, the House minority leader, said in a statement that Mr. Brownback and his allies were guilty of mismanaging the state. But “rather than take responsibility for our state’s stagnant economy and self-inflicted budget crisis, Republicans chose to blame public education,” he said.
