We open this novel with the understanding that there will be death. It is a certainty. A story about a heart transplant is impossible without this inevitable equation: One body must give, and one must receive. From the first line of the French writer Maylis de Kerangal’s layered, meditative novel, we know that 19-year-old ­Simon Limbres will lose his heart.
But first, in a joyous, teenage moment, three boys go surfing. The black, pre-dawn water is “dark, marbled, veiny,” and Simon and his two friends thrum with life. We meet the living Simon only briefly. We surf one cold, heavy wall of water with him, and then in a road accident, he is gone. Throughout “The Heart,” he ­remains elusive — a secretive teenager, his life left unfinished and unknown. Even in flashbacks, he is closed and contradictory. We watch as the people who love him subjectively recreate him, and the effect is hollow and fractured. We come away with the impression of an absence rather than a presence.
The story unfolds in an intricate lacework of precise detail. Each character is introduced in particle form, and then the details compound until a wholeness is reached, a person takes shape and steps forward. We meet Simon’s mother, Marianne, who, not sensing disaster, falls back asleep when she first hears the phone ring, and who clings to each moment of borrowed time before the unimaginable understanding breaks over her. We meet Simon’s father, Sean, to whom Marianne must relay the news. She listens to her husband’s unsuspecting voice knowing that “it was the voice of life before,” and that she will never hear it again. We meet the doctor who must gently extinguish all hope. And we meet the organ-coordination nurse, a man of enormous, delicate integrity, who must broach the subject of donation. He sings to know he is alive, keeps a goldfinch and, despite the presumed-consent laws of France, believes in respecting the wishes of the family absolutely. These characters feel less like fictional creations and more like ordinary people, briefly illuminated in rich language, beautifully translated by Sam Taylor, that veers from the medical to the philosophical.
“The Heart” takes place over the course of a single day, but plot is not what drives the narrative. Once the decision is made to donate Simon’s organs, inevitability sets in, and what follows is a foregone conclusion. Instead, the story is propelled by a series of recognitions — incremental, articulated, human moments: narrative earthquakes that break open and pull us deeper into the story.
Some moments are defined by essential questions about the wide, gray line between life and death. Here, death has been reimagined by science, and the heart has lost its medical sovereignty. It can still beat after death is declared. But what about the “iceberg of ancient terror,” Kerangal writes, “being declared dead, by doctors, when you are still alive”? Science cannot resolve this primal fear, and the frayed, unanswered question shadows the air. Simon’s bewildered parents must trust the doctors, doctors who deal in brain death rather than body death.
