I believe that America has the opportunity to once again live by our values, live up to our values in the 21st century, but I think that America can only do that if Americans can succeed. And there are lots of reasons why Americans today are feeling left out and left behind. CLINTON: Yes, of course, the economy has not been working for most Americans. Yes, of course, we have special interests that are unfortunately doing too much to rig the game.
SANDERS: Let me...
SANDERS: ... this is a good discussion here.
The reality is we that have a corrupt campaign finance system which separates the American people’s needs and desires from what Congress is doing. So to my mind, what we have got to do is wage a political revolution where millions of people have given up on the political process, stand up and fight back, demand the government that represents us and not just a handful of campaign contribution — contributors. SANDERS: Now all of the ideas that I’m talking about, they are not radical ideas. Making public colleges and universities tuition free, that exists in countries all over the world, used to exist in the United States. Rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure, and creating 13 million jobs by doing away with tax loopholes that large corporations now enjoy by putting their money into the Cayman Islands and other tax havens. That is not a radical idea.
CLINTON: Well, Chuck...
TODD: ... (inaudible) Clinton, go ahead...
CLINTON: ... If I could, you know, in the very first debate I was asked am I a moderate or a progressive and I said I’m a progressive who likes to get things done. Cherry picking a quote here or there doesn’t change my record of having fought for racial justice, having fought for kids rights, having fought the kind of inequities that fueled my interest in service in the first place going back to my days in the Children’s Defense Fund.
CLINTON: ... I think it’s important that, look, I understand Senator Sanders really trying to distinguish himself. I understand that, that’s what you do in campaigns, but at the same time let’s not be — in, I think an unfair way, making an accusation, or making an attack about where I stand and about where I’ve always stood.
SANDERS: That’s right, I mean, instead of arguing about definitions, let’s talk about...
CLINTON: ... Well, you began it yesterday with your comments...
SANDERS: ... What we should do, and one of the things we should do is not only talk the talk, but walk the walk. I am very proud to be the only candidate up here who does not have a Super PAC, who’s not raising huge sums of money from Wall Street...
SANDERS: Well, Rachel, actually, that wasn’t accurate. In 1988 the Republican did win, I believe, by 3 points. I came in second. It was 34-31, I think, 19 for the Democrat. In that race the Democrat was the spoiler, not me. And it is true...
CLINTON: I am not going to make promises I can’t keep. I am not going to talk about big ideas like single-payer and then not level with people about how much it will cost.CLINTON: A respected health economist said that these plans would cost a trillion dollars more a year.
SANDERS: ... you know...
CLINTON: So I think it’s time to end the very artful smear that you and your campaign have been carrying out...
CLINTON: ... in recent weeks, and let’s talk...
... let’s talk about about the issues. Let’s talk about the issues that divide us.
SANDERS: Let’s talk about — OK, let’s talk...
CLINTON: And let’s — let’s...
SANDERS: ... let us talk about issues.
CLINTON: ... we both agree with campaign finance reform.
SANDERS: ... let’s — let’s — let’s talk about issues.
That is what goes on in America. I am not — I like...
... there is a reason. You know, there is a reason why these people are putting huge amounts of money into our political system. And in my view, it is undermining American democracy and it is allowing Congress to represent wealthy campaign contributors and not the working families of this country.
CLINTON: Well, you know, Senator, I don’t think — I don’t...
TODD: ... Secretary, we’re gonna...
CLINTON: ... I don’t think you could find any person in political life today who has been subjected to more attacks and had more money spent against her by special interests, among whom you have named a few, than I.
And I’m proud of that. You know, when I took on the drug companies and the insurance companies for universal health care coverage, they went after me with a vengeance. CLINTON: Today, you’ve got hedge fund billionaires aligned with Karl Rove, running ads against me to try to get Democrats to vote for you. I know this game. I’m going to stop this game.
TODD: Well, going on that then, why criticize her on Super PACs, and you got — and all this when it is — you know, that’s the system? I mean, you could be participating in a publicly-financing — public financing system...
SANDERS: But if the...
TODD: ... and being able to set — being able to set an example.
MADDOW: Secretary Clinton, on the issue of Wall Street...
MADDOW: ... on the issue of Wall Street, when our reporters go out and talk to people on the ground in the early states, what they tell us over and over again when they find voters who are leaning toward Senator Sanders rather than yourself is that the most frequent area of concern that they hear from those voters is the issue of Wall Street and whether or not you are too close to Wall Street.
MADDOW: Senator Sanders, you have been a critic of Secretary Clinton taking those speaking fees and having donations from Wall Street. What about her defense of her record? SANDERS: Let me just say this. Wall Street is perhaps the most powerful economic and political force in this country. You have companies like Goldman Sachs, who just recently paid a settlement fine with the federal government for $5 billion for defrauding investors.
TODD: ... she has had more people praise her plan than yours.
SANDERS: Well, we’ve had a number of economists supporting our legislation. And here’s where we are. The American people can judge. Six largest financial institutions in America today have assets of roughly $10 trillion; equivalent to 58 percent of the GDP of the United States of America.SANDERS: That is a lot of money. They issue two thirds of the credit cards, and by the way they’re ripping off a whole lot of people with high interest rates on the credit cards, and they write about one third of the mortgages.
And, I want to say something, and it may sound harsh, not to you, but to the American people. In a sense, in my view, the business model of Wall Street is fraud. It’s fraud. I believe that corruption is rampant, and the fact that major bank after major bank has reached multi billion dollar settlements with the United States government when we have a weak regulator system tells me that not only did we have to bail them out once, if we don’t start breaking them up, we’re going to have to bail them out again, and I do not want to see that happen...
CLINTON: ... Well, Senator, no one wants to see that happen. I mean, look, I care deeply about this because just like you I have met so many people who had their life savings wiped out, who lost their homes, who are barely back with their heads above water.
Could you work with them, or have you made enemies of big business in this country with the way you’ve approached them in this campaign?SANDERS: Of course I can work with them, but let’s be clear. When I talked about Boeing and I talked about General Electric, what I was referring to is an outrage. I suspect the secretary agrees request me.
Not only did I vote against that war, I helped lead the opposition, and if you go to my website,berniesanders.com, you will see the statement that I made in 2002. And it gives me no pleasure to tell you that much of what I feared would happen the day after Saddam Hussein was overthrown, in fact, did happen.
TODD: All right. Senator, I want to stay, though...
CLINTON: If I could — if I could...
CLINTON: ... respectfully add — look, we did differ. A vote in 2002 is not a plan to defeat ISIS. We have to look at the threats that we face right now...
... and we have to be prepared to take them on and defeat them.
I agree with the secretary that I think what has to happen — and let me just mention what King Abdullah of Jordan said. I think he hit the nail on the head. SANDERS: And what he said is essentially the war against ISIS is a war for the soul of Islam. And it must be Muslim troops on the ground that will destroy ISIS, with the support of a coalition of major powers — U.S., U.K., France, Germany and Russia.
CLINTON: A group of national security experts, military intelligence experts, issued a very concerning statement about Senator Sanders’s views on foreign policy and national security, pointing out some of the comments he has made on these issues, such as inviting Iranian troops into Syria to try to resolve the conflict there; putting them right at the doorstep of Israel. Asking Saudi Arabia and Iran to work together, when they can’t stand each other and are engaged in a proxy battle right at this moment.CLINTON: So I do think questions have been raised and questions have to be answered because when New Hampshire voters go on Tuesday to cast your vote, you are voting both for a president and a commander in chief. And there is no way to predict what comes in the door of that White House from day to day that can pose a threat to the United States or one of our friends and allies, and I think this is a big part of the job interview that we are all conducting with the voters here.
CLINTON: As I — as I certainly recall, the question was to meet with without conditions. And you’re right, I was against that. I was against it then I would be against it now.SANDERS: OK.
SANDERS: I think President Obama had the right idea, and the bottom line is that of course there have to be conditions. But, of course it doesn’t do us any good to not talk with our adversaries...
CLINTON: ... Well, we set conditions on Iran. We worked hard to get them established, and to be enforced, and then we talked. That’s exactly the right...
CLINTON: ... And, that’s what I did with the President, so he and I are on the very same page.
TODD: Alright, as Commander in Chief, Senator Sanders, you’ve got to prioritize potential threats to the United States. Three countries, North Korea, Iran, Russia. How would you rank them in order of their threat to America’s security right now...
SANDERS: ... ISIS...
TODD: ... Starting with the biggest threat.
SANDERS: ISIS, you forgot one...
TODD: ... I didn’t say that...
SANDERS: ... No, no...
TODD: ... No...
SANDERS: ... ISIS would be ...
TODD: ... We already had that. I’m talking about these three countries. 
TODD: Secretary of Defense Ash Carter this week picked one of those three, and he has said Russia is, basically, the most important national security threat. Sort of reorienting the defense and the challenges to that. Do you agree with his decisions...
SANDERS: ... No, I don’t. I worry very, very much about an isolated country. That’s what makes me nervous. Russia lives in the world. China lives in the world. North Korea is a very, very strange country because it is so isolated, and I do feel that a nation with nuclear weapons, they have got to be dealt with. Dealt with effectively.
TODD: Thank you both, Rachel?MADDOW: Secretary Clinton, I want to ask you about a national security issue that is closer to home. There are thousands of veterans, over 100,000 veterans living in the state of New Hampshire.
And I love New Hampshire, too, because you haven’t voted, but...
... but, look, I think people are blowing this up out of proportion. But I think we need improvements in the process by which results are determined.
MADDOW: Senator — Senator Sanders, in 1964...SANDERS: Oh (inaudible).
And I think that the coalition that President Obama put together to win twice is a coalition that I can put together and add to. And that’s what I’m prepared to...
TODD: We’ll stay on this issue. We’ll stay on this topic.TODD: Secretary Clinton, just like there are some Democrats that question Senator Sanders’ ability in the general election, many Democratic voters that our reporters have been running into in Iowa and New Hampshire, they tell our reporters over and over again they’re worried about the emails issue, not because they don’t believe your explanation, but because it’s a drip-drip, because the cloud is hanging over your head and that it will impact the general election.
MADDOW: Secretary Clinton, do you want 30 seconds on that issue? CLINTON: No.
The last time I had the chance to talk with you on this issue, on the death penalty, you said that capital punishment has a place in a very few federal cases, but you also said you would breathe a sigh of relief if the Supreme Court abolished the death penalty nationwide. Tonight, do you still support capital punishment, even if you do so reluctantly?CLINTON: Yes, I do. And — you know, what I hope the Supreme Court will do is make it absolutely clear that any state that continues capital punishment either must meet the highest standards of evidentiary (ph) proof of effective assistance of counsel or they cannot continue it because that, to me, is the real dividing line.
The New York Times checks assertions made from the Democratic candidates, Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders, during Thursday’s debate in Durham, N.H.
MADDOW: Senator Sanders, you have singled out the death penalty, and Senator Clinton’s support for the death penalty, as an issue that makes it hard to consider as progressive in your mind...
SANDERS: ... Look, I hear what the Secretary said, and I understand, but look, there are — all of us know that we have seen in recent years horrible, horrible crimes. It’s hard to imagine how people can do, bomb, and kill 168 people in Oklahoma City, or do the Boston Marathon bombing, but this is what I believe, and for a couple of reasons.
But, second of all, and maybe, in a deeper reason, of course there are barbaric acts out there. But, in a world of so much violence and killing, I just don’t believe that government itself should be part of the killing. So, when somebody commits...
SANDERS: Absolutely. I think the Secretary described the situation appropriately.SANDERS: You know, I don’t go around asking for governor’s resignations every day. In fact, I think I never have in my life. But I did ask for the resignation of Governor Snyder because his irresponsibility...
TODD: But if you do that as president...
Let me start with you, Secretary Clinton, on this question. Obviously, President Obama got a lot of ambitious stuff done in his first year and a half. You’re going to have to make choices. And there’s a lot of heavy lifts. And he made choices. He did healthcare and it came at the expense, arguably, of immigration reform. Had he put immigration reform first, perhaps that gets done and healthcare doesn’t.TODD: So there are three big lifts that you’ve talked about: immigration, gun reform, climate change. What do you do first? Because you know the first one is the one you have the best shot at getting done.
TODD: All right, but Senator Sanders...
... you’ve still got to do something first. As you know, history said — shows what you pick first is your best shot at getting, and how you prioritize things.
SANDERS: No, let...
SANDERS: ... I am absolutely supportive of comprehensive immigration reform and a path towards citizenship for 11 million people today who are living in the shadows. All right? We got to do that.
And when you put together a budget, you have to make a lot of hard decisions, but I think it’s not appropriate to say “I’m going to get rid of this, get rid of that” until you have a very good process that gives you the information about what to do. CLINTON: But I want to add something else, you know, because look, we have so much work to do in our country, and I think it’s the greatest work that Americans will be called to do. And of course, we have to have people in every community involved in it. We have to have the political voice, the political grassroots speaking up and speaking out about what we have to try to accomplish in Washington.
