Cubans frequently fumigate homes and businesses to block mosquito-borne diseases.
WASHINGTON — As the White House considers a historic visit by President Obama to Cuba this year, a concern beyond the political and diplomatic hurdles has arisen: the Zika virus.
Mr. Obama has said he would “very much” like to visit Cuba before the end of his presidency, and aides have hinted that a visit could come as soon as next month. But disease experts say Zika’s imminent arrival in Cuba is almost certain, although the island nation has yet to officially report cases of locally acquired Zika infection.
“Zika will be all over the Caribbean by the end of February, and almost certainly that includes Cuba,” said Dr. Peter Hotez, the dean of the National School of Tropical Medicine at the Baylor College of Medicine. In other words, it is possible that Mr. Obama could arrive in the middle of an epidemic.
Dr. Hotez also said the disease would soon become endemic in Peru, where Mr. Obama will travel in November for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit meeting.
Experts generally agree that since the Zika and dengue viruses are spread by the same mosquito, wherever the dengue virus is endemic in the Western Hemisphere — including Cuba and Peru — the Zika virus will soon be as well.
“It’s only a matter of time,” said Dr. James Kazura, the director of the Center for Global Health and Diseases at Case Western Reserve University.
Presidential overseas visits are highly choreographed trips that involve hundreds of aides, security personnel and reporters, including many who have recently had children or are considering the prospect. The main worry about the Zika virus is its potential link to microcephaly, a condition that causes babies to be born with unusually small heads and, in the vast majority of cases, damaged brains.
So far these risks have yet to alter schedules at the White House.
“Over all, the president is not changing travel plans based on Zika,” said Peter Boogaard, a White House spokesman.
Neither are other senior officials in the administration. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew traveled in January to Puerto Rico to discuss solutions to the island’s debt problems, and Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. intends to be in Mexico this month for economic talks. Both places have Zika infections.
Other top officials will continue to visit Latin America, and a large delegation from the administration still plans to travel in August to the Olympics in Rio de Janeiro. Brazil is ground zero for the epidemic.
But there have been a handful of assignment changes at the State Department and Pentagon because of the Zika epidemic, officials said. Six State Department employees and 14 family members who are pregnant and assigned to American Embassies in countries affected by Zika have chosen to leave their posts, Mark C. Toner, a State Department spokesman, said Friday.
At the Pentagon, a pregnant spouse of a service member assigned to United States Southern Command, which includes South and Central America, transferred out of the region three weeks sooner than previously scheduled because of Zika, said Maj. Adrian J. T. Rankine-Galloway, a Defense Department spokesman.
The White House has coped with worse. In October 2014, as near-panic about the Ebola epidemic in West Africa convulsed the country, Mr. Obama invited to the White House Nina Pham, one of two Dallas nurses infected with the disease while treating an infected man in Dallas.
Officials quietly asked for confirmation from top health experts that Ms. Pham was no longer infectious. Reassured, Mr. Obama hugged Ms. Pham in the Oval Office, an expression of confidence in officials’ grasp of the science of the disease. Mr. Obama later invited to the White House health officials who had helped battle the disease in West Africa.
Zika is far less dangerous than Ebola, particularly for Mr. Obama. Most infections go unnoticed. Those sickened usually suffer little more than a flat pinkish rash, bloodshot eyes, fever, joint pain and headaches that pass after a few days. In addition to its possible link to microcephaly, the virus can in rare circumstances cause Guillain-Barré syndrome, when the body’s immune system attacks part of the peripheral nervous system and causes paralysis, which is usually temporary, sometimes life-threatening and almost always terrifying.
But the science of Zika is far from settled. Zika has been found in saliva and urine, and Brazilian researchers recently warned that it might have the potential to spread through kissing. The virus may remain in a man’s semen for months, and officials have confirmed cases of its being transmitted by sex.