Beyoncé, a global superstar who has mobilized fans around the Black Lives Matter movement without a single protest speech, has drawn the ire of a police group that says it will refuse to attend her coming concert in Miami.
The Miami Fraternal Order of Police said in a statement that it had voted to let its members boycott the show, scheduled for April 27, because it believed Beyoncé had used this year’s Super Bowl halftime show “to divide Americans by promoting the Black Panthers.” The group called for other law enforcement organizations to boycott her concerts as well.
During the halftime show, Beyoncé and her dancers wore outfits widely perceived to be reminiscent of the Black Panther movement, down to the black berets. Afterward, her dancers also joined Black Lives Matter activists in holding up a sign demanding justice for Mario Woods, a 26-year-old black man who was shot more than 15 times by police officers in San Francisco after he slashed a stranger in the face.
At one point, the dancers raised their fists in salute.
There are differences between what Beyoncé did and Mr. Tarantino did to draw criticism. Mr. Tarantino, who is white, faced anger from police groups over a direct remark. Beyoncé’s message was unspoken, though still perceived as a threat. In both cases, the backlash was severe.
Mr. Kappeler noted that many police departments and groups now use social media and the Internet to “sway public opinion about their practices,” including with statements like the one issued in Miami, and they also publish positive stories about their work on social media. Those methods, he said, try to reinforce “the reductionist notion that repeats a mantra: good cop, bad cop,” and that there are only a few bad apples in police departments.
Mr. Kappeler added that police unions tend to elect as leadership the most “aggressive” members from their ranks to protect the police from criticism.
The latest target, then, is Beyoncé, who, instead of attending protests and making direct speeches against the police, alludes in her “Formation” music video to the shootings of Trayvon Martin, an unarmed black teenager who was killed by a civilian during a confrontation in Florida; and of Michael Brown, an unarmed black 18-year-old killed by a white police officer in Ferguson, Mo.
Both fatal shootings fueled nationwide debate over race relations, but police supporters have rejected the sentiment of the resulting protests. “Hands up, don’t shoot was built on a lie,” the statement from the Miami police union said.
 In another shot, “Stop Shooting Us” is scrawled on a wall. At the end of the video, Beyoncé lies on top of a New Orleans police car as it is submerged in water.
The visuals in Beyoncé’s video, some police groups say, are threatening to officers’ safety, and the issue of whether to provide security at Beyoncé’s concerts are spilling into other jurisdictions. On the Facebook page of Blue Lives Matter, a pro-police organization, a message calling for the boycott of Beyoncé concerts has been shared more than 1,900 times.
In Tampa, Fla., reports said the city’s police union had also chosen to boycott Beyoncé’s concert there, but Stephen Hegarty, a spokesman for the Tampa Police Department, said in an interview that the reports were overblown.
Mr. Hegarty called the media attention around the boycott “sensational,” but added, “it is true that many police officers feel strongly about it.” Police volunteers who do choose to work the event can earn $34 an hour for providing security — those fees are paid by the event hosts (in this case, Beyoncé) and not by the police department, Mr. Hegarty said. He likened the concert to other events hosted by politicians — in those cases, police officers could volunteer to work at the event or not, he said.
According to a statement from the Tampa Police Benevolent Association, police officers would provide security for the event, but can still condemn Beyoncé’s Super Bowl performance.
“We urge all law enforcement officers to boycott the purchase of Beyoncé’s music and the purchase of tickets for her performances,” the statement read.
The Tampa department seemed to be more supportive, at least on Twitter, where it promised to keep Beyoncé’s fans safe at the concert, scheduled for April 29.