MANILA — As Filipinos prepare for the 30th anniversary on Thursday of the “People Power” revolution that toppled Ferdinand E. Marcos, the Marcos family legacy is undergoing a political renaissance by those who claim it was a “golden age” of peace and prosperity.
Ferdinand Marcos, who died in exile in Hawaii in 1989, ruled the Philippines with an iron fist for two decades, with his wife Imelda, whose lavish lifestyle — and thousands of pairs of shoes — became a global symbol of greed and corruption. Marcos was removed from power in 1986 when millions of Filipinos poured into the streets for days of peaceful protests.
But in the decades since Marcos was ousted and fled the country, the outrage has faded for many Filipinos. Despite the accusations of widespread corruption and human rights violations, none of the Marcos family members have been jailed. The family has quietly returned to politics — Mrs. Marcos is a now member of Congress, while her daughter Imee Marcos is a governor.
The family’s political resurgence is led by Marcos’s son, Ferdinand Marcos Jr., known as Bongbong, a popular senator who is tied for first place in the vice president’s race for the May 9 national election, according to a recent survey.
Mr. Marcos has built a coalition from his father’s remaining supporters and young people who were not alive when martial law was declared in the 1970s. He is also backed by the well-funded families who benefited from the Marcos presidency, according to Ramon C. Casiple, executive director of the Institute for Political and Electoral Reform in Manila.
Mr. Marcos has also drawn close to popular politicians. He often appears at rallies with the boxer Manny Pacquiao, a senatorial candidate who is loved by millions of Filipinos. Miriam Defensor Santiago, who is running for president with Mr. Marcos, has a large following among young people on social media.
On the campaign trail, Mr. Marcos usually discusses his plans for the future, but he has also touched on what his father’s supporters consider the “golden age” of the Philippines.
Imelda Orduña, a 70-year-old retired schoolteacher living in the city of Caloocan, north of Manila, who attended one of his recent political rallies, said she remembers well the time of Marcos when there was no traffic, police officers did not extract bribes and criminals were on the run.
Mr. Marcos was campaigning and not available for an interview, his staff said, but during a television interview in August he said he would not apologize for his father’s administration.
“What am I to say sorry about?” he said during the interview, adding that under his father thousands of miles of roads were built, the country had one of the highest literacy rates in Asia, and it was an exporter of rice — the country’s staple food — not an importer, as it is now.
But, he noted during a Feb. 17 news briefing, the issue of martial law and his father’s human rights record does not come up that often on the campaign trail.
Michelle Pulumbarit, 31, a customer service operator who lives north of Manila, said Mr. Marcos was putting forward a proposal for the future that will bring back the best of the Marcos years. She is not concerned about martial law and human rights violations, she said.
For others in the Philippines, the idea of a Marcos “golden age” is not supported by the facts. In her recent book, “Marcos Martial Law: Never Again,” the journalist Raissa Robles estimated that more than 3,200 people were murdered by the government during the Marcos years, and about 40,000 were tortured.
Lisandro Claudio, a professor at the Center for Southeast Asian Studies at Kyoto University, said the Marcos family has changed the political narrative over time, focusing on the glamour and high-profile achievements of the Marcos years.
Marcos supporters note that most of the accusations against the family have never been proved in court. Ferdinand Marcos was never convicted of a crime, but in a class-action lawsuit after his death the United States District Court in Hawaii found his estate liable for torture, summary executions and disappearances.
The Philippine government estimates that Marcos and his associates spirited away $5 billion of government funds by moving the money to overseas bank accounts, as well as buying lavish works of art and jewelry.
Some fear that the election of Mr. Marcos could slow the recovery of that fortune; Mr. Casiple noted that the court system is overwhelmed and in some cases judges are not motivated to rule against associates of the Marcos family.
Apple Buiza, 26, an employee of a Manila aluminum siding company, said the fate of Imelda Marcos’s jewels was not a priority for her in the next election. Ms. Buiza spends hours each day battling traffic to get to work and is frustrated by the current government. She said she has heard stories of how orderly the country was during the Marcos years.
