WASHINGTON — Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter believes he has come up with a way to help the Pentagon retain troops: freezing sperm and eggs.
As part of an initiative to make military service more appealing and family friendly, Mr. Carter has created a pilot program that will pay for troops to have their reproductive cells preserved.
The goal is to give those in uniform the peace of mind that if they are hurt on the battlefield — hundreds of veterans suffered injuries to their reproductive organs in Iraq and Afghanistan — they would still be able to have children.
The program is also meant to encourage women to stay in the military during their 20s and 30s, a time when many leave after giving birth. By freezing their eggs, they will have the flexibility to remain deployed overseas or otherwise pursue their careers and put off having children.
Women who reach 10 years of service — what Mr. Carter called “their peak years for starting a family” — have a retention rate that is 30 percent lower than their male counterparts.
Few companies offer egg and sperm freezing, so the initiative will place the Pentagon — one of the world’s largest employers — at the forefront on the issue, reproductive advocates said. Some Silicon Valley companies like Facebook have begun offering to cover the cost of freezing eggs — which can be more than $10,000 — to help recruit top female candidates.
But the initiative, which Mr. Carter first mentioned in a speech last week about improving retention, raises legal and ethical questions that Defense Department officials will have to navigate.
Dr. Caplan said that the practice of freezing eggs had become widespread only in the past five years, and that it could be more problematic than preserving sperm, which has been done for decades. He said the Pentagon should inform service members that the freezing of eggs is not always successful and can cause complications.
“If your eggs won’t work, you won’t find out until you’re 39,” Dr. Caplan said.
A Pentagon spokesman declined to comment on the legal and ethical questions, saying that details were being worked out. The Defense Department is expected to outline the program in a memo from Mr. Carter in the coming weeks. The program, which applies only to active-duty service members, will be re-evaluated in two years, and could ultimately be made permanent.
The Pentagon estimates that the program could cost about $150 million over five years. It will be offered through Tricare, the military’s health care plan.
During the height of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, several cryogenic firms offered to cover the cost for troops to have their reproductive cells frozen. It is not clear whether any soldiers ultimately used those materials to have children. In recent years, some fertility advocates have lobbied the Defense Department to cover the cost.
Mr. Carter mentioned the program in a speech last week at the Pentagon. Outlining the Defense Department’s efforts to improve the lives of service members, he focused on longer maternity leaves, improved child care and the creation of lactation rooms at military facilities. He touched briefly on freezing sperm and eggs.
“This investment will also provide greater flexibility for our troops who want to start a family, but find it difficult because of where they find themselves in their careers,” Mr. Carter said.
The initiative is part of a series of measures that Mr. Carter has pushed to create what he calls “the force of the future.” He is worried that the military has not adapted enough to compete with top companies for millennials, who put a greater emphasis on work-life balance than did previous generations.
In November, Mr. Carter said that the Pentagon would expand its sabbatical programs to more service members so they could gain experience in academia or different industries. He said that the military was working to modernize its retirement benefits and was creating a LinkedIn-style program to match service members with open positions. In December, he opened all combat positions to women.
Sean Tipton, a spokesman for the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, said he hoped that the rest of the federal government would follow the military’s lead.
