That conversation led to “Hope,” Wednesday’s installment of ABC’s second-year sitcom, in which family man Dre (Anthony Anderson), his wife (Tracee Ellis Ross), his parents (Laurence Fishburne and Jenifer Lewis), and his four children spend nearly the entire episode in their living room debating a fictional case of police brutality near their Los Angeles home. Mr. Barris spoke about the episode as well as his feelings on FX’s “The People v. O.J. Simpson: American Crime Story,” and the disappearing legacy of “The Cosby Show.” These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
Q. What were you trying to achieve with this episode?
A. Police brutality is the issue we chose to talk about, but the bigger issue for me is talking to your kids about what’s going on in the world. It used to be you could shelter them in your own way, but with Internet and phones and 24-hour news, you can’t avoid those conversations.
Why did you decide to shoot it on one set, with everyone together?
I wanted to do something different. We wanted to let the audience eavesdrop on this family’s conversation. I felt like the best way to do that was to let the viewer be an eighth member of the family.
How did you ride the line between being meaningful and funny?
One of the things that made me nervous is that it’s not a super-funny episode. We wanted to have enough of a balance that it didn’t bum you out completely, but it gave you an entry point to accept what was happening.
How did you manage to work in the comedy?
The biggest thing was we didn’t want to trivialize the subject, but at the same time, we are aware we’re a family comedy. I believe comedy is a really good lens to filter serious issues through. If people are laughing, they don’t necessarily realize until they stop laughing that they just took something in that’s going to start a conversation.
CNN anchor Don Lemon and author Ta-Nehisi Coates both appear in news coverage of the fictional case. Did they shoot new footage for you?
Don Lemon did. Ta-Nehisi lives in Paris, but we spoke and he allowed us to use his likeness and words. The footage we used worked perfectly because this is something that has happened time and time again.
Were there any specific references you avoided?
I intentionally didn’t mention Black Lives Matter. We try to show the family is not monolithic and has a lot of different points of view and let people take what they may from it.
In the episode, Dre talks about the fear he felt when President Obama was first being inaugurated and stepped out of the limousine. He says he was afraid the hope Obama represented would be snatched away. Does that reflect your personal feelings?
We went back and forth about whether to put that in. When that inauguration was going on, several newscasters commented that Obama’s suit was made out of Kevlar. Without saying it, they were saying that everyone was fearful. A huge amount of people were like, “Get back in the car!” Because we know the world we live in. Obama represented hope and change for so many people of different colors from all over the world, and we felt like losing him would destroy us.
Did you get much feedback from ABC about this episode’s script?
I was very worried, but I got fewer notes than I have on any other episode. The only battles we had to have were with Standards & Practices and the legal department over clearing clips.
What clips did you battle over?
ABC has a general policy that you can’t show images of the World Trade Center on Sept. 11. We really wanted to show that as one of the images kids are seeing, but it’s just a companywide mandate, so we understood it. We pushed back a bit, because it was such a worldwide event, but they just have some things, like the Paris attacks, that they have decided they’re not ready to show. So we had to write around those things.
Paul Lee was a big supporter of “black-ish” from the start, and he was recently replaced as ABC Entertainment president by Channing Dungey. Does that cause you any concern?
I have concerns in that I’m a big fan of Paul Lee. He changed my life and gave me an opportunity to do the show in a way that I felt a lot of network presidents wouldn’t. I don’t know Channing Dungey well, but we have talked several times, and she seems like an amazing executive. Everyone around town loves her. So I feel the network is behind the show.
Dre’s line about O.J. Simpson, “Black people were so desperate for a win that we had to root for this idiot,” seems especially timely in light of FX’s “The People v. O.J. Simpson: American Crime Story.” Have you seen that show, and what do you think of it?
It’s my guilty pleasure. It’s so bad, but it’s so good. I like it because it’s pulp, and once you take that in, it’s fantastic.
Considering “The Cosby Show” is in danger of vanishing as a cultural document because of the allegations against Bill Cosby, does that put more pressure on your show as one of the few successful African-American family sitcoms in TV history?
Because there are so few, when there is one, you do feel an extra amount of pressure. I don’t necessarily believe that “The Cosby Show” should disappear as a cultural reference, but it is. That’s sad to me. I understand why. He was a man who possibly did some really bad things and he should be punished beyond a doubt. But that show, and the impact it had not just on black culture, but culture, was amazing.
I look at Channing Dungey, and she’s this amazing executive who’s stepping into this almost impossible job. She also has a dual narrative running along with it that she’s the first black woman to do it. Outside of her culture, I’m not sure people take that in. She will have to rise and be better than most.