Seth Rudetsky is not a household name except on Broadway, where he is so well known and well connected that he is sometimes referred to as the mayor of the place. A hazard of being around him is that you feel you have spent the rest of your life in slow motion. Mr. Rudetsky, who is 48 and likes to say he suffers from “adult A.D.D.,” is a multitasker’s multitasker. Several days a week he is the afternoon D.J. on “Seth’s Big Fat Broadway,” a show on Sirius/XM satellite radio, where he is also the host of a weekly talk show, “Seth Speaks,” not to be confused with “Seth’s Broadway Chatterbox,” a weekly talk show he does live at the Midtown cabaret Don’t Tell Mama, or “Rhapsody in Seth,” his one-man autobiographical play, or, for that matter, “This Week in the Life of Seth Rudetsky,” a weekly column he writes for Playbill.com.
Mr. Rudetsky also writes books, organizes theater cruises and is a prolific contributor to YouTube, where he posts what he calls “deconstructions” — clips where he lip-syncs and then analyzes the Broadway performances of Patti LuPone, Bernadette Peters, Betty Buckley and the like. He is a gifted pianist, in demand as an accompanist, and there is hardly an AIDS benefit for which he has not written a number. He talks like a record at 78 r.p.m., seldom pausing for breath and starting new words before the old ones are entirely finished.
On top of this usual workload (not to mention a husband and teenage daughter), Mr. Rudetsky is now appearing at the Nederlander Theater eight times a week in “Disaster!,” a musical that he also wrote, together with Jack Plotnick, and for which he is the musical supervisor and song arranger. “Disaster!,” which opens March 8, is a spoof of ’70s movies like “Airport” and “The Poseidon Adventure,” and serves up a full menu of calamity — earthquake, tidal wave, fire, sharks, piranhas, giant rats — to the accompaniment of Top 40 songs from the same era.
For a jukebox musical, it has attracted an unusually high-profile cast, including a “Rent”-certified heartthrob (Adam Pascal), a “Xanadu” and “Rock of Ages” veteran (Kerry Butler) and two Tony Award winners (Roger Bart and Faith Prince) — who, like everyone else connected with the show, are counting on theatergoers wanting to relive a cultural moment many people would just as soon forget.
With a few exceptions, everyone in the cast is there not just because of the script but also because of a personal connection to Mr. Rudetsky. Ms. Butler he knew from childhood, and Mr. Bart and Mr. Pascal from his talk show. His history with Ms. Prince goes back to the 10 years they were in group therapy together. The director of the show is Mr. Plotnick, who happens to be Mr. Rudetsky’s best friend.
Mr. Rudetsky has a character actor’s looks, not a leading man’s; his face is long, rubbery and a little mournful. He can sing and dance, but not as well as many in the ensemble. If “Disaster!” were not his own show, in fact, it’s debatable whether he would ever have been cast in it.
A few days later, sitting in the mezzanine of the Nederlander, Mr. Rudetsky grew a little teary as he explained how a show called “Disaster!” was the culmination of all the intersecting plot lines in his life.
“I was obsessed with it,” he recalled, “and played the original cast album constantly.” Before long he was the kind of kid who borrowed scores from the library and couldn’t understand why school didn’t let out early when the Tony nominations were announced.
Then there was the equally classic high school period, when he was teased for being gay and overweight and a teacher said he was too selfish to amount to anything. At Oberlin, which he entered in 1984, he majored in classical piano, not because he had given up on musical theater, but because he wasn’t sure he could make a living at it. “I thought I was going to be a school psychologist and audition for shows at night,” he explained.
At the same time he was branching out into comedy. He tried stand-up for a while, and then did sketches at Don’t Tell Mama with Mr. Plotnick, whom he met when they were both subbing in the Off Broadway musical “Pageant” in 1991. He began making a name for himself writing sketches and musical numbers for Broadway benefits like the Easter Bonnet and Gypsy of the Year competitions, and that in turn led to a stint working on Rosie O’Donnell’s TV talk show.
All the while, the Rudetsky Rolodex — or rather, the roster of people unable to resist Mr. Rudetsky’s energy and enthusiasm — was expanding exponentially. By now it includes all the people who follow him on Sirius. Many of them, he pointed out in wonderment, actually listen to him in their cars.
The current version of “Disaster!” is actually the fourth. The show was originally put on, in a sort of concert version, as a one-night benefit in 2011 for Only Make Believe, which performs theater for children in hospitals. Mr. Rudetsky, who as a child was almost as obsessed with weather and natural disasters as he was with Broadway, had been kicking the idea around for years, Mr. Plotnick explained, but had never done anything about it. With just six weeks to go before the benefit, Mr. Plotnick snatched Mr. Rudetsky’s laptop one afternoon and started writing things down while Mr. Rudetsky dictated.
In 2012 the show had a three-month Off Off Broadway run at the tiny Triad Theater on the Upper West Side, and in 2013 it graduated to Off Broadway, at St. Luke’s Theater, where it received a very favorable review from Charles Isherwood of The New York Times.
With each move, the cast has gotten more illustrious, the show more elaborate. The new production has an eight-piece band, a scenic design by Tobin Ost, and costumes by the six-time Tony winner William Ivey Long, who, it almost goes without saying, is a friend of Mr. Rudetsky’s. In fact, the lead producer, Rob Ahrens (who made his reputation with “Xanadu,” another movie-spoof musical), may be one of the very few people involved who didn’t know Mr. Rudetsky personally. He saw the show at St. Luke’s, he said recently, and laughed for two hours. “I had such a great time I just felt better about life,” he said.
Mr. Rudetsky said he was trying not to think about all that.
