MANCHESTER, N.H. — More than half a million voters cast ballots in the New Hampshire primary on Tuesday, rewarding Donald J. Trump and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont with resounding victories, and sending some candidates home to rethink their campaigns. But the results also tell much about the electorate and the challenges the contenders face going forward.
Among voters who cared most about honesty and trustworthiness, 91 percent chose Mr. Sanders and only 5 percent chose Hillary Clinton, according to exit polls. She fared only slightly better among voters who wanted candidates who seemed to care most about people like them. And the younger the voters, the more skeptical they were of Mrs. Clinton: She received just 16 percent of the support from people under 29, and 32 percent from those 30 to 44. The only age group she won: voters over 65.
While pollsters have repeatedly identified Mrs. Clinton’s trustworthiness as a concern of voters, Clinton advisers have long hoped that even if people did not trust her personally, they would come to trust that she would fight for their needs. She clearly still has work to do on that front. Some of her allies, looking back on the race so far, rue that she did not apologize months earlier for using private email when she was secretary of state. They fear that a sense of mistrust became baked into the electorate before she contained the controversy.
While Mr. Trump and Mr. Sanders positioned themselves as political outsiders and won big, the establishment was not entirely demolished. Sixty-nine percent of Democratic voters said they wanted the next president to have experience in politics, and they narrowly favored Mrs. Clinton, according to exit polls. Forty-five percent of Republicans said they preferred a president with political experience, and those voters favored Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio, followed by former Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida.
Mrs. Clinton has been emphasizing her government experience for months. But, according to advisers, she thinks it will start working to her advantage in the coming contests in states where many voters know little about Mr. Sanders or whether he is qualified to be president. Mr. Kasich and Mr. Bush, in turn, are likely to hold up their records as governors to draw contrasts with Mr. Trump in the next primary, in South Carolina, where many Republican voters say they respect candidates who have served in public office.
She lost many major demographic groups, performing best among the older and wealthier, and among people who care about experience and electability in November. But these voters were small in number compared with Mr. Sanders’s legions. Mrs. Clinton won 112,404 votes in New Hampshire in 2008 in a tough race against Mr. Obama and Mr. Edwards; on Tuesday, she won 95,249 votes to Mr. Sanders’s 151,578.
The presidential debates have been high-octane, high-ratings and highly entertaining affairs, but they were not seriously damaging to a candidate until a revelatory performance by Senator Marco Rubio of Florida on Saturday, just three days before the New Hampshire primary. As Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey attacked Mr. Rubio as a typical Washington politician who spoke in scripted sound bites, Mr. Rubio reinforced that image by repeating the same lines about President Obama’s determination to change the United States.
It suddenly seemed as if Mr. Rubio, a first-term, 44-year-old senator, did not have an original thought in the world. He hurt himself further on Monday as he deplored 21st-century cultural forces and “the values they try to ram down our throats” — and then repeated the same phrase a few seconds later. Mr. Rubio, who had been rising in the polls before the debate, was sliding toward a fifth-place finish in the New Hampshire primary as final returns were tallied.
In the 2008 Democratic primaries, Mrs. Clinton beat Mr. Obama in Ohio, Pennsylvania, West Virginia and other states partly because of solid support from working-class white voters. But Mr. Sanders prevailed with these voters in New Hampshire on Tuesday. Sixty-eight percent of white noncollege graduates supported him, as did 65 percent of people from families earning less than $50,000. On the Republican side, the same groups of voters broke strongly for Mr. Trump.
Mrs. Clinton says she thinks she can still win back these voters with her policy proposals for paid family leave and for capping prescription drug costs for some Americans, but so far she has not performed well with less affluent voters in New Hampshire or Iowa.
Mr. Trump led in many Iowa polls before the Feb. 1 caucuses, but he came in second place when it came time for the actual voting. That result raised questions about whether all the people crowding into Trump rallies were true-blue supporters or celebrity worshipers.
But on Tuesday night, Mr. Trump’s supporters proved that they were committed and enthusiastic enough to turn out for their candidate. He won among first-time voters in a Republican primary, as expected. But he also won among Republicans, independents and people who have voted in past party primaries.
He did especially well with voters who preferred candidates who “tell it like it is.” But he lost to Mr. Kasich, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas and Mr. Bush among voters who wanted a candidate who “shares my values.” In the end, Mr. Trump won 30 to 40 percent of the vote among many demographic groups, showing that he can win primaries and caucuses when a large Republican field splits the vote.
Something went wrong between Mrs. Clinton and the women of New Hampshire. Mr. Sanders won 55 percent of their votes compared with Mrs. Clinton’s 44 percent, with married women and especially unmarried women breaking his way, according to exit polls.
Those results rocked the Clinton campaign, given that Mrs. Clinton is running to become the first female president and enjoyed the support of many of the most powerful women in the state, including its governor and its Democratic senator. Moreover, women provided the margin of victory for Mrs. Clinton in her 2008 primary victory here.
Clinton advisers are confident that her support will rebound with women in Nevada, South Carolina and the Super Tuesday states that vote on March 1. But some of Mrs. Clinton’s friends are nervous: They did not expect her to lose New Hampshire so badly, and for women to be such a big factor in her defeat.
Mr. Trump struck a chord with Republican primary voters on many issues, but particularly where Muslims and illegal immigrants were concerned. Sixty-four percent of voters said they supported temporarily barring Muslims from entering the country if they are not citizens, and 44 percent of those voters backed Mr. Trump.
Forty-one percent of voters said that illegal immigrants should be deported to the countries where they came from — and 50 percent of them supported Mr. Trump. No other Republican candidate came close with the New Hampshire residents who held these views.
Voters who chose candidates at the last minute — on Primary Day itself — broke narrowly for Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump. But Mr. Kasich was the top pick of voters who chose their Republican favorite over the last few days, suggesting he may have benefited from Mr. Rubio’s poor debate performance on Saturday night. Among Democratic voters who made up their minds in the last few days, Mr. Sanders did better.
The candidates who fared best in New Hampshire — Mr. Sanders, Mr. Trump and Mr. Kasich — all offered easily understood, well-communicated messages. While other candidates struggled to refine their pitches, Mr. Trump repeated his vow to build a wall on the nation’s southern border, Mr. Sanders once again railed against Wall Street, and Mr. Kasich promised to unify Americans of all parties and backgrounds. It helped that the messengers, in all three cases, came across as authentic advocates of their positions.