DÜSSELDORF, Germany — Every year, as the great Carnival parade before Lent approaches, this wealthy Rhineland city buzzes with the question: Whom will Jacques Tilly, master float builder, skewer this time?
Using art to take aim at politicians and other powers that be is a tradition born of nearly two centuries of Carnival satire in the Rhineland of Germany. Today, it is a custom that is growing ever more pertinent — even perilous.
Last year, Mr. Tilly defied worries about retribution from Islamic extremists and took on the assailants of the French satirical weekly newspaper Charlie Hebdo.
The year before, when President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia seized Crimea just two days before the big parade, Mr. Tilly and five co-workers built a giant timber and papier-mâché float showing Mr. Putin with his forearm bulked up, Popeye-style, with a large muscle called Crimea in the form of a ticking bomb.
This year, the question is whether and how Mr. Tilly will tackle Germany’s top topics of conversation: the more than one million asylum seekers who arrived last year and the New Year’s Eve assaults, many of them linked to migrants, on scores of women in nearby Cologne.
Mr. Tilly, 52, dapper even in red worker overalls and resembling a playful puppet master, is giving nothing away. Proud to show off his creations at his cavernous, drafty workshop, he steadfastly refused to say what stands inside the giant tent that dominates the courtyard where the secret “political” floats are hidden.
Carnival here hardly shares the fame of the colorful, dancing celebrations in Rio de Janeiro, or of Mardi Gras in New Orleans. Outside Germany, it is something of a secret that the cities and towns in the Rhine river valley go wild, too.
But for five days starting on Thursday, up to one million people will swill beer and take to the streets here, as well as in Cologne and Mainz. In the mileslong parades and costumed ceremonies, the political floats take pride of place.
Mr. Tilly is steeped in a European tradition that made jesters, or fools, the kings during Carnivals. From the Saturnalia of the Roman Empire through the Middle Ages, the Continent celebrated what Mr. Tilly called “the magical time” when winter nears, then spring and summer await.
But, of course, they do, particularly in a shrinking world where sensibilities — and sensitivities — bump up against each other with sometimes dangerous consequences.
The float was considered daring — enabling Mr. Tilly, and his many backers here, to lord it over Cologne, Düsseldorf’s archrival in all things Carnival, and which declined to address the same delicate subject.
This year, too, the float gave Düsseldorf an advantage. The ruling Carnival Committee had already tightened security against possible trouble stirred by the Charlie Hebdo float.
In Cologne, by contrast, local grandees have rallied around their city since the shock of the New Year’s Eve assaults and plan to triple or even quadruple the police presence when the celebrations peak next week on Rose Monday.
Cologne “was hit very, very hard” by the New Year’s violence, admitted Sigrid Krebs of that city’s Carnival committee, which oversees 115 of perhaps 200 Carnival associations there.
Up and down the Rhine, cities and towns are putting a premium on preventing a repeat of New Year’s Eve, and on explaining to newcomers, especially those from the Muslim world, that the partying and lewdness are innocent and — this is Germany, after all — have quite a few rules.
In his workshop, Mr. Tilly and his team tend to this year’s creations. They make dozens of floats for the parade each year, including five or six political ones. All are destroyed after the parade, however, so he displays numerous photos to show off past works.
He pokes fun at United States presidents, German chancellors, Mr. Putin and Islamic State terrorism. He does not shun crudeness: A creation from 2003 has Angela Merkel, not yet chancellor of Germany, emerging from the rear end of Uncle Sam.
That, Mr. Tilly explained, was after Ms. Merkel emphasized to Washington that not all Germans opposed the United States’ impending war in Iraq against Saddam Hussein.
But Mr. Tilly is not sure he agrees with a famous German satirist, Kurt Tucholsky, that “satire allows everything.” Mr. Tilly said he would not, for instance, depict Mohammed — an act considered blasphemous by many Muslims.
“You have to hit the right tone, as sharply as possible,” he said.
By tradition, Carnival opens on the 11th minute of the 11th hour on the 11th day of the 11th month, November, and runs until Lent.
For people like Wolfgang Düppel, 46, an information technology worker at a large insurer, the peak days of Carnival recall his childhood — when things like levying a “fools’ fee” of a few pfennigs on drivers in his Düsseldorf neighborhood was part of growing up. Many people from that time have moved away, he noted, but return for Carnival as one might for Christmas.
Janine Stemmer, the rare female president of a Düsseldorf Carnival association (officially, there are 76 groups), takes Carnival so seriously that she even married the man she met at Carnival 2010, where they were named the “princely pair,” on Nov. 11, 2011.
Ms. Stemmer, 43, has been involved in Carnival her whole life: In 1968, her grandfather founded the association she now leads. Not even the heavy rain forecast for this weekend could lessen her excitement to ride a float created by Mr. Tilly on Rose Monday.
Asked about the effect of the attacks in Cologne, however, she grew pensive. Luckily, she said after a pause, Düsseldorf has Mr. Tilly.
