Hunched over her saumon marine, Peggy Siegal, the omnipresent New York film publicist and event planner, was sitting between Oliver Stone and Anne Hearst at the Manhattan restaurant La Grenouille last October, talking about the night she tried to ascend to the throne of England.
To Ms. Siegal, however, the ascendence seemed utterly natural.
For anyone who knows Ms. Siegal — and above a certain rung in this city’s social stratosphere, who doesn’t? — that story says it all.
Irrepressible, truncheon-blunt and forever pushing the boundaries between “no” and “maybe,” Ms. Siegal, 68, has employed sharp elbows and inexhaustible energy reservoirs to claim a unique social position in New York and the Hamptons: as a host for hire for clubby, insider-only film screenings and dinners for the influential, she stands at the crossroads of Hollywood power and New York society (or what’s left of it), functioning as a spin doctor, salonista, celebrity confidante and, occasionally, bouncer.
Certainly, her business is changing, as studios pay closer attention to the bottom line and competitors look to siphon clients. Even so, after 30 years, Ms. Siegal remains Hollywood’s secret weapon in New York, particularly during the breathless sprint known as Oscar campaign season.
It was a crisp afternoon in early January, and Ms. Siegal stood at the base of the stairs of Kappo Masa, the celestially expensive Japanese restaurant beneath the Gagosian Gallery on Madison Avenue. She wore a Chanel-inspired wool miniskirt and jumper, and her hair, once a spiky confection that veered into Joan Jett territory, had been trimmed into a floppy-banged wedge that recalled an English schoolboy.
 This lunch, for example, was just days before ballots for Oscar nominations were due.
It is the Hollywood version of a get-out-the-vote blitz in politics, in which studios hustle to make sure their Oscar hopefuls are front and center in the minds of voters. But unlike in a political campaign, studios must play by certain rules: There are no mass mailers or robocalls in an Oscar campaign. Academy rules forbid telephone lobbying. Any communication by mail (including email) must not include photographs, fancy graphics, promotional language or any reference to the achievements of the filmmakers or actors.
And few people have done it better. In an industry where publicists come and go, Ms. Siegal has lasted for 30 years, even as the era of publicist as star seems to be passing.
One mentor, Bobby Zarem, is now living in Savannah, Ga.; another, Lois Smith, died in 2012. While fellow boldface names in the business have worked to extend their reach (Nadine Johnson has broad portfolio of clients in art, fashion, real estate and technology; Lizzie Grubman has ventured into branding and talent management), Ms. Siegal has made herself a force in the business by dominating a highly specific niche: A-list screening events.
She has faced challenges, most clearly from Andrew Saffir, whose rival marketing company, the Cinema Society, has been gaining momentum in recent years. (Darin Pfeiffer, a former employee, has also started his own events business.) But no one has managed to supplant her.
After three decades of Malibu weddings, Greenwich polo matches and Hamptons barbecues, Ms. Siegal knows how to draw influencers. She maintains a database of some 30,000 contacts, she says, broken down by profession (she has a filmmaker list, a finance list, an art list) and nationality (a British list, a German list).
She casts each lunch, or tea, or dinner, like she’s casting a movie. For a lunch for “The Danish Girl,” Tom Hooper’s film about a transgender artist, she invited Larry Gagosian, Rob Pruitt (the post-conceptual artist) and Françoise Gilot, the 94-year-old French painter who once dumped Pablo Picasso. For a screening of the Hungarian Holocaust film “Son of Saul,” she lured the survivor and author Elie Wiesel — “and all Jews want to meet Elie Wiesel,” Ms. Siegal said.
Even so, just as Martin Scorsese keeps going back to Leonardo DiCaprio for his films, Ms. Siegal tends to traffic in some familiar faces: Charlie Rose, Barbara Walters and Martha Stewart in media; Michael Douglas, Darren Aronofsky and Sofia Coppola in film. The actor Bob Balaban is such a frequent guest that he may as well be her mascot.
Typical of a Peggy Siegal event, the lemon-yellow banquettes at Kappo Masa were dotted with highly familiar faces that day.
To Ms. Siegal, who friends say is something of a Nostradamus when it comes to Oscar prognostication, Mr. DiCaprio is a near lock for best actor.
A day later, Ms. Siegal was frantically circling the sun-drenched Rainbow Room high above Rockefeller Center around noon, directing her assistants as they rearranged pink and blue Post-its on her seating chart for a lunch-and-learn for “The Big Short” featuring the film’s director, Adam McKay.
Like a marathoner at Mile 7, she was getting up to cruising speed with her second of five events that day, a personal record (the day began with a brunch for “The Hateful Eight” featuring Samuel L. Jackson and ended with a Sylvester Stallone dinner for “Creed”).
But if the pace was grinding her down, the strain did not show in her face.
As her friend Michael Douglas said, “Peggy looks the same as she did in 1985.” Pushing 70, her skin is buttery smooth, her crow’s-feet but a hint. That’s the nice way to say it. Considering that she is pushing 70, it is natural to assume she has had work done. That would be the not-so-nice-way to put it, at least with most women. For Ms. Siegal, it’s a compliment.
This is the woman, after all, who presented the 167 guests at her 60th birthday party at the Plaza Athénée, who included Billie Jean King, Vera Wang and David Koch, with an annotated pamphlet called “How to Look Like Me at 60,” recommending the professionals who kept her looking vibrant — all 23 of them. It included her gynecologist (“glamorous, attentive”), her podiatrist (“gives the best toe reductions in town”) and her plastic surgeon (“gave me a new neck a year ago”).
To her, cosmetic surgery is just another weapon in a woman’s arsenal, along with Oscar de la Renta gowns. “The best way to combat gender and age discrimination is to knock them out when you walk into a room,” she said.
In a 2006 book, she told the writer Alex Kuczynski how doctors remove fat from her posterior and inject it into her face. 
With those in positions of power, she knows how to stroke and coddle (she famously signs off on emails “XOXO Peggy” — even, seemingly, when mass-emailed by assistants).
She can also bare fangs. Joanna Molloy, a longtime gossip columnist for The Daily News, recalled a lunch at Michael’s where a waiter asked if they would like to hear the specials. “Don’t even bother,” Ms. Siegal barked at him. “You’ll probably get it wrong, and I know what I want.” (“She’s one tough lady,” Ms. Molloy said).
Reporters who cross her can usually expect a volcanic response.
Ms. Siegal said that she has taken steps to rein in her temper.
“Miscommunication is what sends me into a rage,” she said.
Her lack of a filter has made her a target in the gossip columns. This past spring, they painted Ms. Siegal as a Marie Antoinette in Manolo Blahniks after she told The Wall Street Journal that Mayor Bill De Blasio and his wife, Chirlane McCray, had “made themselves socially irrelevant” by skipping the Met Costume Gala. “It is a major shortcoming not to mingle with all classes,” she had said.
While she has had public tiffs with the likes of Jerry Della Femina, the adman and Hamptons power broker, perhaps her most meaningful face-off is with the Cinema Society’s Andrew Saffir, the former Ralph Lauren executive who has elbowed his way into a professional niche that Ms. Siegal basically invented; his company holds some 70 events a year.
To set himself apart, Mr. Saffir has claimed downtown as his turf, holding fashion-heavy screening parties at nightclubs or rooftop bars like Mr. Purple, on the Lower East Side, that draw guests like Prabal Gurung and Michael Stipe.
To Ms. Siegal, her relationships built up over three decades protect her market dominance, particularly with prestige, “intellectual” films, and she is quick to dismiss any suggestion of a rivalry with Mr. Saffir.
Besides, Ms. Siegal said, she has already tried to colonize downtown. In 2000, she joined forces with Lizzie Grubman, the publicity dynamo 23 years her junior.
The professional marriage lasted about a year. It did not help that Ms. Grubman became a tabloid staple after backing her Mercedes S.U.V. into a crowd at a Southampton nightclub, injuring 16 people. Ms. Siegal said that ultimately, the generation gap was too great.
“I was in the wrong part of town,” Ms. Siegal said.
On her way to meet an old friend, John Travolta, at her party for his new FX mini-series, “The People v. O. J. Simpson: American Crime Story,” at Monkey Bar, it seemed clear that Ms. Siegal is in no hurry to leave the social pinnacle she spent a lifetime clawing to reach.
She lives in a two-bedroom apartment on East 74th Street that used to belong to Black Jack Bouvier (Jacqueline Onassis’s father), decorated like an English manor, with stately portraits of “other people’s relatives,” she said. She recently mingled with Juan Carlos I, the former king of Spain at the Dominican Republic resort of the sugar baron Pepe Fanjul; she spent Thanksgiving at Martha Stewart’s house; she counts David Koch, the oil magnate and Libertarian patron saint, as a close friend.
Even so, success has come at a price. She never married, or had children, although she has been linked to plenty of power players, like Austin Hearst, the publishing heir. She often works seven days a week.
Her old Freudian analyst might say that she is still trying to satisfy the ambitions of her mother, Annette, who died in 2011.
Annette Siegal, the wife of an upwardly mobile light bulb magnate, Martin Siegal, was a regal woman who wore white gloves and couture clothing, and pushed her daughter toward the social pinnacle. “She named me Peggy, which has nothing to do with Siegal — it’s like Tyrone Katz — because she thought that name would sound great in the halls of Vogue magazine,” Ms. Siegal said.
While her mother taught her that appearance was of paramount importance for a woman, she thought education was better left to men, Ms. Siegal said.
That slight, she said, has provided a lifetime of motivation.
Nor is it her ability to join forces with other brand-name agencies. Her attempts to form partnerships with other power publicists, like Harriet Weintraub and Ms. Grubman, were short-lived. And there seems to be no suggestion of an anointed successor in her own office, as if the possibility she will one day stop what she is doing is all but unthinkable.
At last, the Lincoln pulled up to Monkey Bar. Ms. Siegal, in a mink scarf, headed off for another night of air kisses, another night brokering introductions between the likes of Rudolph Giuliani and John Travolta.
Around midnight, the party was still hopping, but Ms. Siegal slouched into a red leather booth, placing a small bowl of sauteed spinach on the white tablecloth before her.
