MIAMI — In the wake of a United States Supreme Court decision that struck down part of Florida’s capital punishment law, the State Legislature and courts are grappling with proposals that could significantly change sentencing in a state with one of the nation’s most crowded death rows.
For now, the ruling has closed the state’s pathway to the death penalty: Prosecutions in capital punishment cases are stalled, and lawmakers are rushing to write and pass a new statute before their session ends in six weeks. It is also uncertain whether the 390 inmates awaiting execution in Florida will remain on death row or be resentenced to life in prison. As of last week, more than 40 of those inmates had appeals pending.
On Tuesday, the Florida Supreme Court granted a stay of execution to Cary Michael Lambrix, who was to die by lethal injection on Feb. 11 but received a reprieve until the court rules on an argument from his lawyers. They argued Tuesday that the decision from the United States Supreme Court last month should apply retroactively to all of Florida’s death row inmates.
Already, one Pinellas County judge has told prosecutors that they cannot pursue capital punishment in a first-degree murder trial because Florida currently has no death penalty.
In the State Capitol, the Republican-controlled Legislature is debating how best to change Florida’s unorthodox law, with some pushing for a thorough overhaul to blunt future legal challenges and others vying for an easy fix that would simply address the court’s narrow ruling.
The Legislature has refused for years to address the law’s constitutional frailties — primarily that it requires only a simple majority of a 12-person jury to recommend a death sentence to a judge — despite the urging of the Florida Supreme Court to do so a decade ago, said Raoul G. Cantero, a former state justice who has called for change.
Florida is second only to California in the number of death row inmates, according to the Death Penalty Information Center. The Florida governor, Rick Scott, issues death warrants routinely. But the state leads the country in death-row exonerations with 26, and critics of Florida’s law said that number could be traced to the statute’s flaws.
In all, 31 states have capital punishment.
In its ruling, the United States Supreme Court found that Florida’s death penalty system gave too much power to judges and not enough to juries, a violation of the Sixth Amendment.
To recommend a death sentence, a jury must agree on at least one aggravating factor, a circumstance that makes a murder so horrific that it merits ending a killer’s life rather than imposing a prison sentence. The aggravating factor could be that the crime was especially heinous or that it was committed after substantial premeditation.
Florida is the only state that does not require a jury to unanimously agree on aggravating factors. Jurors in the state also do not tell the judge which factors they chose. So after a jury makes its recommendation, the judge can hand down a death sentence based on different aggravating factors altogether, an anomaly that the Supreme Court ruled was unconstitutional.
In the court’s majority opinion, Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote that “the Sixth Amendment requires a jury, not a judge, to find each fact necessary to impose a sentence of death.” She added that allowing judges to find aggravating factors “independent of a jury’s fact-finding” made the system in Florida unconstitutional. It is one provision the State Legislature must fix if it is to reinstate the death penalty.
“This is the issue most observers of the capital system saw as unconstitutional for a number of years,” said Scott E. Sundby, a University of Miami law professor who is an authority on capital punishment.
Even with that fix, Florida would still provide the country’s easiest procedural path to a death sentence, Mr. Sundby said. Under Florida’s system, the jury provides only a recommendation of death to the judge, and the recommendation does not have to be unanimous.
Alabama and Delaware are the only other states that do not require a unanimous jury verdict on death sentences. Delaware and Florida require a simple majority; Alabama requires a supermajority, a vote of at least 10 to 2. Those states are also the only ones that allow judges to override recommendations for life in prison and impose the death penalty.
The Supreme Court decision on Florida’s law did not consider the issues of unanimous or advisory juries. But they also make the law vulnerable to constitutional challenge, legal experts said.
A recent investigation by The Villages Daily Sun newspaper found that Florida juries had failed to agree unanimously on death sentences in 75 percent of the cases against the prisoners now on death row. It also found that only 43 percent of the prisoners would have been sentenced to death under a 10-to-2 supermajority vote.
Lawmakers are arguing passionately about how far to go in rewriting the law, with the Senate leaning toward requiring unanimous verdicts from juries for death sentences and the more conservative House moving forward with a bill that would require a jury vote of at least 9 to 3 for a death sentence recommendation but a unanimous decision on aggravating factors.
The Florida Prosecuting Attorneys Association favors the House bill, which cleared its first subcommittee vote on Tuesday.
Some, though, said that political motives were preventing a more thorough overhaul that would require unanimous jury verdicts for death sentences. State Senator Thad Altman, a Republican who has tried for years to change the law, said unanimity demanded greater deliberation by jurors, which was only fitting for a death sentence. Convicting criminals in Florida requires a unanimous jury, so condemning them to death should be no different, he said.
