If you are logged into Facebook, the blog post will tell you your average degree of separation “from everyone.” The number is an estimate derived from statistical algorithms and not, as it seems, an intrusive estimate of the reach of your friends and family. According to the post, Facebook users in the United States are connected by an average of 3.46 people.
It placed my personal degree of connections at 3.2, below average but nowhere close to the reach of Sheryl Sandberg, who, the post says, is separated from everyone by only 2.92 degrees.
In the philosophical piece, similar in its approach to the work of Jorge Luis Borges and César Aira, Mr. Karinthy had his characters propose a game of connection, choosing strangers such as a Nobel Prize-winning writer and a worker for the Ford Motor Company and forging lines of acquaintance between themselves and those subjects.
“Nobody from the group needed more than five links in the chain to reach, just by using the method of acquaintance, any inhabitant of our planet,” he wrote.
The playwright John Guare took up the idea in 1990, writing a play titled “Six Degrees of Separation,” which was adapted three years later into a movie of the same name starring Stockard Channing and Will Smith.
Many people were introduced to the theory through a slightly different version of the game, which uses any celebrity’s proximity to the actor Kevin Bacon on a cast list as a measure of how much weight he or she carries in Hollywood. In an interview with BuzzFeed in 2014, Mr. Bacon said he originally thought the game was “a joke at my expense,” but eventually came to peace with it and even named his charity SixDegrees.org.
But Mr. Karinthy’s theory has also been of interest to the social sciences. In 1967, the psychologist Stanley Milgram set up the “small world experiment,” a practical application of the idea of degrees of separation using hand-delivered packages. He confirmed the six degrees of separation, although his results were disputed.
Nicholas Christakis, the co-author of “Connected: The Surprising Power of Our Social Networks and How They Shape Our Lives,” linked our fascination with recognizing strangers to a biological urge to distinguish friend from foe. He recalled the legends of medieval knights meeting on the road and stopping to recite their lineages.
