Raissa Fomerand grew up in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and spent her early adulthood as a young striver in Carroll Gardens and Brooklyn Heights. She remembers those days fondly. So when her children were grown and out of her colonial in Larchmont, Ms. Fomerand, 71, divorced and retired, wanted to move back to New York City.
A year ago she started hunting for an apartment in Manhattan, and the search proved unnerving.
Prices in Manhattan, as she put it, had “hit the ceiling,” and “everything was minuscule and expensive.” With the price of one-bedrooms in the more sought-after neighborhoods approaching — or surpassing — $1 million, she counted herself lucky when she heard of a studio on the Upper East Side for a bargain of $400,000, but then found out it had little more than 500 square feet. The two-bedroom apartment in Mamaroneck, N.Y., where she has been living since her divorce cost less than half that and has more than double the space.
For now she has decided to stay put.
Like many others in her sociological cohort these days — men and women whose children are grown and who want to trade those unused rooms in Tudor- and Victorian-style houses, as well as the steep suburban property taxes, for the city’s excitement and convenience — Ms. Fomerand finds herself stranded in the suburbs.
These empty-nesters have reaped the benefits of the suburbs: They sent their children to excellent public schools and raised them in safety and comfort, in backyards, playrooms and cul-de-sacs. And their houses have increased nicely in value. Now they would like to find apartments with doormen and elevators so they don’t have to climb stairs, shovel snow and schlep packages. They want a place where they can “age in place,” as the phrase goes. But they are finding that in the past 15 years, prices for such apartments in Manhattan and Brooklyn have risen far more than the values of their suburban homes, so much that they may never make it back to living in the city they always thought they would return to. Instead, they end up staying in their houses, or downsizing to smaller suburban homes or apartments.
To be sure, this is a problem largely felt by the comfortable: New Yorkers who have had the luck and income to live where they choose, who have had the luxury of planning and expecting a certain lifestyle when they grow older. These people could live less expensively in other cities, but often their family, friends and work are here, and they don’t want to leave the area.
Some calculate that with prices so high in many parts of Manhattan and Brooklyn, if they relocated to the city they couldn’t afford the cultural events and restaurants that they said were among the biggest reasons to move there.
STEVE AND AMY NELLISSEN, who own and manage a bridge club in New Jersey, decided to sell their five-bedroom, three-bathroom contemporary in Ramsey, N.J., after their two daughters were grown. They flirted with taking an apartment in New York, where Mr. Nellissen was born and where they lived as a young married couple. But learning that modest Manhattan two-bedrooms were going for $1.5 million, they sold their house in November for $690,000 (their taxes had been almost $19,000 a year) and settled on a two-bedroom, $2,600-a-month rental in Fort Lee, N.J., with panoramic Hudson River views.
According to a Queens College study of data from the United States Census Bureau’s American Community Survey of 2009-2013, the median price of an owner-occupied house or apartment was $518,400 in Westchester; $454,500 in Nassau County; and $451,400 in Bergen County, N.J. In Brooklyn it was $557,100, and in Manhattan it was $828,100. While prices in the three suburban counties rose 34 percent, 40 percent and 39 percent since 2000, they rose 80 percent in Brooklyn and 70 percent in Manhattan.
RealtyTrac, a real estate information company, recently named Brooklyn the nation’s least affordable housing market and Manhattan its third-least affordable (San Francisco was second), by comparing median incomes with median housing prices.
A couple living on pensions, Social Security and interest from investments might decide to rent in Manhattan or Brooklyn and use the profit from the sale of their suburban home to help finance their expenses. But they would find that on, say, the Upper East or Upper West Side, a two-bedroom apartment in a building with a doorman and an elevator would sell for more than $1.3 million (don’t forget the monthly maintenance charge) or rent for $5,000 or $6,000 a month. And if they chose not to give up the car they depended on so much in the suburbs, they might pay another $500 to $900 a month for a parking space.
Thirty years ago, they could have rented a spacious two-bedroom for the cost of parking that car.
True, 30 years ago, they might have moved to the suburbs because of their disenchantment with living in a city where there were more than 2,000 murders a year, subways were coated with graffiti and many neighborhoods were plagued by arson and abandonment. But New York’s resurgence in the late 1990s turned their thinking around and made them long to return to the city once their children were grown. And the sharp increase in suburban taxes — a $1 million house in, say, southern Westchester might demand a total of $25,000 a year in school, municipal and county taxes — added to their desire. But those ambitions have been dashed by the real estate boom.
But when they scoured the ads for apartments and saw two-bedrooms in elevator buildings renting for $6,000, they did a brass-tacks cost analysis. They used a formula that factored in the loss of income deductions from property taxes and mortgage interest, as well as savings in expenses for heating, lawn mowing, watering and other maintenance. They concluded it would cost them more per month to live in the city. Mr. Tamlyn said the price point he arrived at was one they did not want to pay.
“We can’t find something that we can swap for our house,” he said.
RUTH KAPLAN, a 60-ish real estate broker in White Plains, grew up near Ebbets Field — then the Brooklyn Dodgers’ baseball stadium — and lived in the city as a young wife for a dozen years. With three children, she and her husband moved to the suburbs, ending up in a four-bedroom house in Rye Brook, in Westchester, in a development with amenities including a swimming pool. But the children have grown and left, and she and her husband have divorced.
Because she travels to Brooklyn every Friday to babysit for her granddaughter in Williamsburg, she began thinking of making her life simpler by scaling down to a place in Manhattan. She looked for ads for two-bedrooms she might buy on the Upper East Side. Stunned by Manhattan prices, she decided to settle for a one-bedroom or a studio. She even thought about renting.
But she is reconciling herself to the possibility that she may just stay in the suburbs, taking an apartment near the train station in White Plains, a 40-minute commute to Grand Central.
There are those who manage to find — and afford — an artful compromise. Three years ago, Ken and Marci Gruber downsized from a house in North Caldwell, N.J., to a two-bedroom condo in Verona, N.J. They were not ready, said Ms. Gruber, a video producer, to give up their lives in New Jersey, where among other activities they help organize the Montclair Film Festival. But not being able to quell their longing for Manhattan, they recently bought a one-bedroom co-op on Riverside Drive. It is about 650 square feet — too small, the couple said, for them to live in full time — so they use it as a pied-à-terre, splitting their time between the two apartments.
But Myra Harris, 69, a retired teacher, is discouraged. She was raised in leafy Jamaica Estates, Queens, where Donald Trump also grew up, and as a young woman lived in Manhattan from 1968 to 1984, once paying $320 rent for a two-bedroom apartment at East 76th Street.
She raised her three children in Westchester, and now she and her husband live in a four-bedroom, 2,400-square-foot townhouse in Mamaroneck. As someone who gets into the city two or three times a week to catch a play or stroll through a museum, she wants to move back and has gone online to look at apartments.
She is now considering lowering her sights to an apartment in New Jersey, where her daughter lives.
