Iowa hardly seems like a natural habitat for those of the New York species.
A visit to the Hawkeye State means swapping hot dogs for corn dogs and pavement for pastures.
And yet, the results of the caucuses there are looking (at least relatively) good for the three candidates with strong New York ties: Donald J. Trump finished in second place in the Republican race, while Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders remain nearly deadlocked in the Democratic contest.
The city slickers all have very different relationships with New York.
Mr. Trump was raised in a two-story Tudor-style home in an affluent enclave in Queens. Since then, he has grown into a city icon, with a persona as “yuge” as the buildings that bear his name.
If the accent didn’t already give it away, Mr. Sanders’s roots are in Brooklyn, though he eventually settled in Vermont.
While Mr. Sanders jettisoned New York, Mrs. Clinton transplanted herself here after leaving the White House. Her move was met with some skepticism, as critics accused her of carpetbagging in her run for senate.
As the candidates crisscrossed Iowa, their Gotham backgrounds came under fire when “New York values” were referenced with more than a little contempt.
Still, that didn’t stop Mayor Bill de Blasio from joining the fray with a visit over the weekend to canvass for Mrs. Clinton.
The Times political reporter Alexander Burns told us that despite some groans, voters had yet to reveal any real New York fatigue.
Their patience might be further tested, with Michael R. Bloomberg threatening to set forth as a third-party candidate.
Dust off those parasols. Today is sunny and clear, with a high of 48.
Tomorrow, you might want to trade them for umbrellas, though — stormy skies await on Wednesday.
Winter coat watch: Nope.
• Scoreboard: Pistons untie Nets, 105-100.
• Devils host Rangers, 7 p.m. (MSG+ and MSG 2). Islanders host Wild, 7 p.m. (MSG+ 2). Knicks host Celtics, 7:30 p.m. (MSG).
• Alternate-side parking: in effect until Monday, Feb. 8.
The political fracas in Iowa might grab headlines every four years, but a rivalry set closer to home plays out annually on this date.
Today is Groundhog Day, when we decide which creature is the better prognosticator of winter’s tenacity: Pennsylvania’s Punxsutawney Phil, or New York City’s local favorite, Staten Island Chuck.
Before placing bets on a meteorological marmot, it would be wise to consult the research by our friends at DNAinfo.
Their analysis reveals that our hometown hero Chuck and his shadow score significantly higher than Phil in predicting the seasons.
Chuck boasts an accuracy rate of 66.7 percent, while Phil struggles behind, at 38.9 percent.
Accuracy aside, Chuck may be relieved to learn that Mayor de Blasio will not be appearing at this year’s ceremony. The animal playing the furry forecaster has not exactly gotten along with City Hall in recent years.
As it turns out though, neither groundhog saw a shadow this morning. Early spring it is!
Follow the New York Today columnists, Tatiana Schlossberg and Noah Remnick, on Twitter.
