345 pp. Arcade, $24.99.
Giorgio Vasari didn’t stint with his praise. ­Everything Leonardo does “clearly comes from God rather than from human art,” while Michelangelo, who was “graciously” sent down by “the benign ruler of heaven,” is the “perfect exemplar in life, work and behavior and in every endeavor.” Celebrating perfection, as Vasari’s gossipy “Lives of the Artists” does, is one thing — ­dramatizing it, quite another. Storey’s richly imagined tale of Leonardo and Michelangelo and their rivalry, as they conceive the Mona Lisa and the David in Florence at the turn of the 16th century, casts Vasari’s not-of-this-world paragons as men, and starkly different ones at that, as the title’s play on oil and water suggests.
Leonardo, at the height of his powers, is graceful and distinguished, with unbounded insights and interests. Michelangelo, more than 20 years Leonardo’s junior, is disheveled, obscure and single-minded. Storey’s heroic foils are convincing, as are the cameo appearances of the pair’s famous contemporaries Sandro Botticelli, Cesare Borgia and Niccolò Machiavelli.
Tremendously entertaining and “unapologetic” in its artistic license, “Oil and Marble” will remind an older generation of the pleasures of Irving Stone’s art historical fiction, particularly his chronicle of the Sistine Chapel ceiling commission, “The Agony and the Ecstasy.” Storey’s affection for the period is clear. Her narrative instincts are strong and her dialogue sharp; throughout, her exposition is adroit and informative. The only false note is struck, inevitably, in her depiction of Lisa del Giocondo, which involves the thankless task of divining the sitter’s “secret.” Sir Kenneth Clark called the Mona Lisa’s enigmatic smile “a quarry so shy” it must be approached “with every artifice.” Storey’s attempt, by no means clumsy, doesn’t come off. But then, one can hardly fault her for not being Leonardo’s equal. Vasari wouldn’t either.
Picasso wasn’t the 20th century’s most enlightened boyfriend, to put it mildly. Women, he once told Françoise Gilot, the mother of two of his four children, were either “goddesses” or “doormats.” Dora Maar, the Surrealist photographer Picasso left for Gilot, defied the artist’s outrageously glib tags. Valdés’s novel explores Dora’s mysterious, self-denying life after Picasso through the prism of her fateful 1958 trip to Venice with the writer James Lord and his former lover, Bernard Minoret.
Narrated by an author much like Valdés — an ardently anti-Communist Cuban exile who lives in Paris with her husband and daughter, as Valdés has done — “The Weeping Woman” interweaves present and past with intelligence and humor. An acquaintance’s dilettantish chatter is laid bare: “Renata worked; at least, she told us she worked, or I seemed to gather as much, or she used to work, though not so much or so often anymore; that is, she was still working, but not that much, only ‘sporadically,’ seasonally.” And Lord’s snobbish, vicarious self-importance is checked: Valdés dryly observes his habit of perching in front of his portrait by Giacometti. But not everyone comes off badly. Many of the leading Parisian avant-gardists — Guillaume Apollinaire, Leonor Fini, Juan Gris, Max Jacob, Wifredo Lam, André Lhote, Kiki de Montparnasse, Man Ray — are conjured with fidelity and charm.
“The Weeping Woman” isn’t without flaws. Picasso’s longtime personal secretary is confusingly referred to as both ­Jaume (the Catalan spelling) and Jaime Sabartés. Valdés’s translator, David Frye, is overfond of the word “litany,” which appears with pathological frequency. And, as Dora acknowledges, “it’s so unbearably boring when everybody’s in love with Picasso.” The abject, all-pervading Picasso-worship, whether Dora’s, Lord’s or that of others, can be tiresome even if Valdés herself is anything but enamored with the artist.
318 pp. Random House, $28.
A middle-aged star spots an up-and-comer, falls in love, launches her career and dies in eclipse. Sound familiar? In “Georgia,” Tripp does well to avoid the cliché. Her Alfred Stieglitz, the photographer and gallerist whose relationship with Georgia O’Keeffe defined his later years, is neither an imperious Pygmalion nor an angst-ridden Norman Maine, the fading idol of “A Star Is Born.” More to the point, Tripp’s O’Keeffe is complex and original, little resembling Galatea or Vicki Lester, Maine’s dutiful wife.
The novel spans O’Keeffe’s adult life: her early correspondence and encounters with Stieglitz; her triumphs; her marital ups and downs; her rejuvenation in New Mexico; the commission for the Rockefeller Center mural that was never realized; Stieglitz’s death in 1946 (she would outlive him by 40 years) and beyond.
Tripp writes gracefully — on the whole. For O’Keeffe’s sake, I hope Stieglitz’s pickup chat sounded better than it reads here: “He quotes from the critics, some of the reviews. . . . I notice the words live on his tongue: exile, privation, flowing, rise, mystical, in a sensitized line. I am aware of him standing near me — so near, it feels almost unsafe.” “Privation”? “Mystical”? “Sensitized line”? Evidently you had to be there. And we could do without the Gertrude Stein-speak: “He loves them. He loves them”; “It was good. It was good, the painting.” Strange to say, Tripp is considerably better on the couple’s late-in-life lovemaking — “It is slow and sad, like a leave-taking” — than their youthful passion, which consists largely of chills, shivers, aches, “electric” touches, breathlessness.
Sex and Stein notwithstanding, “Georgia” conveys O’Keeffe’s joys and disappointments, rendering both the woman and the artist with keenness and consideration. In the novel’s final chapter, O’Keeffe reflects on her younger sister’s warmth and compassion: “Sometimes that kind of goodness lends a quality of greatness to a life. I never had that kind of life.” She didn’t need goodness to achieve greatness.