Mr. Bush, the former governor of Florida, had been soundly rejected by an electorate he no longer recognized, hobbling his campaign and leaving him little choice but to withdraw from the presidential race.
It was a stunning turn for the man who a year ago embodied all the qualities that his party’s elders imagined Republican voters wanted in a president: civility, experience, pedigree and tolerance.
The party of Prescott Bush, George Bush and George W. Bush is, for the moment, the party of Donald J. Trump.
Highlights of speeches given by Republican Party candidates after the South Carolina primary.
For the past year, party leaders who had pleaded with Mr. Bush to run and armed his campaign with a record-shattering war chest of $100 million had consoled themselves with assurances that Mr. Trump’s popularity in the polls would never translate into victory at the ballot box.
Mr. Trump, it turned out, knew their voters better than they did.
Mr. Trump’s commanding back-to-back primary wins in two disparate regions of the country have forcefully shaken the Republican firmament out of a prolonged state of self-denial.
With Mr. Bush’s exit, mainstream Republicans did not just lose a beloved would-be standard-bearer. They are now bereft of the single most forceful and outspoken detractor of Mr. Trump in the presidential campaign. In debate after debate, and rally after rally, Mr. Bush questioned Mr. Trump’s tactics, his qualifications, his judgment, his worldview and his very decency.
On his way out of the campaign, Mr. Bush — in a line that seemed squarely directed at Mr. Trump’s divisive brand of politics — declared that a president must tend for all corners of the country and all kinds of people.
Where Will Bush Voters Go?
Jeb Bush is out, leaving everyone wondering who his supporters might vote for instead.
Now, with Mr. Bush’s exit, the Republican establishment confronts an urgent decision: Either destroy Mr. Trump or embrace him.
There are plenty of vulnerabilities to exploit if his opponents can summon the will and the muscle.
Even as he won in South Carolina, Mr. Trump seemed to overstay his welcome, revealing a tendency to test voters’ patience. In South Carolina, late-deciding voters made up 45 percent of the Republican electorate, and they uniformly scorned Mr. Trump. And surveys suggest that even some Republicans find him unlikable and lacking in compassion.
What’s more, so much of Mr. Trump’s campaign and his conduct remain startlingly unpredictable, from his spats with the pope to his shifting memories of his previous positions on momentous issues, such as his opposition (then later support, then opposition again) for the American-led invasion of Iraq.
And Mr. Trump will soon lose a feature of the 2016 race that has disproportionately benefited his candidacy: a large and unwieldy field of rivals that carved up much of the Republican electorate into small slivers.
In the coming weeks, rivals beyond Mr. Bush are expected to quit the race, winnowing the contest down to three or four figures who will finally have a megaphone that begins to rival his own.
Yet Mr. Trump keeps winning. Within the past 12 days, he has captured the hearts of moderates in New Hampshire and born-again Christians in South Carolina. In both states, he won decisively among both men and women, independents, voters without college degrees and those age 45 and over.
Disconsolate Republican operatives spent much of Saturday night in dismay, over the death of the Bush dynasty and the success of Mr. Trump. Even in the face of polling that documented Mr. Trump’s appeal, and even after his win in New Hampshire, they privately doubted that he could sustain his momentum.
Party leaders are now openly questioning how Mr. Trump’s remaining Republicans rivals have approached his unusual candidacy and demanding that they have to let go of their restraint and take him on.
“It’s crazy that nobody else is trying to win except Trump,” said Mr. Stevens, who took direct aim at Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, long viewed by many within the party’s leadership as their best chance to overtake Mr. Trump.
The party’s collective shrug over Mr. Trump since he entered the presidential race last summer, and its stubborn unwillingness to treat him as a serious threat, is reflected by the paltry sum that both campaigns and outside groups have devoting to undermining him.
In a presidential campaign during which “super PACs” spent $215 million, just $9.2 million, or around 4 percent, was dedicated to attacking Mr. Trump, even as he dominated the polls for months.
It now seems inevitable that Mr. Rubio and Mr. Cruz will direct their fire and their campaign dollars against Mr. Trump as never before, as they desperately try to halt his momentum by March 1, when 12 states and territories hold primaries.
At stake for the Republican Party is whether it embraces a new generation of conservatism, as embodied by Mr. Rubio and Mr. Cruz, the children of Cuban immigrants, or hitches its wagon to a deeply unorthodox, anti-immigrant and politically promiscuous figure like Mr. Trump.
In the fast-fading world of Bush-era figures, who are mystified that even the appearance of a once adored former president and two former first ladies failed to sway voters last week, some are quietly saying it is time to accept a new reality: that Mr. Trump is the face of the Republican party.
