One of the publishing industry’s only black editors is transmitting ideas from writers on the margins to the mainstream readers who need to hear them.
On an unnervingly balmy November day, the scene at Medgar Evers College in Brooklyn was restless and expectant. Ta-Nehisi Coates was scheduled to appear on campus for a discussion about his best-selling book, ‘‘Between the World and Me.’’ Evers has a student body that is over 80 percent black, and interest in the event was palpable. Outside, on Bedford Avenue, a diasporic survey of music — reggae, soca, R.&B., trap — flew out the windows of rusted sedans as a slow parade of students filed into the building: a group of young men in near-identical oxfords and knit ties; a woman in a knee-length camouflage hoodie, black tights and Timberland boots; kids wearing mohawks, flattops, cornrows and uncountable Afros.
That was perhaps an understatement. That year, Coates won a MacArthur ‘‘genius’’ grant, was tapped to write a new installment of Marvel’s ‘‘Black Panther’’ comic series and saw ‘‘Between the World and Me’’ nominated for the National Book Award. Coates’s book — and his ongoing tour of the country to promote it — was the latest peak in Jackson’s career. Over the last decade and a half, Jackson has ushered into being the works of category-defying novelists like Victor LaValle and Mat Johnson, polemicist-experientialists like Coates and the civil rights attorney Bryan Stevenson and pop-cultural vanguardists like the chef-memoirist Eddie Huang and the rapper-entrepreneur Jay Z. To the extent that 21st-century literary audiences have been introduced to the realities and absurdities born of the phenomenon of race in America, Jackson has done a disproportionate amount of that introducing.
That day in Brooklyn, Jackson wore glasses, a plaid shirt open to just below the clavicles and shoes with insouciant laces that looked ready to untie themselves at any moment. The descriptive cliché about tall people is that they tend to bend over at the waist or, worse, at some hump-inducing point along the spine — presumably in order to make others feel more comfortable. But Jackson’s bearing was unapologetically erect, even as he kept glancing down at his phone, looking for word from his author. While we waited, he told me about a recent trip to the Texas Book Festival, where he accepted the Kirkus Prize on Coates’s behalf.
Coates arrived and greeted Jackson with a hand on the shoulder before he was whisked upstairs to the cafeteria, where by now hundreds of students, faculty members and administrators sat waiting for the talk to begin. Jackson was seated close to one side of the podium, but at some point he slipped out of his seat and materialized toward the back of the room. He stood there throughout the event, arms crossed loosely over his chest, half hidden by a wall of black draping, watching his author with a mix of protectiveness and amusement.
A photograph of Jackson taken in 2010 at Coa­chella works as a tidy metaphor for his singular role as an editor. Jackson had accompanied Jay Z and Beyoncé to the music festival in search of material for what would become ‘‘Decoded,’’ a book-length exegesis of Jay Z’s lyrics, written by Jay Z himself. The image captures the three of them — Jackson just off to the side — standing in front of a mesh fence. Behind them are countless palm trees, sprouting open into an opaque sky. Everything else is chaos: Onlookers, some shirtless, form a horseshoe around the trio, smartphones and cameras aloft. The picture is a kind of grotesque, conveying something nameless and sick about the nature of American celebrity, and how it sometimes mirrors the ever-unfolding, sideshow drama of race; Jackson, Jay Z and Beyoncé seem to be the only black people in frame.
‘‘Decoded’’ had a real, if comically belated, impact on how the wider world approaches the content of lyrics in rap. Just two years after its release, for instance, the venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz invested $15 million in a start-up, Rap Genius, that encourages the same sort of close reading. Jackson’s role, then, is to perform nothing less than a kind of magic. He stands between the largely white culture-making machinery and artists writing from the margins of society, as well as between the work of those writers and the largely white critical apparatus that dictates their success, in both cases saying: This, believe it or not, is something you need to hear.
The book that perhaps best encapsulates that ethos is one of Jackson’s first, ‘‘Step Into a World: A Global Anthology of the New Black Literature,’’ published in 2000. The collection, which he and the ‘‘Real World’’ star turned hip-hop journalist Kevin Powell compiled, brought together a cohort of writers — Junot Díaz, Edwidge Danticat, Paul Beatty, Hilton Als, Claudia Rankine and others — who have today come to form a loosely generational, unabashedly multicultural alternate literary establishment. ‘‘Step Into a World’’ marked a turning point for Jackson, who had until then been publishing reference works that were the stock in trade of John Wiley & Sons, where he worked at the time.
Compilations like ‘‘Step Into a World’’ have tended to play an outsize role in the history of black artistic and intellectual achievement — maybe because of their emphasis on collectivity, on ‘‘movements,’’ a canny response to the difficulty of individual advancement in the literary arena. The most prominent example of the genre is perhaps ‘‘The New Negro,’’ published in 1925, which heralded the arrival of the Harlem Renaissance. Edited by the Howard University philosophy professor Alain Locke and dedicated, rather grandly, to ‘‘the Younger Generation,’’ the volume included contributions from Jean Toomer, Zora Neale Hurston, Arna Bontemps and Langston Hughes. It also contained a short treatise on black comedy in the theater by Jessie Fauset, who served for eight years as literary editor of the N.A.A.C.P.’s magazine, The Crisis, and whom Hughes credited as one of the people who ‘‘midwifed’’ the movement. Fauset corresponded widely with Renaissance figures, and her letters reveal a deft, coaxing way with writers. She folds criticism seamlessly into flattery, identifying the writer’s most consequential gift and encouraging its cultivation. Jackson fills a similarly multifaceted role today — gatekeeper, encourager, cool-but-kind appraiser of talent — and might be the first 21st-century example of a 20th-century type: the black editor as not only acquirer, tweaker and disseminator but also as movement-shaper.
There is, upon inspection, a kind of coherence among the books that Jackson has taken on over the course of his career, especially recently, as executive editor at Spiegel & Grau, a post he has held since 2006. Each of his most famous books is a kind of jeremiad: Bryan Stevenson’s 2014 ‘‘Just Mercy,’’ for example, flits between an honest accounting of America’s racial past and present and an electric, almost Whitmanian optimism about the future. Matt Taibbi, best known for his scathing commentary and reportage in Rolling Stone, reaches Pentecostal levels of urgency in ‘‘The Divide: American Injustice in the Age of the Wealth Gap,’’ also published in 2014. Jill Leovy’s hit last year, ‘‘Ghettoside,’’ reveals one of the many undersides of American life — the startling frequency of black male death — with a quiet, morbid awe.
His father died when Jackson was 4, leaving his mother, an observant Jehovah’s Witness, to raise him and his two siblings. Jackson left the church when he was a student at the prestigious Hunter College High School, on the Upper East Side, but returned at the urging of his mother while she battled cancer. She died when he was 18, and when he left the church again in his 20s, it was for good. His official renunciation of the religion meant he was cut off from his siblings.
Jackson had already fallen under the spell of publishing during his high-school days, working for a book packager, James Charlton Associates, as part of an internship. He worked at another publishing house before enrolling at Columbia University. Soon, he found his way to John Wiley & Sons. He took part in the quickly intermingling hip-hop and literary scenes of the ’90s, frequenting places like the Nuyorican Poets Cafe and writing his own essays and reviews.
Jackson has had to be both. The facts of his life in publishing speak to his inevitable place on the inside: the glass-enclosed office; the bookstore — McNally-Jackson in SoHo, which he helped open with Sarah McNally, who was then his wife — that has now become a New York literary institution; his naming last year as a Publishers Weekly Notable of the Year. Still, he has also acted as a one-man A.&R. unit: He spends much more time corresponding with emerging writers than with the agents who are prone to sending him their most generic ‘‘black’’ offerings.
Despite his success, he still senses a certain condescension within the industry. ‘‘I’m sensitive to that,’’ he says, ‘‘people treating me like I’m here by their grace in some way, that they are welcoming me to something that I helped build.’’ Here, if you need it illustrated, is how good intentions so often miss their mark; how an industry that prides itself on its progressive politics can almost wordlessly become an alienating place for a person like Jackson.
It’s a feeling he has had since his high school days on the Upper East Side: ‘‘The only way to get into Hunter is to pass the test,’’ he says. ‘‘There’s no affirmative action; you just gotta pass the test. And almost nobody passes the test. So if I’m there, it’s because I passed the test. I’m not there because somebody did me a favor. So don’t look at me like I don’t belong here. Which is what happens. So I think from an early age, I developed this aversion to that attitude that I have dealt with, in part, by looking for support outside of the industry. Which is why — white, black, whatever — I love talking to writers, because we’re talking about the thing that they care about, which is writing, and their ideas.’’ In other words: as equals.
One afternoon in November, after the talk at Medgar Evers, I met Jackson at a French bistro across the street from his office. The place was dimly lit, and there were minutely drawn maps and fake frescoes on the walls. Our conversation started with the idea of responsibility. More precisely: I spoke of responsibility, and he humored me. I was worried, I shared, as an accordion-led melody played around us, about falling short of some standard in my writing, including the article I was writing about him. It wasn’t quite enough for my work to be published, or well received, or even satisfying to me on the level of aesthetics. I perceived my efforts, such as they were and are, as part of a long and significant and exacting tradition, and there was something — I couldn’t quite name it — that I owed. I felt bound inextricably to . . . to something. While I talked, Chris nodded.
‘‘What is the tradition that we’re even talking about?’’ he asked, not completely rhetorically. ‘‘I certainly feel responsibility to something, too.’’ He stopped for a moment, looked downward, then back at me.
Jackson — yes, privileged by his rarefied position in publishing, but also still attuned, by dint of birth and background and experience, to the distorting effects of race — finds himself at the straining center of these extremities.
The history of the Greek Revivalist behemoth at 55 Wall Street, now home to Cipriani, is a history of Manhattan itself. Here float the ghosts of robber barons, real estate titans, politicians, thieves. The National Book Awards were held here in November, and the permanent features of the place — great marbled columns, chandeliers, arcades, a gaudily patterned dome — dwarfed the temporary signs of the awards ceremony: an elevated stage, draped in velvet, decked on both sides by stairs, sat along one of the walls. Near another wall was an afterthought of a red carpet.
Before the ceremony began, cheesy horn-led jazz played while the faces of the nominees, their books beside them, flashed across screens. Journalists fidgeted with laptops. Wineglasses in the hundreds twinkled periodically under the light. Upstairs, on a shallow mezzanine, there was a makeshift cocktail reception, packed wall to wall, and while wading through the crowd, I was grabbed by a short man with a shaggy haircut and a white beard.
Then came a rapid series of tortured gestures: a wince; a vague and useless raising of the hands. ‘‘Sorry,’’ he said. Then, to a friend: ‘‘He really does look a lot like Ta-Nehisi.’’ (Which, well, I don’t, not close.) I smiled and walked away.
Jackson just grinned and shook his head, kept grabbing hands.
Later though, over email, on several occasions, I asked him the same question: How does it feel?
His last response was long and discursive, brimming with irony and humor. At one point he slipped into a short recounting of the little indignities he had been subjected to over the years in his business, besides the recurrent cases of mistaken identity: the assertion from a colleague that the sales figures of a Vibe-branded collection of articles about Tupac Shakur were inflated by shoplifted books (‘‘This, of course, didn’t even make sense’’); the time he was asked, in a crowded room, to fetch coffee for a colleague; the time, after Russell Simmons had said ‘‘nigga’’ in a meeting, a member of the marketing staff kept repeating the word until Jackson had to ask him to stop.
The litany helped clarify the stakes for Jackson’s work. It is undeniable that the rise of the so-called meritocratic elite has cleared the way for certain exceptional members of recently oppressed minorities to operate, and sometimes even succeed, at the highest levels of American society. What it has so far failed to deliver — what it was never, perhaps, quite engineered to ensure — is a full sense of arrival. Of belonging. And in this country whose heart has always been moved, perhaps inordinately so, by a phrase nicely turned, it might just be that art — argumentative, confrontational art; art obsessed with a fair hearing of the truth — is the vessel through which this hope might be realized.
