With Maria Ruiz out of work, the family had to cut expenses, including Internet and cellphone data service. Dinner is prepared outside on a grill.
Brigida Castro, who lives in a concrete home off a one-lane road in the town of Donna, said the main local Internet provider had told her it could not bring service to her street. Her daughter, Perla, 16, is a junior at a high school in the South Texas Independent School District geared toward directing students into medical professions. The school district has put Wi-Fi on more than 100 school buses to help students who do not have access at home, and Perla relies on school bus rides — nearly three hours a day — to finish homework.
“I could go home on a shorter bus route, but I want to get A’s,” Perla said.
Some municipalities are trying other solutions. The city of Pharr, with the help of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, has proposed using local tax funds to bring Internet service to all homes and to put free hot spots around town.
But the biggest boon would be the Lifeline overhaul.
Teachers do their part to help. In the McAllen school district, an eighth-grade math teacher, Sandra Guerra, recently chatted online with six students who were stuck on a problem about polynomials. She sent them a digital photo of the equation and detailed steps to solve the problem.
The next morning, knowing some students had no Internet at home and were working off worksheets she had prepared for them, Ms. Guerra started class with a review of the problem that had troubled other students the night before.
“I have 50 minutes with them in class, and I can’t cover everything in that time, so the learning continues when they are home and they can go online,” Ms. Guerra said.
Not every teacher is as understanding. Yunuen Reyes, 17, a high school senior in Pharr, does not have Internet at home and typically has three hours of homework a day that require research and collaboration with classmates online. Some assignments and take-home exams are due by midnight and must be submitted over the web.
So after her shift working at the drive-up window of a Chinese restaurant, Yunuen scrambles to find Wi-Fi at a nearby Starbucks or at fast-food restaurants. Often, she goes to the home of a friend who lets her use the family computer and Internet connection. Recently, she got a C on an English assignment that she had not completed before the deadline to submit it online.
