At Trash and Vaudeville, the rock ’n’ roll clothing store in the East Village, punk rock music played as usual. Fliers for defunct bands peeled off the wall. Shoppers ambled through the cavernous space, plucking leather jackets from pipe racks.
Jimmy Webb, a manager, stood by the door with his peroxide-blond hair and threw tattoo- and bangle-covered arms around regulars.
But it was not just any Sunday. Trash and Vaudeville, once the place to get black skinny jeans and Dr. Martens (it was the first place that stocked the chunky British boots in the United States), and where generations of suburban teenagers — and a few Wall Street types — came to shed their old skins and emerge transformed, was closing its doors after 41 years at 4 St. Marks Place.
Like Mr. Webb, a former drug addict who once lived in Tompkins Square Park, the store is a survivor. Unlike many of the strip’s storied shops — recently, Sounds record shop — the store is not closing forever. (Over the weekend, the nearby St. Mark’s Bookshop and the Patricia Field boutique closed permanently.) Trash and Vaudeville is merely moving, to 96 East Seventh Street, near First Avenue.
“You’ll have to walk two blocks,” Mr. Webb said on Sunday, kissing another peroxide blond, Elin Hunter, a musician, on the cheek. “Two more blocks for this kiss, and a good pair of skinny jeans and heels,” he added.
Customers spanning four decades came to pay their respects, among them the rock photographer Bob Gruen and Chris Stein, of Blondie, whose daughter Akira was trying on a pair of Pop Art Dr. Martens.
Legions of customers lined up to take home something in the store’s pink-and-black bags.
“It was the place you had to go in New York City if you were a punk rocker,” said Kimra Luna, originally of Riverside, Calif., who used to tour with punk rock bands. “We always stayed on St. Marks,” she said. “We picked up all our gear there. We’d go without food to shop at Trash.” Ms. Luna has a ring through her septum and neon-blue hair, but, now 31, she mainly came for punk rock onesies for her baby.
The store owner, Ray Goodman, and his wife, Daang Goodman, decided to relocate because of the rent, which had risen to $45,000, and because the street, once synonymous with punk culture, “became a food court,” he said. The new space, like the old one, will have two stories — apparel upstairs, shoes downstairs — but it will be about 40 percent the size of the previous, 5,500-square-foot space.
For years, Mr. Goodman spent his days “rag picking,” searching through warehouses of clothes from previous decades for music-inspired looks: Hawaiian shirts, gabardine shirts, go-go boots.
Sensing a demand in the early 1980s, he ordered 100 pairs of slim-fitting black jeans from a small manufacturer in Brooklyn. At the time, virtually all denim was blue. The black jeans were a hit. As punk rock style grew in popularity in Britain, Mr. Goodman added items he brought back in duffel bags from London.
Soon Mr. Goodman found himself not only connected to the music he loved but also dressing its stars. Joey Ramone came around with his mother — “she was just the nicest” — looking for pants to fit his willowy 6-foot-5 frame.
Mr. Goodman married the designer Daang Tripajayakorn and the store began carrying her edgy label, Tripp NYC, known for designs with leopard prints and metal buckles.
They kept the atmosphere “comfortable” and said they loved their eccentric customers, like “clothes talkers” — “customers who stayed two hours, they’d have entire conversations with the clothes,” Mr. Goodman said. “You knew they weren’t going to buy much, but they were entertaining.” Then there was the man whom they found watching television in a dressing room. He had brought his own set.
Ada Calhoun, the author of “St. Marks Is Dead,” said the store’s departure signaled a turning point for the strip. “The punk St. Marks Place?” she said. “I’m trying to think of what’s left. Not much. I think a couple of people with safety pins on stoops” — teenagers re-enacting the past.
But for a moment, on Sunday night, the real thing appeared, in a black leather jacket and shaggy black hair. It was Marky Ramone.
