In the way that the Internet has scrambled pretty much everything, it has remade the textbook of oddball rap. For this generation, the tree of influence is short and irregularly shaped: Soulja Boy for self-started, Internet-driven fame; ASAP Rocky and the rest of the ASAP Mob for flamboyance and for eradicating regional loyalty; Chief Keef for the disassembly of traditional ideas about verse structure; Young Thug for radiant weirdness and genuine indifference.
This set of reference points doesn’t quite result in a unified aesthetic, though. Instead, it is a license for eccentricity, building a new generation raised almost exclusively on misfit elders, rappers who were (and sometimes still are) maligned for their unconventional approaches.
Their children are, to a man, even stranger, as seen at two concerts with loads of thematic overlap last week: Lil Yachty, who performed Tuesday night at Webster Hall’s Marlin Room, and Lil Uzi Vert and Playboi Carti, who shared a bill Wednesday night at S.O.B.’s.
Some fun facts about Lil Yachty, ascendant microstar of Atlanta’s loopy, decentered hip-hop scene: wears his hair in thin braids accented with red beads; has rapped over the “Rugrats” theme song; sometimes dresses in nautically themed clothing; has a great name.
Lil Yachty’s songs meander and stagger — they often sound like children’s music played on a warped turntable. “1Night,” his most widely known song, was used in a hilarious viral comedy video, but it’s effective all on its own: easy boasts delivered with a nasal swing at a turtle’s pace. Lil Yachty sounds as if he’s laughing and as if he’s dazed, one mode inseparable from the other.
That said, his performance last week was as rowdy as his songs are trippy. For a half-hour, he shouted his way through his cache of SoundCloud hits: the sleepily elegiac “Water on My Face,” the woozy “I Don’t … ,” the scrambled “Ice Water.” And, of course, “1Night,” twice. Even the D.J. who hyped up the crowd before Lil Yachty arrived stuck to the pneumatic-drill-intense hip-hop: Ferg, OG Maco, Young Thug, Skepta, Lil Uzi Vert. (When the D.J. played the eternally optimistic Fetty Wap, the crowd mostly shrugged.) And as if to highlight Lil Yachty’s inheritance path, ASAP Ferg, an elder-cum-spirit guide, emerged at the end of the show to lend a few minutes of barking to the cause.
By old rules, this all qualifies as a fascinating curio. But these are astonishingly fluid times. Among the people guiding Lil Yachty’s nascent career is Coach K, a longtime Atlanta fixture who was integral in building the careers of Young Jeezy and Gucci Mane. And if you were at Madison Square Garden for Kanye West’s recent album-listening party/fashion show/performance art installation, you would have seen Lil Yachty, in a red sweatshirt matching his braids, standing onstage between Young Thug and Ian Connor, fashion brat and post-rap style muse.
For the most part, Playboi Carti songs follow simple patterns; he is almost an incidental rapper, more at ease with the performance of the role than with the actual act of rapping.
At this show, Lil Uzi Vert — wearing a Marilyn Manson shirt by the illustrator Deer Dana — showed off a range of outsider styles, covering the distance from Lil Yachty’s sleepy melodies to Playboi Carti’s broken-up tough talk and beyond. “Top” and “Super Saiyan” were sinister, “Right Now” was comic, and “Left Right” was both of those things. Amid all the theatrics, what sets Lil Uzi Vert apart from his peers is his rapping — he delivers verses as if words were more than mere sounds.
This was a raucous show, with a cluttered stage and powder-keg air. DJ Drama was onstage, rapping along. The rising Memphis star Young Dolph made an appearance. Playboi Carti came back out for the conclusion of the set. And at the end of the show, there was ASAP Ferg again, emerging from the wings to offer his blessing and incite an oddball riot.