Politics|How Does It Feel, Chief Justice Roberts, to Hone a Dylan Quote?
How Does It Feel, Chief Justice Roberts, to Hone a Dylan Quote?
WASHINGTON — Justice Antonin Scalia loved opera, but he also had a soft spot for Bob Dylan.
In a 2010 dissent, for instance, he chastised the majority for refusing to answer key questions in a case about sexually explicit text messages because technology was evolving so fast.
“The-times-they-are-a-changin’ is a feeble excuse for disregard of duty,” he wrote.
Justice Scalia was in good company. Mr. Dylan has long been the most cited songwriter in judicial opinions, said Alex B. Long, a law professor at the University of Tennessee and the author of a 2012 study, “The Freewheelin’ Judiciary: A Bob Dylan Anthology,” published in the Fordham Urban Law Journal.
It was a 2008 dissent from Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. that really opened the floodgates, Professor Long said. “Judges’ inclination to go to Dylan has actually increased in the past few years, probably as a result of Roberts’s dissent in that case,” he said.
But a few Dylan fans frowned when they read the chief justice’s 2008 dissent. His quotation, from “Like a Rolling Stone,” was not a faithful reflection of what Mr. Dylan had sung. Though the justices occasionally correct their opinions long after they are first issued, the quotation has remained unchanged and incomplete.
Almost eight years later, Chief Justice Roberts this month finally broke his public silence on the matter during an interview at a law school in Boston, explaining why and how he had chosen to quote the lyric. In the process, he illuminated the special role Mr. Dylan plays in American jurisprudence.
The 2008 case concerned standing — the requirement that parties have a direct, personal stake in a litigation. The chief justice argued that the plaintiffs in the case before him, who were collection agencies for pay-phone companies, lacked standing.
“I know Bob Dylan would have agreed with that,” Chief Justice Roberts said, to laughter.
Then Professor O’Brien asked about the missing word.
Why did Chief Justice Roberts use the published version? “I’m a bit of a textualist,” he said, to laughter.
Professor O’Brien, who seemed to think the song as sung was the superior source, had a quick retort. “If not an originalist,” he said.
There is a reason Mr. Dylan is so popular among judges, Professor Long said: His lyrics are pithy, memorable and pointed.
Mr. Dylan will not maintain his exalted stature forever.
The youngest member of the Supreme Court, Justice Elena Kagan, 55, has already moved on to the music of the 1980s.
That was a reference to “867-5309/Jenny,” Tommy Tutone’s indelible 1981 hit, which reached No. 4 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and will still get people of a certain age onto the dance floor at college reunions.
Still, it will be hard to displace Mr. Dylan. The day after the Supreme Court established a constitutional right to same-sex marriage last year, Justice Scalia sang a song to Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
