Jimmy thinks it over for a moment. Then, being born for mischief, he flips the switch off.
You kind of expect the whoop of a siren or maybe the loss of electrical power. Instead, there is not so much as a flickering light. Once Jimmy absorbs the nothingness, he turns the switch back on.
And thus we have a pretty good metaphor for this episode, which, after 10 “Better Call Saul”-free months, is distressingly anticlimatic.
The nonevent of the switch flip, as it happens, is one of the few happy surprises in “Switch,” as the episode is titled. The other surprises are either silly or implausible. It is enough to make you worry about the future of this show.
Let’s take a step back. Season 1 of “Better Call Saul” ended with Jimmy bailing out of a meeting with Davis & Main, having decided, apparently, that the life of a lawyer at a high-end firm is not for him. The implication was that Jimmy was done aspiring to respectability, the kind achieved by his older brother, Chuck, the co-founder of a corporate law firm that Jimmy had hoped to join. By the end of the last season, Jimmy realized that Chuck is a liar and conniver who has done everything in his considerable power to block Jimmy’s career.
Some interesting ideas about the slipperiness of labels like “good” and “bad” were explored in Season 1. 
Unfortunately, almost nothing prepared viewers for Jimmy’s decision to abandon his legal dreams. The season ended on a strangely discordant note. We learn more in “Switch” about the rationale for Jimmy’s quick professional about-face. The episode starts the very same day as the last episode, as he settles into a postlaw life. What are his plans? It’s unclear, as he explains to his soon-to-be love interest, Kim Wexler, in a hotel bar, after a day of floating in a nearby hotel pool.
“I got into law for all the wrong reasons,” Jimmy tells her. Namely, to please his older brother.
Now, it seems, he’d like to go back to small-time con artistry, and he demonstrates what he means, on the spot, by fleecing an obnoxious, foul-mouthed stockbroker who is drinking at the same bar and shouting into his cellphone earpiece. It’s not just any foul-mouthed stockbroker, either. That’s Ken, played by Kyle Bornheimer, last seen pulling into a gas station in Season 3 of “Breaking Bad.” He was driving a BMW convertible, with the license plate “Ken Wins,” and still spewing braggadocio into that earpiece. Walter White is so angered by Ken’s peacocking that he sabotages Ken’s car, which soon explodes.
 But it’s in this scene that we watch the first gratuitous twist in “Switch.” Kim segues into con artist sidekick far too readily. She has spent all of her screen time, thus far, as Jimmy’s moral compass. In a flash, she is inventing a pseudonym and playing Ken for a mark.
The co-creators Vince Gilligan and Peter Gould carefully eased an assortment of characters toward the dark side when they worked on “Breaking Bad.” Here, they take Kim and, poof, she morphs from upstanding law firm associate to associate flimflammer, in a matter of seconds.
It’s here that I audibly groaned. I found myself hoping that the next scene, in which he glad-hands colleagues at the office, was shot in slow motion because it was a fictional daydream. But no. In the span of a few days, divided by episodes in two seasons, Jimmy decided to join the firm, then decided he didn’t want to be a lawyer, and then joined the firm.
What’s depressing about this change is not merely how little of it seems to flow from either events or the destiny of character. It’s that Jimmy’s enlistment at Davis & Main delays the moment that he will become Saul Goodman. When that transformation will occur is anyone’s guess, but last year I attended a “Better Call Saul” screening in Los Angeles and one of the show’s writers suggested that Jimmy will turn into Saul when it makes sense for Jimmy.
Allow me to propose an alternative: Jimmy should become Saul when it makes sense for viewers. Which was probably a few episodes ago. To state the obvious, Jimmy’s problems aren’t as interesting as Saul’s. Jimmy counsels elderly clients and worries about his noxious brother. Saul counsels drug dealers and worries about getting killed.
Also — and this seems like no small point — Saul’s name is on the show. The brief opening credits show us Saul’s car, but thus far, Saul is absent. This must be a television first: a show where the eponymous character has yet to appear, more than a full season into its run.
Far more compelling was the B plot of “Switch,” about the baseball-card recovery mission of Mike Ehrmantraut on behalf of the feckless pharmaceutical dealer Daniel Wormald. Wormald has been burgled of both cash and cards, in his home, by Nacho, after Nacho slyly ascertains Wormald’s name and address.
Sharp-eyed “Breaking Bad” fans may have recognized one of the cops who arrived to investigate this home robbery. Officer Saxton, of the Albuquerque police, played by Stoney Westmoreland, was summoned by Skyler White in Season 3 of “Breaking Bad,” when she unsuccessfully tried to have her husband bounced from the house after she learned of his life as a meth maker.
Sad to say, spotting cameo “Breaking Bad” players was one of the deeper pleasures of “Switch.” Arguably, the finest scene is the opener, where, as with the first episode of Season 1, we watch Saul Goodman in his eventual and future guise as an assistant manager at a Cinnabon in Omaha. Shot in black and white, over Billy Walker’s version of “Funny How Time Slips Away,” this flash-forward finds Saul — or “Gene,” as he’s known — trapped after hours in a garbage room at the mall where he works. He thinks for a moment of exiting through an emergency door, then reconsiders when he reads a sign that says tripping the alarm will automatically summon the police.
That’s not the sort of attention a fugitive living under an alias wants. So Saul/Gene waits for another mall employee to happen by and open the other door, though not before scraping “S.G. was here” on a wall.
It’s a bit of a tease. We miss you, Saul! It’s also a reminder that Saul is almost literally trapped in his new identity. The moment echoes events at the end of the episode, when Jimmy confronts the box of his new office, and that ominous on-off switch. We know from “Breaking Bad” how Saul winds up in that garbage room. What we don’t know is how he winds up as Saul. Which would be fine if “Better Call Saul” didn’t need Saul to be compelling. On the evidence of “Switch,” it does.
One last cavil. It seems as though this episode dabbled in the cartoonish. I get that Wormald needs an inappropriately showy vehicle to underscore the foolhardy way he spends his ill-gotten cash. But really, does it need to be a massive yellow and red Hummer with flames and outlandish spinning rims, and a license plate that says “Playuh”? And Ken’s cellphone banter at the bar is so loud and obscene it seems to belong in a less subtle and less sophisticated show.
I am eager to hear other thoughts.  Please, people, tell me what I missed and why I ought to look forward to the rest of the season.