UNITED NATIONS — When the World Health Organization wanted to know how the war in Syria was affecting the mental health of those forced to flee their homes, the agency hired someone known less for her expertise than for her connections: The consultant, Shukria Mekdad, is the wife of Faisal Mekdad, the deputy foreign minister of Syria and a powerful defender of the government’s war effort.
Her appointment has led critics to question the aid agency’s impartiality.
Jennifer Leaning, a professor at the Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, questioned what she called the “optics” of hiring a senior Syrian government official’s wife as a consultant on something as sensitive as mental health. Not least, Ms. Leaning said, it would call into question any data Mrs. Mekdad gathers on the mental health of Syrians displaced by a war her husband has helped prosecute.
“At this point it reflects a degree of tone-deafness that is not appropriate,” Ms. Leaning said.
Mrs. Mekdad, she went on, plays no “prominent” role in the office, and was brought on as a consultant for the mental health assessment project after she had served in the United Nations resident representative’s office in Syria.
United Nations aid agencies can work in a country only with the blessings of the government. And they are often accused of bending over backward to satisfy the demands of that government to be able to operate.
The W.H.O. has been widely criticized for not ringing the alarm early enough on the threat of Ebola in West Africa, in part because of political meddling by government officials there to play down the threat.
In Syria, even with Mrs. Mekdad’s involvement, it’s not as if the health agency has had an easy time. According to Ms. Hoff, Syrian security forces have repeatedly taken medical supplies from aid convoys going into rebel-held areas, including rehydration salts, which are used to treat children with diarrhea.
On Wednesday, the United Nations emergency relief coordinator for Syria, Stephen O’Brien, told the Security Council that the health ministry had prohibited aid convoys from reaching around 30,000 people in recent weeks.
It is part of a pattern that United Nations officials have long described as government obstructionism. Mr. O’Brien said United Nations convoys this year have reached less than a quarter of 487,000 Syrians long cut off from food and medicines. “Humanitarian operations cannot continue to be bogged down by unnecessary and unacceptable restrictions, obstructions and deliberate delays that are costing people their lives,” he said.
His briefing comes three days before a planned cessation of hostilities that has been negotiated by American and Russian diplomats. It is to apply to most of Syria, starting at midnight Saturday, and officials hope it will allow for the sustained delivery of aid.
The frustration with the United Nations in Syria stems in part from the fact that, for the first three years of the conflict, its agencies refused to send humanitarian convoys into opposition-held areas because the government wouldn’t allow it.
At the time, United Nations officials said privately that if they delivered aid to areas controlled by groups opposed to President Bashar al-Assad without an explicit nod from the Security Council, they would lose their access to those in need who lived in government-held areas.
Aid started flowing into rebel-held parts of the country only after the Security Council authorized it in 2014. In December 2015, United Nations convoys delivered food for 2.5 million people.
Still, even 18 months after that Security Council measure, the United Nations finds it difficult reaching more than 4.5 million people living in what it calls besieged and hard-to-reach areas. United Nations officials have repeatedly appealed to the government to lift obstacles.
Syrian doctors have criticized W.H.O. too, pointing out that, until recently, the agency has been all but silent about the attacks on hospitals and health centers in opposition-held areas.
An advocacy group, Physicians for Human Rights, has documented more than 346 attacks on hospitals and health centers since the war began, many in the last few months, as the violence has escalated. The W.H.O. has recently issued two public statements.
For his part, Mr. O’Brien, insisted that the United Nations strives to deliver aid in “a neutral and impartial way” and that the charges of coziness with the government were unfounded.
The W.H.O. in Damascus has not specifically said why it chose Mrs. Mekdad to carry out the mental health assessment: There are no publicly available documents that show her qualifications, nor any scholarly papers written by her on the subject.
Ms. Mekdad’s husband, Faisal, is a longtime diplomat and was his country’s top envoy to the United Nations from 2003 to 2006. He is a staunch supporter of Mr. Assad, and he is among the senior government officials who has met with United Nations diplomats pleading for access to deliver humanitarian aid.
Mrs. Mekdad’s Facebook profile reveals little about her professional qualifications, but includes bits of her personal interests: She likes Edith Wharton, President Assad and his political party.