1 hr. and 45 min.
The ghost light is on, planted at center stage, but if its job is to keep spirits away, it isn’t working. In “O, Earth,” Casey Llewellyn’s whimsical, politically impassioned riff on Thornton Wilder’s “Our Town,” phantasms are present, and at least one of them is angry.
The first ghost we meet, though, is Wilder (Martin Moran), a gentle soul who is digging his shovel into a hillside, looking for a time capsule.
Social changes that have been reshaping American life since the early 20th century, the time “Our Town” depicts, are a particular concern of “O, Earth,” a play that demands we notice who still gets left out of our narratives.
Presented by the Foundry Theater at Here, it gives us a Grover’s Corners where the baseball-loving young George (Jess Barbagallo) is transgender and his sweetheart, Emily (Kristen Sieh), is a feminist. The Stage Manager (Donnetta Lavinia Grays) is a black woman who feels invisible as she’s “helping tell this story about these white people.” And remember Simon Stimson (Mr. Moran), the town’s alcoholic choirmaster? Gay and closeted, he drinks to drown his feelings of isolation.
That sounds schematic, but Ms. Llewellyn and her director, Dustin Wills, have supplied “O, Earth” with plenty of silliness and surreality, making a sparkling, jagged mishmash of time and place that includes contemporary Greenwich Village and Los Angeles. When Emily alights on the West Coast, having left Grover’s Corners behind, why would she not head straight for Ellen DeGeneres (Moe Angelos) and her wife, Portia de Rossi (Emily Davis)?
Poignant and funny, “O, Earth” can be clumsy, too, though that’s no fault of the fine cast. The play flattens badly into what feels like political show-and-tell in scenes involving the ghosts of Marsha P. Johnson (Julienne Brown, a.k.a. Mizz June) and Sylvia Rivera (Cecilia Gentili), early transgender activists in New York.
Yet it is a meeting between these ghosts and Wilder’s that brings the play closest to naming what may have been the real Wilder’s enduring heartache. Surprised that the Stonewall riots didn’t make it into “Our Town,” Marsha says of him, “I thought he was part of the family.” 
The Wilder we meet is the shade of a man who was too frightened to talk of such things, who wrote a famous play about a town where none of the characters loved like him.
“O, Earth” answers that fear with capacious sympathy and the certainty that sexuality — like race, like gender — should shut no one’s experience out of the stories we tell.