On June 12, 1994, Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were brutally murdered outside Ms. Simpson’s Los Angeles home. In the trial that followed, argues “The People v. O. J. Simpson: American Crime Story,” our current social conflicts and media culture were born.
The 10-episode series, starting Tuesday on FX, looks at that case from two decades ago and sees today an embryo. The power, and the competing claims, of identity politics. The marathon news stories packaged as entertainments. Above all, the idea that black and white Americans can look at precisely the same scene and see entirely different realities.
The show acquits itself well. Despite the audience’s knowledge that the former football star Orenthal James Simpson will be found not guilty (history is not a spoiler, sorry), the series is absorbing, infuriating and, yes, thoroughly entertaining.
Go back through the key points and main players of the trial.
“The People” opens with video of the 1991 police beating of an African-American motorist, Rodney King, which sets the racial context (and echoes in the Black Lives Matter movement), then jumps to the hours and days after the murders, as suspicion settles around Mr. Simpson (Cuba Gooding Jr.).
But he’s still famous, and rich enough to assemble his fractious dream team of defenders, including Mr. Cochran, Robert Shapiro (imagined by John Travolta as a vain wax doll), F. Lee Bailey (Nathan Lane) and Alan Dershowitz (Evan Handler), aided by Mr. Simpson’s pal Robert Kardashian (David Schwimmer).
Against this well-financed club, its meetings catered with lox and whitefish from Nate’n Al of Beverly Hills, is the overtaxed yet overconfident prosecutor Marcia Clark (Sarah Paulson), certain that once a jury sees the evidence and O. J.’s history of domestic violence, neither race nor celebrity will matter. She’s driven, idealistic, blinded, doomed.
“The People” shifts tones nimbly. When Mr. Cochran stages Mr. Simpson’s house for a walk-through by the largely black jury — removing pictures of white people and furnishing it with Afro-centric décor and art from “the Cochran collection” — the makeover scene slyly slippity-slides to Coolio’s “Fantastic Voyage.” But the series also slaps us with reality: grisly stills from the murder scene; a moment in which Mr. Cochran is slammed to the hood of his car during a police stop, in front of his children.
Like an amateur sleuth arguing that a guilty man was framed, this series believes that two seemingly opposed ideas can be true: a charge of police racism, say, can be both legitimate and cynically deployed. Its triumph is to take a case that divided the nation into teams and treat everyone, vulture or victim, with curiosity and empathy.
The casting is inspired, from Connie Britton as Faye Resnick (Ms. Simpson’s friend turned instant tell-all author) to Larry King as himself. Robert Morse is delectable as the journalist-gadfly Dominick Dunne, who dismisses the notion that the police framed Mr. Simpson. “O. J. hosted pool parties for them,” he scoffs, dragging out “pooool” into a little catty aria.
The line is on the nose enough to leave a mark, but it feels like more than mere name-dropping. The trial is long over, “The People v. O. J. Simpson” tells us, but the world is still dining out on this sad story.