A quiet moment outside the New York State Assembly on Tuesday. After meeting briefly, lawmakers adjourned for a two-week winter break.
ALBANY — The scene in the State Capitol last week bore all the hallmarks of democracy at work: advocates and lobbyists pushing their causes, earnest interns scurrying about, and protesters making insistent pleas for funds for everything from housing to hepatitis C.
But there was one place where little was happening: the legislative chambers, where laws are, in theory, made.
Last week, the state’s 213 elected lawmakers — or as many who were able to attend — gathered for a couple of hours, passed a few minor bills and some well-meaning resolutions, and then formally adjourned for a 14-day winter break, officially ending their workweek in Albany.
The time was 1:32 p.m. On a Tuesday.
A month into this year’s legislative session — and two months after the corruption convictions of Sheldon Silver and Dean G. Skelos, the former leaders of the State Assembly and Senate — the state’s lawmakers have responded with a leisurely return to well-established habits, marked by two-day weeks in the capital, six-minute floor sessions and a collection of one-house bills with little or no chance of becoming law.
And while a slow start to session is nothing new — the activity usually intensifies with the heat of budget negotiations at the end of March — the circumstances of the 2016 session are unprecedented. Never before have both leaders of the Legislature been deposed in such unceremonious fashion, and the public perception of Albany suggests a crisis: Nearly nine of 10 New Yorkers tell pollsters corruption is a serious problem in the state.
Lawmakers certainly paid tribute to the notion that things needed to change; real ethics reform had to happen, and the deal-making process — historically conducted behind closed doors by the governor and the two legislative leaders — needed to be far less opaque.
But that sense of urgency has seemingly dissipated, unable to penetrate the intractable culture of Albany: The 2016 Legislature has yet to offer any new bills related to ethics reform, and the leaders of both houses have been noncommittal on a raft of proposals made in January by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.
The somnolent pace has amazed even those accustomed to Albany’s inertia.
On Feb. 2, Carl E. Heastie, the Bronx Democrat who serves as speaker of the Assembly, announced the passage of a paid family leave bill. It was the fifth time his chamber has passed such a bill that will almost certainly not pass the Senate, where Republicans oppose the Assembly model and are clinging to a majority. The sense of déjà vu was not lost on one supporter, who noted that the bill was passed on Groundhog Day (the name of the 1993 Bill Murray movie about a man reliving the same day over and over and over).
Individual members of the Legislature say that the slow approach to new ethics rules can be frustrating for them as well, but that ironing out details in proposals takes time.
In the Assembly, for instance, where Democrats are dominant, members say that there are disagreements about capping outside income, and if so, at what level. The governor wants lawmakers to adopt a cap of $11,925 a year, or 15 percent of their base salary; some feel that is too low, while others support a total ban. There is also disagreement over a plan to strip pensions from convicted lawmakers, which would require a change of the State Constitution; the proposal stalled in the Assembly last year after labor unions raised their worries that lower-level public employees could lose their benefits if found guilty of a crime.
“We always want to be mindful of how this affects everyone,” Mr. Heastie said when asked about the idea.
In the Senate, John J. Flanagan, the Republican majority leader, says he does not believe in any ban on outside income, adding that the governor’s proposals are filled with “a lot of a very important significant details” that need to be properly vetted before being considered.
There are examples of major laws’ being passed early in the year in previous sessions. In January 2013, for example, the governor pushed through the Safe Act, a controversial gun control bill, in the wake of the massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut. This year, however, the bills publicized by both houses have primarily been of the sort that are more than likely doomed to wither, including a Senate-passed proposal to add term limits to leaders’ positions in both houses.
For his part, the governor has not had a particularly active public presence in Albany this year either, and reporters are currently keeping a running tally of time elapsed since his last formal news conference in the capital (233 days on Sunday).
After the swearing-in ceremony, Mr. Cuomo informally took questions in the court’s parking lot, and reiterated his belief that the Legislature should be working harder to fix ethics, an opinion he said was shared by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, who also attended Ms. DiFiore’s swearing-in.
“I think his point — that we need ethics reform — is the same thing that I have been saying,” Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, said.
Even so, one lawmaker who was in attendance for his speech in front of a public radio studio audience thought Albany got off easy.
“I actually was expecting worse,” said Assemblyman John T. McDonald III, a Capitol Region Democrat.
Back at the Capitol, meanwhile, the day’s session was already over by the time Mr. Bharara finished at 5 p.m. The next day — Tuesday — the Senate met for 45 minutes, passing a series of resolutions and a pair of noncontroversial bills. The Assembly met for a little over an hour, and did the same sort of low-stress business.
As legislators left their chambers, one was asked why the 2016 session was seemingly off to such a sedate start.
