At 19, Mark DeFriest was sentenced to four years in prison after stealing some tools.
That was in 1980. He’s been behind bars since — mostly.
Mr. DeFriest’s initial crime in Florida was arguably a misunderstanding. He took tools that his deceased father had bequeathed to him before his father’s will had been legally processed.
Since then, Mr. DeFriest, now 55, has remained a prisoner because of his 13 escape attempts, seven of them successful, earning him the nickname “Prison Houdini” and more than 30 additional years of incarceration.
On Wednesday, Mr. DeFriest had a chance to gain his freedom legally during a parole hearing in Florida. Instead, the parole commission gave him six more months, with an effective release date in August, so that he can complete a transitional program that teaches life skills, Mr. DeFriest’s lawyer said.
“It went well enough today that I would consider it a victory,” John Middleton, a lawyer who has represented Mr. DeFriest for decades, said in an interview.
Mr. Middleton said the release date did not guarantee that he would be freed this year. Mr. DeFriest still has time to serve for infractions committed while imprisoned in California and Alabama. Only if those penalties are lifted will he be paroled in six months.
Mr. DeFriest has gained national notoriety thanks in part to his elaborate escape attempts, many of which were recounted in a 2014 documentary, “The Mind of Mark DeFriest.” The film’s director, Gabriel London, has become one of Mr. DeFriest’s strongest advocates, testifying on the inmate’s behalf at the Wednesday hearing.
In one escape attempt, Mr. DeFriest claims to have dosed a staff coffeepot at a state mental institution with the powerful psychotropic drug LSD, which had been kept in the infirmary. He said security personnel were alerted before he could make his getaway.
In another, he removed one of his teeth to warrant a trip to the dentist. He then used improvised firearms he had built in the hospital’s wood shop to escape. The firearms, or zip guns as Mr. DeFriest calls them, were a reliable prop in several of his escape bids.
Trying to convince Mr. DeFriest to behave was “kind of like telling a kid ‘Don’t put your hand in the cookie jar,’ ” said Mr. Middleton.
Mr. London’s film portrays Mr. DeFriest as a something of a disturbed genius, a person who could memorize and recreate the teeth on a jailer’s keys but who lacked the discipline to stop trying to escape.
Mr. DeFriest’s sentences snowballed with each offense, including his most serious crime: stealing a car at gunpoint after one of his escapes. At one point, he was to be locked up through 2085.
The number of people rallying on Mr. DeFriest’s behalf also grew. Many cited mental competency as the root of his troubles. 
In December 2014, after Mr. Middleton and others testified before the Florida parole commission that Mr. DeFriest had never been mentally competent enough to stand trial, his sentence was sharply reduced.
The hearing on Wednesday represented his first chance to legally go free in 36 years. Mr. London expressed frustration over the outcome.
He and Mr. Middleton blamed the six-month extension on a bureaucratic error made in communications between Florida and Oregon— where Mr. DeFriest was moved to be near his wife in preparation for his release — that mistakenly classified him as still serving a life sentence.
As a result, he was never enrolled in a required transitional program. Mr. DeFriest will up for release again in August only if completes the six-month practical skills course intended to help convicts avoid committing crimes again.
On Wednesday, Mr. DeFriest expressed exasperation in a statement to the panel, according to state records. “I haven’t had problems since I moved here to Oregon but I feel like I have been sent out here and set up to fail,” he said.