The death of a woman at the Mott Haven Houses in the 40th Precinct reveals a swirl of deeper dysfunction.
The strangers slept no more than a dozen steps apart in a housing project in the South Bronx — she on a cot pushed up against the wall in the living room of her ailing mother’s apartment, and he in a narrow, airless hallway of the building, on the threshold of his family’s door.
She worried he had been locked out of his apartment, and one day last month told her mother she wanted to offer him some soup. But the mother, mindful of the danger that faces residents in the stairwells and expansive courtyards of the Mott Haven Houses, warned her it was the kind of encounter that could get her killed.
A few days later, the man, Angel Feliz-Volquez, 26, hearing her in the fifth-floor hallway, burst from his apartment with a 20-inch machete and repeatedly struck the younger woman, Carmen Torres-Gonzalez, 59. He sliced her neck, face, shoulder and forearm, the back of her head and both her hands, severing one, and then stood over her, according to a police report.
Ms. Torres-Gonzalez’s killing was the first of 2016 in the 40th Precinct, a two-square-mile area at the southern tip of the Bronx where the towers of 14 housing projects dominate the skyline, methadone clinics dot the main thoroughfares, and gangs and drug-dealing wane with each police roundup and then roar back.
But the murder sprang from a swirl of deeper dysfunction, from a public-housing system that remains a redoubt for the sort of serious crime that once plagued much of New York City, and from a string of government encounters that failed to keep Mr. Feliz-Volquez from hurting more people as his mental health deteriorated.
Entrenched violence in housing projects and uneven, ineffective services for mentally ill poor people are among the stubborn causes of what killings remain in an era of historically low crime, spurring intense but often frustrating efforts by the police to identify and track the most violent and most vulnerable.
Some police precincts now routinely log no killings in a given year. Citywide, homicides plummeted to 333 in 2014, the lowest since comparable statistics started to be kept a half-century ago, from a peak of 2,262 in 1990 when crack-cocaine drove so much of the city’s violence.
The 40th Precinct, though, remains one of a few areas where homicides have persisted, feeding off the isolation of poverty and turf rivalries among criminal crews that linger despite the neighborhood’s progress in undoing some of its history as an emblem of urban blight. In the neighborhoods that make up the precinct — Melrose, Mott Haven and Port Morris — nine people were murdered last year; the precinct recorded the biggest increase in the city in major crimes. This year, all three city police officers who have been shot were struck amid the precinct’s housing projects. They all survived.
To understand how and why killings continue in a city that has seen crime fall to historic lows, The New York Times is reporting this year on violence in the 40th Precinct, and documenting the story of each homicide.
Ms. Torres-Gonzalez. Her killing was the first of 2016 in the 40th Precinct.
Sixty years after the predominantly Irish area was transformed by blacks and Puerto Ricans moving into new housing projects, it now faces the specter of another overhaul as developers buy up once-industrial waterfront property for luxury towers.
But the vast tracts of public housing are not going away, and residents still speak of routines shaped by day-to-day violence whose victims they say are often ignored — among them undocumented immigrants, many from Mexico, who worry about coming forward to report crime. Homicides in the precinct reached 21 in 2011, after hovering between eight and 16 for a decade before that, and then dropped to 12 in 2012, eight in 2013 and seven in 2014 before rising again last year.
Roughly a third of the precinct’s 95,000 residents live in public housing, and data show that people who live in those buildings and on their edges are packed almost twice as densely as residents of the precinct over all. The 15th Congressional District, which includes the area, is the poorest in the United States.
For people who live there and watch friends fall victim to crime, fear has remained a fact of life across generations.
But Ms. Torres-Gonzalez, who earned a secretarial degree in Puerto Rico before moving in the 1980s to the Bronx, where she taught Spanish to children, tried not to be intimidated by such fears. In a building where tenants are often afraid to open their doors for strangers, Ms. Torres-Gonzalez was a confident presence, coaxing neighbors out with food or a favor.
Since her 77-year-old mother came out of a coma two years ago, Ms. Torres-Gonzalez stayed with her each night, cooking sorullos — fried cornmeal sticks — and helping her get around. During the day, she visited grieving families at nearby hospitals — her own husband died from cancer 20 years ago — and prepared gift boxes for a church group that supported victims of domestic violence.
Ms. Torres-Gonzalez’s voice became a preoccupation of Mr. Feliz-Volquez, who told the police after his arrest that he heard her calling his name in the middle of the night and talking about him. He told investigators he thought she and an upstairs neighbor had been spying on him. He is now at the Rikers Island jail complex after being charged with second-degree murder; Amy Attias, his court-appointed lawyer, said she had asked for a psychiatric exam.
It was not the first time he had heard voices that others say were not there. In March, he was charged with cracking a plate over the head of a manager at a Manhattan restaurant where he worked. He told the authorities that his co-workers were talking about him when they thought he was not listening, several co-workers briefed on his statements said.
“To me, that’s evidence something’s going on inside this person’s mind that’s not real,” one co-worker, Colin Bryson, said.
Mr. Feliz-Volquez was ordered to complete seven days of community service and an anger-management program. His contact with the authorities only increased, though. Since June, his erratic behavior had drawn at least four visits by the authorities, a law enforcement official said. Each time he was taken for observation to Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center.
Mr. Feliz-Volquez, who was born in the Dominican Republic, used to speak of wanting to be a professional volleyball player, his grandmother, Maria Matos, said. He loved going to Citi Field to watch baseball. He studied hard at Walton High School in the Bronx, and took a job at McDonald’s to help his single mother with the rent, Ms. Matos said.
In 2012, he began teaching soccer at Children’s Village, a community center for at-risk children in Westchester County.
Ms. Matos said his mental illness surfaced about a year ago, when he told his mother that he could not sleep and had stopped eating or drinking anything but lots of coffee. Clothes started sagging off his 6-foot-1 frame.
“I think it was the depression that got him,” Ms. Matos said.
A family friend from Mr. Feliz-Volquez’s church got him a job as a dishwasher at Asia de Cuba in downtown Manhattan. A few nights after its grand opening, a manager, Felipe Murcia, was scraping dirty dishes into the garbage.
Then the room went black. When he came to, Mr. Murcia was staggering backward, blood dripping from a gash on his forehead that required 35 stitches. Shattered plates lay on the floor, and Mr. Bryson subdued Mr. Feliz-Volquez.
“Why’d you do this?” Mr. Bryson recalled asking.
“You know what you do,” he said Mr. Feliz-Volquez replied.
All that his co-workers had done, they said, was invite him to meals, only to be rebuffed. He refused to speak Spanish, and insisted that his Dominican co-workers use the English pronunciation of Angel, rather than the Spanish one.
After the attack, Mr. Bryson and the chef, Brendan Mica, barricaded him inside the room, only to watch as Mr. Feliz-Volquez changed into street clothes and waited for the police.
Mr. Feliz-Volquez was charged with felony second-degree assault for hitting Mr. Murcia with a plate. In August, he pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor assault charge; Mr. Murcia said prosecutors told him they could not prove that Mr. Feliz-Volquez had used a plate.
Mr. Murcia said doctors told him the wound must have been caused by a hard object. He said prosecutors did not question him thoroughly, emphasizing that Mr. Feliz-Volquez had no record and suggesting that Mr. Murcia must have provoked the attack. Mr. Murcia now questions whether prosecutors could have done more to pursue the felony assault charges against Mr. Feliz-Volquez.
“It’s mysterious no one seemed to take that seriously,” Mr. Bryson said.
There is no indication that Mr. Feliz-Volquez is among the 78 New Yorkers the city has started to track for their history of mental illness and violence, said the law enforcement official who described his contact with the authorities.
Sarah Solon, a spokeswoman for the Mayor’s Office of Criminal Justice, said the tracking system, known as the hub, was still taking shape after its formation in August and has been operating only by referral.
“The next stage, now that we’ve learned some lessons about how to do this well, is to work with all of the different agencies to figure out cases like Angel’s, I think, where a red flag should be raised,” she said.
Social workers for the New York City Housing Authority are charged with helping some psychiatric patients returning home from hospitalizations, most of whom are not a threat, though the risk of violence increases when a person is off medication and psychotic. But residents said it remained difficult for social workers or the police to monitor what was happening within the four walls of a home, especially in housing projects where people feel isolated from community programs and jobs. Many tenants yearn for stronger interventions by the city.
The details of Mr. Feliz-Volquez’s medical treatment are confidential, but his grandmother said he spent at least three days at the hospital on his first visit, which she thought was mainly related to insomnia. She worried about his being prescribed medication.
She said his recovery was short-lived. One of the first signs was that Mr. Feliz-Volquez had stopped accompanying his mother to church on Sundays. Around Christmastime, he bought the machete on eBay, storing it under his bed, according to the police.
His apartment was five and a half linoleum tiles across from the door of Ms. Torres-Gonzalez’s mother, at the end of the fifth-floor hallway.
Two days after the killing, splotches of dried blood stained those tiles. “Bastard!” a friend of Ms. Torres-Gonzalez screamed in the hallway, prefacing it with an expletive, her voice echoing off the walls.
Mr. Feliz-Volquez’s door would later be tagged with graffiti reading “Killer” and “Justice will be served,” but this was a day for a more basic task.
Another woman was on her hands and knees, a Lysol bottle in one hand and a green cloth in the other, scrubbing her friend’s blood from the floor. A hallway light above flickered off before they went inside.