When she was 15, growing up in suburban Maryland, Lyric Cabral decided on two things: She wanted to be a photojournalist, and she wanted to live in Harlem. Five years later, in 2002, she found her first apartment in the neighborhood. One afternoon, after stopping to say hello to a friend at a vegan juice bar on 125th Street, she found herself talking to a man at the counter.
His name was Saeed Torres. He was 50 or so, a home-brewed Renaissance man with his own dance company and a collection of African drums. He liked to eat well, bake his own desserts and smoke weed. Torres appointed himself Cabral’s ambassador to the neighborhood. He took her to weekend drum circles at Mount Morris Park. A few months later, he found her a new apartment, on the top floor of a three-story brownstone on 121st Street between Lenox and Seventh Avenues. He lived on the ground floor, where his wide circle of artist friends would visit for late-night jam sessions and meandering conversations.
Among the friends that Torres brought to the brownstone was Tarik Shah, a jazz musician who gave Torres upright-bass lessons. Shah was reticent around strangers like Cabral, but alone with Torres, he would open up. He lamented the fall of the Taliban and bragged about his martial-arts prowess. ‘‘The jihad is ongoing,’’ he said at one point. ‘‘It doesn’t stop.’’ Torres gently encouraged Shah’s rants with monosyllabic affirmations. Yeah. . . . Right. . . . O.K.
Torres was something of a chameleon. Some days, Cabral would see him leave the brownstone in a suit, with a briefcase; other days it would be colorful African robes and sandals. He usually had a lot of cash on hand, though Cabral once lent him $2,000 when he was short, which he soon repaid. He had two cellphones and would often excuse himself before answering. He said he worked for the Legal Aid Society, which sometimes required him to travel abroad. In 2005, Torres suddenly moved out of his apartment. He called Cabral a few hours later. ‘‘If anybody asks you anything about me,’’ he said, ‘‘don’t give them any information.’’ He had something important to tell her, he said, but she would need to hear it in person.
She didn’t take him seriously at first, but he persisted, and she finally agreed to go meet him two years later. By this time, Cabral’s career as a photojournalist had taken off, and Torres was living in South Carolina and had a young son. He sat her down at his kitchen table and gave her a folder of documents — a lease for a Bronx apartment, a fax in Arabic from a charity in Jordan, a flowchart about ‘‘just war’’ theory. There were also several newspaper clippings about Tarik Shah, who around the time Torres left Harlem had been arrested and charged with conspiring to provide material support to Al Qaeda. ‘‘Bronx Qaeda Arrest — L.I. Terror-Camp Plot,’’ blared The New York Post. Cabral remembered the news, but she never made the link between the Tarik Shah in the papers and the Tarik she met in Torres’s garden apartment.
Torres explained that he had been ‘‘investigating Tarik’’ and that ‘‘the F.B.I. was paying the rent’’ on his brownstone apartment. He did not use the word ‘‘informant,’’ preferring to call himself a ‘‘civilian operative.’’ Torres spoke of his work as though it were a service to the community — a making of amends for his past misdeeds. He saw himself as a guardian, the first line of defense in the war against terrorism.
Cabral was familiar with the thorny moral problems that sometimes arose in her profession — the ‘‘awkward dance,’’ she now calls it, between reporter and subject and their conflicting expectations of how the story would be told. The story that Cabral chose to tell about Torres is very different from the one he tells about himself. On Feb. 22, PBS’s ‘‘Independent Lens’’ will broadcast ‘‘(T)error,’’ the documentary that Cabral and a colleague, David Felix Sutcliffe, would come to film about her old neighbor. Last year, ‘‘(T)error’’ had its premiere at Sundance, where it won the Special Jury Award for Break Out First Feature.
When Cabral and Sutcliffe screened ‘‘(T)error’’ for Torres, he gave it four and a half out of five stars, complaining that he came across as too depressed. Cabral pointed out to him that the film is bookended by two moments of happiness. At the beginning, he’s in the kitchen frosting a cake with his son. At the end, the F.B.I. has offered him a new assignment, though it would eventually fall through. In that conversation, Cabral was trying to show Torres that it was his work with the F.B.I. that was making him unhappy. ‘‘Informants don’t get to reflect,’’ she told me later. ‘‘The F.B.I. would never encourage informants to think about these moral and ethical ramifications of their work.’’ In her eyes, the deepest treachery Torres committed may have been against himself.
For the F.B.I., domestic counterterrorism sometimes entails stings — finding people who might commit violent acts in the future and testing how far they’re willing to go. This task often falls to paid informants like Torres, who can spend months grooming their targets and steering the conversation toward jihad. In cases in Miami and Newburgh, N.Y., informants have offered their targets tens or hundreds of thousands of dollars to commit an act of mass violence. ‘‘Some Al Qaeda cases were so aggressive, it was approaching entrapment-light,’’ said Karen Greenberg, the director of the Center on National Security at Fordham Law School. The bureau has been more moderate with recent cases against people suspected of supporting the Islamic State, especially young ones, she added.
The F.B.I. has used informants against targets — Communists, Mafiosi, Black Panthers, dirty politicians, Weathermen, drug dealers, white-collar fraudsters — for most of its history. But Muslim extremists have posed a unique challenge. In 2006, five years after the Sept. 11 attacks, fewer than 40 of the bureau’s 12,000 agents had even a limited proficiency in Arabic; reportedly fewer than 20 were Muslim. Informants have filled the gap. By 2008, the F.B.I. was using thousands of them. None are considered employees, and they are often paid in cash.
In his book ‘‘The Terror Factory,’’ the journalist Trevor Aaronson argues that the F.B.I. targets ‘‘punks’’ and ‘‘losers’’ — underemployed men on the fringes of society who would not have the means to become terrorists on their own. The book suggests that mosque-crawling informants are a bit like police officers who are filling their town’s treasury through speed traps. Laws designed to keep the public safe from the most flagrant offenders wind up often catching borderline cases, men like Mohamed Osman Mohamud, a Somali-American who pressed a keyboard button that he believed would detonate a truck bomb at a Christmas-tree-lighting ceremony in Portland, Ore. He was 19 at the time and in the company of undercover F.B.I. agents, who provided him with the fake bomb.
Responding to the criticism that these sting operations turn incompetent jihadist sympathizers into would-be terrorists, Ali Soufan — a former F.B.I. agent who went undercover to investigate Shah — pointed out in a 2013 Wall Street Journal review of ‘‘The Terror Factory’’ that being ‘‘literally idiots’’ did not stop people like the Shoe Bomber (2001) and the Times Square Car Bomber (2010) from nearly carrying out successful terror attacks without any interaction with the F.B.I.
Torres told me that he has contributed to eight investigations. In court, Torres has testified that he first agreed to work with the bureau while in prison for armed robbery. Before the case against Shah, Torres worked on a sting operation targeting Mohammed Ali al-Moayad, who claimed to know Osama bin Laden and was convicted in 2005 of conspiring to provide financial support to Al Qaeda and Hamas.
Aaronson’s book catalogs the cases of more than 500 federal terrorism defendants and finds that fewer than 10 dealt with would-be terrorists who independently planned to carry out attacks on American soil. Far more were cultivated by the company of men like Torres. Shah, for example, collected jihadist books and mused about opening a training facility. But he hadn’t come very close to joining Al Qaeda at the point he met Soufan, who Torres led him to believe was a recruiter for the group.
‘‘It’s like bait,’’ Torres says in the film, reflecting on the Shah case. ‘‘Threw the hook out there. He bit into it.’’ Shah pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 15 years in prison.
I met Torres at a small-town coffee shop in upstate New York on a cold Saturday in January. He arrived half an hour late, looking grandfatherly in corduroys, a dark woolen overcoat and a herringbone cap. His brown eyes were frank and inquisitive. ‘‘I eat big,’’ he said. He ordered a veggie burger, a chicken sandwich, a decaf cafe latte and a glass of warm water.
Torres agreed to give Cabral and Sutcliffe access to his phone, and the film includes Torres’s text messages to his handlers and Akili. In one text, Torres encourages Akili to watch a ‘‘Taliban warrior’’ episode of ‘‘Homeland.’’ The F.B.I. wants updates on Torres’s progress and the target. Torres obliges but complains about the hard work and low pay. At one point, he claims that his monthly envelope of F.B.I. cash is $600 light.
Sutcliffe and Cabral consulted lawyers who told them that what they were doing was legal, as long as they didn’t interfere with the investigation. Trying to film Torres while he met with the F.B.I. or Akili, they decided, would be too risky. So their early filming hews closely to Torres and his cagey narrative of the case’s progress. Standing before a map of Pittsburgh, he tacks up laminated photos of bearded men. ‘‘They are all targets that’s in suspected areas,’’ he says with a gravely official air. ‘‘I don’t have no feelings for them. You’re making Islam look bad. You gotta go.’’ Sutcliffe, who was filming the scene, wondered whether this was going to be a higher-level operation than he expected. Then Sutcliffe noticed that one photo was of Adam Gadahn, an American-born Qaeda spokesman who had not been inside the United States for several years. ‘‘He was totally trying to hustle us,’’ Sutcliffe told me.
The film’s emotional climax comes when Torres is browsing Facebook while he awaits a reply on his friend request to Akili. Cabral takes the opportunity to confront him about Shah.
‘‘Have you ever had a target who was a friend or a family member?’’ she asks.
Cabral felt that she, too, had been betrayed by Torres. She worried that some of her conversations with him from their Harlem days might have been taped. But soon, in the middle of filming, Cabral would have to choose whether to deceive him in turn.
In March 2012, Akili sent a mass email to civil-liberties activists, accusing the F.B.I. of ‘‘harassment.’’ Apparently, some of Torres’s approaches had been clumsily overt. Torres, he says, was constantly asking him about his views on jihad; at one point, he asked him to obtain a gun. Torres, he says, almost forced him to get acquainted with another man, who tried to talk him into traveling abroad and left him with his phone number. Akili says that he typed the number into a search engine and learned that it belonged to an F.B.I. informant.
The email found its way to Cabral’s inbox. She was on the road, driving behind Torres. She did not tell Torres about Akili’s suspicions. That night, she and Sutcliffe debated what to do. Akili was most likely under surveillance, and approaching him could tip off the F.B.I. to their presence in Pittsburgh. At the same time, Akili’s voice had the potential to improve the film immeasurably. They decided it was worth the risk. The hardest part would be feigning ignorance with Akili, whose comings and goings they had been indirectly documenting for months. ‘‘We had to strip away everything we knew about this person and reacquaint ourselves with his public self,’’ Cabral said.
On camera, in the living room of his public-housing apartment, Akili comes across as an eccentric autodidact, barefoot, turbaned, plump and pale. As he speaks solemnly about the ‘‘greatest jihad’’ being the overcoming of a person’s ‘‘lower, bestial desires’’ through Islam, the camera makes note of his video games and a glittering medallion on his wall. For someone who believes that he is being unjustly hunted by the F.B.I., he is serene and oddly self-possessed. But three days after Cabral and Sutcliffe interview Akili at his apartment, the F.B.I. hauls him away in handcuffs. Akili pleads with Sutcliffe, who was filming the scene, to get help for his wife.
When Torres and I met upstate, he complained that Cabral and Sutcliffe should have warned him before they reached out to Akili. ‘‘They double-sworded me now, do you know what I mean?’’ He shifted to a discourse on the ‘‘just’’ lie and the ‘‘unjust’’ lie, how a lie is morally defensible if it prevents harm to innocents.
So was the lie of Cabral and Sutcliffe a just lie or an unjust lie?
He wasn’t happy with the filmmakers’ decision, but neither was he ready to call them out on it. Cabral may have captured more of Torres’s double life than he had ever intended to show her. He didn’t seem to fault her for it. It may simply have been a case of his respecting the next thief.