Presidents’ Day promises the usual array of thematic TV diversions: historical documentaries, basic cable marathons, James Franco traveling through time to stop the Kennedy assassination.
In the Hulu series “11.22.63,” based on the 2011 novel by Stephen King and debuting Feb. 15, Mr. Franco stars as Jake, a teacher who is shown a wormhole to 1960 and uses it to try to thwart Lee Harvey Oswald.
The murder of President John F. Kennedy has captivated artists and audiences for five decades, and it’s easy to see why. It is a narrative gold mine: epoch-defining tragedy, political intrigue, true crime and a motley cast of characters who range from the handsome and heroic leader of the Western world to the runty outcast who (we’re told) killed him in Dallas. One could spend from now until October 2017, when the final remaining records on the assassination are scheduled to be released, wallowing in J.F.K. metafiction and not reach the end.
Here is a small sample of the offerings, most from the ’90s J.F.K.-conspiracy mini-craze, organized loosely by culprit.
“American Tabloid” by James Ellroy.
James Ellroy’s sprawling historical crime novel, acclaimed upon its release in 1995, posits that the assassination was not the moment America lost its innocence, as the cliché has it, because America was never innocent. As with Mr. Ellroy’s more straightforward crime novels, like “L.A. Confidential,” the story focuses mostly on the mercenary acts of a few behind-the-scenes operators, whose collaborators included, but were not limited to, the Feds, the Kennedy family, the mafia, Jimmy Hoffa and Howard Hughes. Their high-level blackmailing, heroin stealing and Bay of Pigs-militia training amounts to a dark secret history of the mid-20th century. The novel, the first in the author’s “Underworld USA” trilogy, ends as the motorcade roles inexorably into Dealey Plaza. But by then, you’re wondering how J.F.K. lasted as long as he did.
What about Oswald? He’s mostly a non-factor.
What about Oswald? He did it.
What about Oswald? He is framed for the murder and actually gives the Smoking Man, a nonsmoker before the Kennedy plot, his first cigarettes.
In a 1997 episode of this British cult sci-fi comedy, the titular spaceship’s crew members travel back in time in search of Indian food and end up instead in the Texas School Book Depository, where they inadvertently knock Oswald out of the window and prevent the assassination. A quick time-skip to a few years later reveals that a resulting chain of events, beginning with Kennedy’s impeachment for sharing a mistress with the mob boss Sam Giancana, left the world on the brink of nuclear annihilation. In an inspired solution, they convince Kennedy that to preserve his legacy, he must go back in time with them and assassinate himself.
What about Oswald? He fires two shots but is unwittingly tangential to the murder.
What about Oswald? He’s the crux of the whole thing, though, like most of us, a victim of circumstance.
Oliver Stone’s audacious 1991 thriller featured lurid details — we all remember where we were when we first saw a shirtless, gold-painted Tommy Lee Jones — and an expansive conspiracy that reached into the White House, the Pentagon, organized crime and the intelligence community. Kevin Costner starred as Jim Garrison, the dogged, possibly misguided New Orleans district attorney whose accusations and book, “On the Trail of Assassins,” formed much of the basis of “JFK.” The historical details were widely disputed, but the film’s pastiche of cinematic styles and its rich cast — Jack Lemmon, Walter Matthau and Sissy Spacek are among the co-stars you may have forgotten about — make it a compelling watch to this day.
What about Oswald? As critics noted when the film was released, Oswald was perhaps the only person in the film who didn’t play a role in Kennedy’s death.
“Seinfeld” wasn’t above a little intertextual parody, and arguably the most memorable example was a two-part episode from 1992 that goofed on “JFK.” In it, Kramer and Newman, who claimed that the Mets’ first baseman Keith Hernandez had spit on them, stood in for Kennedy and Gov. John B. Connally. Jerry Seinfeld was Jim Garrison, the investigator. (Wayne Knight, who starred as Newman, had a role in “JFK.”) The bit added the phrases “magic loogie” and “second spitter” to the show’s voluminous lexicon.
What about Oswald? Mr. Hernandez was cast as the patsy, not that he cares what you think about him. He’s Keith Hernandez.