Whether it’s TV ratings or avocado consumption, we’re inundated with ways to quantify the annual extravagance that is the Super Bowl. I would like to suggest another avenue of analysis: publicly available New York City taxi data.
Taxi usage patterns provide an insight into how exciting the game was and even say something about which halftime performers were most popular.
Let’s start with last year’s game, between the New England Patriots and the Seattle Seahawks.
Taxi activity’s lowest level in New York coincided with the climactic moment of the game, just as Malcolm Butler intercepted Russell Wilson at 9:59 p.m. to secure the 28-24 victory for the Patriots. New England called a timeout after Butler’s interception, but many Super Bowl party guests apparently didn’t wait around to watch Tom Brady take a knee before they hailed cabs. Taxi activity spiked soon after the interception and continued to rise, reaching its peak just minutes after the 10:06 p.m. final whistle.
That was a close, exciting game, so it makes sense that people stayed until the very end. What happens when games are blowouts? One year earlier, the Seahawks dominated the Broncos, 43-8, in a game that was effectively over in the third quarter.
A lot of people didn’t stick around to watch the Seahawks’ coronation; taxi activity increased throughout the fourth quarter, similar to the way fans flee stadiums early when one team has an insurmountable lead.
In general, the more exciting the game, the less taxi use during the fourth quarter and the larger the postgame spike. That pattern has repeated itself every year since 2009, with the exception of 2014, which was the only lopsided contest in that period.
When it comes to halftime performances, I wasn’t surprised to see that taxi activity picks up at the beginning of halftime. People may want to use the 30-minute window to, among other things, leave one party and watch the second half somewhere else.
We can also get an idea from taxi activity which Super Bowl halftime performances were most anticipated: when there are fewer trips at the beginning of halftime — representing people who don’t want to miss the halftime show — and more taxis at the end of halftime.
By this admittedly crude standard, Beyoncé’s 2013 Super Bowl performance was the most highly anticipated by New Yorkers. The Black Eyed Peas and Bruce Springsteen seem to be the least popular judging from the bump in people taking taxis in the middle of their shows.
Beyoncé is on stage again this year, joining Coldplay and Bruno Mars, so we’ll see if the pattern holds.