BEVERLY HILLS, Calif. — There are downsides to being a longtime action-movie hero, as Sylvester Stallone has found out: He’s had four back operations, two shoulder surgeries and a spinal fusion, that one after he fractured his neck filming “The Expendables.” Over the years, expectations of his assumed athletic prowess grew so high that he stopped wanting to play golf or basketball with anyone. When opinions about his acting abilities hit their nadir, around the time he won a Razzie for worst actor of the century in 2000, he half-agreed with his harshest detractors.
All of which made an unexpected upside of devoting a career to playing he-men especially sweet. Mr. Stallone’s Oscar nomination, for his supporting performance in “Creed” — the seventh film in the “Rocky” franchise, which won him his last Oscar nominations four decades ago — has left him, by all outward showings, enormously grateful and glowingly proud, if slightly befuddled.
Three and a half weeks earlier, he had collected a Golden Globe for his performance in “Creed,” a win that left him so dumbfounded that he failed to notice the standing ovation of the crowd. He had also failed, to his lasting dismay, to thank the film’s writer and director, Ryan Coogler, or his co-star Michael B. Jordan, which had prompted tut-tutting from Samuel L. Jackson, among many others, on Twitter.
Everything you need to know about the contenders in one quick rundown.
By week’s end, the awards news shifted to the homogeneity of the Oscar acting nominations, which all went to white actors. That Mr. Stallone received the lone nomination for “Creed,” a film written and directed by a black man and largely about black characters, only fueled the controversy, making Mr. Stallone’s joy over the recognition bittersweet.
He had met Mr. Coogler, who he described as “a full-fledged genius, a savant,” three and a half years ago, before Mr. Coogler’s first feature, “Fruitvale Station,” came out.
The younger director came up with the idea for “Creed” when his own father, a devout “Rocky” fan, fell gravely ill (he has since recovered). Mr. Coogler wanted to tell the story of the illegitimate son of Rocky Balboa’s old boxing foe and friend, Apollo Creed. Set in present-day Philadelphia, the film would explore the city’s vibrant black culture through the eyes of Adonis Creed, who seeks out an aged and ailing Rocky to train him.
Despite landing a meeting with Mr. Stallone, Mr. Coogler did not think for a moment that the storied actor would agree to the film. So, en route to Mr. Stallone’s office, Mr. Coogler stopped at a Best Buy to get a Blu-ray of “Rocky II” for Mr. Stallone to sign. The movie was his dad’s favorite, and Mr. Coogler figured he would never see the star again.
He has also found deep solace in the acclaim his performance drew from Hollywood’s establishment. Irwin Winkler, who has been producing films with Mr. Stallone from the first “Rocky” on, said seeing Tom Hanks and Steven Spielberg leaping to their feet to applaud Mr. Stallone’s Golden Globe win was especially gratifying.
