Now, nearly three months later, she has emerged to tell her side, backed by a public relations and reputation management firm, Status Labs, based in Texas.
Her message: She didn’t like the person she saw in the video, either.
“When I watch it, I am embarrassed and sorry,” she said in a telephone interview. “I see someone dealing with a high-stress situation who gets flustered. I see a moment where I feel like I’m not representing my best self, and I see somebody who’s trying to do her best to help marginalized students.
“I try to remember that’s only one moment of a full day, and only one moment in a 12-year career,” she said.
Attempts by ordinary people to recover their reputations after spectacular downward spirals as public villains du jour is an emerging art form and business opportunity. Status Labs has worked pro bono to arrange Ms. Click’s interviews and distribute professional head shots to replace the more commonly known image of her: a blurry, mid-yell frame from the YouTube video.
The backlash put Ms. Click in legal and professional hot water. In January, she agreed to 20 hours of community service for the misdemeanor third-degree assault charge against her. The university suspended her in January pending its own investigation.
Few have publicly come to her defense, and her lack of public statements left only one narrative to swirl in the news and on social media.
“When she stays silent, everyone assumes that she was guilty of something, and the vacuum gets filled by, often times, trolls, detractors and people who dislike her,” said Darius Fisher, the president of Status Labs.
In the recent interview, Ms. Click acknowledged making mistakes, painting herself as passionate for the cause but saying she was unprepared for crowd-control duties.
She said she was first drawn to Concerned Student 1950, the group that gathered to protest racial issues on campus, at the university’s homecoming parade in October. There, she witnessed an angry crowd respond to the students.
“I didn’t want them to feel alone,” she said.
The November day she was filmed in the YouTube video, the atmosphere on campus was tense. Racial incidents had unfolded throughout the semester, she said, and the black student group was protesting from a tent encampment in the center of campus. The night before, a truck with a Confederate flag had driven around near the campsite, which the students interpreted as an intimidation tactic.
The morning the video was shot, the university’s president, Timothy Wolfe, had stepped down. The protesting students had spent hours talking to the news media, Ms. Click said, but asked for a break so they could prepare for a news conference. At that point, a human wall formed around the campsite to keep reporters out.
“I wasn’t prepared for that interaction,” she said, adding that she wished she had taken the time to “respectfully converse” with the student.
“I certainly didn’t mean what I said to be a call for violence,” she said.
Mr. Schierbecker, in a telephone interview, said he had watched and read most of Ms. Click’s recent interviews, but was not sold on her explanation.
Ms. Click, a mother of three, said she was nevertheless surprised and disappointed that she became the national focus, instead of the protests or the racial issues.
Her goal, she said, is to continue working for the university.
