“When you’re starting a brand, you have to be a product of your own experiences,” says the designer Greg Rosborough. “You can’t fake being something else.” Along with his co-founder, Abdul Abasi, Rosborough has created Abasi Rosborough — a three-year-old men’s wear brand that is, in many ways, a product of both of their pasts.
A Tucson native, Rosborough, 32, grew up playing basketball and studied business at the University of Arizona, where he worked as the student manager for the men’s basketball team. His fascination with sneakers and athletic wear (and a little luck) landed him in meetings with Nike, the team’s gear sponsor, to discuss the latest innovations and designs for the team’s uniform.
After graduating from FIT in 2008, Rosborough landed an internship at Ralph Lauren Purple Label, where his work under old-world Italian tailors led to a job as a designer for Polo. Abasi went to the cult men’s wear brand Engineered Garments to work as a designer, and then ran the brand’s Garment District store, Nepenthes.
Slowly, the pair began to reshape a suit jacket on their own terms. They kept the horsehair canvassing of the jacket (a signature of Savile Row suits) so that there would be some shape to the chest, eliminated all buttons but one and reduced the collar lapel to a simple, elegant line. Their aim was to make a suit that was just as sophisticated and dignified as any other — but more comfortable, easier to move in, more versatile. Using Abasi as the fit model, they developed a kind of ergonomic tailoring, adapting a raglan sleeve and adding panels of wool jersey fabric to make a suit with a designer sensibility, which wouldn’t be out of place in an office, but which moved like activewear. (Roll over the image above to see each of the design changes they made on their signature “Arc” jacket from the spring/summer 2016 collection.) “We just allowed it to become what it was naturally, based on how the body moves,” Rosborough said.
So began the Abasi Rosborough brand. Now in its sixth season, the collection has evolved to include sportswear designed using the same ideas — there’s a denim trucker jacket cut with the same raglan sleeve as the suit jacket, and knits designed with anatomical fits, made from the looms Nike uses to create its FlyKnit sneakers.
