SALVADOR, Brazil — From a mosquito’s point of view, the sweaty, minimally clothed multitudes thronging the streets of this northeastern city on Monday night must have looked especially delectable.
Drunk on beer and preoccupied by the prodigious carnal possibilities, young men and women danced their way along Avenida Oceânica as Brazilian pop icons performing atop giant motorized stages exhorted them to jump, party and celebrate life.
Despite deepening fear and worry across the Americas since the World Health Organization declared that Zika is a global emergency, millions of Brazilians this week offered a collective shrug and took to the streets to celebrate Carnival. Such dispassion has alarmed public health officials, who are scrambling to curb the outbreak among a population that has long lived with mosquitoes — and which seldom takes precautions to avoid bites, especially those too poor to afford repellent, window screens or air-conditioning.
In conversations with scores of revelers in Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo and Salvador, only a handful expressed concern about Zika — and few people wore the pants or long-sleeve shirts that would reduce the chance of mosquito bites.
“Carnival in Rio: A Party for Humans and a Feast for Mosquitoes” is how one newspaper headline summed up the mood.
Here in Salvador, an impoverished, sweltering city of three million that has been hit hard by Zika, hotels are fully booked, news outlets are fixated on Carnival, and cologne-suffused sweat, not mosquito repellent, is the dominant scent wafting through the crowds that gather day and night. According to some estimates, attendance is up 25 percent over last year.
Amid soaring unemployment, a plummeting currency and an expanding corruption scandal that threatens the presidency of Dilma Rousseff, Zika barely registers among Brazilians.
Still, for outsiders, the sight of so many people gallivanting about in various stages of undress and seemingly oblivious to the potential dangers of Zika can be striking.
The warning last week that the virus might be transmitted through saliva appeared to have little impact on the hallowed tradition of snogging complete strangers. An entirely unscientific survey of revelers who were asked about the dangers of contracting Zika through unprotected sex yielded expressions that blended ridicule with disbelief.
Samba troupes performing as the festival wrapped up.
Carnival is simply playing its time-honored role as a national escape valve during tough times, said Raul Juste Lores, editor at large at Folha de São Paulo, one of the nation’s largest newspapers.
Citing the growing threat of Zika, some critics have questioned the state government’s decision to add two nights to the traditional five-day pre-Lenten festival, which ends Wednesday; others have bemoaned what they described as lackluster public education about the virus and piecemeal efforts at mosquito eradication. In many Brazilian cities, mosquito repellent has become nearly impossible to find.
Compared with the international renown and well-orchestrated celebrations of Rio, Carnival in Salvador feels more unscripted and at times chaotic. Most of the action takes place on narrow city streets blasted with the sounds of axé, an Afro-Caribbean influenced genre of music that was born in coastal Bahia, the state that counts Salvador as its capital.
Despite conga lines of scowling, truncheon-bearing military police, pickpockets eagerly work the crowd and episodic brawls only briefly dent the merriment. This year, the biggest controversy appears to be a mayoral decision to grant a monopoly to a single beer company, Schin, prompting a clash between the police and protesting beverage vendors whose goods had been confiscated. Most years, more than two million people, most of them Brazilian, participate in what has been described as the world’s largest street festival.
Brazilian doctors have reported more than 4,000 cases of microcephaly — a rare condition in which infants are born with abnormally small heads — that they believe are linked to the Zika virus, though the number of confirmed cases is much smaller. By some estimates, the virus has infected more than a million Brazilians, though few people experience symptoms, which include joint pain, fever and a rash. Health officials in some affected areas have also reported a surge in cases of Guillain-Barré syndrome, a nerve disorder that can cause temporary paralysis and leave some patients dependent on life support.
The apathy, however, is not ubiquitous. Fabrizio Andrade, 35, a hairdresser from Aracaju, the capital of Sergipe State, said he began slathering his body with mosquito repellent after his younger brother contracted Zika last month. “I’m frightened to death of mosquitoes,” he said, shortly before taking off his shirt and disappearing into a dancing mob.
Even those who acknowledged their fears of Zika said their dread was tempered by a belief that tough times should never get in the way of a good party. Taking a pause from banging on a drum, Priscila Lacerda, 28, a cook from Rio who is eight months pregnant, said many pregnant women she knew refused to leave their homes, or did so only fully covered.
She said that she was vigilant about wearing mosquito repellent, and that she made sure the potted plants in her home were free of standing water.
