Once mostly anonymous, the producers who oversee top television series have sometimes become as well known as the actors who star in them. On occasion, The New York Times will pose questions from readers (and some of our own) to notable show runners and post their responses.
“It feels like TV is leading the way,” Ms. Khan said. “The floodgates opened up, and people are seeing themselves represented more on television.“ On Tuesday “Fresh Off the Boat” — based on Eddie Huang’s memoir about growing up Taiwanese-American in Florida during the ’90s — will become the first American TV series to do an episode focused on the Chinese New Year holiday. In honor of the occasion, Ms. Khan recently fielded questions about the show’s cast, its hip-hop theme song and her previous work on the cult-favorite sitcom “Don’t Trust the B---- in Apartment 23.” These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
Q. Why did you initially want to tell Eddie Huang’s story?
A. I loved being able to talk about the first-generation experience. I really related to the experiences Eddie wrote about: having parents who are immigrants but being born here with siblings, and being that bridge between the old and the new schools. I’d never seen a family sitcom deal with that.
Why did you decide to do a Chinese New Year’s episode?
When we got the Season 2 order, it initially was for 13 episodes. We didn’t know if we’d get a full order, with the back nine. We knew Episode 13 was going to end up around Chinese New Year, so we’ve always had that earmarked. Even if we don’t do any more, we definitely want to hit that, because it’s such an important holiday for so many people. The fact that it hasn’t been represented at all makes it such a great opportunity for our show. Hopefully, this will become part of our show’s canon; every year, we’ll do our Chinese New Year episode.
How familiar were you with the holiday’s traditions?
The writer of the episode, Sheng Wang, is Taiwanese-American, and he grew up in Houston around the same time that the show is set, so a lot of his experiences were like this. We have Korean writers, Chinese writers, Indian writers, and I’m Persian. Some of us would go to school and explain about our New Year’s and get made fun of by our classmates. “What are you talking about? New Year’s is in January.” It was unexpectedly emotional for people to talk about that. Hopefully, after this episode airs, more kids on the playground will know what this is. That’s kind of a cool thing.
I feel really satisfied that so many people can relate to it. I don’t think I’ll ever stop feeling like somewhat of an outsider, because my experience is not the majority’s. Being a woman, Persian and gay, I become more and more of an outsider with every click of the microscope. But what’s fun for me is to take the way I’ve seen the world and have it inform the way I write the characters. It feels different to me than maybe the way a white guy experiences the world through his prism.
It seems many controversial topics are brought up through a comedic portrayal of cultural stereotypes in order to appeal to a wider audience who may think they are laughing with characters about culture clashes but may really be laughing at them based on their own prejudices. Do you think new avenues for TV, like Netflix and Amazon, will allow for a deeper, more honest look into these topics? — Scott Yeilding, Beverly Hills, Calif.
Because of successes like “Fresh Off the Boat,” “Dr. Ken, “Master of None” and “The Mindy Project,” there will be more shows like these, and then you can get more nuanced with what you talk about. As far as dealing in stereotypes, you can’t control viewers or know what their inner thoughts or beliefs are, but we are always telling stories from the inside out. The family is not the butt of the jokes. They’re not the ones in the fishbowl being pointed at. We see the world through their eyes. They control the narrative. That is kind of revolutionary.
Randall Park is one of the funniest comedic actors working today, regardless of race. I obsessively watched “Veep” for his performance. Randall understands this character, and he knows how to be funny, emotional and real, and how to carry story weight. He’s like a utility knife. He can bring it all. I’m so grateful and lucky that he’s part of this show because of his skills.
Constance Wu is such a powerhouse, yet she hadn’t done much comedy before you cast her. Did you see this kind of potential in her?
I remember seeing her picture, and she looked so young. She’s got to be the mother of three boys, and I thought, “I’m never going to buy it.” She came in, and from the first second she opened her mouth as Jessica, she nailed it. She inhabited that character. The choices she makes are so unusual, and she elevates everything. She makes it so much funnier than you thought it ever could be.
How do you balance the specificity of the experience of growing up Chinese- American with the constraints of a sitcom? And not being Chinese-American yourself, how do you incorporate and maintain the Chinese-American experience and perspective in a non-stereotypical way? — Caroline, Washington, D.C.
Luckily, we have a lot of Chinese-Americans on staff, from executive producers to writers to cast members. We always try to make sure the show has an authenticity and a specificity, because we want it to feel like these are real people. This is just one family. They’re not going to represent everyone’s experience ever, but we really spend time making sure we get these characters correct.
I was really glad that the “Good Morning Orlando” episode dealt with the Long Duk Dong issue from “Sixteen Candles” as well as paying tribute to Margaret Cho’s “All-American Girl.” Will there be any more episodes that shine a light on other Asian-Americans? — Kenix, Calif.
We have an episode coming up in a few weeks called “Michael Chang Fever.” It’s 1996 on the show, and that was around the time he made it to the finals of the Australian Open against Boris Becker. It’s a huge deal in the Huang household. Louis is an enormous fan. He gets headbands made as a member of the “Chang gang.” That’s a really fun episode, and Billie Jean King plays herself in it. She’s amazing.
Could you please replace the opening theme song? I think the show itself is cute, but I have reflexively changed the channel on more than one occasion because the song is so unpleasant. — Matt Lemmons, Jonesboro, Ark.
Oh, no, I love the song! It makes me so happy. It doesn’t sound like any other theme song on TV. Some people said, “It’s a little loud,” and I said, “That’s exactly right.” We have to announce ourselves. We need to make a little noise.
Absolutely. I love that show so much. We’re talking about possibly doing some sort of Christmas special. There’s been a lot of interest in it. We felt like we didn’t have enough time with that show. We only got to do 26 episodes, and there are so many more stories we want to tell. I’d love to do it.
Always try to stay yourself. When you start out as a TV writer, you get a lot of pressure from outside forces to fit into what they think people want. Writing in another person’s voice is a skill you have to develop when you’re working on someone else’s show. But if you can maintain your perspective, that’s what will make you stand out. And as you move up, that will serve you more and more.
What kept you going early on?
Just paying the bills. I never had a backup plan. I’ve only been good at one thing. I admire people who are jacks-of-all-trades. That’s not me. I’ve always been passionate about movies, TV and writing, and I’ve been working so hard at it for so long. There were lots of setbacks, but I loved it so much, there was no alternative. I just picked myself up and kept going.