Inhabitants of the encampment near a Costco and car dealerships defied the city’s order to disperse by Friday, forcing a dilemma for San Francisco’s municipal government, which has until now sought to use gentle persuasion in its dealing with the large homeless population. “I kind of want to stay put and fight it out,” said Elizabeth Stromer, 45, a former nurse who lives in a tent not far from a BMW dealership on the edge of the city’s Mission District. She described the standoff as a “personal battle” between the homeless and the administration of Mayor Edwin M. Lee.
The majority of tents were still standing Friday afternoon and many inhabitants vowed to hold their ground. “What we need is a solution,” said a homeless man who gave his name as Santino and said he had no plans to move his tent. “Pushing the homeless around is going to do nothing.” A man on a bicycle stopped to give Mr. Santino a sandwich.
Late Friday, Rachael Kagan, a spokeswoman for the Department of Public Health, said she did not anticipate a sweep of the area by the authorities. Enforcement of the order would be done “on a case-by-case basis,” she said.
For years the homeless have been fixtures in neighborhoods across San Francisco, a jarring contrast to the tremendous wealth generated by the technology boom. City officials say the problem has become more visible as real estate development in formerly rundown areas has pushed the homeless to the doorsteps of the city’s more affluent neighborhoods. San Francisco, where average office rents are now higher than in Manhattan, has seen housing costs skyrocket in recent years.
At a passion-filled hearing on Thursday at City Hall, both homeless and homeowners made impassioned pleas to legislators to resolve the issue.
Dr. Joshua Bamberger, a physician and an expert on homelessness at the University of California, San Francisco, said that 15 percent to 20 percent of the homeless who sleep on the streets of San Francisco were mentally ill and that the city should focus efforts on housing them.
Also included among the city’s homeless population are drug users attracted by the city’s lax law enforcement and those drawn to California for its milder weather and the notion of job opportunities.
In persuading the homeless to leave the streets, the San Francisco authorities face a mixture of mistrust and defiance from the homeless population.
Ms. Stromer, the former nurse, said she tried to get into one of the city’s homeless shelters but became disillusioned when her belongings went missing. When registering to enter the shelter, she handed over a silver locket for safekeeping that contained some of the cremated remains of a daughter who died in a car accident. “No one could figure out where it went,” she said.
Ms. Stromer blames alcoholism for her slide into homelessness, and even though she has now quit drinking, she cannot envision returning to a stable life.
