The model Natalia Vodianova, 33, is known for her Cinderella story: She went from selling fruit in her native Nizhny Novgorod in Russia to scaling the heights of the fashion world. A luxury-campaign favorite — she is currently the face of Calvin Klein Euphoria perfume — Ms. Vodianova has also become a philanthropist, founding the Naked Heart Foundation, which supports Russian families raising children with special needs, and hosting the organization’s annual Fund Fair, to be held this year in London on Feb. 20.
Ms. Vodianova lives in Paris with her boyfriend, Antoine Arnault, and her four children, though she still finds time for pampering once in a while.
The most important thing is to keep the skin clean and moisturized. Cleansing can be very rough on the skin, so I use a French pharmaceutical brand, La Roche-Posay, which is mild. Then for creams, I use the Super Aqua day and Super Aqua night creams by Guerlain. I’m an ambassador for the brand, but these are not the most famous products in the line. They are just ideal for me because I like how it’s very smooth to put on makeup afterward.
Then, since I have very, very sensitive eyes, I use this cream that my dermatologist recommended. It’s called SVR Topialyse, and it’s specifically for irritated eyelids. It’s not like my eyelids are itching all the time, but it’s a really soft cream and it’s soothing.
Another thing I’m absolutely loving is the Fresh Black Tea Firming Overnight Mask. Masks, the thing about them is that you have to put it on and stay put and not do anything. It’s really boring. I’m a mother; I don’t have time for these things. The fact that the mask is overnight is just a genius process. I pile it on and go to bed, and that’s it. I don’t have to think about it.
 Sometimes I don’t wear mascara and just use the Charlotte Tilbury classic eyeliner powder pencil and maybe smudge it a tad. I also love Eyeko brow gel. The formula is not matte but has a little shine to it. My eyes are light, and I think it’s nice to have a darker brow to set them off. And in my bag I have all these little Fresh tinted lip moisturizers, like Sugar Petal. They’re so great because they’re so easy.
One thing I learned from modeling is that a little shine in the corner of the eyes is really festive. You can use something like Vaseline if you’re really looking for light, but I like this beautiful Charlotte Tilbury pencil called Champagne Diamonds. It says it’s for blue eyes — that’s probably why I like it!
 I like the fact that Euphoria is beautiful, but there’s also something sensual about it. During the day, I love the Euphoria body lotion. It’s so discreet, but you feel fresh and extra clean somehow.
My hair is very fine. I have a lot of it, but being a model means I undergo a lot of blow-drying and a lot of pulling, so it’s important to rejuvenate the hair and feed it as much as possible. I do a lot of Leonor Greyl. It’s a very French brand, and a hairstylist, Odile Gilbert, said I should try the cream for the ends of the hair. They have a little clinic in Paris, and it’s one of my only real indulgences. I’ll go every couple of weeks and it takes two hours, but you get a full head massage and amazing oils and masks. I feel like I’ve had a week of holiday after I leave the place.
I also use a lot of Christophe Robin products. I get my hair colored by Christophe — I get it a little blonder than my natural color; I need the pick-me-up! — and I also get it cut when I’m at the salon. I’m obsessed with his volumizing mist with rose water. And I do rotate shampoos, so when I’m not using Leonor Greyl, I like his cleansing milk with blueberry. It’s really incredible.
What bothers me about yoga and Pilates is that I get very strong arms — very defined shoulders and such — very quickly. Everybody loves it, but I completely hate it. I don’t want defined arms. I want to look very feminine. I want to have soft curves and not be too skinny and be in good shape but not have defined arms. This bothered me always. Then one day I woke up and had, like, a revelation. I thought, ‘Ahh, I know what I want to do!’ I’ll do dancing because I figured in dance the arms are more like accessories. You never pull yourself up with your arms, but you do move them around.
I found a lovely, very quiet dance studio where I take private classes. I do jazz and contemporary. I do it once a week, and there’s something so wonderful about it. You get more in touch with yourself as a woman, I think.
For diet, I do have rules. I follow the blood-type diet. I know a lot of people don’t believe in it. But I’ve had problems with my digestive system ever since I was a little girl. I had ulcers, and then in my 20s, I was having really deep problems. Then I tried this, and in two weeks I found a huge difference in how I felt.
I’m lucky because I am AB blood type, and I don’t have to be too disciplined. I can still eat meat and carbs and fish. But there are rules, like I can’t have red meat except for lamb. And same with vegetables. I can’t have a ton of things, but I am allowed others. I like it, though. I’ve been doing it for over 10 years.