Dixon Place, 161A Chrystie St.
Sparely staged but unrelentingly verbose, Christopher Ford and Dakota Rose’s comedy “The White Stag Quadrilogy,” now at Dixon Place, aims to send up 1970s Hollywood (and a bit of the 1980s), but succeeds largely in skewering itself. The show, from the troupe On the Rocks, is a sequel of sorts to “Wolfert,” a 2015 production at Dixon Place, directed, like “White Stag,” by Ms. Rose and starring many of the same performers.
“Wolfert” (which I did not see) introduced theatergoers to Jerry F. Wolfert (Andrew R. Butler, here reprising the role), a filmmaker, self-published writer, occult devotee (Kenneth Anger is presumably an inspiration) and sleazy, fatuous and blustery egotist. “Wolfert” depicted his antics on a New Year’s Eve in Los Angeles in 1968; “The White Stag Quadrilogy” follows him to 1979, as he tries to complete an ill-fated adaptation of Kate Seredy’s 1937 historical children’s book “The White Stag,” Jerry’s final installment in an epic four-film extravaganza.
Orbiting Jerry are his fastidious ex-wife, Pearl (Rebeca Miller, also playing a long-winded narrator); Pearl’s sister, Michele (Michelle Uranowitz); Michele’s twin brother, Earl (Derek Smith); and Boots (Jaime Wright), a stripper.
There are long monologues, especially from Mr. Butler, to fitful laughter; antlers suspended from on high; and, as you might expect, a stag head worn by actors at times. Jerry pontificates in a robe and underwear, while Earl and Michele flirt semi-incestuously. The prim but awkward Pearl (Ms. Miller has the funniest, most closely observed moments in the show) comes to have auteurist and performing aspirations of her own.
The most successful gag is a line dance to the Little River Band’s cheesy 1979 hit “Lonesome Loser” in Act I. (Chloe Kernaghan is the choreographer.) Act II, taking place in 1989, offers a humorous dance, too, set to Kate Bush’s 1985 classic, “Running Up That Hill.” Pop piffle is ripe for parody, but if it’s the ’80s you intend to lampoon, there are certainly more deserving targets than Ms. Bush. But then, that would be the least of the misfires in this strained, self-amused production.