The N.C.A.A., the nonprofit organization that once governed college athletics and now more closely resembles a sprawling sales team for high-end workout gear, was, like so many despots before it, meant to be a force for good. Its first executive director, a former sportswriter named Walter Byers, built the organization as a buffer against creeping capitalism and shady gambling interests — a way to protect ­student-athletes from the rampaging hordes of greed charging in from the sidelines. It was meant to be a place of purity.
But like most theoretical utopias, it has ended up doing more harm than good. As documented in Joe Nocera and Ben Strauss’s new book, “Indentured: The Inside Story of the Rebellion Against the NCAA,” it has lost its way so many times that it is now the organization from which players need protection. The reason is as simple as humanity itself: the collision of zealotry and commerce. When (rich, white) men convince themselves that (poor, black) athletes need to be shielded from the corrupting influence of money, measures to keep them from it — even as the world of collegiate sports begins clearing more than $900 million a year in revenue — are not seen as plunder; they are seen as noble, just and vital. That those men end up keeping so much of that money for themselves? Hey, it has to go somewhere.
Thus, college sports grow ever more lucrative and the players — still — are denied even basic compensation above scholarships, which can be pulled for no reason and without explanation. No­cera and Strauss explain how this was baked into the concept of the N.C.A.A. in the first place. Byers and his successors recognized the importance of increasing revenue streams not as a way to spread the wealth but to expand the N.C.A.A.’s power, to ensure that their “protection” of college athletes would be total. The N.C.A.A. — and the college presidents it serves — ennoble themselves to maximize college sports’ revenue as a matter of self-preservation. They see income as ammunition to protect the athletes, when in fact it is gunning them down.
This was sustainable for a surprising number of years until, thanks to the power of television and ballooning broadcast contracts, the amount of money surrounding college athletics became so insane that the corruption could no longer be ignored. To wit: ESPN paid the N.C.A.A. $7.3 billion for a 12-year contract to air the college football playoffs starting in 2014; that same year, when the University of Connecticut Huskies won the men’s basketball championship, their star point guard Shabazz Napier complained that N.C.A.A. rules literally made him go to bed hungry.
Nocera and Strauss track some unlikely heroes in the long fight against the N.C.A.A., including a series of socially awkward lawyers who didn’t even like sports, the former “sneaker pimp” turned radical reformer Sonny Vaccaro and the Northwestern University quarterback Kain Colter, whose attempts to unionize college football players was quashed by coach Pat Fitzgerald and led the school to distance itself from the once-beloved player. The book features so many case studies of the N.C.A.A.’s arcane, Dickensian rules that they start to feel numbing. But the point is clear. Those rules do what cartels are built to do: consolidate their own power and crush those who defy them. So Coca-Cola is a “corporate champion” of the N.C.A.A. Tournament even as Kansas’ Cliff Alexander had to sit out that tournament last year because his mother took out a loan to help support her family. And on and on it goes.
Critics of the N.C.A.A. — including Nocera, a New York Times columnist who has often written about the organization, and Strauss, a Times contributing writer — are sometimes challenged to say what they would do differently. That’s a legitimate question, and Nocera and Strauss offer no concrete plan among their ideas. Yet it misses the point of the N.C.A.A.’s malfeasance in the first place. To reach the critical mass necessary to inspire real change, one must continue to point out, bit by bit, just how much the current system fails the men and women putting their bodies on the line for our amusement and Nike’s bottom line. That Nocera and Strauss still have to yell, that this ludicrous system is still in place, is a sign that it is not yet time to niggle about solutions. Next month we’ll all be filling out our March Madness bracket pools. The five dollars you contribute is more than the athletes who play the games you’ll enjoy are allowed for their services, which is almost too absurd to contemplate. “Indentured” can’t fix every problem. But it can make us confront them from the comfort of our couches, where, in this case, the front lines of this battle are being fought. There might not be a lot of answers yet. But at least, and at last, there are questions.