Sotheby’s and Christie’s, which both reported slightly lower sales in 2015 last month, faced their first major stress test of the year this past week with the February sales of Impressionist and modern works in London, followed by their contemporary auctions a week later.
Art, like commodities and equities, is an asset whose value has been bolstered in recent years by the huge amounts of “cheap” money available because of low interest rates and the stimulative policy of central banks called quantitative easing, which increases the money supply.
Commodities and equities had a difficult 2015 because of the collapse in the price of oil and the economic slowdown in China. With art’s reputation as a “lagging indicator” — a market that changes only after conditions in the wider economy have changed — some are wondering whether the art world will have a difficult 2016.
Results of the sales of Impressionist, modern and Surrealist art at both auction houses told similar stories. Totals were considerably lower than they were last February. At Christie’s, the tally of 95.9 million pounds, or about $138 million, from 89 lots on Tuesday night was some 35 percent down from the equivalent sale in 2015. The £93.7 million grossed at Sotheby’s the following evening from 54 works represented a 50 percent contraction on the previous February. About a quarter of the lots failed to sell at both houses, and there was noticeably less telephone bidding from staff members who had represented Russian and Chinese clients in recent years.
Demand was more selective, but so, too, was the supply. Much of the drop-off in totals can be explained by owners’ reluctance to consign trophy-quality works when buyers are nervous or distracted — and when the auction houses and third parties are less willing to risk guaranteeing sales. Only four lots were financed in this way at these evening auctions.
When high-quality works were offered, and were not fresh to the market, the math could be sobering.
Christie’s did find a telephone buyer for Max Ernst’s important and much-exhibited 1941 Surrealist landscape, “The Stolen Mirror,” for a top price of £7.6 million, or about $11 million, with fees, just above the low estimate. The only lot in the sale to be guaranteed by the auction house — two others were backed by third parties — this vision of moss-encrusted figures in a ruined port, painted in the year when the German artist fled Nazi-occupied France for the United States, had been bought by its London-based seller for $16.3 million at Christie’s in New York in 2011.
The owner of Picasso’s 1935 “Tête de Femme” lost more than $13 million when the painting sold within estimate at Sotheby’s to a telephone bidder for the evening’s high of £18.9 million, or $27 million. Two dealers with knowledge of the matter, who asked not to be identified in keeping with the trade’s confidentiality protocols, said the seller was the Malaysian financier Jho Low. The quintessential 1930s Picasso head-and-shoulders study of his lover and muse Marie-Thérèse Walter had been bought in November 2013 at Sotheby’s in New York for $39.9 million.
There was also a shortfall between some of the values put on works in late 2015 and what the market was prepared to pay in early 2016. Matisse’s historically interesting but visually uninspiring 1923 painting, “La Leçon de Piano,” had been owned by the same Scottish family since 1926. It carried a low estimate of £12 million at Sotheby’s and fell to a single bid of £10.8 million from the international dealer David Nahmad.
But if a work combined a prestige name, iconic imagery and freshness to the market, there was still plenty of money to be thrown against an estimate. This was particularly true at Christie’s, which offered a number of paintings in the £500,000-to-£5 million range with easy appeal to wealthy private buyers. At least three telephone bidders ignored the recent movement against Renoir to push the price of a 1913 Renoir nude to £3.9 million, double the low estimate. In another instance, the Geneva-based dealer Thomas Seydoux, bidding on behalf of a client, gave an upper estimate £7 million for a 1928 Marc Chagall painting of the artist and his wife in front of the Eiffel Tower that had not been seen at auction for 35 years.
At Sotheby’s, there was a protracted duel between a telephone bidder and the Oslo dealer Ben Frija for one of the last two large-scale lifetime casts of Rodin’s 1890-91 bronze, “Iris, Messagère des Dieux,” left in private hands. This extraordinarily modernistic female nude, once owned by the actor Sylvester Stallone, was eventually bought by Mr. Frija for £11.6 million, almost double the low estimate of £6 million.
Oliver Barker, a senior specialist in contemporary art at Sotheby’s, gave a winning bid of £7.3 million on behalf of a client for Paul Delvaux’s 1936 surrealist masterwork, “Le Miroir,” showing a fully clothed woman gazing at the reflection of her naked self. The painting achieved an auction record for the Belgian artist, just as it did in 1999 when its American seller bought it at auction in London for £3.2 million.
The Delvaux was typical of the sort of work that appeals to serious buyers of Impressionist, modern and contemporary art.
Impressionist and modern, known as “Imps & Mods,” was the biggest-selling category at auction until 2005, when it was overtaken by contemporary. With some collectors now wary of the high prices being paid for works by living artists, the new crossover category of “20th Century” — combining the later works from Imps & Mods with earlier pieces from postwar and contemporary — has become the key money-making market for international auction houses. Sotheby’s, which last month announced its acquisition of the formidable New York art advisers Art Agency, Partners, and Christie’s promoted this February fortnight of sales as a celebration of 20th-century art.
But where does this leave early Impressionism? Totally out of collecting fashion, judging by results at these London auctions. At Christie’s, the third-party guarantor bought Camille Pissarro’s 1869 landscape, “Le Village à Travers les Arbres,” with a single bid of £602,500, while Sotheby’s saw all four of its Impressionist paintings from the 1860s and ‘70s fail to sell. Monet’s 1871 landscape, “Un Moulin à Zaandam,” estimated at £800,000 to £1.2 million, was among the casualties. It had been bought three years earlier at Sotheby’s, when Russian and Chinese buyers were much more active, for £1.1 million.
Wherever it is heading, it looks as though the destination is going to be different from what it was in 2015.