MANCHESTER, N.H. — Hillary Clinton appeared frustrated.
So why do so many voters not believe it?
Throughout the debate, Mrs. Clinton found herself cornered by Senator Bernie Sanders and the moderators about her ties to Wall Street, the political contributions that have bolstered her campaign account, and the hundreds of thousands of dollars in paid speaking fees she received from Goldman Sachs and other financial firms in the months after she left the State Department.
Mrs. Clinton tried again and again to explain that her plans for Wall Street would be tougher and go further than Mr. Sanders’s proposals by also regulating the shadow banking industry, the insurance companies and other wrongdoers.
“I have a broader view,” Mrs. Clinton said, contrasting her plan to that of Mr. Sanders, whose anti-Wall Street message has turned him from a long-shot candidate to a serious contender for the Democratic nomination.
The Times reporter Michael D. Shear analyzes key moments from the first one-on-one Democratic debate between Hillary Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders, in Durham, N.H.
In an election year fueled by the anger over the growing gap between rich and poor, Mrs. Clinton, who is widely viewed as too close to the financial sector, seems an imperfect messenger for change. She has developed sophisticated policy proposals that many economists agree would aggressively regulate the financial sector, but they have collided with the image that Sanders supporters and other political rivals have painted of her: Wall Street’s friend and defender.
The New York Times will be checking assertions made throughout the 2016 presidential campaign.
Despite her husband’s record of deregulation and trade deals, Mrs. Clinton has been ahead of much of the Democratic Party in identifying economic headwinds and proposing restrictions to try to deal with them.
In her 2008 presidential campaign, Mrs. Clinton ran to the left of Barack Obama, angering some of her Wall Street donors with a 2007 speech in which she called for eliminating the so-called carried interest loophole, rolling back the Bush-era tax cuts on the wealthy, placing limits on chief executives’ compensation and imposing tighter regulations on derivatives. “Let’s finally do something about the growing inequality that is tearing our country apart,” Mrs. Clinton said in June 2007 at a “Take Back America” gathering of liberal groups.
But that was before the financial crises and the anger that Americans harbor because the players involved were never punished.
Asked by CNN on Wednesday night why she accepted such a high fee, Mrs. Clinton seemed unable to fully respond. “That’s what they offered,” she said uncomfortably.
On Thursday, Mrs. Clinton expanded on her paid speechmaking, saying she also spoke to other groups, like heart surgeons and camp counselors. But again, she seemed to struggle, this time when pressed by the moderators if she would release the transcripts of all of her paid speeches.
For Mrs. Clinton, the key question should not be whether she received generous checks from Wall Street, but whether she did their bidding in return. At one point, she challenged her opponent to identify even one example of how her Wall Street contributions or paid speaking fees resulted in a favor from her, calling the implication an “artful smear” by Mr. Sanders. “If you’ve got something to say, say it directly, but you will not find that I ever changed a view or a vote because of any donation that I ever received,” Mrs. Clinton said.
Mr. Sanders, eager to avoid suggestions that he is making personal or gendered attacks on Mrs. Clinton, did not bother to directly answer the question. As is his custom, returned to his old refrain: Wall Street is too big, too powerful, and no one in their right mind believes they contribute to politicians out of the goodness of their hearts. “That is what power is about,” he said.
