The matchmaker in the fur-flecked T-shirt got down to business. What about a white rabbit with pink eyes named Tonya?
The pair exchanged a quick glance. “I’m O.K. with it,” said the woman, Ashley Chui.
The matchmaker, Amy Odum, disappeared down a hallway, returned with Tonya and set her on the artificial turf to explore the room. Then she took the couple’s rabbit, Moo, a male colored like a Holstein cow, and put him down nearby.
Moo hopped tentatively toward Tonya, and another Sunday session of speed dating for rabbits was underway at the city animal shelter in East Harlem.
Rabbits might seem the last species on earth that would require human-supervised dating.
But this was not mating dating. This was something much trickier.
Moo was looking for a roommate.
So the Animal Care Centers of N.Y.C. shelter on East 110th Street invites rabbits and their owners to meet candidates for adoption in sessions usually run by Ms. Odum, 58, a longtime volunteer.
The dating room was no-frills: windowless cinder block, a rectangle of turf, two litter boxes filled with hay, stacked cardboard boxes of dog leashes and cat collars in the corner. The rabbits had nothing to focus on but each other.
Tonya sat in a litter box chewing a stalk of hay. Moo stretched, twitching a little, and sniffed her face. Tonya was motionless. Moo jumped back.
“They’re both a little tense,” Ms. Odum said.
The goal, Ms. Odum had said, is not any sort of magical chemistry.
After a while, Tonya hopped over to Moo and gave him a little kiss. He jumped over her like the cow over the moon. They broke into a playful chase, stopped, sniffed each other’s faces. Then Moo approached Tonya and lowered his head.
Moo kept his head low, then pushed it into Tonya’s side. “She’s making him beg — it’s pretty pitiful,” Ms. Odum said.
Moo turned his back and made a show of washing his face. “Sometimes I think they’re faking it a little with the grooming,” Ms. Odum said.
In came a big, black bunny named Bronx. Within a few minutes, Bronx mounted Moo — a power move, not a sexual one. He scooted away.
Mounting is a sensitive topic.
Moo’s owners seemed a bit shaken.
There are plenty of rabbits to choose from at the shelter these days — over 60, more than Ms. Odum said she had seen in 10 years of volunteering, possibly a side effect of a ban on selling rabbits in pet shops, which took effect last year.
New rabbit owners often change their minds after learning how much work the animals are, Ms. Odum explained. Rabbits are fussy and messy. Despite their apparent cuddliness, many dislike being held. “They’re definitely high-maintenance pets,” she said. So people who got pet store rabbits in the last days of legality had only shelters to turn to when buyer’s remorse kicked in.
Ms. Chui asked Ms. Odum to bring in Edie, a lionhead with crazy white tufts sprouting from her forehead and big black eye patches. She was adorable.
Edie and Moo did not hit it off. Nor did they fight. They sat five feet apart, facing each other, glancing away, then turning back again.
The pair began a halting ballet of approach and avoidance.
Moo hid in the corner. Edie sniffed the wall. Moo stood on his hind legs and periscoped. Edie hopped very slowly toward him, then stopped.
“This is more peaceful,” Ms. Chui said.
She and Mr. Chow have been seeing each other for a year and a half. They’ve lived together since September. They are not engaged. Rabbits can live 10 years, and Moo is 2. Getting a rabbit is a long-term commitment.
“Well, we’d like to get married, soon,” Mr. Chow cut in.
The last prospect, a chocolate beauty named Pika, spent much of the session doing “binkies” — spring-and-twist moves that signify rabbit joy. Moo seemed mystified.
There was another round with the same rabbits, minus brash Bronx.
Tonya and Moo seemed more at ease. He lowered his head and nudged her flank again.
“If you gave him a little kiss, he’ll be yours for life,” Ms. Odum said. Tonya demurred.
On Edie’s second pass, she and Moo had a long mutual face sniff.
Mr. Chow pointed and smiled. “That’s good,” he said.
Mr. Chow and Ms. Chui conferred briefly and announced their decision: Edie.
Ms. Odum went off to fetch her.
“As sad as it is to say, we kind of liked the way Edie looked better,” Mr. Chow said.
“I don’t know about that,” Ms. Chui said.
“Well, then, why did we decide on her?” Mr. Chow asked.
In the end, they agreed that Edie’s personality also seemed the best fit.
At the cages, Ms. Odum was a little disappointed: Tonya had been at the shelter since August, Edie less than a month.
Ms. Odum gathered the fluffy rabbit in her arms.
