David Sclarow built his first wood-burning pizza oven so he could feed guests at the wedding of two cheesemakers. They were getting married some distance from Brooklyn, where he lived, so he layered the bricks and concrete on top of a flatbed trailer that he could hitch to the back of his Volkswagen Doka. The next time he took his mobile pizza oven for a spin, it collapsed, but by that point, he liked it so much that he rebuilt it.
It was the second oven in which he started baking small, irregular, alluringly blistered margheritas at the Brooklyn Flea in 2008. It caved in, too. This time Mr. Sclarow got serious, engineering a steel-hulled model shaped like a Quonset hut. The third Pizza Moto oven was stolen last year, but he still has three others designed along the same lines.
Clearly Mr. Sclarow is one of those chefs for whom half the fun is playing with fire, not to mention building the fire and a heatproof structure to contain it. When he was ready to open a stationary pizzeria in Brooklyn, a defunct Papa John’s where pizzas were made in a gas oven would not seem to have held much appeal for him.
Then he and his business partner, Anna Viertel, looked at the site, on the grim, shadowy, underpopulated borderland between Carroll Gardens and Red Hook. Behind the back wall was a large white-tiled oven from the late 19th-or early 20th century, sealed up and long forgotten.
Would it take more than two years of restoration and modification to make the oven work again? Yes. Would Mr. Sclarow and Ms. Viertel undertake most of the masonry, plumbing, welding and electrical work themselves? Absolutely. Would there be a lot of red tape to cut through before the city would grant permits, and the restaurant would open in October? You bet.
A perfect location, in other words.
In the new restaurant, given the unwieldy full name Pizza Moto @ John Grace Bakery, Mr. Sclarow has room to stretch out. He has an imaginative bunch of appetizers that aren’t bound by the conventions of pizzerias or even Italian restaurants. Most are pretty good, but there’s more joy in the pizzas, which go well beyond the limited varieties of single-serving pies that sustain the outdoor operation.
Those are without a doubt the best brick-oven pizzas a New Yorker can find in a schoolyard or park. But the pies at the new restaurant don’t need any such qualification. Despite minor variability, the pies coming out of the old bakery are already among the top tier of New York brick-oven pizzas.
The pizzas have grown to a 14-inch size you can share without scowling, and there are more of them. The clam pie is something like a flat clam chowder: It’s topped with sliced potatoes and profoundly smoky bacon. But what makes it hard to put down is the flavor of clams cooked in cream and white wine that suffuses the whole thing.
Another tomato-free pizza is a complex and compelling duet for cheese and fungus. It starts with a restrained application of ricotta, fontina, pecorino and mozzarella, which are covered with juicy, springy roasted mushrooms and feathery shaved raw ones.
Tomato sauce underlies the very good pepperoni pizza (it’s actually chorizo, slightly hotter, and tangy) and the “eggs in hell” pizza, which has bacon and mozzarella arrayed around the cyclopean eye of a single sous-vide egg. Chile oil makes the eggs in hell a more engaging bacon-and-eggs than the carbonara pizza, a special whose four cheeses melded into a single, not very interesting white blanket.
The crust is in the modern Brooklyn-Neapolitan family exemplified by Franny’s and Roberta’s. Other doughs have a more complex flavor, but the one at Pizza Moto is far from bland. The highest bubbles on the sizable outer rim are starting to go black, and there are patches of char on the base. The crust is sturdy, but not brittle or tough. It crackles upon meeting your teeth, but its white interior is delicate, filled with small air pockets.
Crackle is the entire point of the nonconformist pie that’s sprinkled with salt, pepper and rosemary, and shellacked with bacon fat. Essentially a hot-pork-drenched cracker, it makes a superb appetizer if you can get over any narrow-minded hangups about eating two courses of pizza.
At any rate, it’s a better opening move than the freebie the kitchen sends out, a fried lasagna noodle coated with powdered cheese, tomatoes and pizza seasonings. It sounds more interesting than it is. But a similar frilly noodle, hand-pulled and boiled, was involved in the guinzaglio, one of the most fascinating and delicious appetizers I ate at Pizza Moto. Tossed in beef shank ragù, seasoned with fermented black beans, shiny with bone marrow, dressed with fried shallots, scallions and warm batons of celery, it managed to taste Chinese and Italian at the same time.
Fried broccoli is about as crisp as fried broccoli can get, but it’s supposed to be swiped in yuzu-kosho curd that is too cloying; it needs more spice. I would have liked the Caesar salad with smoked trout more if it hadn’t struck me as a lesser version of the majestic herring Caesar at M. Wells Steakhouse. Toast spread with smoked swordfish whipped into a smooth brandade was lovely, though, perked up with pickled onions and dotted with poppy seeds.
The restaurant currently won’t take reservations for parties of fewer than five. This isn’t an unusual policy, but here the result is that smaller groups, even when they arrive early, can end up staring at the two big empty tables and the wall art — lightboxes made from vintage pinball playfields — for a long while.
Cocktails, which have stiff spines, can make the clock tick faster; so can the fine domestic beers. The two Italian wines I tried were less focused.
One night as I waited to be seated, I was parked at a table in the kitchen, under a collection of high-minded cookbooks. The table has a great view of the oven, and the real estate agent who rented the space was sitting next to me, which is how I heard the story of its discovery.
from some old school desks he had found, matching their height to the bar of soapstone tiles he had pulled out of a Dumpster.
Are there easier ways to open a pizzeria? Sure. Would any of them have resulted in anything resembling Pizza Moto? Come see for yourself.