Political art has changed over the past 50 years. Unlike the protest art of an earlier era, much of the most interesting new work feels slippery and evasive, as if reluctant to speak its mind. In part, this is a reflection of different, though not necessarily evolved, thinking. We’ve abandoned old beliefs in utopias, in visions — some would say hallucinations — of a society built on absolute good for all, in which art plays a declaratively positive role. The 1960s counterculture, even at its most anarchic, was based on such beliefs and visions. And that counterculture is long gone.
The current political work — and there’s quite a bit out there — seems tailored to an altered terrain. On the one hand, it is flourishing under global capitalism and its new collecting culture. At the same time, its character is shaped by distinctly 21st-century doubts about the moral efficacy of art in a market-intensive, ideal-averse world. In the political thinking of an earlier time, you were either part of the problem or part of the solution, the inference being that there was a solution. The art of the present is not so sure.
Which brings us to “Laura Poitras: Astro Noise,” at the Whitney Museum of American Art, an engrossing solo show by an artist best known for three remarkable films documenting the United States government’s post-Sept. 11 “war on terror.” (She has also written for The New York Times.) The first film focused on the American occupation of Iraq; the second, on the detainment and torture of prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba. The third, the Oscar-winning “Citizenfour,” was a white-knuckle, you-are-there account of Edward J. Snowden’s leak of thousands of pages of classified National Security Agency documents in 2013, revealing mass surveillance at home and extensive drone wars abroad.
The show, which fills the Whitney’s eighth floor, deals with all of these subjects, too, though in images that are not always easy to interpret. It opens with six large photographs of what could be prettily patterned fabrics. They are, in fact, examples of encrypted data intercepted from satellites and drones by a top-secret surveillance center or “listening post,” this one British, on the island of Cyprus. The original images were part of the leaked Snowden trove, and your feeling about them — as about much else in the show — will naturally be colored by your ethical take on his actions. Were they treasonous, or heroic, or both?
Inside the exhibition proper, the lighting is dim, and the first gallery bisected by an enormous projection screen with different videos playing on its front and back. The side facing the entrance shows slow-motion close-ups of people viewing ground zero in the days just after the Sept. 11 attacks. These are odd images. A few people wear masks against the still-toxic air; a few frown. Most just stare. They could be looking at almost anything. The high emotions I remember from that time simply don’t register on these predominantly youthful faces.
The video is accompanied by a soundtrack of a woman singing the national anthem, in a version edited by Ms. Poitras to sound fractured and dirge-like. The recording was made live at Yankee Stadium during the fourth game of the World Series on Oct. 31, 2001. A commonly voiced sentiment at the time was that Sept. 11 “changed everything.” It did not, however, more than momentarily interrupt the city’s entertainment schedule. And several of the critical changes it did inspire were hidden from public view. This is suggested in films playing on the reverse side of the screen, of American soldiers interrogating two men captured in Afghanistan in 2001 and held at Guantánamo for six years, without warrant.
Other examples of new or stepped-up government initiatives prompted by the Sept. 11 attacks are revealed elsewhere. In an installation called “Bed Down Location,” we are invited to lie on a carpeted platform in a darkened gallery and look up at video projections of star-filled night skies in Yemen, Somalia and Pakistan. When a daylight projection comes on, shot at a military test site in Nevada, drones streak like bullets above us. The implication is that they’re present, but invisible, in the African and Asian skies, too, which encourages us to scan those vistas more closely, see them differently.
Like the skilled film director she is, Ms. Poitras is good at drawing us into narratives, making us feel that we’re part of the action. She does this again in an angled corridor that leads from “Bed Down Location” to the final gallery. The corridor walls are pierced with lighted slots. They’re at varying heights, and each gives a view of some secret thing. There are copies of classified N.S.A. and C.I.A. documents related to surveillance, and a memo defining the technical difference between “clandestine collection” and “covert action.” (You don’t see what’s in such a collection; you don’t see who did such a deed.) A written report by a former interrogator in the notorious Abu Ghraib prison outside Baghdad makes eye-opening reading, set beside a video interview with a prisoner tortured at Guantánamo. And an interview with the retired N.S.A. technical director William E. Binney, who blew the whistle early on domestic spying, pairs up nicely with a short film showing a computer thumb drive, presumably holding confidential data, being tossed into a churning cement mixer.
That clip was shot in 2012, by which time Ms. Poitras had been on United States government watch lists for six years. On a brief audiotape in the show’s final room, she explains how she thinks that happened. In 2004, when she was in Baghdad documenting the American occupation, she happened to be filming a neighborhood where an American soldier was killed. The military said that she must have had prior knowledge of the attack, and immediately she began being stopped, searched and questioned every time she crossed a United States border. After experiencing more than 40 detainments, she relocated to Berlin.
In 2015 she filed a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit against the government and received hundreds of pages of documents confirming the extent of the harassment she’d been subjected to. Copies of the files, heavily censored, are in the exhibition; others are printed in the catalog, a compact black box of a book subtitled “A Survival Guide for Living Under Total Surveillance,” with essays by Kate Crawford, Mr. Snowden and the artist-activists Trevor Paglen and Hito Steyerl.
Ms. Poitras is, of course, an artist-activist, too, though of a style different from that of utopians of old. A clue to the difference is in the word “survival.” Hers is not an art of uplift and exhortation. It isn’t an art of the “We Shall Overcome” sort, because in the 21st century, “we” is barely locatable, a transcultural network of web addresses. It isn’t a “Power to the People” kind of art, because the very concept of power has been so polluted by abuse as to be held in terminal suspicion: Power is the problem, for everyone, including us, as Ms. Poitras illustrates at the end of the show.
There, we learn that we’ve been subjects of surveillance throughout our visit. Our presence in “Bed Down Location” was electronically spied on and monitored. An infrared camera embedded in the gallery ceiling sends real-time images of all visiting stargazers and drone-spotters to a monitor in the show’s last room. We also discover that whatever electronic devices we’re carrying have been detected and recorded: We see coded references to them scrolling down a video screen.
This concluding evidence of electronic tracking is a characteristic Poitras touch, at once blunt and subtle. It’s an exercise in what another artist-activist, Paul Chan, calls an “art of cunning.” It’s a realistic art that admits fantasy, the way the most levelheaded investigative journalism — Ms. Poitras’s, for example — draws on the surprise of theater. It’s an art that doesn’t address power, but just shows how it works. It chips away at its primary defense: certainty.
A lot of young artists seem to be operating this way. (Read all about them in “Strike Art: Contemporary Art and the Post-Occupy Condition,” by Yates McKee, due out from Verso this month.) It’s an approach that’s much easier to control in a film than in an exhibition, but at the Whitney, Ms. Poitras seems ready to reduce control in favor of letting more information in.