This year’s rock nominees include current genre leaders like Florence and the Machine, Alabama Shakes and Muse, alongside the rising pop-crossover acts James Bay and Elle King. And then there’s Highly Suspect.
“I thought it was a joke,” said Johnny Stevens, the band’s lead singer, after his trio surfaced this year in the Grammy categories for best rock album (“Mister Asylum,” Highly Suspect’s debut) and best rock song (“Lydia”). The awards will be presented on Monday in Los Angeles, with the ceremony airing live on CBS.
A straightforward guitar-driven group somewhere between the Black Keys, Foo Fighters and Queens of the Stone Age, Highly Suspect began as a bar cover band playing songs by Sublime, Jimi Hendrix and Pink Floyd. In 2011 the group relocated from Cape Cod, Mass., to Brooklyn — a scene where Highly Suspect, which also includes the twin brothers Rich and Ryan Meyer on bass and drums, didn’t quite fit in. “There was nobody bringing that harder sound,” Mr. Stevens said.
But Highly Suspect raised its profile with appearances at festivals like Bonnaroo and Lollapalooza, while “Lydia,” with its crunchy, distorted chords, picked up plays on rock radio. “Our biggest challenge with this band was to keep them as far as we could to the left, so they wouldn’t fall into that knuckle-dragger, heavy-metal sort of vibe,” said Bill Burrs, a 300 employee with a focus on radio.
“Mister Asylum,” which was released last summer, has sold about 34,000 copies to date, the label said; “Lydia” has more than 110,000 paid downloads and 3 million YouTube views and has been streamed nearly 10 million times on Spotify. The band counts around 39,000 fans on Facebook.
Highly Suspect’s competitors for the Grammys, however, dwarf those numbers many times over. For example, Mr. Bay’s “Hold Back the River” and Ms. King’s “Ex’s & Oh’s,” both nominated for best rock song, have a combined 113 million views on YouTube and more than 250 million Spotify streams.
While industry insiders say that labels and publicists often hire consultants to strategize on reaching the most Grammy voters, executives at 300 denied making any special push for Highly Suspect. “We’re a small, independent company with no resources, so to do self-aggrandizing efforts like that — ” said Mr. Cohen, trailing off. He also invoked an unprintable line from Public Enemy’s Chuck D diminishing the importance of the awards.
The band’s label seems to agree. “I feel like they’ve already won by getting nominated,” Mr. Giberga said.
