“You see the mover reach past someone to turn on the lights without asking, then open the fridge, open the cupboards,” he recalled recently.
Touches of home are “obliterated instantly” and often just piled up on the curb.
And it doesn’t just happen once.
Mr. Desmond, an associate professor at Harvard, has spent the last eight years studying evictions from seemingly every possible angle. His research has made him a rising star in the field and last year won him a MacArthur fellowship, the so-called genius grant.
Now, with “Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City,” to be published on March 1 by Crown, Mr. Desmond aims to bring an overlooked aspect of American poverty and inequality to a broader audience.
Mr. Desmond also offered a parallel between America’s exploding prison system and the drastic growth in evictions, a once relatively rare phenomenon, he asserts, that has become “an epidemic,” particularly in poor African-American neighborhoods.
“Just as incarceration has come to define the lives of low-income black men, eviction is defining the lives of low-income black women,” Mr. Desmond said.
“Evicted,” which closely follows eight families and their landlords, both black and white, mostly keeps the data to the endnotes. Written with the vividness of a novel, it offers a dark mirror of middle-class America’s obsession with real estate, laying bare the workings of the low end of the market, where evictions have become just another part of an often lucrative business model.
He sits with tenants while they debate whether to hold back rent money to pay for food or a relative’s funeral, and visits warehouses where the possessions of evicted families are held — if they haven’t just been dumped by the curb.
In person, Mr. Desmond, 36, mixes low-key friendliness and on-message discipline, expressing polite frustration with conversations about ethnography that focus more on the researcher than the research. An afterword titled “About This Project” — the first place the word “I” appears — was written only after extended urging of his editor, Amanda Cook.
“He was very reluctant to say anything about himself,” said Ms. Cook, who prevailed over more than a dozen other editors in an auction that shot into the high six figures, according to employees at other publishing houses that bid.
That afterword lifts the curtain a little, offering a few paragraphs about Mr. Desmond’s childhood in Winslow, Ariz., where his father was a nondenominational minister and his mother worked various jobs. Money was often tight, and after he left for college the bank repossessed the family home.
Asked about the circumstances of the repossession and its effect on him, Mr. Desmond, an expert observer of others, said he was fuzzy on details and reluctant to “overinterpret” himself.
“The things you’re closest to are often the things you know least about,” he said.
But around that time, he started volunteering with Habitat for Humanity and hanging out with homeless people in Tempe, where he was attending Arizona State University.
Mr. Desmond’s immersion in evictions began during his graduate student days at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. For his dissertation fieldwork, he moved into a rundown trailer park on Milwaukee’s predominantly white South Side, and later to a rooming house on the city’s mainly black North Side. (Sherrena, he reveals in the afterword, was his landlord.) Over 18 months, he let his voice recorder run, capturing interviews and fly-on-the-wall scenes that, when transcribed, ran to nearly 5,000 single-space pages.
Mr. Desmond, who has created a website, justshelter.org, which gathers information about housing groups across the country, makes no bones of the advocacy component of his work. But he doesn’t shrink from depicting less than sympathetic behavior by tenants, like the decision by Larraine, a 54-year-old woman who has just been evicted from the trailer park, to blow her monthly food stamps on a single home-cooked lobster dinner.
In an endnote, Mr. Desmond describes pressing Larraine for an explanation. The one she finally comes up with — “because I wanted to” — may not satisfy all readers.
But for the extreme poor, Mr. Desmond argues, bad decisions are a result of poverty, more than poverty is a result of bad decisions.
