One of the more interesting features of the Democratic primary process is the generational divide among support for candidates — older Democratic voters generally prefer Hillary Clinton, and younger ones overwhelmingly prefer Bernie Sanders.
Being, um, older myself, I have some historical and experiential basis for understanding and analyzing that portion of the electorate. But as with most older folks, understanding what motivates younger people can be a mystery. This seems like some sort of evolutionary artifact of aging: obtuseness to youth.
Therefore, writing as an older person about what younger people are doing and feeling is rife with the possibility of “back in my day,” “those crazy kids,” “get off my lawn” tone deafness. So much so that wise writers often steer clear of the topic.
But this, I hope, is not that. This is a father trying to better understand the political awakening and sensibilities of his own children, and trying to understand what informs their leanings.
First, they are unimpressed by the Republican candidates for president, and are even afraid of some. That means that our discussions can be narrowly focused on the Democratic race.
They like Bernie Sanders and don’t fully trust Hillary Clinton, though they don’t believe Sanders is electable and would therefore “settle for” Clinton in that case, as my youngest son put it.
They view Sanders as the more “authentic” (that word kept coming up) and consistent of the two, and the one with whom they have the most ideological agreement, even though they generally believed that his positions would most likely be impossible to implement.
My children went to high school in the city that gave birth to Occupy Wall Street, and as such we had many an evening discussion about income inequality at the dinner table. In a way, Bernie Sanders is the first Occupy Wall Street presidential candidate. There is little daylight between their positions.
And yet, none of them, including my daughter, was moved by the fact that, if elected, Clinton would be this country’s first female president.
The particular phenomenon of young women expressing no fealty for Clinton on the basis of gender is a head scratcher for many older Americans, particularly pioneering feminists, who have been part of the struggle to bring women’s rights as far as they’ve come.
Kate Cronin-Furman and Mira Rapp-Hooper point out in an article on Vox that this is understandable for young women who exist in educational environments where they regularly equal or even outperform young men.
My children were 7 and 4 on 9/11. That day, after working late into the night trying to make sense of the trauma and the tragedy, I finally made it home. They were asleep, but I woke them. I told them what they already knew, that some bad men had done a bad thing, but I reassured them that they were safe and would remain so.
From that year to this one, America has been at war. Indeed, if you are under 30, this country has been at war for half or more of your life. Therefore, the most noninterventionist, least hawkish candidates probably hold more appeal than the others, even with the current threat of the Islamic State.
My children can’t remember a time when terrorism wasn’t a threat. They have lived most of their lives with the ambient possibility of calamity. In the same way that I grew up with — and am numb to — the possibility of global thermonuclear war, so they are with the threat of terror.
The one area where they struggled with both candidates was on the issue of racial and social justice.
But there has been an abrupt racial awaking for my children and a historical reclamation of memory as they have begun to wrestle with the persistence and perniciousness of racism and have come to identify with the goals of Black Lives Matter.
They see the new proposals by both candidates as pandering to black votes, although they each mentioned that Sanders had been active in the civil rights movement. My eldest son said that he was disappointed about Clinton’s involvement with the 1994 crime bill and mass incarceration. He was born in 1994.
I must say that I have no memory of the bill’s passage. I was a young man with a young family who had just moved from the Deep South to Detroit.
It is possible that the bill’s passage isn’t marked by a memory for me because so many liberals were behind the bill: Joe Biden took credit for it, Bernie Sanders voted for it, Bill Clinton signed it and Hillary Clinton lobbied for it. Furthermore, many members of the Congressional Black Caucus voted for it. Indeed, the bill got more Democratic votes than Republican ones.
I do, however, remember the Whitewater investigation from 1994, one of the first Clinton administration scandals, the one that also spawned Travelgate and Filegate. The Clintons were never prosecuted in any of those investigations, but they emerged scarred.
Hillary Clinton often brags about surviving unending political attacks, but others see too much smoke for there to be no fire. The continued investigations added to my children’s mistrust of her. Maybe that’s what Republicans want; maybe some of their leeriness is warranted; maybe there is some place between smear campaign and smoking gun where reasonable people can be reasonably apprehensive.
Whatever the case, she seems to me weakened by the decades of questions, which may have even more of a deleterious effect on young people’s willingness to trust her.
This is hardly a broad survey, and shouldn’t be taken as such. No sweeping conclusions can be drawn from this column, nor are they meant to be. This is simply a view into one family’s conversations about politics, and how one father came away with a deeper respect for the thoughtfulness and thoroughness of his children.