STATE COLLEGE, Pa. — In the sun-drenched student center on the Pennsylvania State University campus here, a few days after Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont trounced Hillary Clinton in the New Hampshire Democratic primary last week, Renee Tillman, Melanie Suarez and Kamryn Sandidge were picking at their lunchtime salads when they were asked if they considered themselves feminists.
The responses to her campaign pitted mothers and daughters, set off debates about what feminism is and provoked reflection among women of all ages, evident in dozens of interviews and impassioned responses to an online query about whether it is important to elect a woman as president.
Many younger women already take for granted some of the gains that those before them fought for, and they identify strongly with their generation’s collective concerns — student debt, finding a job in postrecession America, and the fight for gay rights and a more flexible view of gender than their parents considered.
Older women recall their own struggles to break the glass ceiling, and battles in male-dominated workplaces. They feel themselves running out of time to see a woman reach the presidency.
Ann Wightman, 57, a lawyer in Centerville, Ohio, said she remembered the trial judge who “admonished me in open court that ‘if the boys must wear ties in the courtroom, so must the girls.’ ” Suzie Siegel, 57, a cancer patient in Tampa, Fla., said she was “determined to live to see” a feminist woman elected president.
So is Dana Whittle, 69. Standing in the cold at South Station in Boston last week, she took in a moment of stillness in the middle of an earthshaking personal transition. Lugging two massive bags, she was returning from South Carolina, having packed up her second home, which she was selling amid a divorce after 30 years of marriage.
In Denver, at a climbing gym with a view of the Rocky Mountains, climbers scampered up gray walls as hip-hop played in the background. Madeline Schiebel, 26, a former fund-raiser for Planned Parenthood who works at the gym, said most of her friends — “open, forward-thinking people” — were backing Mr. Sanders.
Still, her view is not universal.
Younger voters are also generally more open to big government, a possible explanation for the appeal of Mr. Sanders, who calls himself a democratic socialist. John Della Volpe, the director of polling at the Institute of Politics at Harvard, who has studied millennial voters the past 15 years, said his most consistent finding was that there are “surprisingly few differences” between the sexes.
“You cannot say this for other generations,” he said.
Ms. Camazine, the Penn State freshman, agreed, saying, “I think there would be more of a stir if there were a transgender candidate.” And while she would be “absolutely thrilled” to see a female president, she sees Mr. Sanders’s philosophy, and his emphasis on fighting inequality, as closer to her own priorities.
Democratic women, of course, are not the only ones reflecting on their own lives this election season. In Decatur, Ala., Cathryn Buse, 35, a stay-at-home mother and Christian author who said she voted Republican, spent years working as an industrial engineer — a male-dominated field that forced her, she said, to examine how men perceived her in the workplace.
Ms. Buse said she had been impressed by Carly Fiorina, the former chief executive of Hewlett-Packard who last week dropped her bid for the Republican nomination. Looking ahead, Ms. Buse has her eye on other possible female candidates, including Gov. Nikki R. Haley of South Carolina.
Here at Penn State, among the many young Sanders backers is Abigail Kennedy, a 21-year-old junior, who is an author of a children’s book, “Madam President,” that is intended to inspire young girls. When she was in the fifth grade, she wrote in her yearbook that she wanted to be president. It still stings, she said, to remember that other children laughed.
