One of Saturday’s biggest election surprises was the entrance and exit polling measuring Hispanic voters in the Nevada caucus. It found that Bernie Sanders defeated Hillary Clinton by eight percentage points among Hispanic voters, overturning months of conventional wisdom about Mrs. Clinton’s strength among nonwhites.
The actual election returns in Las Vegas’s Clark County hint at a different story. Analyzed neighborhood by neighborhood, they suggest that Mrs. Clinton might have won the Hispanic vote by a comfortable margin. She won about 60 percent of delegates in heavily Hispanic areas, a result that calls the finding of the polling into question.
There is not much evidence, though, that Mrs. Clinton won Hispanic voters by the sort of landslide margin that she did eight years ago. That’s a good sign for Mr. Sanders, who needs to make up for the huge swing among black voters, who have gone from uniformly for President Obama to uniformly for Mrs. Clinton.
But the finding that Mr. Sanders won the Hispanic vote is at best extremely questionable — and, at worst, wrong.
Similarly, it was widely reported that Mrs. Clinton fared extremely well in the precincts along the Las Vegas Strip.
Brian Fallon, the Clinton campaign press secretary, tweeted that the campaign estimated that Mrs. Clinton won 61 percent of the vote in Hispanic precincts throughout the state.
Does that prove the “entrance polls were wrong,” as Mr. Fallon said? Not on its own. It’s dangerous to infer much about the preferences of a demographic group based on the results of the areas where they live. Hispanic voters who live in majority Hispanic areas might be particularly likely to support Mrs. Clinton. In other words, focusing only on the places where Hispanic voters are most prevalent could provide a misleading picture of Hispanic voters over all. We know that this is an issue in other contexts: Similar analysis would overestimate the Democratic share of the vote among Hispanic voters, or the Republican vote among white voters.
A Democratic pollster unaffiliated with either campaign said that Mr. Sanders does better among nonwhite voters in areas where whites represent a larger share of the population, which would suggest that a precinct-based analysis would understate Mr. Sanders’s strength.
There’s another problem: There were relatively few homogeneous precincts, where almost all of the voters are Hispanic. Even the majority Hispanic precincts in Nevada have large numbers of non-Hispanic voters, who themselves could have been likelier to support Mrs. Clinton (though the findings still hold if one excludes the precincts where there appear to be an above-average number of black voters, who favored Mrs. Clinton by a wide margin).
But it is a stretch to say that Mr. Sanders could have done so well among Hispanic voters in non-Hispanic areas that he overcame a deficit in relatively Hispanic areas, where a large proportion of the Hispanic population lives.
Precinct data isn’t perfect. But I would take it over this entrance/exit poll.
Over all, the poll included just 1,024 respondents — and just 213 Hispanic respondents. In a normal poll, that would imply a margin of error of plus or minus six percentage points.
That’s because an entrance-exit poll isn’t a random sample of the population like a normal poll. It’s a random sample of precincts, usually between 15 and 60 in a state exit poll. This one had just 25 precincts. Race is not usually used as a criteria for selecting precincts.
Precinct selection introduces a whole new dimension of error into an entrance-exit poll for Hispanic voters, or any demographic group that’s concentrated in small areas. The 25 precincts could overrepresent an unrepresented group — imagine if a New York exit poll, by chance, included two Orthodox Jewish precincts in Brooklyn and showed a Republican ahead among Jewish voters — or completely miss a small, geographically concentrated group.
You can imagine how this could wind up creating the opposite risk of the precinct analysis: What if the entrance-exit poll simply doesn’t include a heavily Hispanic precinct where Mrs. Clinton excelled? The danger is real with a sample as small as this, especially in a highly diverse state.
This type of problem is responsible for one of the biggest exit poll controversies in memory: the finding that 44 percent of Hispanic voters supported George W. Bush in 2004. Simply by chance, 3 of the 11 plurality Hispanic precincts were in Miami-Dade County, where Hispanic voters are particularly conservative. The 44 percent finding was four points higher than the result from a compilation of the 50 state exit polls — a difference well outside the formal “margin of error” for a sample of that size.
The exit polls have also been criticized for other issues measuring Hispanic voters, like whether pollsters conduct Spanish-language interviews. They generally do not, although Spanish-language questionnaires are typically offered in Nevada and other states with large Hispanic populations.
Referring specifically to the Nevada results, Mr. Lenski added that there are additional errors with caucus and entrance polls. The entrance poll measures initial preferences — those can change at the caucus, and uncommitted is an option that received 3 percent support in initial preference. The delegate tallies don’t necessarily line up with actual vote counts, either; the delegates are allocated only after candidates get 15 percent of the vote. In other words, a candidate could win 60 percent of the delegates without winning 60 percent of the vote.
There were signs of problems Saturday in poll results themselves. Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Sanders were tied in the initial entrance-exit poll estimates; she ultimately won by around 5.5 points. Clearly the entrance polls missed Mrs. Clinton’s strength somewhere.
Is it possible that the precincts missed Mrs. Clinton’s strength among Hispanic voters in Clark County? Quite possibly. Even the final entrance-exit poll numbers show Mrs. Clinton leading in Clark County by just 5 points; she actually won there by 10 points.
It’s even harder to give it credit when there’s so much reason to wonder whether it’s right. Mrs. Clinton fared well in majority Hispanic precincts. National polls show Mrs. Clinton faring well among Hispanic voters — and Mr. Sanders basically finished in line with national polls among both white and black voters.
All evidence considered, and although we can’t know for sure, I’d err on the side of a Clinton win among Hispanic voters.
But it would be hard to argue that she won Hispanic voters by a lot. Sixty percentage points could easily be too high if she indeed fared better among Hispanic voters in non-Hispanic areas. The entrance-exit poll result may not be perfect, but it certainly seems consistent with this possibility. If I had to bet, I’d say she won Hispanic voters by a somewhat more modest margin.
It would still imply that Mr. Sanders made big gains over the last month. But it would still be short of what he would need to overcome Mrs. Clinton’s vast strength among black voters. She won them by a huge margin, whether you look at the entrance-exit polling or majority black precincts.
