Michael Brick, a former reporter for The New York Times who covered crime in New York, education in Texas and extreme sports nationwide, died on Monday in Austin, Tex. He was 41.
The cause was colon cancer, said his wife, Stacy. At his death, Mr. Brick was a senior writer for The Houston Chronicle.
Mr. Brick started on the business desk at The Times in 2001 and helped cover the utility giant Enron’s collapse in a financial scandal. In 2005, he was sent to Louisiana to report on the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina; he returned to New York to cover crime and the courts. He also wrote feature articles, notably a ruminative, closely observed series in 2005 called “Summer at Ruby’s,” about a dive bar in Coney Island.
“Inside, fluorescent lamps shine on the beer girl posters and the old-time photographs and the purblind man selling toilet paper by the ladies’ lavatory,” Mr. Brick wrote in one article.
Mr. Brick left The Times staff in 2008, but signed a yearlong contract to write about unconventional and sometimes dangerous sports nationwide in a Times column called Pushing the Limit, profiling athletes who did just that. He wrote of skateboarders, boulderers, wild hog hunters and rattlesnake wranglers, among others.
He continued to contribute articles to the newspaper from Texas, including coverage of Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan’s shooting rampage that killed 13 people and wounded 32 others at Fort Hood, Tex., in 2009.
Mr. Brick was the author of “Saving the School: The True Story of a Principal, a Teacher, a Coach, a Bunch of Kids, and a Year in the Crosshairs of Education Reform,” a well-received book, published in 2012, about the efforts of a group of dedicated educators to resuscitate a failing high school in Austin.
In 2013, he published “The Big Race,” a Kindle Single e-book about a nationwide motorcycle race.
He became a senior writer at The Chronicle in 2014.
Christopher Michael Brick was born on June 21, 1974, in Cheverly, Md. His family moved to Dallas when he was 14, and he graduated from R.L. Turner High School in Carrollton in 1992 before attending the University of Texas at Austin.
Mr. Brick left college to work for The Corpus Christi Caller-Times. He was later a speechwriter for a Texas state representative. He came to The Times after working for thestreet.com, a financial news site, and as a researcher on the 2001 book “The Informant,” about a price-fixing conspiracy, by Kurt Eichenwald, a former Times reporter.
Besides his wife, with whom he lived in Austin, Mr. Brick is survived by a son, John-Henry; a daughter, Celia; another daughter from a previous relationship, Sadie Aasletten; his father, Robert; his mother, Mary; and a brother, Jeffrey.