Henry James wrote that criticism showed the mind engaged in “a reaching out for the reasons of its interest,” and A. O. Scott, a chief film critic at The New York Times, says something similar toward the end of “Better Living Through Criticism,” his lively and argumentative book: “Let’s say that a critic is a person whose interest can help to activate the interest of others.” The difference between the two formulations is important. James’s critic is talking to himself and is not necessarily being paid for his reaching. Mr. Scott’s critic — like Mr. Scott himself — has a job to do and readers to persuade or annoy.
But the notion of interest brings the two remarks together, and almost casually excludes most of what we often think criticism is. What happened to judging, finding fault, even interpretation?
Seeking for reasons of interest might involve some of these activities, but it wouldn’t have to, and the shift of emphasis is illuminating. Mr. Scott doesn’t exclude judgment from his inquiry. He says it’s “the bedrock of criticism.” And he reminds us that the job is “not nice. To criticize is to find fault.” (He also thinks that critics are always getting things wrong and devotes a brilliant chapter to how they so consistently manage this.) But bedrock is not soil, and still less is it the plants and creatures that grow on the earth. It may at times be essential to find fault; it is scarcely ever enough.
“Better Living Through Criticism” is composed of six chapters and four dialogues. It opens with an imaginary (or perhaps not so imaginary) interviewer asking the critic: “What’s the point of criticism? What are critics good for?” And it says, just before it closes, that where criticism is concerned, “nobody has ever figured out where to begin, or what to conclude.” Does this mean we have gotten nowhere?
Certainly, we haven’t been given what Virginia Woolf called “a nugget of pure truth to wrap up between the pages of your notebooks and keep on the mantelpiece for ever.” But if we were looking for an intelligent, informed and often funny account of why we can’t live comfortably with criticism (in any of the word’s meanings), and can’t live without it, either, we need look no further, and shall probably want to read this book more than once.
Thinking takes many forms, though, and even anti-intellectualism is an intellectual posture. Sometimes thinking means just saying, “I don’t get it,” as long as this phrase doesn’t suggest that you’re refusing all further inquiry. Sometimes it is a matter of wonder, in both of its senses: what is happening here, and how amazing this is.
Mr. Scott recalls R. P. Blackmur’s definition of criticism as “the formal discourse of an amateur.” So criticism is “not really, in the conventional sense, a job at all.” The meanings of “amateur” as lover, collector, dabbler, don’t make things look better. But an interesting truth lurks here. The professional doesn’t have to lose touch with the amateur he or she also is. What Mr. Scott’s book suggests, and what “thinking” turns out to mean in criticism, is that it is possible to do for money what you would do for love, or have to do anyway.
Mr. Scott’s book moves swiftly through its elusive topics. Is beauty really in the eye of the beholder? What does it mean to visit a museum? What sort of creature is a critic? What are the virtues of being wrong? And what is happening to criticism in the age of digital opinion and the prophesied death of print? The witnesses called include Kant, Rilke, Emerson, Susan Sontag and Edmund Wilson, but they don’t weigh the book down, and you may be relieved to hear that Howard Hawks’s film “Bringing Up Baby” gets more mentions than any other work or person, except Henry James.
Mr. Scott does not forget his day job or his pleasures, and the book ends with a bravura section on food criticism and the Pixar movie “Ratatouille.” He is distinctly lyrical about the need to follow Julia Child’s instructions and sauté the different vegetables of the title dish in the same olive oil. “That oil is the medium and the meaning, the form and the content, the matter and the spirit.” His imagined interviewer says he is losing control of his metaphors, and Mr. Scott says, “I am, but let my exaggeration stand for the overwhelming nature of the experience.” Ideally, critics need to be overwhelmed before they start thinking. But then, the reasons for eating are just the beginning of reasons for an interest in food.