New York Fashion Week is comfortable caroming into its second half on Presidents’ Day Monday. (You didn’t think anything so slight as a national holiday would interrupt fashion week, did you?) By Thursday, many of the gathered fashion tribe will be heading to London to continue the international jaunt. But before then, there’s lots to see.
After a quick stop at The Row at 9 a.m., the party heads uptown, with an Upper East Side twofer: Carolina Herrera, who presents her new collection at the stately Frick Collection at 10 a.m., an appropriately tony venue for New York’s grande dame of the white blouse and ball skirt. It will be tempting to linger after the show for a quick spin through the galleries, but time is short: Tommy Hilfiger’s Hilfiger Collection follows directly, at the Park Avenue Armory at 11 a.m. Mr. Hilfiger’s show will host fashion’s first-ever “Instapit”: a tranche reserved only for Instagram photographers to snap to their hearts’ content. Suggested hashtag: #thewaywelivenow.
POODLE SKIRTS AHEAD?
Designers with a wilder bent own the afternoon. Rosie Assoulin holds her fall presentation at 1 p.m., followed by Jeremy Scott, fashion’s perennial provocateur, at 2 p.m. Mr. Scott is calling his new collection “Cowboys and Poodles.” The eagle-eyed may already have spotted a Scott-branded car emblazoned with a rocket-riding cowgirl lolling Moynihan Station last week. Then it’s off to Phillip Lim at 3 p.m., followed by New York’s master of mise-en-scène, Thom Browne, at 5. Mr. Browne has ginned up surgical theaters, funeral processions and mirrored cubes in which to stage his shows. Up next? Only Mr. Browne, inscrutable and tight-lipped until the curtain rises, knows.
Maria Cornejo, unofficial wardrober of gallery girls everywhere, kicks off the evening shows at 6, followed by Rag & Bone at 8 p.m. Then, for those with the fortitude for a long night out, the fun really begins. Mike Eckhaus and Zoe Latta of Eckhaus Latta mastermind some of fashion week’s most unusual shows, casting D.J.s, artists, fellow designers and pals to model their wares. (Last season, the party fixture Juliana Huxtable, the designer Susan Cianciolo and Grace Dunham, sister of Lena, were among the troupe.) This season, they bring the show to PS1, MoMA’s contemporary art center in Queens, where their work is included in the “Greater New York” show. The action starts at 9:30 p.m.; the party, they promise, goes well after that.