In 1996, Pat Buchanan — running as a populist, a protectionist, an outsider — won three of the first four Republican primary season contests, taking caucuses in Louisiana and Alaska, finishing a close second in Iowa, and then winning New Hampshire outright.
None of those victories mattered in the end. Buchanan spoke only for a quarter to a third of the Republican electorate, and once the race moved on to bigger states, he lost them all to Bob Dole. His populist rebellion offered an interesting template for the future, but it was put down without much difficulty and left no lasting mark on the party.
Thus far, in a sense, Donald Trump has done only what Buchanan did before him, without the early caucus wins but with a larger margin in New Hampshire. Of course that comparison understates his success: Buchanan didn’t lead national polling consistently for months, or beat his closest rival by 20 points in the Granite State. But the example of Iowa, where sustained attacks drove up Trump’s unfavorables and cost him late-deciding voters, suggests that like Buchanan’s pitchfork crusade, the Trump insurgency can be contained if the rest of the field consolidates and if his chief rivals are actually willing to attack him.
Except now we know that that isn’t going to happen anytime soon.
If Marco Rubio — a candidate broadly acceptable to the party, with high favorable ratings and decent general-election odds — had succeeded in putting away the troika of Jeb Bush, John Kasich and Chris Christie on Tuesday, then the path to a three-man race between Rubio, Trump and Ted Cruz would have been clear enough, and with it the path to Trump’s eventual defeat.
But instead, Rubio rode his debate disaster down to fifth place, Jeb spent about 1.2 gazillion dollars to finish just slightly ahead of Rubio, and Kasich claimed second place without doing any better than Jon Huntsman did in 2012.
At least Christie is dropping out. But the other three arguably have equal claims to fight on. Rubio still has the highest upside, Jeb the most money and organizational muscle, and Kasich — well, Kasich just beat both of them.
Or alternatively, all three of them look equally pathetic: Rubio unable to capitalize on good press and a clear opening, Jeb unable to capitalize on all that money and organization, and Kasich unable to break out of the Huntsman demographic in a party where playing to that demographic offers little save newspaper endorsements.
Given that equality-in-ineptitude — and after what we just witnessed in New Hampshire — there’s no reason to assume that any of them will have a breakout moment in South Carolina. Kasich will probably lag, but another virtual tie between Jeb and Rubio seems entirely plausible. In which case all three men could still be in the race a month from now, with Kasich hanging on hoping for a big win in his home state, Ohio, while Jeb and Rubio wage an Eastern Front-style war in Florida.
If that happens, there would probably no longer be a path to outright victory through the so-called establishment lane — only a path to delegate accumulation, with an eye toward a contested convention in the summer.
Which would mean, in turn, that the only non-Trumpian candidate who would have a path to outright victory is Ted Cruz, a man variously despised as an opportunist and feared as Barry Goldwater 2.0.
And even Cruz still needs to consolidate Ben Carson’s voters (a task made more difficult by their post-Iowa spat) and peel off a few more from the rest, in order to run the table in the South — his key to victory.
Which leaves us with the Trump-as-nominee scenario, something I’ve consistently predicted will not happen. I’m not going to break with that prediction here. But it must be acknowledged that if you were scripting a path to the nomination for a populist candidate who only has a third of the party in his corner, this is almost exactly the script that you would write — with a strong but still-limited hard-right candidate like Cruz, and then a logjam of weak and deluded mainstream politicians competing deep into the primary season for the rest of the vote.
The question for those politicians now is how deep the delusion runs. For Bush or Rubio, especially, a fourth-place finish in South Carolina should mark the end of their campaigns. Will it? Or is there enough stubbornness and folly in either man to keep on sawing off their party’s nose to spite the other’s face?
Then for the rest of the party’s leadership, an increasingly futile dogfight between Rubio, Jeb and Kasich should lead to reconciliation with the only candidate who has successfully attacked and beaten Trump to date: Rafael Edward Cruz. But will it? Or does the idea that it’s safer to let Trump “rent” the party than to cede it to Cruz actually have purchase outside of a few donors and consultants?
Finally, for those of us covering this campaign with some kind of rooting interest in a wiser, more public-spirited Republican Party down the road: What we should be rooting for — what I’ve tried to hope for — is a candidate who can channel, à la Richard Nixon with George Wallace, the legitimate grievances of the Trumpistas while stiff-arming his rank, un-republican fascismo.
But if no such candidate emerges — as seems increasingly likely — what then should we root for? For a compromised “establishment” candidate limping out of a contested convention? For Cruz’s self-limiting True Conservative™ message to prevail?
Or should we begin to root for Donald Trump — not as a candidate actually to champion, now or in the fall, but as an agent of divine retribution for a corrupt and stumbling party, a pillaging-and-torching Babylonian invasion of which it must be said: The judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether.
I think that temptation still deserves to be resisted. But stay tuned.