Way up in the foothills of the Alps, about as far north as you can go in the Lombardy region of Italy without hitting Switzerland, a series of terraced vineyards hug the hillsides overlooking the river Adda. With the majestic snowcapped massif to the north, the narrow river valley to the south and centuries-old castles crowning hilltops for good measure, this wine zone, Valtellina, is strikingly beautiful.
For years, the wines, made almost entirely of the nebbiolo grape, were little known in the United States and, indeed, in the rest of Italy. Most of the production went to Switzerland, which naturally has a taste for good Alpine wine.
Perhaps this was as it should have been. Production of the wine was necessarily small, and the wines presented a different, leaner, tauter face of nebbiolo. The steep terraced vineyards, source of the best grapes, had to be tended almost entirely by hand. Their labor-intensive nature, along with the rapid industrialization of Lombardy, led some growers to abandon the terraces in the mid-20th century. The colossal effort required to farm wasn’t worth the return.
As in other wine regions with precipitous hillside vineyards, like Cornas, stalwart growers persevered even as much of the rest of the world ignored them. I remember back in the 1990s, a few Valtellina wines would occasionally show up on shelves in New York. But the prevailing attitude was that these wines were too austere, too acidic, to appeal to many Americans.
So much has changed since those dark old days. Even by the 1990s, growers and winemakers, sensing more demand for distinctive wines and a greater potential return, were reclaiming Valtellina vineyards. Production hasn’t expanded much, but new producers have brought great energy to the region.
At the same time, many Americans in recent years have learned to embrace wines like Valtellina that are defined as much by acidity as by easygoing fruit flavors. And perhaps climate change has made that evolution easier, as Valtellina wines have become naturally richer in texture and deeper in flavor.
Demand and appreciation for nebbiolo has skyrocketed as well. As prices have risen for the best Barolos and Barbarescos, the most famous nebbiolo wines, consumers have sought other, less-expensive sources.
The choices are few. Nebbiolo, unlike many other grapes, has not prospered outside its home territory, northwestern Italy. But alpine regions in Piedmont, like Carema, Ghemme and Gattinara, as well as Valtellina in Lombardy offer less-expensive alternatives to Barolo and Barbaresco.
Within the Valtellina zone, where nebbiolo is known instead as chiavennasca, the wines are defined by two basic quality levels. The base is simply Valtellina, which tends to be light-bodied and tannic.
A distinct step up, with richer textures and more complex flavors, is Valtellina Superiore. The Superiores may be from five sub zones: Sassella, Grumello and Inferno, along with two I’ve rarely seen in New York, Valgella and Maroggia.
Valtellina also produces Sforzato, a powerful Amarone-style wine in which dried grapes are blended in for added body and concentration.
It may well be that we have entered a prime era for Valtellina production. A recent wine panel tasting of 20 bottles of Valtellina Superiore found excellent quality almost throughout. For the tasting, Florence Fabricant and I were joined by Jeff Porter, beverage operations director for the Batali & Bastianich Hospitality Group, which includes restaurants like Babbo and Del Posto; and Aaron Von Rock, East Coast wine director for the Patina Restaurant Group, who is based at Lincoln.
By reputation, Valtellinas are wiry, angular wines, but we found a wide variation of styles ranging from lean to rich and round. Not only that, while Valtellina Superiores must be aged at least two years before going to market, and three years if the wine is labeled “riserva,” vintages in our blind tasting ranged from 2012 all the way back to 2004, indicating two things: Some producers may hold bottles even longer before releasing them, and when the wines hit the stores, they’re not exactly flying off the shelves.
The wide range from lean to rich made me wonder whether some of these producers weren’t treating these wines as Sforzatos and blending in some dried grapes. Aaron offered an alternative to my perhaps cynical surmising, suggesting that the varying elevation of vineyards played a crucial role in the texture and richness of the wines. Jeff noted that these wines posed a challenge to consumers, who, without knowing the stylistic details of the wines, may unintentionally end up with very different bottles.
While it’s no longer hard to find Valtellinas in stores, production remains small, and the number of producers are few. We had 20 bottles in our tasting, but they came from only 12 producers. So our 10 favorites included some multiple cuvées.
They came from well-established producers like Aldo Rainoldi and Sandro Fay, newer names like Dirupi and Mamete Prevostini, and Ar.Pe.Pe, which may be the closest thing Valtellina has to a cult producer.
Our top wine, the 2011 Dirupi, was on the richer side of the spectrum, yet it showed great finesse and individuality, as opposed to some of the other plush wines in the tasting, which seemed more generic. This wine showed a classic Valtellina flavor profile as well, with notes of herbs and flowers, along with the typical tar and mineral character of nebbiolo.
No. 2 was the 2011 Sassella Sommarovina from Mamete Prevostini, a leaner yet highly seductive wine with great purity. A second Prevostini wine, a 2010 riserva, was richer and more deeply flavored. What separated them in the rankings? We seemed to prefer the clarity and finesse of the 2011 to the opulence of the 2010, but just by a hair.
In third place was the 2010 Inferno Fiamme Antiche riserva from Ar.Pe.Pe., which showed richness and complexity. It was also by far the most expensive wine in the tasting at $72. No. 4 was the 2011 Sassella from Aldo Rainoldi, an understated wine with flavors of menthol, herbs and minerals. At just $18, it was our best value. Rainoldi also produced our No. 6 bottle, a 2010 Inferno riserva, which was earthy, deep and still quite tannic.
Also worth noting are some names that were new to me, like the 2008 Sassella from La Castellina di Fojanini, with its lingering, earthy flavors of red fruit and licorice; the rich, tannic 2010 Sassella Grisone from Alfio Mozzi, and the straightforward yet deep 2008 Grumello from Alberto Marsetti.
Apart from the 2011 Rainoldi, these Valtellina Superiores were not inexpensive wines. Most of our favorites ranged roughly from $30 to $45. Still, in the nebbiolo world, especially given the difficulty of production and the singular nature of Valtellinas, these represent pretty good values.
