HONG KONG — The Pentagon has evidence that the Chinese military has deployed surface-to-air missiles on a disputed island in the South China Sea, a United States official has said.
The deployment escalates regional tensions that have been inflamed by China’s extensive effort to build artificial islands in the South China Sea, bolstering its claim to sovereignty over an area about the size of Argentina, where the Philippines, Vietnam and other nations also claim territory. The United States does not recognize China’s claims, and in recent months, it has sailed warships and flown military aircraft near the Chinese outposts to assert its right to freedom of navigation.
The United States official said the Chinese appeared to have deployed HQ-9 missile batteries on Woody Island in the Paracel chain. China has long had military and civilian infrastructure on the island, which is also claimed by Vietnam and Taiwan. Taiwan’s Defense Ministry, in a statement, confirmed on Wednesday that China had placed antiaircraft missiles on the island.
The Chinese Ministry of Defense did not confirm or deny the missile deployment, but it noted that the Chinese Navy and Air Force had deployed forces on the Paracel Islands “for many years.” “The hype by certain Western media outlets is purely them playing the old ‘China threat’ tune,” the ministry said in a faxed statement.
Vietnam appeared to have no immediate reaction to the reports. But anger over China’s presence in the Paracel Islands fuels strong anti-Chinese sentiment there. On Wednesday, more than 100 people gathered in Hanoi to commemorate the 37th anniversary of the start of a border war with China, with people chanting the Vietnamese names of the Paracel and Spratly island groups, The Associated Press reported.
The missile deployment was earlier reported by Fox News, which said pictures from ImageSat International showed that two missile batteries had appeared on the island sometime between Feb. 3 and Sunday.
The American official, who requested anonymity to discuss intelligence matters, did not comment on when the missiles might have been deployed, how many there were or whether they were operational. The official spoke Tuesday night in the United States, which was Wednesday in Asia.
The Chinese-made missiles have a range of about 200 kilometers, or 125 miles, and are capable of destroying aircraft, cruise missiles and ballistic missiles, according to Missile Threat, a website run by the George C. Marshall Institute in Arlington, Va.
Word of the deployment came as President Obama was concluding a summit meeting in California with leaders from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Several member nations, including the Philippines and Vietnam, have expressed concern over China’s efforts to construct artificial islands in the Spratlys, low-lying islands, reefs and shoals that lie to the southeast of the Paracels.
“The United States continues to call on all claimants to halt land reclamation, construction and militarization of features in the South China Sea,” the Pentagon said in a statement on Tuesday.
Adm. Harry B. Harris Jr., the head of the United States Pacific Command, said on Wednesday that the missile deployment, if verified, would go against pledges not to militarize the South China Sea that China’s president, Xi Jinping, made in September when meeting with President Obama at the White House.
But Zhu Feng, a professor at Nanjing University who studies China’s foreign policy, said that the Chinese make a distinction among South China Sea island groups. He noted that the Paracels were much closer to the Chinese mainland than the Spratlys, which lie more than 250 miles to the south and have been the focus of much of China’s island-building efforts.
Mr. Xi, in his Washington remarks, specifically referred to the Spratlys, not the Paracels, when saying that China “does not intend to pursue militarization” in the South China Sea.
Woody Island, known as Yongxing in China, is the seat of a new, county-level Chinese district, Sansha, complete with a domed government building sporting Ionic columns. An airstrip, jutting out of two ends of the small island, hosts Chinese fighter aircraft and is home to a military garrison.
Mr. Zhu, in a telephone interview, said the missile deployment was probably meant to help protect new Chinese naval bases at Sanya, a city in the Chinese island province of Hainan. Those bases are home to submarines and are eventually expected to host an aircraft carrier.
“The reinforcement of the defense of Woody Island is definitely to constitute some sort of military flank in defense of Sanya, which is becoming China’s naval headquarters,” said Mr. Zhu, who added that China could do a better job of communicating its intentions.
Euan Graham, director of the International Security Program at the Lowy Institute for International Policy in Sydney, Australia, agreed that the Chinese may be deploying the missiles to help defend the Hainan naval bases, as well as to protect aircraft operating from Woody Island. It may also give the United States and other nations pause before sending a plane over the disputed area to challenge what they consider to be China’s excessive maritime claims, Mr. Graham said.
“Not that the Chinese are going to shoot down an aircraft in peacetime, but certainly it is going to raise the threat environment and the risks for any U.S. commander who’s thinking about where to do an overflight next,” Mr. Graham said in a telephone interview.
But Mr. Graham said imagery he had seen suggested that the missile batteries might not be operational, because they appeared to lack supporting infrastructure.
That, he said, raises the possibility that China’s intent might not be to put them there permanently, but to improve China’s negotiating position on South China Sea issues — or to gauge the reaction of the United States and other countries, including Australia, whose foreign minister, Julie Bishop, is in Beijing this week to meet with her counterpart.
