There were reports of secret waiting lists to hide long delays in care. Whistle-blowers said as many as 40 veterans had died waiting for appointments. And Congress was demanding answers.
Despite mounting evidence of trouble at the Department of Veterans Affairs, Senator Bernie Sanders, then the chairman of the Senate Veterans Affairs Committee, initially regarded the complaints as overblown, and as a play by conservatives to weaken one of the country’s largest social welfare institutions.
But the scandal deepened: The secretary of veterans affairs resigned. Reports showed major problems at dozens of V.A. hospitals. And an Obama administration review revealed “significant and chronic systemic leadership failures” in the hospital system.
Mr. Sanders eventually changed course, becoming critical of the agency and ultimately joining with Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican, and other colleagues to draft a bipartisan bill to try to fix the veterans health care waiting list.
Mr. Sanders’s chairmanship of the committee, his most notable leadership post in the Senate, has become a go-to credential in his upstart quest to win the Democratic nomination for president. He routinely boasts of praise from the largest veterans organizations, who lauded his fight to expand benefits. And he frequently speaks of how he helped devise the wait time fix and was able to “crack the gridlock” of Washington, as one of his campaign mailers put it.
But a review of his record in the job also shows that in a moment of crisis, his deep-seated faith in the fundamental goodness of government blinded him, at least at first, to a dangerous breakdown in the one corner of it he was supposed to police. Despite inspector general reports dating back a decade that documented a growing problem with wait times, Mr. Sanders, who had served on the committee for six years before he became its head, was quick to defend the agency and slow to aggressively question V.A. officials and demand accountability.
His major objective as chairman was to expand the menu of veterans benefits. It was an ambitious goal, and as with his proposals today for free public college and universal health care, many viewed it as unrealistic. The cost was so high that even Republicans who normally favor more aid for veterans blanched at the dollars involved — while fearing that more offerings would cause even longer waits at the overburdened V.A.
The bill he ultimately helped write included a hard-fought $5 billion to hire more medical professionals, a provision Mr. Sanders favored. As a compromise, he agreed to a Republican provision to pay for veterans to get care outside the department. It was an approach that some Republican presidential candidates — and a veterans organization backed by the billionaires Charles G. and David H. Koch — want to expand on, but Mr. Sanders and others have long feared it as a step toward privatization and a shrinking of the agency.
He began his term by calling in the major groups, such as the American Legion and Veterans of Foreign Wars. “I said: ‘O.K., guys, what are the issues you are concerned with? How can we address them?’ ” he recalled.
Veterans advocates involved in those conversations said they were impressed.
Not only was Mr. Sanders uncharacteristically approachable for a senator, they said, but in a time of mandatory budget cuts they found him willing to advocate expensive initiatives on their wish list, from restoring cuts to military pensions to expanding dental care and reproductive health options.
Mr. Sanders packaged the proposals into one 367-page “omnibus” bill, with an estimated cost of $21 billion over 10 years — a cost that would lead to its demise.
“It was everything that we in the veterans community had been working for — everything was in there,” said Diane Zumatto, the national legislative director with Amvets, who said it was ultimately “too much” and impractical. “It would never get passed because it was such a huge price tag,” she said.
The bill drew a puzzled reaction from Republican colleagues who found it overly expensive and who bemoaned what they viewed as a lack of compromise and a failure to adequately address the existing waits. In February 2014, the bill fell four votes short of the 60 needed to advance in the Senate. Only two Republicans voted for the bill.
Mr. Sanders was not happy. “If you think it is too expensive to take care of veterans, don’t send them to war,” he said at the time.
Less than two months after Mr. Sanders’s legislation went down to defeat, the concerns over wait times engulfed the agency in the biggest scandal in its history.
The crisis was tipped off in April 2014 by reports that staff members at the veterans hospital in Phoenix were so overwhelmed that they created off-the-books waiting lists to hide delays in care that stretched for months, while top leaders collected bonuses for meeting scheduling goals.
In the months leading up to the revelations, Mr. Sanders’s counterpart on the House Veterans Affairs Committee, Representative Jeff Miller, a Florida Republican, had taken a tough tack, holding repeated hearings on the delays and calling for a congressional investigation.
Mr. Sanders held a hearing in mid-May, after the scandal broke, at which he implored colleagues to resist a rush to judgment. He devoted a significant portion of the session to asking each veterans’ organization testifying whether the hospital system provided good care. All agreed it did.
In the interview last week, Mr. Sanders said he had been dismayed with “the constant bashing of the V.A.” in the news media at the time, prompting him to focus on what he saw as the merits of the health care system.
“I think by and large most V.A. facilities provide pretty good health care to our veterans,” he said.
During the crisis, Mr. Sanders did support the commencement of an inspector general investigation, which later found manipulation to hide long waits was “systemic throughout” the V.A.
Republicans on his committee, though, were growing impatient, and they wrote Mr. Sanders to demand more hearings, which they said they had been requesting since he began his chairmanship. In the first 17 months, they said, he held “only seven oversight hearings, which did not even begin to address the issues facing the department.” The letter noted that Mr. Sanders had not responded to their earlier requests for hearings.
“We had a number of hearings,” Mr. Sanders said.
In the following months, Mr. Sanders negotiated legislation to fix the V.A., working with Mr. McCain, as well as Mr. Miller on the House side, on what became a $16 billion package that passed with bipartisan support.
The final bill, Mr. Sanders said, included remnants of his earlier “omnibus” legislation.
And a central feature of the legislation, inserted by Republicans, was that veterans who had long waits or lived far from V.A. treatment could use a “Choice Card” to seek care from an outside physician.
In stump speeches and debates, Mr. Sanders has touted those talks and the eventual law as a signature achievement of his two years as the committee chairman. He lost the position when Republicans took control of the Senate in the 2014 elections.
The law, meanwhile, has proved to be an underwhelming fix: Wait times, the V.A. acknowledged last summer, were increasing.