ALBANY — As the wins pile up for Stony Brook again this season, the Seawolves remain haunted by the question that has troubled them for five agonizing years, beginning with when they first reached the cusp of the N.C.A.A. tournament: Can they finally win when it matters?
Of all the story lines circulating through the midmajor conferences, the most compelling might be the one hanging over Stony Brook — no matter how many times Coach Steve Pikiell and his players insist that one year has little impact on the next, or the next, or the next. Having won 18 games in a row — the longest active streak in N.C.A.A. Division I — the Seawolves (22-5, 13-1 America East) certainly offered a sense entering Wednesday’s game against Albany that this might be the year that their torturous history in March would end.
Twice, Stony Brook has had its N.C.A.A. tournament hopes dashed by Albany, which entered Wednesday’s game positioned, naturally, as the No. 2 team in the conference and surging. This time, the Great Danes harnessed the conference’s most dominating force, Jameel Warney, while shooting 54.7 percent from the field to win handily, 82-70.
The game was played at Sefcu Arena, also the site of last year’s conference title game, which verged on the miraculous — at least for the Great Danes, who beat the Seawolves on a 3-pointer after a rebound was tipped out to guard Peter Hooley in the closing seconds.
Hooley’s mother, Susan, had died of cancer only weeks earlier, and his winning shot reverberated as one of the spine-tingling moments of March. The shock waves are still being felt at Stony Brook.
With four trips to the conference title game in five years, Pikiell has built Stony Brook into a consistent winner, recording five consecutive 20-win seasons, a 52-10 conference record since 2011 and a 61-7 record at home over that span. It would almost be easy to overlook the fact that all four of those championship-game appearances ended in losses, by a combined 20 points.
Before Wednesday’s game, Warney tried to play down the significance of the matchup. But an edge to his voice hinted that there was still plenty left to prove.
With Warney — the reigning conference player of the year and defensive player of the year, and a good bet to repeat as both — the Seawolves returned their top seven scorers from a year ago. They had five freshmen and no seniors in last season’s rotation; now they have no freshmen and three seniors playing regularly. The experience has altered their identity.
Albany, on the other hand, has seemed to revel in its contributions to Stony Brook’s anguish. In a highlight reel shown on the video screen before tipoff, the Great Danes (22-7, 11-3) replayed the clip of Hooley’s winning shot, lingering on the postgame celebration for a couple of painful beats.
Stony Brook jumped out ahead on Wednesday, 19-13, but Albany zoomed back to take a 6-point lead with two minutes remaining in the first half. As the Seawolves tried to increase the pace, Albany was content to keep the action subdued.
Warney was held to just one field goal in the first half, on only three attempts. He made a more concerted effort to get involved in the second half but was muzzled at every turn by Albany’s Richard Peters, Greig Stire and Mike Rowley, who double-teamed him relentlessly and funneled him toward the baseline, where he had less room to maneuver. Warney finished with 14 points, 8 rebounds and 3 blocks.
At halftime, Brown reminded his players that they needed to finish strong. Their lead grew to 15 with 8 minutes 44 seconds remaining.
