On two magazine covers the singer Zayn Malik has graced in the last few months — for Billboard and L’Uomo Vogue (as well as the racy video with his girlfriend, Gigi Hadid) — he looks every bit the young brooding pop star. The requisite smoldering stare, perfectly manicured stubble and bad boy tattoos are all in tow.
Zayn Malik sported gray locks for the cover of Billboard magazine.
And then there’s the hair.
Mr. Malik, 23, a former member of the musical group One Direction, peers out in both images from beneath a silver mane. This isn’t a case of a young man going prematurely gray, but a premeditated decision by the performer, who has a penchant for dyeing his hair and then broadcasting it to his 6.5 million Instagram followers.
Gus Kenworthy, the Olympic freestyle skier who came out as gay last year on the cover of ESPN magazine, debuted an ashen dye job in December on his Instagram account, thanking Anderson Cooper, the CNN news anchor, for the inspiration, adding the hashtag #50shadesofgay.
Gone are the days when guys would actively avoid graying hair. For a new generation of adventurous men, dyeing one’s hair gray is gaining traction, appropriating a naturally occurring phenomenon from older men and giving it a millennial twist.
Both Mr. Malik and Mr. Kenworthy declined to be interviewed for this article.
After the ESPN cover, 24-year-old Mr. Kenworthy went to Ms. Rau to go platinum blond. “I said: ‘You know, you just came out to an entire nation. You should do what you want to do,”’ she recalled saying.
Gray and silver hair has definitely been trending, said Aura Friedman, a senior hair colorist at Sally Hershberger Salon in New York. “The demographic of guys who come to me to go gray are doing it more as a fashion statement,” she said, as opposed to a more natural look. Ms. Friedman has dyed the hair of Phillip Picardi, the digital editorial director of Teen Vogue, and Drew Elliott, the chief creative officer for Paper magazine, among others.
Interest definitely seems to be up. A representative from Amazon said it had seen a threefold increase in the last year in customers searching for gray hair dye.
Tyler Oakley, 26, the social media personality who parlayed his online cachet into the documentary “Snervous” and book “Binge” last year, has experimented with his hair color, adopting many shades, from purple to green.
Admittedly, part of that is because of the positive response he received from friends and on social media, getting 90 “likes” on his Instagram account. “Of course, my mom doesn’t like it,” Mr. Vasquez said with a laugh.
Achieving the silver fox look is an involved process. “In the industry we call it a bleach and tone or a double process,” Ms. Friedman said, referring to a two-part procedure in which the hair is first stripped of its natural pigment and then colored, an undertaking that can last eight hours and is often costly.
While there is a range in prices depending on hair length and color, Ms. Friedman estimated that going gray would start at $350 at most salons. (She estimated a session for her services would be $600.) And that doesn’t take into account upkeep. “It does require a lot of maintenance, going back to the salon for touch-ups and conditioning it at home with the right products in between appointments,” she said.
The continued care also requires commitment, Ms. Rau said. “It’s like owning a pet,” she said.
However, because there are so many shades of gray — from those with bluish undertones to more natural variations — the color must be versatile enough to compliment a variety of skin tones.
Thanks to endorsements from style-savvy celebrities and the growing popularity among the fashion cognoscenti, going gray is likely to hit a tipping point. “It’s crazy how many men have contacted me,” Ms. Rau said of the response to Mr. Kenworthy’s gray unveiling on Instagram.
