Pro Football|Ken Stabler, a Magnetic N.F.L. Star, Was Sapped of Spirit by C.T.E.
Ken Stabler, a Magnetic N.F.L. Star, Was Sapped of Spirit by C.T.E.
Ken Stabler and C.T.E.
The family of Ken Stabler, the former Raiders quarterback who died in July at age 69, speaks about his life and the effects of C.T.E., which was diagnosed posthumously.
Shortly before he died in July, the former N.F.L. quarterback Ken Stabler was rushed away by doctors, desperate to save him, in a Mississippi hospital. His longtime partner followed the scrum to the elevator, holding his hand. She told him that she loved him. Stabler said that he loved her, too.
They were the last words anyone in Stabler’s family heard him speak.
The day after Stabler died on July 8, a victim of colon cancer at 69, his brain was removed during an autopsy and ferried to scientists in Massachusetts. It weighed 1,318 grams, or just under three pounds. Over several months, it was dissected for clues, as Stabler had wished, to help those left behind understand why his mind seemed to slip so precipitously in his final years.
On the neuropathologist’s scale of 1 to 4, Stabler had high Stage 3 chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or C.T.E., the degenerative brain disease believed to be caused by repeated blows to the head, according to researchers at Boston University. The relationship between blows to the head and brain degeneration is still poorly understood, and some experts caution that other factors, like unrelated mood problems or dementia, might contribute to symptoms experienced by those later found to have had C.T.E.
Stabler, well known by his nickname, the Snake (“He’d run 200 yards to score from 20 yards out,” Stabler’s junior high school coach told Sports Illustrated in 1977), is one of the highest-profile football players to have had C.T.E. The list, now well over 100 names long, includes at least seven members of the Pro Football Hall of Fame, including Junior Seau, Mike Webster and Frank Gifford.
Few, if any, had the free-spirited charisma of Stabler, a longhaired, left-handed quarterback from Alabama who personified the renegade Oakland Raiders in the 1970s. Stabler was the N.F.L.’s most valuable player in 1974 and led the Raiders to their first Super Bowl title two seasons later. He ended his 15-year N.F.L. career with the New Orleans Saints in 1984.
Quarterbacks are provided more protection from hits than most football players. An offensive line’s purpose is, in part, to protect the quarterback, and leagues like the N.F.L. have special rules to discourage severe blows to players in the most important position on the field.
But Stabler’s diagnosis further suggests that no position in football, except perhaps kicker, is immune from progressive brain damage linked to hits to the head, both concussive and subconcussive.
Stabler is the seventh former N.F.L. quarterback found to have had C.T.E. by Boston University, which says it has found C.T.E. in 90 of the 94 former N.F.L. players it has examined, including the former Giants safety Tyler Sash, who died at 27 in September and whose diagnosis was made public last week.
On Wednesday, the family of another Super Bowl quarterback, Earl Morrall, told The New York Times that Morrall was found to have Stage 4 C.T.E. after his death in 2014 at age 79.
Morrall was best known as a trustworthy backup to two future Hall of Fame players, Johnny Unitas of the Baltimore Colts and Bob Griese of the Miami Dolphins.
With Unitas missing most of the 1968 season with an injury, Morrall led the Colts to a 13-1 record and two postseason victories. But he threw three interceptions in a stunning upset loss to Joe Namath and the Jets in Super Bowl III.
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative brain disease, has been found in dozens of former N.F.L. players. Here are some of the most notable cases, along with New York Times coverage.
In 1972, at age 38 and with his familiar crew cut, Morrall took over for an injured Griese in the fifth game of the season and helped lead the Dolphins to a perfect record. Griese returned in the conference championship game and played in Miami’s Super Bowl victory to cap a 17-0 season, still the only perfect record of the 50-year Super Bowl era.
Morrall was an all-American at Michigan State and drafted second over all in 1956 by the San Francisco 49ers. He played 21 seasons with six N.F.L. teams. When he died in April 2014, his family said that the cause was complications from Parkinson’s disease.
Morrall’s son Matthew confirmed that the family was told Morrall had C.T.E.
Because C.T.E. can be diagnosed only posthumously, and most brains are not examined for the disease, incidence rates among athletes and nonathletes are difficult to ascertain. A study by the Mayo Clinic, released in the fall, found C.T.E. in 21 of 66 men who played contact sports (mostly football), but found no traces of the disease in 198 other brains of men who had no exposure to contact sports. The Mayo Clinic said it was unclear whether brain changes in the athletes caused any changes in behavior.
Scientists are quick to note that they do not understand why some football players get C.T.E. and others do not.
But the disease, once thought to afflict mostly boxers, has been found in recent years in deceased athletes who have played soccer, rugby and even baseball.
Most brains are donated by families hoping to understand why their loved one’s cognitive functions declined in later years. Symptoms of C.T.E. are similar to those of Alzheimer’s disease or dementia, including memory loss, confusion, impulsiveness and depression.
For decades, the N.F.L. rebutted research by independent experts that connected brain trauma to long-term cognitive impairment. Only in recent years, long after Stabler’s career ended, has the league begun to publicly acknowledge it has a problem.
Stabler is a finalist for this year’s Pro Football Hall of Fame class, to be voted upon by sportswriters and announced on Saturday, the day before Super Bowl 50 in Santa Clara, Calif.
He was a finalist three times before, the last in 2003, and his nomination regularly led to sturdy debate. This time, Stabler was selected posthumously as a senior finalist, along with Dick Stanfel, an offensive lineman who died at 87 in June.
Like those of other famous players, Stabler’s long career may have bolstered his case for the Hall, but it also made him more susceptible to long-term brain disease.
After retiring from football, Stabler worked as a broadcast analyst for the N.F.L. and for the University of Alabama, where he had played quarterback under Coach Bear Bryant. His damaged knees became such a problem in the past 10 years that he rarely ventured out.
On social media and the web, commenters reacted to the news that former N.F.L. quarterback Ken Stabler’s brain had C.T.E, believed to be caused by repeated blows to the head.
It was not until the final few years that his family recognized a rapid decline in his cognitive functions, too. Several symptoms — which cannot be conclusively attributed to C.T.E. — began to show themselves quickly, beginning with Stabler’s complaints of a high-pitched ringing in his head. In his final year, he once gritted his teeth so hard that he broke a bridge in his mouth and had to get dental implants.
Noise and bright lights became enemies. A lifelong lover of music, Stabler stopped listening to the radio in the car, choosing to drive hours in silence. He increasingly complained about the clanging of kitchen dishes and the volume of the television.
Family and friends found him repeating himself, sharing stories privately or during public events that he had told just minutes before. He lost his sense of direction, pointing north when he spoke about the coast just a few miles south of his home in Gulfport, Miss. Driving, he became flustered at four-way stop signs.
In the fall of 2014, he moved to Arizona to be closer to his oldest daughter, Kendra Stabler Moyes, 45, and her twin sons, 17-year-old Justin and Jack, who play high school football.
“I remember them calling me and saying, ‘Mom, Papa keeps stopping at green lights,’ ” Stabler Moyes said.
Stabler recognized his decline, but it was not his personality to talk about his problems. He did not tell his daughters as he battled prostate cancer for three years, harking to what John Madden, Stabler’s coach in Oakland, described after Stabler’s death — a player who would not go into the training room until he was sure everyone else was gone.
In his later years, Stabler worried about the risk of concussions to his grandsons, a sign of his growing ambivalence toward football. The boys lived with Stabler for a time, and he drove them to school and went to all their practices and games. Both are now juniors in high school, and neither is a quarterback, but Justin wears his grandfather’s No. 12 on the field.
Stabler wondered about his own mind years before he died. He and Bush talked about it after the 2002 death of the longtime Oakland center Dave Dalby, who mysteriously crashed his car into a tree in a parking lot. It came up again after an event where Stabler saw a struggling John Mackey, the Hall of Fame tight end. Mackey died in 2011, and C.T.E. was diagnosed.
“I remember Kenny looking at me and saying, ‘You ready to deal with that?’ ” Bush said.
More and more of his peers had their brains examined and were found to have C.T.E., too. And when Seau, the former linebacker, shot himself in the chest in 2012 and was later found to have had C.T.E., Stabler vowed to give his brain for research.
Stabler added his name to a class-action lawsuit brought by former players against the N.F.L., seeking damages from decades of concussions. The suit was settled last April and is under appeal. Under the current deal, Stabler’s family would not be eligible for compensation because Stabler’s C.T.E. was diagnosed after the April 2015 cutoff.
The day after last year’s Super Bowl, shortly before scheduled surgery to replace his aching knees, Stabler learned he had Stage 4 colon cancer.
McKee found widespread damage and the buildup of abnormal tau proteins throughout Stabler’s brain, consistent with the symptoms that Stabler tried to disguise, mostly with his sense of humor, from all but his closest friends and family.
To N.F.L. fans, it can be hard to separate the swashbuckling image of the Snake from the man his family knew — a constant presence, a willing chauffeur, a not-so-great cook.
When Stabler was 31, a 1977 Sports Illustrated feature story detailed his penchant for honky-tonks and marinas, usually with a drink in one hand and a pretty woman in the other. Already married twice, he married again before he spent 16 years in a relationship with Bush. He pondered what he might do after football. Open a honky-tonk himself, he thought.
His family hopes that the most powerful lesson he provides is the one delivered after he was gone.