MEXICO CITY — The fight took less than an hour. At the end of it, at least 49 followers of two rival gang leaders lay dead, stabbed and beaten to death in an overcrowded, aging prison in the northern city of Monterrey.
The trouble began just before midnight on Wednesday at the Topo Chico Prison when a struggle broke out between the gangs led by Jorge Ivan Hernández Cantú and Juan Pedro Saldívar Farías, said Gov. Jaime Rodríguez Calderón of Nuevo León.
All of the dead were inmates, he said. The state government put the original death toll at 52, but officials said they had found only 49 bodies. One inmate was killed by a shot fired by a guard, Mr. Rodríguez said in interviews with local news media, but the rest were stabbed and beaten to death.
The two gang leaders, both serving sentences for organized crime activities, had been moved from federal prisons. The government identified 40 of the dead on Thursday afternoon, and neither of the gang leaders was on the list.
Video footage taken by local residents from nearby rooftops showed the crowds of men shouting at each other in a prison yard. As the violence spread, inmates set fire to the prison warehouse.
Twelve prisoners were reported to have been injured, five of them seriously, in the uproar at the prison, the oldest in Nuevo León.
Initial news reports said the riot had broken out as part of an escape attempt, but the government said none of the inmates had escaped.
“We are living through tragedy due to the conditions in the prisons,” Mr. Rodríguez said at a news conference in Monterrey.
Forces from the federal police and branches of the military surrounded the prison, Mr. Rodríguez said, but they made no attempt to enter it because its layout prevented a rapid deployment inside.
The riot was brought under control around 1:30 a.m., the state government said.
Mexican prisons are severely overcrowded, and riots frequently break out. In September, a leader of the Zetas drug gang was stabbed to death at Topo Chico in a riot that left 11 inmates wounded.
In February 2012, 44 prisoners were bludgeoned and stabbed to death as guards stood by in a state prison in Apodaca, in the Monterrey suburbs, in a riot started by the Zetas. As the Zetas killed inmates from their rivals in the Gulf drug gang, 30 Zeta leaders escaped.
The month before, 31 inmates died in a prison in a neighboring state, Tamaulipas, in fighting between Zetas and the Gulf gang.
Carlos Jáuregui, the former public security secretary for the Nuevo León state government, said that overcrowding at the prison had been a problem for more than a decade. “During my tenure, it was a constant preoccupation because it could not be resolved,” Mr. Jáuregui said.
