The stage was being set to announce the retirement of James Levine, the music director of the Metropolitan Opera since 1976, after his longstanding health woes seemed to worsen this season to the point that singers and musicians were having difficulty following his conducting.
But then Mr. Levine and Peter Gelb, the Met’s general manager, paid a visit last week to his neurologist for an update on his condition — and the doctor gave Mr. Levine an 11th-hour reprieve, saying that Mr. Levine’s most serious problems could probably be solved by adjusting the dosage of a medication that he has been taking for Parkinson’s disease.
The news cheered Mr. Levine, who had been saddened by the thought that his illness might force him to step down. “I hope he’s right, because I love the Met company more than I can describe,” the conductor said on Monday evening in an interview at the office of his neurologist, Dr. Stanley Fahn.
And it surprised Mr. Gelb, who said in an interview that he had been in talks with Mr. Levine about announcing the conductor’s retirement after this season and making him the Met’s music director emeritus. But Mr. Gelb said that he felt obligated, morally and artistically, to see if changing Mr. Levine’s dosage would improve his upper-body movement and help him return to normal.
The question of what to do about Mr. Levine — who is beloved by singers, musicians and audiences — poses a conundrum for the Met. He has not only shaped but also helped define the modern Metropolitan Opera since becoming its music director 40 years ago, conducting more than 2,500 performances, choosing repertoire and nurturing many careers.
But more than a decade’s worth of health problems — including Parkinson’s disease, back problems, and a severe spinal injury from a fall that forced him to miss two seasons and has left him conducting from a wheelchair — have taken a toll on his ability to lead vibrantly.
Some of those well-reviewed performances came off with extraordinary measures behind the scenes, Met employees said. Orchestra players who had trouble reading Mr. Levine’s beat relied more on intuition of what they thought he would want and on watching the concertmaster. Singers onstage looked more to the prompter’s box for direction. And Donald Palumbo, the Met’s chorus master, conducted the chorus from the wings of the stage, with using an audio monitor to help him coordinate with the orchestra.
Dr. Fahn, an expert on Parkinson’s, said in an interview with Mr. Levine present that Mr. Levine had Parkinson’s disease, but that it did not seem to be progressing and that his involuntary movements, or dyskinesia, seemed to result from too high a dose of the medication L-dopa. “If you lower the dose, and keep him smooth at a lower dose, he should be able to do pretty well,” Dr. Fahn said, adding that he had reduced Mr. Levine’s medication on Thursday and was already seeing strong improvement.
Mr. Levine is scheduled to conduct the Philadelphia Orchestra this month in Philadelphia, and his next test at the Met will be in March, when rehearsals start for Verdi’s “Simon Boccanegra,” starring Plácido Domingo.
So for now Mr. Levine and the Met are watching and waiting to see how he responds to his new regimen. Mr. Levine said that he hoped he was not done yet as music director.
