MANCHESTER, N.H. — Donald J. Trump once boasted that he could someday be the only person to turn a profit running for president. He may be closer than anyone realizes.
Mr. Trump’s campaign spent just $12.4 million in 2015, according to disclosures filed with the Federal Election Commission, millions less than any of his leading rivals for the Republican nomination. More than half of Mr. Trump’s total spending was covered by checks from his supporters, who have thronged to his stump speeches and bought millions of dollars’ worth of “Make America Great Again” hats and T-shirts.
While the convoluted accounting is required by law — so that Mr. Trump’s companies do not make illegal corporate contributions directly to his campaign — it also means that Mr. Trump is in effect taking millions of dollars out of one pocket and depositing it into another.
What remains is a quintessentially Trumpian endeavor that blurs the line between campaigning and brand-building and complicates Mr. Trump’s claims that he is funding his own White House campaign. About three-quarters of Mr. Trump’s total campaign spending has either gone to reimburse his own businesses or has been covered by funds from grass-roots donors, according to an analysis by The New York Times of F.E.C. reports. Virtually all of the money Mr. Trump himself has put into the campaign was lent, rather than donated outright, meaning that he could potentially sell enough hats and T-shirts to pay himself back down the road.
Mr. Trump’s advisers resist the idea that he is in the campaign to make money. They note that Mr. Trump’s political stands have cost him money, too, as when Macy’s, which has sold Trump-branded men’s wear, and NBC, which airs the reality show “The Celebrity Apprentice” that Mr. Trump hosted, cut ties with Mr. Trump over his comments about illegal immigration.
But Mr. Trump has been dubious in the past of wealthy businessmen, like Steve Forbes and Michael R. Bloomberg, who actually spend their own money on campaigns for high office. During the 2000 election, according to Fortune magazine, when Mr. Trump flirted with an independent bid for president, he scheduled paid speeches in the same cities where he was holding political events. “It’s very possible that I could be the first presidential candidate to run and make money on it,” Mr. Trump said at the time.
Some of the costs for which Mr. Trump’s companies are now charging his campaign would probably be incurred even if he were not running for president, such as salaries for borrowed Trump Organization personnel and some of his private plane flights. Excluding short hops around the New York City area, Mr. Trump’s private aircraft logged 66 flights in July, August and September 2015, according to the most recent available federal flight records. During the same period in 2014, the aircraft made 51 flights.
Mr. Trump would hardly be the first person to find a financial upside to running for president. Mike Huckabee, who dropped out of the Republican race on Monday, has used his campaign mailing lists to hawk miracle cures for cancer. A variety of failed Republican contenders have parlayed White House bids into lucrative careers on radio and television. And Hillary Clinton’s six-figure speaking fees are due, in some measure, to her high profile as a former candidate and cabinet secretary.
But a tour through campaign filings suggests that no one meshes business and political pursuits quite as seamlessly as the candidate whose campaign is built on his celebrity.
It remains to be seen whether Mr. Trump’s campaign operation is better at promoting the candidate’s brand or at winning elections. He lost the Iowa caucuses by a few percentage points. On the other hand, Mr. Trump has sold 179,000 copies of his new book, “Crippled America,” according to Nielsen BookScan, about $4 million worth of sales at the list price.
At a campaign event in Exeter on Wednesday night, Mr. Trump promoted his soon-to-open Washington hotel, which will be in the renovated old post office building on Pennsylvania Avenue.
Mr. Lewandowski, the campaign manager, said there was no confusion back at the campaign headquarters (a slice of the fifth floor of Trump Tower). Since the campaign is not allowed to take in-kind contributions from the company, Mr. Lewandowski said, every borrowed Trump employee and flight-hour has to be properly compensated out of the campaign account.
After the Iowa caucuses, the paths to the nomination diverge for the three leading candidates.
Some critics remain unconvinced that all of the help Mr. Trump’s companies are providing his campaign is being properly accounted for.
In December, Mr. Trump threatened legal action against a pro-Jeb Bush “super PAC,” Right to Rise, after the group ran ads suggesting Mr. Trump was not fit to be commander in chief. But the threat was delivered by Alan Garten, general counsel to the Trump Organization, rather than by Mr. Trump’s campaign.
Right to Rise has filed an F.E.C. complaint, charging that Mr. Trump is illegally using corporate resources to further his campaign.
There are signs that Mr. Trump has begun to invest more significantly in a traditional political apparatus. His campaign’s payments to companies not affiliated with the Trump Organization doubled between August and November. As of the end of December, Mr. Trump had spent almost as much on field staff ($2 million) as on promotional merchandise and marketing ($2.5 million).
And at the moment, Mr. Trump leads by double-digits in national polls and in New Hampshire, which holds its primary on Tuesday.
One way or another, he suggested Wednesday, he will win.
