Ann Freedman, long a leading New York gallerist, and a couple who accused her in a federal lawsuit of fraudulently selling them a fake Rothko painting for $8.3 million settled their lawsuit on Sunday.
Terms of the settlement were not disclosed, but the agreement was confirmed by lawyers for Ms. Freedman and for the collectors, Domenico and Eleanore De Sole.
The De Soles, who filed their case in 2012, had been seeking $25 million from Ms. Freedman and Knoedler & Co., the gallery where she had served as president and which closed in 2011, just ahead of several similar lawsuits from unsuspecting collectors who had bought fakes.
The case against Ms. Freedman, whose testimony had long been anticipated, is expected to be dismissed in Federal District Court in Manhattan on Monday, said Luke Nikas, a lawyer for Ms. Freedman. But the case against Knoedler, now entering its third week, would continue.
“Ann is pleased to be able to reach this settlement,” said Mr. Nikas. “From the very beginning of these cases, Ann never wanted to keep a penny of the profits she made” from inauthentic works.
Gregory Clarick, a lawyer for the De Soles said that he would reserve comment until he had addressed the settlement in court on Monday. A lawyer for Knoedler did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
The settlement follows damaging testimony about how much Knoedler and Ms. Freedman earned from the sale of more than 30 fakes that were said to be by Abstract Expressionist masters but were actually painted by an all but unknown Chinese artist in the garage of his Queens home.
Ms. Freedman and the gallery have said they, too, were fooled by the paintings, which were all provided by Glafira Rosales, a Long Island art dealer, who has pleaded guilty to criminal charges in connection with the case.
Among the mysteries of the case has been how readily the art market embraced works that had no documented provenance. At least two of the Rosales works ended up hanging in a major museum before their inauthenticity was discovered.
Lawyers for the De Soles elicited testimony from a series of art experts who said that they had never authenticated the Rosales works that Ms. Freedman appeared to present them as endorsing.
But Mr. Nikas was able to show that some of the experts who testified that they had never authenticated the forged works had nonetheless expressed enthusiasm for them.
One, David Anfam, volunteered to send a “a not long, yet highly persuasive email” to a museum in Buffalo after Ms. Freedman wrote to him about the possibility of that institution acquiring a Barnett Newman painting that turned out to be among the fakes.
Still, Mr. Anfam and Christopher Rothko, the artist’s son, testified that they had never given Ms. Freedman permission to include their names on a list of “individuals with special expertise on the work of Mark Rothko” who had viewed the painting that the De Soles bought.
Five previous lawsuits filed by collectors against Ms. Freedman and Knoedler have been settled before trial. Four are still pending.
Testimony last week indicated that, between 1994 and 2008, works presented to Knoedler by Ms. Rosales as the work of Jackson Pollock, Robert Motherwell and other giants of painting, had been sold for about $70 million, bringing the gallery $32.7 million in net income and earning Ms. Freedman just over $10 million in commissions.
The gallery paid about $26 million to Ms. Rosales. Pei-Shen Qian, a Chinese artist who has been charged in the case but fled to China, has said that Ms. Rosales and her boyfriend, Jose Carlos Bergantiños Diaz, who has been charged but fled to Spain, typically paid him only several thousand dollars for each forgery.
The De Soles argued in their lawsuit that Ms. Freedman knew that the Rosales works were counterfeit or intentionally overlooked obvious signs of fraud. Collectors said Ms. Freedman should have realized the paintings were fake for a variety of reasons, including the fact that Ms. Rosales was selling them at prices that were far below market. Ms. Freedman had countered that she ended up owning several herself, evidence of her belief in them. Embarrassingly, though, one of those, said to be a Pollock, misspelled the artist’s name.
Lawyers for the De Soles had also argued that the story of the provenance of the works, which were said to have come from the family of a mysterious Swiss collector identified only as “Mr. X,” had shifted, which they presented as a red flag that Ms. Freedman should have noted.
The De Soles said Ms. Freedman told them that she knew the collector’s identity but had to keep it confidential. Ms. Freedman, however, has said that she tried to discover the identity of the collector, but that Ms. Rosales would not divulge it.
Mr. Nikas said that he expected Ms. Freedman would still appear as a witness in the case, called by lawyers for the De Soles. He said she would continue to assert that she had believed in the Rosales paintings and would never have sold those works if she had known that they were not genuine.