The next Elon Musk may soon be working at a City University of New York campus in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, perhaps joined by the next Sergey Brin in Flushing, Queens. And they could be creating hundreds of jobs.
At least that is the hope of the New York City Economic Development Corporation, which with CUNY will announce on Thursday a new visa program intended for immigrant entrepreneurs. The plan, called IN2NYC, is to have 80 entrepreneurs set up shop on CUNY campuses, advising professors and students while working to build companies — in exchange for a special temporary work visa that is exempt from the quotas. New York is the first city in the country to offer such a program.
The entrepreneurs will qualify for a skilled-worker visa, known as an H-1B. Applicants need an employer to sponsor them for the visas, which are extremely limited: The visas are capped at 65,000 a year, with another 20,000 available for foreign students who have earned graduate degrees in the United States. Last year, 233,000 people entered the lottery for the visas, with about two-thirds of them losing out.
But people working with nonprofits and institutions of higher education are exempt from the caps, and IN2NYC will use its partnerships with CUNY to help the entrepreneurs get the visas.
Maria Torres-Springer, the president of the development corporation, said the program would build on New York’s history of being a welcoming place to immigrants. “We’re seeing innovation hubs really beginning to blossom all over the city,” she said, mentioning a clean-technology incubator she recently visited in Brooklyn, made up mostly of immigrant workers.
IN2NYC will work with seven campuses: Baruch College, City College, the College of Staten Island, LaGuardia Community College, Lehman College, Medgar Evers College and Queens College.
Entrepreneurs will form a board of directors, most of whom will be American citizens or permanent residents, to establish the employer-employee relationship that an H-1B visa requires. Since entrepreneurs will be employed at a college for more than half their time, collaborating with professors and students, they will be exempt from the H-1B visa caps.
“The impact of an immigration lawyer to help the next Elon Musk with no visa or a college student with no status has never been more significant,” said Peter F. Asaad, the managing legal partner of Immigration Solutions Group, an immigration law firm in Washington that is providing counsel to New York City.
Mr. Musk, the founder of SpaceX and the co-founder of Tesla Motors, was born in South Africa and came to the United States as a college student. Mr. Brin, the co-founder of Google, was born in Russia.
The development corporation expects that each entrepreneur will initially employ at least three people. Applications will be accepted in late spring, with the program scheduled to start in autumn.
Mr. Ryan sees only an upside.
