Before the pandemic hit, Michelle Bernier was finally rebuilding after a lost decade.
Ms. Bernier, 47, was injured shortly before the last recession and lost her job at a nursing home in Lewiston, Me. By the time she was well enough to work again, the economy had collapsed, and she and her husband had to rely on food stamps.
By last year, however, things were looking up. She had a job she loved, as a home nurse, and was earning $20 an hour.
Coronavirus wiped it all away. Her clients no longer wanted outsiders coming to their homes, meaning Ms. Bernier was out of work. The extra $600 a week in unemployment benefits from the federal government kept her afloat for a while. But that supplement ended in July, and she isn’t sure how she will get by without it. The bill collectors that she thought she had shaken are already hounding her again.
“So here I am stuck without a job again and floundering, trying to figure out what my next career will be,” she said.
The newly released data suggest that families with lower pretax incomes, like Ms. Bernier’s, were catching up to their richer counterparts between 2016 and 2019. The bottom 90 percent of the income distribution actually saw its share of overall earnings increase slightly in 2019 — reversing a decade-long decline. Even so, a Fed analysis noted that the rebound happened from record lows.
And even at a moment when tighter labor markets were translating into more broadly shared prosperity, divides in wealth — savings amassed over time, rather than the money a family earns in a given year — remained high.
In 1989, the top 1 percent of wealth holders held about 30 percent of the nation’s net worth. That had jumped to nearly 40 percent in 2016 and was little changed in the latest survey, Fed economists said.
While wealth did climb slightly for those in the bottom half of the distribution, the poorer half of American families held just about 1 percent of the nation’s savings in 2019, the Fed data and a related report showed.
All figures are in 2019 dollars. Stock holdings includes indirect ownership, including through 401(k) accounts.
The survey’s overall wealth measure does not include defined benefit pension plans and Social Security benefits, which are hard to value. An augmented measure that incorporates pension plans shows that the wealth share at the top has still risen, but by less, according to a Fed report.
Only the richest 10 percent held more wealth in 2019 than on the eve of the 2007 to 2009 recession, based on the release, though broad-based progress was beginning to take hold.
Financial assets have long been particularly concentrated in the hands of the rich, and that trend persisted through 2019. The median family with stocks among the wealthiest 10 percent held about $780,000 in them, directly or indirectly, last year. The median family in the bottom quarter with stocks held a little more than $2,000, the data showed.
The percentage of lower-wealth households that held some stocks climbed, but remained far lower than for the rich. About 94 percent of the wealthiest families hold stocks, compared to one of every five households in the bottom 25 percent.
President Trump often highlights the stock market’s performance as a signal of success, but the data reinforce that it does not speak to how many Americans are doing financially.
The survey also showed how wealth concentration is perpetuated across generations. In 2019, the wealthiest 1 percent of families expected $1.6 million in inheritance. Those in the bottom half of the distribution anticipated just $39,000.
