The blazes that raced across western Oregon this week could be the most unexpected element in a fire season that’s full of surprises: Not just more wildfires, but wildfires in places that don’t usually burn.
The forests between Eugene and Portland haven’t experienced fires this severe in decades, experts say. What’s different this time is that exceptionally dry conditions, combined with unusually strong and hot east winds, have caused wildfires to spiral out of control, threatening neighborhoods that didn’t seem vulnerable until now.
The fires in Oregon, which have led to the evacuation of hundreds of thousands of people and are approaching the Portland suburbs, stand out from what has already been an extraordinary fire season in the West, where global warming, land-use changes and fire management practices have combined to create a hellish mix of smoldering forests, charred homes and choking air.
Before this week, Oregon was grappling with a much more contained problem, a series of smaller fires on both sides of the Cascade Range, which divides the state between east and west.
Fires are common in the east, which is normally dry, according to Philip Mote, a climate scientist at Oregon State University. In some areas of eastern Oregon the “return period,” or length of time between major fires, is as little as 20 years, he said.
But the western slope of the Cascades, which catches most of the moisture that blows in from the Pacific Ocean, is normally wetter. “Out here, the return period can be hundreds of years,” he said.
That protective moisture has faded, in large part because climate change has altered precipitation and temperature patterns.
Those dry conditions were most likely exacerbated by climate change, according to Meg Krawchuk, a professor at Oregon State’s College of Forestry. And they had the effect of “teeing up the landscape” for a wildfire, she said.
The critical moment came Monday and Tuesday, when a windstorm carried hot air from the high desert in the eastern part of Oregon over the mountains, rapidly spreading the fires in the more populated western part of the state, according to Josh Clark, fire meteorologist at the Washington State Department of Natural Resources.
Those winds were the strongest the state has seen in at least 30 years, Mr. Clark said. And when they crossed the mountains, the winds raced down through river canyons, which compressed the air, warming it further and pushing it westward like a bellows.
As those fires raced west, they met unusually dry conditions, said Dr. Kolden, which in turn allowed the fires that were already burning to spread rapidly. “The fire’s able to move very quickly and just explode down these canyons,” she said.
The fires now threatening Oregon’s cities and towns could be worse than anything in that part of the state in decades, said Cassandra Moseley, chief research officer at the University of Oregon and a professor at its Institute for a Sustainable Environment.
And what’s different this time, Dr. Moseley said, is that far fewer people lived in those areas 90 years ago. “Tillamook didn’t have people in it,” she said. By comparison, this week’s fires seem likely to cause large numbers of casualties.
Today: As wildfires continue to rip through parts of the West, Oregon is seeing unprecedented destruction. My colleague Jack Healy talks to those living in its path.
It’s Tuesday, September 15.
So Jack, tell us what’s been happening in Oregon.
— The flames comes that toxic smoke that’s blanketed the West Coast, smothering several major cities.
— as incredibly dry conditions, exacerbated by the effects of climate change, combined with a really historic and devastating windstorm to create some of the worst fire conditions that people here have seen in years, if not generations.
Nearly three dozen wildfires so widespread they can be seen from space.
There are 30 different fires burning.
In Oregon, officials are bracing for a mass fatality incident.
They have killed 10 people and displaced tens of thousands of people across the state, from just outside of Portland all the way down to southern Oregon.
This could be the greatest loss of human lives and property due to wildfire in our state’s history.
The damage is widespread, and the scale is just absolutely mind-boggling. So I flew into Portland last Thursday. And when I arrived, the plane touched down through a thick, impenetrable haze of smoke that has actually grounded a lot of flights and prevented travel in and out of the area pretty severely.
So right after touching down in Portland, as I drove into the fire zone through tiny little towns that were being evacuated and places that were smoldering, one of the things that I kept hearing from residents, whether it was people in Portland, or fire officials who were on the front lines of this, or people whose houses were being actively evacuated, was this: Everybody just kept saying, “The entire state is burning.” The scope of these fires is so widespread that it’s hard to conceive of what a million acres really looks like. I talked to one Red Cross volunteer who had been trying to put people up in hotels. And one of the challenges that they had been facing is that as hotel rooms fill up around the area where the fires are, they were trying to put people farther out in different towns. But the problem they were running into is that they were encountering refugees from other fires the farther out they put people. So it was like these disasters were sort of spreading and colliding as you went south from Portland, to Salem, to Eugene, to Medford.
So you’re hearing that the whole state is on fire, and now you have to cover it. Where are some of the places you go?
So I went to an evacuation site in Salem at the state fairgrounds. There were a lot of people sleeping in their cars and just parked in the parking lot waiting for some motel or some room that was close by that would take a pet or accommodate their family.
What’s your name, ma’am?
With a K or a C?
C. My sister is Cindy.
Two of the people I met were Carla Heath and Cindy Essman. They’re two sisters.
OK. OK. And Cindy?
And for the past week or so, they have been sleeping in the front seats of their silver Buick Encore.
It is, I know. You do what you have to do at this point.
You know? And that way, everybody can stay together.
They spent two nights in the parking lot of a shopping center.
Yeah, Bi-Mart shopping center in Stayton.
And they decamped to the Oregon State Fairgrounds just because smoke was getting so terrible that it was getting hard to breathe.
Just the smoke in Stayton is so bad?
Oh, you could cut it with a knife it’s so bad.
That’s why we’re here with three birds, two dogs.
Oh really? Oh my goodness!
Yeah. The birds were on the other side.
Their house survived, and they’ve been able, like some other residents, to kind of return and check on it and go back and forth as the fires have continued to kind of chew through the landscape.
They don’t want us to go back.
No, they don’t want us to go back now. It’s getting too — oh, the smoke is horrible there now.
But they’ve been really concerned about what they’re going to do long term and how long they’re going to be evacuated from their house.
Is your patience starting to wear thin? Or you seem like you’re in pretty good spirits about all this.
No! We’re keeping a good — we’re keeping a positive attitude about this.
Not at first, but we’re getting better. Now that we’re out out, I think things are looking up.
Well, ladies, thank you so much for your time.
Thank you. It was nice meeting you.
Really good to meet you. Take care.
So Jack, where do you go next after talking to those sisters?
 And as you drive up, the air just gets worse and worse, and the smoke gets thicker and thicker until it’s basically like the most noxious cloud you’ve ever been in. As I’m driving, I have the air conditioning blasting and trying to recirculate air through the cab of this white Toyota pickup truck that I have rented to get around. And I’m wearing an N95 mask inside the car in an attempt to keep as much of this fine particulate matter that just fills the air from entering my lungs.
And as you push further into the areas that have been burned, you start to see telltale signs of what the fire has wrought along the roadside. You see fields that look like Hawaiian black sand beaches because the fires have just scoured them the color of charcoal. You see areas that are totally unburnt, and then you turn a corner and there is what’s left of a house — just the cytoskeleton of twisted metal and a single chimney standing up like a, like a solitary soldier standing guard or something.
And things get worse and worse the farther east you go, where these little communities of retirees and recreational enthusiasts and summertime campers were just really devastated.
Hey. How are you, sir?
Hey. I’m a newspaper reporter covering the wildfires.
— protect your places?
This is my friend, Sean. He’s just here for the cause.
Sean, hey. I’m Jack.
Mike, great to meet you.
I met a little cluster of neighbors who had decided to stick it out inside of the fire zone — inside of this part of the area that had been evacuated and cleared out — because they were determined to try to save their homes.
And if we didn’t come back in here, my house would be gone, because there’s fires going around that we put out.
He’s been here.
I’ve been here since then. I haven’t left.
He’s been here the whole time.
No kidding? That’s amazing, Darren.
I’m not leaving either.
I just bought the house in November.
I’ve been trying to stay, but I got a wife calling me at home going, get out. And Darren’s staying.
So you think it just jumped from house, to house, to house.
I mean, I was there with other people for 11 hours trying to put that town out.
They were actually cracking open a couple beers and waiting for another couple of neighbors to return to their houses with a refill of water supplies from one of the local fire departments.
Yeah. I should take you down to my house. I’m just three houses down. I told you, it’s right where the fire stopped.
This was on fire.
— that had burned up and almost swallowed up their houses.
Their house is gone.
They’ve also armed themselves with shotguns and sidearms.
— law enforcement?
We carry anyway.
I have — my underwear drawer is locked and loaded. It’s ready to go. Open carrying like this — I usually wouldn’t walk around like this.
But with everything going on, I absolutely would.
They say they are worried about looters and outsiders coming in to rob their places or exploit the evacuations to carry out looting.
The sheriffs are going through, and they’re tagging mailboxes with the caution tape. And that indicates, we’ve checked and no one’s here.
Ah. Which is like an invitation.
Which for looters means, oh, there’s no one there.
And is the looting a real thing that’s happening? Is that a real threat at this time?
To a certain extent, yeah. What has happened in some cases is that there have been some reports and arrests of looting. But what’s also happened, though, is that there have been a bunch of rumors and swarms of misinformation circulating on social media about some alleged organized effort by Antifa to set fires or carry out organized sprees of robberies in communities that have been evacuated. You know, kind of really fan the flames of a climate of fear right now, as people try to wait for some sort of semblance of order, or normalcy really, to be restored.
So it sounds like these guys feel like they’re caught between the danger of the fire itself and the potential fear of someone breaking into their homes. And they have decided that staying and protecting their homes is worth the risk of the fire.
I think that is the essential calculation for so many people.
It’s do you risk your house burning down, or do you risk just not knowing what’s happening at what’s probably your biggest economic asset and the source of so many years of work? Or do you leave and stay safe personally? People across the state are making that individual calculation for themselves.
It’s the apocalypse, man. The whole state’s burned down. I’ve never seen anything like it.
700,000 acres right now.
So Jack, after you leave the town of Gates, where do you go next?
Well, I went to the Black Bear Lodge, a little motel in Salem where evacuees had been staying for the past week. And there I met Travis and Jane James.
OK. OK, great.
And they are from the tiny little communities of Detroit and Idanha. And Detroit suffered probably some of the worst devastation in the fires outside of Portland. About 70 percent of the businesses and homes in this little lakeside resort town were destroyed, including cafes, a motel, a little restaurant, the market, and even the city hall was destroyed.
The town was basically wiped off the map.
And what do you Travis and Jane tell you?
Well, Travis and Jane had a pretty harrowing story of escape.
So just take me back to Monday, I guess it was, when the wind started to really kick up. What had you guys been doing that day?
Just watering everything.
Because the lieutenant said, water, water. So we were watering the perimeter.
Some people from Detroit and Idanha were able to get out earlier. They left when evacuation was only a suggestion or a possibility.
Didn’t want to leave, because we just got the house.

They had been hoping that they could stay and protect their house. But around 2 or 3 o’clock in the morning on Tuesday, it was just getting to be way too dangerous.
It was gray. It was smoky. It was getting bad.
It was orange outside the day before from the smoke.
Yeah pine trees.
— coming down on our house totally burnt.
Burnt limbs were raining onto their house, as well as burning pine cones and other pieces of ash, and all this other debris that was rising on the column of heat from this fire and just being thrown for miles.
How did it arrive? Did your phones go off?
Yeah, it came on as an alert.
They finally got the alert.
— bag or anything like that?
We came out with a suitcase and two dogs.
They ran out of the house and started to drive down the mountain to try to get to safety. But what happened is, as they’re driving through these walls of fire, trees are falling around them. They’re exploding as they drive.
Yeah. We went around — a tree had fallen down on the highway. We went around it. And as soon as we went around it, the rocks slide hit us.
And so, yeah, so what happens then? The tire blows?
The tire blows.
— in the middle of a forest fire.
We couldn’t change the tire.
How do you take the tire off? You can’t.
They had no choice but to turn around and head back to Detroit, where they had just come from.
We had to put everything back, throw the dogs back in, and then ride on the rim another seven miles back to Detroit.
And the entire forest is basically exploding around them.
I was filming a little bit. I was screaming at him.
Yeah. What were you saying?
Why are you putting me through this?
So what do they do once they get back to Detroit, which is on fire?
Which is on fire. So Travis and Jane and about 70 other their refugees from this fire ended up taking shelter at a boat dock that was sort of a clearing, an area that was not immediately surrounded by trees. Then they were going to wait there until some National Guard helicopters could land and evacuate them by air.
They had to cut a tree because we were surrounded. We couldn’t get out. So they going to bring — what— had three helicopters hovering.
To come take us out.
— National Guard place right down here in Salem.
They’re on station for about four-and-a-half hours before they had to abort because of fuel.
Yeah. Because they couldn’t come because of the smoke.
So they were just kind of hovering?
Yeah, they couldn’t — the wind was blowing 65 miles an hour, so they couldn’t land.
They waited there for hours, but those helicopters could never come in because the winds were just too rough.
And what is happening with the fire during all of this?
 They’re getting covered in debris and ash. And as Jane said, we were surrounded. We couldn’t get out.
How many people would you say were there?
When we left, there was 40 vehicles and 78 people.
They just kept coming in from all over the place. Nobody could get out. They just kept coming in and coming in.
And so what do they do? What is the plan?
They were going to move us all down to the docks.
— and surround the fire trucks around us — the water trucks — and put a big water barrier.
The plan was to essentially make a last stand against the fire. That’s what the fire department called it.

Then they got an OK to leave. So we all lined up, followed the fire trucks out.
Someone with the Forest Service was able to find another way out of there, and they found an evacuation route. 
And there’s all this fire on the left-hand side.
— burning trees. They’re chainsawing them and pulling them out with their trucks so we could keep going. It happened two or three times.
And during that drive, they sort of crept along and tried to stay together as best they could, so that people would not get detoured into other fire zones. Because as they’re driving, there are skirting along the edge of another massive fire that is burning just to the north of the one that had just consumed their community.
It was just a last minute make-or-break thing. It was like, we got one shot to get out here. It’s on fire, but we’re going to go. So we went.
Bunch of studs.
Oh my gosh, they are — they get so many kudos from us.
They had no heroes until that day.
Jane was still really distraught and really traumatized by this.
But I went into complete meltdown.
When we talked, it had been five days or so. And just thinking about that trip was still something that brought her to tears.
— worried that you were gonna die?
It got ugly really quick.
When you see death, it humbles you even more than you are. All I did the whole time was just cry.
I could not stop crying. He kept trying. I’m like, I — I can’t. It was just way too much.
And so what is their plan now? What will they do once the fires stop?
Well, their house survived.
Yeah, they sent — the lieutenant of Idanha-Detroit Fire Department, sent me a picture at of house.
Oh, OK. So there it is. That’s great.
This is out house.
I guess the fire burnt right up to our property line.
They were some of the lucky ones, and their plan is to go back. And I’ve actually been struck by how many people in these places that have burned down are planning to go back. And whether it’s just, return to a house that is now surrounded by a landscape of char, or whether it’s to go back and try to rebuild from nothing again.
People said that this had increased, in some ways, their commitment to these communities that are incredibly threatened and are going to be even more threatened and even more at peril as the effects of climate change grow more pronounced.
Yeah, Jack, my understanding is that these fires aren’t going anywhere. So how did these people square those realities, that the land they live on is under increased threat of destruction but that they also want to try to rebuild their lives there?
Ok, and tell me why.
It’s beautiful up there. It’s God’s country up there. It’s — I could sit outside for hours just watching the wildlife.
We got chipmunks and squirrels.
We got three families of chipmunks. We got a koala bear squirrel. We got chucks.
I think for a lot of the people that I’ve talked to there is a certain amount of wishful thinking, hoping that this fire was just some sort of historically aberrant event — that the winds that ignited these firestorms won’t flare up again, that somehow things will get better. But at a certain point, I think others are starting to wonder whether they can just live with the increased risk of living in a fire zone.
Because if you look outside your window across the West, we sort of all are living in some kind of fire zone. Even if you live in San Francisco or L.A. or Seattle or Portland, you’re miles away from any place, any hillside that’s going to burn down and surround your family, you’re still socked in by smoke. And you’re still contending with incredibly dirty and, in some cases, dangerous air conditions.
And honestly, I’m one of them. I live in Colorado, and I live on the side of a hill in a pretty wildfire-prone part of Colorado. And I know that climate change is real, that the risks of these fires are getting worse as hotter temperatures dry out the brush and as weather patterns shift.
But I think that there is a certain love and commitment that people have to these communities in the mountains, in forests that they’re not willing to give up. Not to mention the fact that for so many people you’re locked into your home. A lot of people don’t have the ease of just pulling up stakes and leaving. It’s what so many of the people in Detroit or Idanha or Gates had invested their entire lives and savings, and a lifetime of work into. And to leave — even when the fire is banging down your door and climate change is screaming its presence — to leave is a really difficult thing.
Well, thank you, Jack.
It’ll start getting cooler.
I don’t think science knows, actually.
On Monday, while meeting with leaders in California about the wildfires there, President Trump brushed off a question about climate change, suggesting instead that the state had failed to properly manage its forests.
When you have years of leaves — dried leaves on the ground, it just sets it up. It’s really a fuel for a fire, so they have to do something about it.
Meanwhile, in a campaign speech, Joe Biden attacked Trump’s record on climate change, saying his inaction and denial had fed destruction in California and Oregon.
If you give a climate arsonist four more years in the White House, why would anyone be surprised if we have more of America ablaze? If you give a climate denier four more years in the White House, why would anyone be surprised when more of America is underwater?
Now that I have a clear understanding of what happened, I have to let you, the public, know what steps I am taking today to deal with our failures. Today is Chief Singletary’s last day.
Lovely Warren, the mayor of Rochester, New York, announced she was firing the city’s police chief two weeks before he was scheduled to voluntarily step down because of the department’s handling of the death of Daniel Prude.
— we have a pervasive problem in the Rochester Police Department, one that views everything through the eyes of the badge and not the citizens we serve.
That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Megan Twohey. Michael Barbaro will be back next week. See you tomorrow.
Already, several mountain communities had been destroyed by flames that roared though the surrounding forests. State officials received reports of dozens of missing people. And as some of the largest blazes neared Portland’s southern suburbs, the authorities warned residents thinking of staying behind in some communities that there would be no firefighters to protect them.
The lesson of this week is that the state must now prepare for more of the same, said Dr. Mote, the Oregon State climate scientist, who recalled that extreme warmth had also led to a record low snowpack in 2015.
