So we asked readers: What was your gateway musical — the show that turned you onto Broadway and the smaller, weirder corners of the theater world?
More moving were the many ways you discovered these shows — not just onstage but also through V.H.S., vinyl, YouTube. As plays migrate to Zoom these days, it’s a heartening reminder that technology has long let theater reach audiences beyond Broadway.
Below are a few more of your answers, lightly edited and condensed.
It was 1979, and I was 11, going to a sleep-away camp. Every night after lights out, a counselor played the Len Cariou-Angela Lansbury album and would explain what was going on in the show, like one character’s hair going white overnight. It is a powerful show made then more powerful by our imaginations.
I had always loved musical theater, but it always seemed like a completely different world, like a dream. But for the first time, while watching the 2008 Tony Awards, I saw myself. I saw my people. I listened to the cast album and was able to see all these characters within my barrio and myself. That’s when I realized that musical theater wasn’t just dreams. It’s our lives put on display in one of the most beautiful ways it can: through song.
Tamara Fuentes, North Bergen, N.J.
In the summer of 2007, a girl at summer camp told me to go home and look up “Defying Gravity” on YouTube. I was a bookish, introverted 12 year old in Miami, and I had never seen anything more captivating in my entire life. I watched dozens and dozens of videos and kept a ranked, ever-changing list of my favorite Elphabas.
The 1953 performance of “Carousel,” one of a Starlight Opera series at an outdoor venue in San Diego’s magnificent Balboa Park, hit me like a thunderbolt. I went with my mother and her best friend at the end of summer when I was 11. It was a rare treat for me — my mother didn’t drive, and my family did not spend money on movies, much less these kinds of shows. As a feminist, I struggle seriously with the line that someone can “hit you — hit you hard — and not hurt at all.” Yet I console myself that the role of women has changed considerably, and the music still soars.
Daryl Ann Glenney, Berryville, Va.
I was 9 years old when my best friend played “Do You Hear The People Sing?” for me on her record player. I was immediately hooked. I had no idea what a prostitute was or why Javert spent his whole life pursuing Valjean. But I knew that after school, with snacks in hand, I could march out to my backyard and shout-sing “Les Miz” at the top of my lungs and feel proud and strong.
Alysson Caine, Queens, N.Y.
At first, I only knew the music from the scratched vinyl my parents bought at a library sale and blared on the Radio Shack record player in the kitchen. A few years later, my family purchased a VCR, and I finally saw the 1973 film. My brother and I acted it out with our stuffed animals — Kermit was always Jesus.
Josh Flynn, Kokomo, Ind.
It was then (and is now) beautifully constructed and intimate, with a gorgeous score, and it’s both genuinely funny and unabashedly romantic. At college age, I saw myself in the callow young hero, Matt; in my 20s, fancied myself the dashing El Gallo; in my 40s, identified with the barely coping dads; and these days I’m a dead ringer for Henry, the befuddled old actor.
Charlie Fontana, Washington, D.C.
I saw a community theater production in my hometown, Lynnfield, Mass., and it changed the game for me. I thought “Tomorrow” was the most magical thing I’d ever seen. The girl playing Annie slid across the floor with such confidence, ease and hope. And there was a REAL dog!
I grew up in China, so there wasn’t and still isn’t a culture of musicals. Came across stuff like “Cats” or “Phantom,” but besides finding the music lovely, I didn’t have much feeling about it. That changed after I saw the PBS recording of the 2006 revival of Sondheim’s “Company” with Raúl Esparza. That production blew me out of my mind. I realized that music in theater doesn’t have to do a “narrative” job, but can exist as a kind of comment and have a space of its own.
The year after kindergarten, I was in a show at day camp. I can’t imagine we actually did the full musical — maybe a revue of some sort — but I definitely sang “One” in a chorus wearing a glittery gold top hat. My parents bought me the cassette of it, and I knew all the words.
Clearly, I didn’t really understand much of what the show was about until I was older — I just liked the idea of a show about putting on a show. But like many things, something about its queerness must have been legible to me even then. I’ve since performed drag numbers to its songs, and a couple of years ago I got to see it staged again at the Hollywood Bowl. I cried.
I’m embarrassed to admit this. I was taken to see “Starlight Express,” the Andrew Lloyd Webber shocker about loved-up trains with a cast entirely on roller skates. It spoke to my 7-year-old soul.
In the spring of 1952, a revival of Rodgers and Hart’s “Pal Joey” was at Manhattan’s Broadhurst Theater on West 44th Street. I was a junior at Weequahic High School in Newark, N.J., and was seeing my first Broadway show. My date and I sat in the mezzanine. The overture began, and I wasn’t in the real world any longer.
