A pharmaceutical company announced a potential treatment for patients with mild or moderate Covid-19.
This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get this newsletter in your inbox.
Federal Reserve officials expect to leave interest rates near zero through at least 2023.
The Big Ten Conference said it would try to play football as soon as the weekend of Oct. 23, reversing an earlier decision not to compete.
Michael Caputo, the cabinet spokesman who delivered an inflammatory online rant after news reports of interference with official disease reports, will take a leave of absence.
The pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly announced that a single infusion of its monoclonal antibody treatment was shown to drastically lower levels of the coronavirus in newly infected patients and lower the likelihood of requiring hospitalization.
Scientists used blood plasma from Covid-19 survivors, isolating and testing their antibodies to find the most powerful ones. They then manufactured vats of antibodies to make the drug. In a trial of more than 450 newly diagnosed Covid-19 patients, Eli Lilly said, only about 1.7 percent of those who received the drug ended up in the hospital, compared with 6 percent who were given a placebo — a 72 percent risk reduction. Those treated with the drug reportedly also had fewer symptoms, and the levels of virus in their bodies plummeted.
Other companies are also working on treatments with monoclonal antibodies, but they are difficult and expensive to make. A single dose could cost thousands of dollars. They offer only a temporary solution, with the antibodies lasting about a month.
But without a vaccine — the only way to elicit a lasting immune response — the treatment could give doctors another weapon in an arsenal with few options.
The study will eventually enroll 800 patients in the U.S. of all ages and risk categories, including people in nursing homes. Eli Lilly has already started manufacturing 100,000 doses in hopes that these interim results, which have not yet been peer reviewed, will bear out.
The company plans to discuss the state of the trial with the Food and Drug Administration, as well as the possibility of emergency use authorization to market the drug.
Here’s our treatment tracker.
After months of testing headaches and complaints about delays, New York City is getting a dedicated lab that will prioritize tests from city residents.
The new Pandemic Response Lab in Manhattan is run by a small robotics company, but the city played a significant role in its creation, officials said.
The hope is that the lab will cut wait times down to 24 to 48 hours, just as the city prepares for its most ambitious period of reopenings, with some in-person public school classes and indoor dining scheduled to begin this month.
New York City’s testing program is already one of the most ambitious in the country, swabbing more than 200,000 people a day, or more than 2 percent of all city residents. The lab will be able to process an additional 40,000 tests and will possibly include some from public school students and teachers.
Facing a $9 billion, two-year revenue shortfall because of the coronavirus’s impact on the economy, Mayor Bill de Blasio announced that he was furloughing staff members at City Hall, himself included (the mayor intends to work during his furlough, for free).
According to an upcoming study from Columbia University and New York’s health department, the city’s shutdown orders this spring reduced the spread of the virus by around 70 percent.
The city changed its hybrid education model, which involves students physically attending school one to three days per week and learning remotely the rest of the time. Because of a staffing crunch, schools will no longer be required to provide daily live instruction to hybrid students when they are at home.
The Brooklyn Museum is breaking a taboo, putting 12 works up for auction to raise money for the care of its collection. The auction next month will include paintings by Cranach, Courbet and Corot.
The case count in India topped five million — less than a month after it hit three million.
Spain’s capital, Madrid, is preparing to impose “selective lockdowns” in areas where cases have risen significantly, an official warned. About a third of Spain’s new cases over the last week were in the city.
With Israel’s infection rates having spiraled to among the worst in the world, the Great Synagogue in Jerusalem will remain closed over the Jewish high holidays, for the first time in its history.
Federal officials said that they planned to start distributing a vaccine within 24 hours of any approval or emergency authorization, and that their goal is that no American “has to pay a single dime” out of their own pocket.
Dr. Robert Redfield, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, told senators that the coronavirus could be controlled in six to 12 weeks — if all Americans wore masks.
Retail sales in the U.S. rose 0.6 percent last month, an increase for the fourth straight month, but the rate is slowing.
Low-income college students in the U.S. are dropping out at alarming rates, many of them saying they don’t have strong enough internet to attend online classes, The Washington Post reports.
How does the federal eviction moratorium work? It depends on where you live.
“The world has never felt smaller”: A Times Opinion piece features six-word pandemic memoirs by adults and children.
I am a preschool teacher in Los Angeles, so the theme for the Zooms this week has been fire safety. The kids all dressed up like firefighters and shared their toy fire trucks. I made a video visiting a fire station and interviewed the firefighter. He turned the lights on the truck and drove in and out of the station for us. Not as fun as touring the station, with all the mom escort volunteers who love firefighters too — but the kids really enjoyed it.
