Campaigners have long warned that the overcrowded conditions at the impoverished camp might lead to catastrophe.
Europe’s largest refugee camp, on the Greek island of Lesbos, has long been a desperate makeshift home for thousands of refugees and migrants who have risked everything to flee war and economic hardship for a better life.
They lived in cramped tents with limited access to toilets, showers and health care. For years, rights groups warned that these squalid conditions would sooner or later prompt a humanitarian disaster.
On Tuesday night, that disaster came. A fast-moving fire destroyed much of the camp, leaving most of its 12,000 residents homeless. By Wednesday, a process of soul-searching had begun among many Europeans, for whom the Moria camp, and the neglect of its residents, has long been synonymous with the continent’s increasingly unsympathetic approach to refugees.
No deaths were initially reported. But vast stretches of the camp and an adjacent spillover site were destroyed in the fire, leaving only a medical facility and small clusters of tents untouched.
Since 2015, Moria has filled with an influx of migrants — now mostly Afghan refugees — seeking to reach northern Europe. It is a bleak tent camp designed for 3,000 people that at times has swollen to more than 20,000 after Europe started blocking their paths in 2016.
Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Union’s executive arm, the European Commission, said she felt “deep sorrow” about the fire, while the governor of a region in western Germany, Armin Laschet, said he was willing to admit up to 1,000 refugees from the camp as part of a wider European resettlement program that has yet to be developed.
Some residents of the camp managed to escape to the island’s main town of Mytilene, while others were able to remain in their tents in small areas of the camp that were unaffected by the blaze. But many were being held nearby on Wednesday morning while the Greek authorities decided where to house them.
Aid workers said that the fire at Moria, which is named after a nearby village, began shortly after 10 p.m. on Tuesday following protests by residents over recent coronavirus restrictions, and that it spread quickly because of high winds and the explosion of gas canisters.
Aid workers, activists and officials said a series of fires were started intentionally by a group of camp residents who were furious at being forced to quarantine after at least 35 people tested positive for coronavirus at the camp.
A new, smaller fire broke out on Wednesday evening in one of the few areas that had survived the first blaze, displacing roughly 1,000 more people, aid workers said.
Notis Mitarachi, the Greek migration minister, said during a Wednesday evening news conference that those responsible for the fires would not go unpunished.
The fire quickly destroyed much of the camp’s formal enclosure, including a facility for 400 unaccompanied children and much of its water infrastructure, before spreading to a spillover site in olive groves close to the camp’s fence. Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis said a state of emergency had been declared for all of Lesbos and noted that all unaccompanied minors would be transferred off the island.
Videos provided to The New York Times by aid workers at the camp showed residents hurrying from Moria in droves in the early hours of Wednesday morning. They carried their belongings in bags slung over their shoulders, some of them pushing infants in strollers, and others draped in blankets.
By sunrise, footage showed that much of the camp’s formal infrastructure had collapsed, with many of the tents burned. Several metal portable cabins were blackened with soot, their walls having buckled in the heat. Trees on the nearby slopes had been charred.
Thousands of displaced residents were left with nowhere to go, with many simply sitting down a few hundred meters from the camp.
“There are thousands of people just sitting on the main road,” said Nick Powell, an Australian aid worker who witnessed the fire and its aftermath, and who was helping to provide food to the survivors on Wednesday.
It is still unclear where they will be taken. George Koumoutsakos, Greece’s deputy migration minister, said during a Wednesday news conference that efforts were being made to rehouse around 3,000 people in new tents.
The priority was to rehouse the most vulnerable, with some 400 unaccompanied minors being moved to “safe zones” and hotels, he said.
Moria was started in 2015, when more than 850,000 war refugees and migrants made their way by boat from Turkey to nearby Greek islands like Lesbos, hoping to travel farther north. A further 300,000 have arrived in the years since.
Conditions at the Moria center on the island of Lesbos were already dire. This year, the coronavirus compounded the misery, and then fires razed the squalid camp, leaving thousands homeless.
There are hundreds, if not thousands, of asylum seekers sleeping rough. They’ve pitched up tents with bamboo and other dried leaves. There are a lot of children here. I can see a tiny, tiny baby, I think no older than three months that’s crying.
Some of the people here have small backpacks with whatever belongings they were able to rescue. Some are looking at their asylum papers, which are actually probably the most valuable thing they own.
And now I think I’m entering the segment of this street that’s occupied by Afghans. 
And this is really, really grim.
From The New York Times, I’m Megan Twohey. This is “The Daily.” Today: Thousands of refugees are on the streets in Greece after a massive fire burned down their camp. My colleague, Matina Stevis-Gridneff, on how they ended up there in the first place. It’s Thursday, September 17.
Matina, tell me about Moria.
Moria is a place in Greece, a vast, sprawling space in the hills of Lesbos, which is a really picturesque island in the Northeastern Aegean. Where over the years, among the olive groves, this sort of slum city of huts and tents and containers has sprung up. Where thousands and thousands of asylum seekers, coming from countries of conflict or abject poverty, or people facing other kinds of persecution in their homelands — in the Middle East, in Africa, or elsewhere — travel, go through Turkey, get on boats and end up on this island.
And how exactly did this happen? How did so many people end up in one place?
So in order to answer that question, we need to go back to the summer of 2015 and examine what happened then. That was the height of the so-called European refugee crisis.
It was a moment when the Syrian conflict was really flaring up.
Hundreds of thousands of people, fleeing violence and terror in places like Syria and Iraq.
Some have come from other parts of the world and are looking for better economic opportunities in Europe.
People were making their way out of Syria and other parts of the Middle East, and transiting through Turkey to the Greek islands.
And in Greece, desperate people are putting their lives at risk on rubber dinghies.
These people, families have just risked their lives, everything they own, everybody they love, to cross this narrow strait here to arrive here in Greece.
More than 50 bodies of refugees recovered from the sea after failed attempts to get to Europe over the last three days. Once again, the Greek island of Lesbos saw the most of the misery.
There were up to 3, 4,000 people arriving every day on these tiny, tiny islands.
Right. I remember. There was that photo of the three-year-old Syrian boy who drowned in the Mediterranean.
That photo was so important. It was such a turning point in the development of the early stage of the refugee crisis. Because it caused this moral pressure on richer, northern European countries — in particular, Germany — to open their doors to these people. And that’s exactly what happened.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel says her country will not limit the number of refugees it takes in. She’s calling for other E.U. members to do the same.
Germans gathered at the station to cheer and clap as refugees went through a temporary processing center set up outside.
By 2016, about one million Syrian refugees had left the Greek islands, transited through Europe, and reached safe haven and a new life in Germany.
And how does Moria fit into these efforts?
At the beginning of the crisis, the authorities thought they had to do something that normally happens when you have a humanitarian disaster of this scale flare up. They thought, we will create some basic facilities on this island, which is the first port of entry for these thousands and thousands of people. And what we’ll do is we’ll try and offer them some basic things like shelter and food. And we will register their asylum applications. And hopefully, the plan was back then, these people will then quickly transit through an asylum system to new homes around Europe.
And what is the attitude of the Greeks? What is their response to all of these people passing through?
So one of the really heartwarming things about this was seeing Greeks step up and the people of Lesbos just really opening their arms and their hearts to the refugees who were overwhelming their island. Remember, Greece had just been through one of the worst financial crises in modern history. People were poor. They were devastated and exhausted themselves. But still, they offered everything they could. And then, in early 2016, something happens that makes things worse.
What is that? What happens?
Well, the European Union sees a situation of dozens of thousands of asylum seekers in Greece, just as even more are continuing to arrive on Lesbos.
Well, as the refugees move North through the European Union, they’re enduring terrible conditions and resistance.
Germany has just registered its one millionth refugee. [CROWD CHANTING] And these people want to send them home.
Germany, which had opened its doors, now appears to be closing them.
And Germany, as well as other countries, they don’t want to take more people in. So they start to close their borders. And collectively, they’re looking for a way to just lessen the flow of refugees and asylum seekers into Europe. And what they do is they strike a deal with a country that these people are arriving through, which is Turkey.
It’s a deal that will affect the lives of hundreds of thousands of stranded refugees and migrants, a game changer in a crisis that’s shaken the very foundations of the European Union.
Under the plan, starting at midnight on Sunday, all migrants who reach Greece will be sent back to Turkey if their asylum claim is rejected.
In return, Turkey gets political and financial rewards.
Basically, what it is is that Europe hands a few billion dollars to Turkey to help them fund facilities and services for the more than three million refugees they’re hosting, to stay there instead of coming to Greece and moving on into Europe. And Turkey starts to slow down this flow of migrants into Greece. But it doesn’t entirely stop. People still do cross over to Greece and end up in Moria. So they’re just stuck. And by the beginning of 2020, it already looks like something is going to go terribly wrong.
President Erdogan says the E.U.‘s aid has been slow to come. But Angela Merkel says more than three billion euros have been paid out. And she expects Erdogan to uphold the deal.
Tensions between Greece and Turkey and the European Union and Turkey begin rising. And Turkey, at the very end of February 2020, says we’ve had enough. We’re opening our borders. If you’re a refugee, if you’re a migrant, please go to Europe. Our doors are wide open.
And not only that, but it actually helps people get to the border with Greece. It buses thousands of people from Istanbul and other parts of the country into Greece. And the people on Lesbos are looking at this situation unfolding. And they’re thinking, Turkey is going to start releasing boats full of more asylum seekers who will come here. And our island is already overwhelmed. By the time I visited Lesbos in March this year, the camp had swelled to more than 20,000 people.
And how are things for the migrants in the camp? I mean, that sounds like an absolutely chaotic, difficult combination of forces that these migrants are dealing with on the island.
Well, of course, they’re extremely frustrated and living in these squalid conditions. But they don’t realize it’s actually about to get worse. Because Covid hits. The first case of Covid-19 is detected in Moria. And in response, the Greek authorities put the whole camp on lockdown. And that sets off a lot of anger and a lot of fear in an already really tense environment. And then it all comes to a head. A small group of migrants set fire to the camp. And everything burns to the ground.
What is the situation in Lesbos tonight?
It’s very, very, very, very, very, very difficult. They see the smoke. The situation is very bad.
A massive fire has almost completely destroyed Greece’s largest refugee camp on the island of Lesbos.
Matina, what happened with this fire?
It was scenes of complete chaos.
The fire start to come on this side. Look, even on the floor. There is little fire. Ah! Ah! Come back!
Of course, flames engulfing this really combustible set of materials — you know, you have tarpaulin, gas canisters at nearly every tent used for cooking and sometimes heating. And these thousands of people just grabbing everything they could and running out of the camp.
And it went on for two nights as the first big blaze on the first night burned down the majority of the camp, and then additional fires the second night finished it.
And what caused this fire?
Based on testimonies, both from Greek officials but also other asylum seekers and aid workers, what happened was that a small group of irate, angry asylum seekers who were being asked to quarantine themselves because members of their family had tested positive for Covid, they started rioting. And according to these witnesses, this is how the fire started.
And why would this group of migrants set fire to their own camp?
People were just extremely upset. Not only about the overall poor conditions of the camp, but because they felt that Covid was being used to hurt them even more. The authorities had tried to prepare some plans for a Covid response at the camp. But at the end, not much seemed to really be there.
So when the outbreak started growing in the camp, and 35 people were tested positive for Covid, and many more people were told they have to quarantine, not in an isolation clinics, but in some container, people were very angry. And so after the fire has decimated Moria, I go to Lesbos to see what’s happened.
So we’ve just arrived at one of the spots where asylum seekers who have been displaced by this fire have gathered.
They’re being blocked by the riot police from going further into town. There are people coughing. There are people who have clearly slept here for the last three nights and are just waiting to see where they’re going to go next.
And it was just thousands and thousands of people on the street. I remember quite immediately seeing a mother with a very small baby on the street. They had put down a few blankets that they were using as mattresses. And that’s where they had spent the night before. And that’s where they were going to spend the night after.

So a woman on a scooter just drove past and screamed, “filthy dogs” at the asylum seekers.
You’re OK? What’s your name?
My name is [INAUDIBLE].
What was the last name?
One baby, 13 months.
Uh huh. It’s a tiny little girl who’s walking very well.
Well done. Oh, you’re beautiful.
I love her shoes. Very nice shoes.
And he said to me, when the fire started I just grabbed her and took my wife and we just ran.
I see. And you just ran?
Yes, yes. Running fast, baby, my wife, running in the outside, away from area.
And what do you think will happen now?
And within 10 minutes, our tent was burned. The fire was everywhere.
We want just freedom.
I don’t want a new camp. I don’t want Moria now.
I just want freedom.
And at that point, this family, with some of their relatives and other people they knew, they had been sleeping on that road for four nights. But he tells me that he’s been in Moria for a year. And he’d actually rather stay on the streets.
What does that mean when he says he wants to sleep on the street? Why would he want that?
The Greek authorities had been feverishly putting together a temporary tented shelter for these people so they wouldn’t have to sleep on the street. But people were so suspicious, so angry, so traumatized by living in Moria and by the fire that they just didn’t want to go to the new camp. This man told me, I am not going to this new camp. And this was something I heard over and over again.

Very good English.
My name is Iram (ph).
— who was carrying her little brother. And then she was actually very upbeat and quite enthusiastic.
He is very, very cute. You look similar.
Very cute. So how long have you been on the island?
The Lesbos is nine months.
OK. Nine months. And were you with your family when the fire started?
Yeah. When the fire starts, we come to here.
I heard that they are making new tents for you. Do you want to go there?
No, no, no. The tent is not good. I want to go to [INAUDIBLE] and the Germany and the France.
But until you go there, should you not have somewhere to sleep where you’re covered and safe?
And she said to me, listen. I don’t want to go to this new camp. I don’t want to go to this place that the Greek government is building.
I don’t like the tents. We don’t. We don’t — we don’t go to the tents.
The tent is the problem.
And Moria, you did not like living there?
No, no, no. I don’t like. I don’t like living here. Because here is where problem is.  It’s not good. It’s very problem here.
I understand. I’m sorry. Thank you very much. Good luck.
So these refugees are desperate not to end up back in a camp. And so how is this resolved and who resolves it?
It’s not resolved, Megan. It’s not resolved. The only positive news has been that 400 unaccompanied minor refugees, children that had arrived in Greece on their own and had been living in Moria on their own without parents or other family, they have been taken to other European Union countries where, hopefully, they’ll start a life. And Germany stepped up and said they would relocate 1,500 people. That leaves around 10,000 people still in need of resettling.
But what’s also been clear, as a message from the Greek authorities, is that they’re also not in a rush to get people off Lesbos, which is what both the locals and the migrants themselves are demanding. The reason for that is they don’t want to send a message that, if a refugee camp burns down, then you get to be relocated to Germany or another country.
So there is clearly an element of management — and some say punishment — in this pace at which people are being resettled.
And Matina, you’ve covered the refugee crisis and Moria since 2015. I mean, seeing what it’s come to now, what do you think happens next? Well, part of me thinks that, if in 2015 and 2016 Europe was able to deal with more than one million refugees arriving, then surely it can humanely handle 10,000 people. This isn’t the same kind of crisis. But the cynical side of me wonders if this new tented camp on Lesbos will just become another purgatory.
There’s this Greek proverb that goes a bit like this: It says, there is nothing more permanent than what’s temporary. And I think of that when I think of Moria.
You can get selfie here?
Ah, yes. How are you? You speak some English?
Oh, very good. What’s your name?
Mahbube. What’s your family name?
Afzali. How old are you? You’re very young?
15. And you’re from Afghanistan?
I’m from Greece, actually.
I interviewed this really dynamic 15-year-old girl. And she was full of energy.
How many months have you been on the island?
She said she’d been on Lesbos for 10 months. She came from Afghanistan.
And we are coming in here because we want a future. And we are waiting because Moria, it’s building again.
You don’t want to go back to Moria?
No, I don’t want.
And what about the new tents that they’re making, do you want to go there?
No, I don’t want anymore.
She said she wanted to go to Germany to have a future, to build a life.
I want to go to Germany, French. Like, country I can make a future. I want to go. And I think Greece not lot like me.
But what struck me was that even someone this young, who clearly had so much hope for the future, in that moment in time, she was beginning to give up on that hope.
And coming in here, but I think now, I wish had not come.
You wish you had not come to Greece?
You wish you were back in Afghanistan?
She felt that after living in Moria for 10 months without school, after this fire, after everything that had happened to her, she just wasn’t sure it had been worth leaving Afghanistan in the first place. Good luck. Thanks for talking to me.
I think I feel two things about the situation I witnessed. The one is that there’s just so much human energy and potential among these people that no country will accept. And they’re stuck in some of the worst conditions. And the other thought was that precisely because no country will accept them, Moria, which was supposed to be this transitory place, will never really be a transitory place. There’s always going to be these places where hopes end rather than begin.
Well, thank you so much, Matina.
Today, and even after we have a vaccine, C.D.C. encourages all Americans to embrace the powerful tools that we have right now, to wear a mask, particularly when they’re in public.
During a Senate hearing on Wednesday, the Director of the C.D.C., Robert Redfield, told lawmakers that wearing masks is the single best way to slow and potentially even stop the spread of the coronavirus.
I might even go so far as to say that this face mask is more guaranteed to protect me against Covid than when I take a Covid vaccine. Because the immunogenicity may be 70 percent. And if I don’t get an immune response, the vaccine is not going to protect me. This face mask will.
At first, when Europe was more tolerant of migrants, people tended to pass through the camp quickly. But in 2016, Europe changed tack, blocking the onward movement of migrants to countries like Germany and leaving thousands stranded in squalid Greek camps like Moria, which soon became overcrowded.
Since then, Moria has been considered an emblem of Europe’s hardening approach to migrants in the aftermath of the 2015 crisis.
Through the European Union, other European countries provided Greece with money to care for its refugee population. But European leaders refused to allow many of them to leave Greek camps for sanctuary elsewhere in Europe.
Stuck in Moria, migrants lined up for hours for food that was often moldy. And they became enmeshed in what for many of them seemed an interminably complex asylum application process, leading to what some doctors deemed a mental health crisis at the camp.
The situation has been no better in other camps on nearby Greek islands. Across the Greek islands before the fire, more than 23,000 people were crammed into camps built for just 6,000, according to recent statistics compiled by aid groups.
“E.U. member states need to have a serious discussion about reducing numbers on the island, and alleviate the pressure on Greece, because Greece cannot deal with this alone,” Ms. Cossé said.
Offers of support began on Wednesday, with the European Commission saying it would immediately help relocate the 400 unaccompanied minors to mainland Greece and onward to new homes in E.U. member states. These children are the last of 1,200 that the bloc has been helping place in other countries.
Ylva Johansson, the European commissioner for migration, said that the commission was also paying for a boat that was on its way to Lesbos on Wednesday afternoon and would serve as a makeshift hotel for the most vulnerable.
She also said that, despite recent efforts to improve the overwhelmed camp, conditions had remained very poor. Thousands of people were transferred off the island as the pandemic began, reducing numbers from more than 20,000 to 12,000, though it remained vastly overstretched.
Reporting was contributed by Niki Kitsantonis and Iliana Magra from Athens, Matina Stevis-Gridneff from Brussels, and Melissa Eddy from Berlin.