Music|A Violinist Lost His Seat and His Job. He Blames China.
A Violinist Lost His Seat and His Job. He Blames China.
In a lawsuit filed in New Jersey, a former member of the well-known Shanghai Quartet said he had been dumped after a remark he made on social media was misinterpreted as an ethnic slur.
Yi-Wen Jiang, a violinist who was, until recently, billed as a member of the Shanghai Quartet, an internationally known chamber group with roots in China, says he didn’t give the pig emoji a second thought.
Responding to a post on social media about Chinese-American relations a few months ago, he typed in the image of the smiley pig face — “the cute one,” he said — and went about his day. But his posting soon caused an outcry and he was called a bigot for what his critics said was his effort to deride the Chinese people as pigs.
Within days, Mr. Jiang had lost his job and, he said, his reputation.
Now Mr. Jiang, who has been a U.S. citizen for over two decades, has brought a lawsuit in New Jersey Superior Court, contending his offhand remark on social media was purposely distorted by those who object to his longstanding criticism of the Chinese government.
He is suing not only his former partners in the quartet, who his suit says unfairly dumped him once he became a subject of scorn, but also a college in New Jersey, where he lives and where he lost his artist-in-residence post.
According to Mr. Jiang’s lawsuit, and interviews, the dispute started when he commented on March 7 on the Chinese social media app WeChat, replying to a friend who had posted a link to a video about American-Chinese relations. When his friend suggested the video was important viewing, Mr. Jiang said he replied in Mandarin, intending to point out that people within China’s wall — its tech firewall — couldn’t see it.
He intended, he said in a phone interview, to highlight how trapped Chinese citizens are when an oppressive government controls the flow of information.
Within his tight-knit classical music community, Mr. Jiang said he was known as an unabashed critic of the Chinese Communist Party, which, he argues in his lawsuit, seized upon the emoji to cause commotion.
Screenshots of his messages were shared widely in China. In the local news media and on Chinese social networks, Mr. Jiang was accused of racism — the emoji was tantamount to calling Chinese people pigs, according to Chinese media. “Jiang made xenophobic and racist comments against the Chinese people, referring to them as ‘pigs’ when the government and people have been making great efforts to battle the Covid-19 outbreak,” read a story in China Daily.
Within days, the Tianjin Juilliard School in China, the first foreign outpost of the New York performing arts college, announced it was firing him from a faculty post set to start this fall. The other members of the quartet were kept on. Mr. Jiang said he told his quartet colleagues that he had no problem leaving the Tianjin engagement, given the controversy. But, his lawsuit says, the Shanghai Quartet then posted on its website that it had accepted his resignation.
Mr. Jiang said he had never resigned. His lawsuit accuses the other members of working with the Chinese Communist Party in orchestrating “a malicious campaign to defame and destroy” his personal and professional reputation, though it does not detail the basis for that claim.
Mr. Jiang’s suit seeks financial damages from the quartet, which include, it says, his share of a federal stimulus payment it received. The suit also accuses Montclair State University, where the members of the quartet have been artists in residence since 2002, of unlawful termination. Mr. Jiang said the university had rescinded his position and benefits because of the fallout.
A spokesman for Montclair State said that its artist-in-residence roles for the Shanghai Quartet were determined by membership in the group, and that, after learning Mr. Jiang was no longer part of the quartet, it had offered him a job as an adjunct instructor. Mr. Jiang said this is a step down from his previous role there, which included health insurance and other benefits.
The quartet was formed in 1983, by the brothers Weigang Li (violin) and Honggang Li (viola). Mr. Jiang joined in 1994 and Nicholas Tzavaras, the cellist, in 2000. They have released dozens of albums; among the most popular is “ChinaSong,” Mr. Jiang’s arrangements of Chinese folk music for strings.
After his WeChat comments became public, Mr. Jiang said he began receiving threatening messages. “Someone made a video, a TikTok, burning my concert picture,” he said. Others, he said, were more violent. “I was scared,” he said, in his first interview since his messages went viral in March.
He said that, urged on by friends and family — and fearing repercussions for his father, who is 84 and a music teacher in Beijing — he had quickly offered an apology in the Chinese news media.
But after lying low for months, Mr. Jiang said he decided to step forward with his account and his lawsuit in an effort to correct the record and regain his career.
Amy Qin and Amy Chang Chien contributed reporting from Taipei, Taiwan, and Martin Tsai from New York.