DealBook|Who’s the Next Woman to Take Over on Wall Street?
Who’s the Next Woman to Take Over on Wall Street?
Want this delivered to your inbox each day? Sign up here.
Marianne Lake: A two-decade veteran of JPMorgan Chase, she now heads the firm’s enormous consumer-lending business. She was previously C.F.O., and after an executive shake-up last year has been considered a top contender to succeed Jamie Dimon.
Jennifer Piepszak: She succeeded Ms. Lake as JPMorgan’s C.F.O. last year as part of the executive reshuffle. Previously, the 25-year veteran of the firm ran Chase’s credit-card business. Like Ms. Lake, she is seen as a leading candidate to take over from Mr. Dimon — though her boss hasn’t indicated that he will step down anytime soon.
Cathy Bessant: She is currently Bank of America’s chief operating and technology officer, and a repeat winner of American Banker’s Most Powerful Woman in Banking award. Ms. Bessant is seen as a top candidate to succeed her boss, Brian Moynihan.
Thasunda Duckett: She leads Chase’s consumer banking and has become one of the company’s most prominent faces — she was appointed to Nike’s board last year — and is one of Wall Street’s top Black executives.
Susan Huang: A co-head of Morgan Stanley’s investment banking business since 2018, Ms. Huang was one of the first women to run a big Wall Street investment banking division. She previously led the company’s U.S. mergers team.
Dina Powell McCormick: One of the Goldman Sachs’s most visible executives, she has also served in the George W. Bush and Trump White Houses. She’s currently responsible for winning business from sovereign clients.
Ruth Porat: Formerly the C.F.O. at Morgan Stanley from 2010 to 2015, she’s currently the finance chief at Alphabet, the parent company of Google. She may not want to return to Wall Street — but would she, if given the right offer?
Sarah Friar: As the C.E.O. of the social network Nextdoor, she may not be the most obvious candidate to take over a big bank. But Ms. Friar was previously the highly regarded C.F.O. of Square, where she led the payments company’s I.P.O. in 2015, and she sits on Walmart’s board. She spent more than a decade at Goldman earlier in her career.
Wall Street has questions about the timing of Ms. Fraser’s promotion. Though she had been seen as Citi’s next C.E.O. for months, and has won praise for her leadership, Ms. Fraser’s promotion may have come sooner than expected because of stumbles by her current boss, Mike Corbat, CNBC’s Hugh Son reports. Among them: Citi’s languishing stock price and its mistaken $900 million payout to creditors of Revlon, which raised questions about the bank’s internal controls.
• But Citi officials defended Mr. Corbat’s tenure and said his retirement next year had been in the works for some time. “Announcing his plans now allows ample time for a smooth C.E.O. transition, which was important to Mike given that he did not benefit from one,” a spokeswoman told CNBC, alluding to the sudden resignation of Mr. Corbat’s predecessor, Vikram Pandit.
Hopes for a new federal coronavirus stimulus before Election Day are fading. Senate Republicans’ $500 billion proposal for additional aid — less than what they had offered earlier — failed in a vote yesterday along mostly party lines. As the two sides dig in for the election campaign, the fragile economic recovery looks as if it will have to fend for itself.
JPMorgan Chase tells traders to return to the office. Executives told senior members of the bank’s sales and trading team to come back by Sept. 21, one of the most aggressive return-to-the-office plans by a major bank thus far. It’s part of a growing push by companies and government officials to bring workers back to offices.
Customers can’t get enough of Peloton. The at-home fitness company said that sales in its latest quarter were up 172 percent versus the same period last year, as new customers bought equipment and existing ones put in a lot more workouts during lockdowns. Peloton’s C.E.O., John Foley, told analysts that strong demand for the company’s exercise bikes means he expects order delays until June.
Rio Tinto’s C.E.O. steps down amid a controversy over the destruction of sacred sites. Jean-Sébastien Jacques and two other executives will resign after shareholders revolted over the mining giant’s willful destruction of prehistoric rock structures venerated by Australian Indigenous groups.
Has business left Milton Friedman behind?
This week, we have been previewing our special project with The New York Times Magazine to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Milton Friedman’s seminal essay, “The Social Responsibility of Business Is to Increase Its Profits.” Check out the magazine in print this Sunday to see the finished product, which features a host of executives, political leaders and Nobel Prize winners weighing in on the legacy of the so-called Friedman Doctrine. And also watch your inboxes for a special edition of DealBook on the same day.
Do we need a “truth and reconciliation commission” for capitalism? The commission, composed of institutional investors and business leaders, would reflect on the issues that companies now say they champion: social injustice, climate change and the minimum wage, among others. “Could we now reflect on what we did not care about before?” Mr. Strine asked.
More than 150 C.E.O.s have warned Mayor Bill de Blasio in a public letter that he needs to address crime and other quality-of-life issues in New York City, or risk endangering its economic recovery as they try to bring workers back to the office. It is a watershed moment in the tension between business leaders and Mr. de Blasio, who have never been particularly close.
“There is widespread anxiety over public safety, cleanliness and other quality of life issues that are contributing to deteriorating conditions in commercial districts and neighborhoods across the five boroughs,” the executives leaders wrote in the letter, organized by the Partnership for New York City, a business group.
• Among those who signed the letter are Albert Bourla of Pfizer; Rodge Cohen of Sullivan & Cromwell; Adena Friedman of Nasdaq; James Gorman of Morgan Stanley; Henry Kravis of KKR; Debbie Perelman of Revlon; Steven Roth of Vornado; Steve Schwarzman of Blackstone; Adam Silver of the N.B.A.; and David Solomon of Goldman Sachs.
