After a distinguished academic career, he brought his love of baseball to a position that he considered a dream job — but that was eliminated five years later.
Gene Budig, the soft-spoken former chancellor of the University of Kansas who in 1994 became the final president of baseball’s American League, died on Tuesday at his home in Charleston, S.C. He was 81.
His wife, Gretchen Budig, said the cause was complications of fatty liver disease.
Dr. Budig (pronounced BYOO-dig) did not expect to be the last to hold his position (nor did Leonard Coleman Jr., his National League counterpart). The job, which included supervising umpires, disciplining players and owners, and arranging schedules, was created in 1901 when Ban Johnson founded the American League and became its first president.
But in 1999, five years after Dr. Budig’s appointment, Major League Baseball owners voted to eliminate the league president positions and fold their functions under Commissioner Bud Selig. That left Dr. Budig and Mr. Coleman jobless.
Dr. Budig, a Yankees fan since childhood, was disappointed.
“He loved that job — it was his dream job,” his daughter Kathryn Budig said in an email.
Championing diversity, Dr. Budig hired Larry Doby, the first Black player in the American League, as his special assistant in 1995.
Dr. Budig took his disciplinary duties seriously. In 1998, he imposed a five-game suspension on Mike Stanton, a relief pitcher for the Yankees, for hitting Eric Davis of the Baltimore Orioles with a pitch. George M. Steinbrenner, the Yankees’ owner, responded angrily.
Dr. Budig, who was known for his reserve, did not reciprocate with similar thunder. Instead, he asked someone at the athletic department at Kansas to send him the largest jockstrap the department had. He autographed it and shipped it to Mr. Steinbrenner.
“Gene always fought his adversaries with a subtle wit,” Mr. Coleman said in an interview.
Gene Arthur Budig was born on May 25, 1939, in Lincoln, Neb., and raised in McCook, in the western part of the state. His birth parents gave him up to an orphanage, and he was adopted by Arthur Budig, an auto mechanic, and Angela (Schaff) Budig, a nurse who worked at the hospital where Gene was born.
Gene never tried out for Mr. Veeck, with whom he later became friends. But he played for his high school team and at the University of Texas, Austin, during his only semester there. He graduated from the University of Nebraska, Lincoln, in 1962 with a bachelor’s degree in journalism and remained there to earn a master’s in English and a doctorate in education.
At Nebraska he was assistant vice chancellor and then assistant vice president before leaving for Illinois State University in 1972 to be vice president, dean and professor of educational administration. He was named president the next year.
Dr. Budig was subsequently president of West Virginia University, appointed in 1977, before joing Kansas as chancellor four years later, remaining there until 1994. While there he helped secure an $18 million state grant to rebuild Hoch Auditorium, which had burned down in 1991. It was renamed Budig Hall in 1997. And he approved the hiring of two high-profile men’s basketball coaches: Larry Brown in 1983 and Roy Williams in 1988.
By 1994, Dr. Budig had become known in baseball circles as a member of the board of the Kansas City Royals. He was chosen that year to replace Dr. Bobby Brown, a former Yankees infielder, as American League president. He followed another academic in baseball’s hierarchy, A. Bartlett Giamatti, who had left the presidency of Yale to become the National League president in 1986 and was named baseball commissioner three years later.
After the league presidencies were eliminated in 1999, Dr. Budig worked briefly as an adviser to Mr. Selig; taught a course, “The Business of Sport and the Public Trust,” at Princeton University; and served on the advisory board of the Pinstripe Bowl, a postseason college football game played at Yankee Stadium.
In 2007, after moving to South Carolina, he acquired a large minority stake in the Charleston RiverDogs, a low-level minor-league affiliate of the Yankees.
In addition to his wife, Gretchen (Van Bloom) Budig, whom he married in 1963, and his daughter Kathryn, Dr. Budig is survived by another daughter, Mary Frances Budig; a son, Christopher; a sister, Mary Ann Myers; a brother, Richard; and five grandchildren.
When Dr. Budig left Kansas to run the American League, there were some doubts about his decision. The Kansas City Star criticized him for leaving serious work to manage athletes. And on his third day as league president, Mr. Steinbrenner told him that he was overqualified.
