As a scholar, Mr. Valderrama put a new focus on the plight of Indigenous people; as mayor of Cusco, he led the response to Covid-19, which killed him.
Before becoming the mayor of Cusco and its surroundings, an area of more than 1.2 million people in Peru and the historic capital of the Incan empire, Ricardo Valderrama had spent four decades studying Indigenous life in the Peruvian Andes.
He recorded love songs in ancient villages and profiled bandits in the highlands. He wrote dozens of books and articles, on everything from peasant uprisings to the collective trauma of colonization.
But it was his first book — published in 1977 and written, like nearly all his work, with his wife, the anthropologist Carmen Escalante — that became an instant classic of Andean literature.
“Gregorio Condori Mamani: An Autobiography,” published in seven editions and translated into at least nine languages, tells the story of a Quechua-speaking laborer whom Mr. Valderrama had befriended in Cusco. It follows him from his experiences as an orphan forced to wander the Andes through his stints as a soldier, prisoner, shepherd and factory worker. A shorter section recounts the life of his wife, a fellow migrant from the highlands who lived with him in a shack on the outskirts of Cusco.
The book was a milestone in Peruvian anthropology, said César Aguilar, an anthropologist at Peru’s National University of San Marcos in Lima, because it broke with the field’s focus on Indigenous people as a means of understanding the rise of Incan civilization. Mr. Valderrama and Mrs. Escalante, by contrast, considered them on their own terms in the present, providing rare, firsthand accounts rich in cultural and historical detail of people who occupied the bottom rung of Andean society.
Mr. Valderrama found and told important stories from the Andes throughout his scholarly career, during which he experimented in film and photography. He turned to politics in 2006, when he ran for the City Council to promote culture and the arts, Mrs. Escalante said.
Mr. Valderrama died on Aug. 30 at a hospital in Cusco. He was 75. Mrs. Escalante said the cause was Covid-19, which had been surging in Peru’s southern Andes.
Along with his wife, Mr. Valderrama is survived by three children, Gonzalo, Julian and Carmen Valderrama; and five grandchildren.
He had been in office as mayor only since December; his predecessor had been suspended over a fraud conviction, and Mr. Valderrama was in line to succeed him. He spent most of his time in office leading the province’s response to the new coronavirus, visiting markets to implement social distancing measures and overseeing the distribution of aid packages for poor residents.
A 25-year-old former councilwoman, Romi Infantas, replaced him.
Mr. Valderrama was born on April 3, 1945, in the Cusco region to Bonifacia Fernandez and Roberto Valderrama. His father worked as a hydroelectric technician and later a bank teller. Both his parents were Indigenous Quechua speakers.
Raised in a middle-class family, Mr. Valderrama received a bachelor’s degree from the National University of St. Anthony the Abbot in Cusco in 1976 and became a professor there in 1990. He learned Quechua from his grandmother, Mrs. Escalante said, and went on to speak it better than his eight siblings.
Mr. Valderrama started dating Mrs. Escalante, a childhood acquaintance from San Jeronimo, while he was a university student; he wooed her with books by feminist writers. They helped lead a generation of young anthropology students in shifting the field’s focus to the pressing issues facing millions of Indigenous people, Mr. Aguilar said.
