Health|Trump Allies Say the Virus Has Almost Run Its Course. ‘Nonsense,’ Experts Say.
The C.D.C. and leading experts have concluded, using different scientific methods, that as many as 90 percent of Americans are still vulnerable to infection.
In April, in an opinion piece for The Hill that endorsed letting the virus circulate, Dr. Atlas cited the conventional wisdom that herd immunity requires that about 60 percent of people have antibodies. But last week he said on “The Ingraham Angle” that “most of the immunity for this virus is felt to be due to T-cell immunity” and speculated that such immunity was why children rarely became dangerously ill and why Asian countries did well against the virus.
The calculations that 85 to 90 percent of all Americans are vulnerable come from numerous sources.
On Friday, the C.D.C., citing still-unreleased data from blood samples collected at commercial laboratories across the country this summer, said that less than 10 percent of samples contained antibodies to the virus.
Also on Friday, in a study published in The Lancet, Stanford University scientists examined 28,500 blood samples from dialysis centers in 46 states and found antibodies in just over 9 percent.
And the epidemic-modeling teams, at the request of the Times, used their models to calculate what percentage of the country is infected; the models were based not on blood sampling but on testing and death data from all 50 states.
Dr. Murray’s institute estimated that 29 million Americans, or 9 percent of the population, have had the virus. The Prevention Policy Modeling Lab at Harvard’s T.H. Chan School of Public Health estimated the figure at 41 million, or 12.5 percent.
Michael T. Osterholm, director of the University of Minnesota’s Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy, said his team believed it was 10 to 12 percent. The Covid-19 Projections website consulted by Resolve to Save Lives, Dr. Frieden’s health advocacy initiative, calculated it at 16 percent.
Each model “has its warts” because they use slightly different assumptions about fatality rates and test accuracy, said Nicolas A. Menzies, a collaborator at the Harvard modeling lab. But all reach similar conclusions: Although some parts of the country were heavily infected in the spring — more than 20 percent of residents of the New York metropolitan area are believed to be immune, for example — the average across the country is far lower.
More than 200,000 Americans have already died, and models estimate that if people return to old habits, such as gathering indoors without masks, more than 300,000 and possibly 400,000 could die before a vaccine is widely available.
The chief proponents of the idea that herd immunity is somehow close at hand are American and European medical professionals who oppose lockdowns. They contend that most people in the world are immune to the virus thanks to “T-cell immunity” derived from having contracted common colds that were caused by the four relatively benign coronaviruses that have circulated for years.
But this theory is unfounded. Helper T-cells are white blood cells that, once “primed” by an initial infection, can linger in the tissues for decades until they meet the same virus again and destroy it, by triggering the production of antibodies and by summoning other virus-killers.
The immunity conferred by a common cold coronavirus appears to last a year or two, immunologists say, and then a person can catch the same cold again. Antibodies against it fade away; primed T-cells remain.
Primed T-cells may lower the odds of dying from the new, dangerous coronavirus, Dr. Crotty said, but that has not been proven. There is no evidence that they protect against becoming infected with it.
The experts who promote the theory that primed T-cells even stop infections typically are not immunologists. Dr. Atlas, a radiologist, has argued on Fox News since July that “people have immunity, even people that didn’t get the infection.” Dr. James Todaro, an ophthalmologist and, like Dr. Atlas, an early advocate of hydroxychloroquine, has echoed that idea. In Britain, a leading proponent of the theory is Dr. Senetra Gupta, a theoretical epidemiologist at Oxford University.
Possibly the most detailed version of the unfounded theory was made in a 37-minute video posted to YouTube on Sept. 8 by Ivor Cummins; it has received 1.4 million views.
Mr. Cummins, a chemical engineer who typically posts videos about diet and heart disease, used numerous slides of cases and deaths to argue that the epidemic had “largely ended” by June in Europe and by late summer in the United States.
Dr. Murray said he was amazed at how many people had seen the video.
Cases were already rising in Europe when Mr. Cummins posted his video. He dismissed those as cases of “dead virus” found by intensive testing — a supposition that was soon proved hollow when hospitalizations, too, began to rise.
In Spain and Britain, public health officials believe that the winter wave has already begun, and have reimposed partial lockdowns.
