A charitable gift annuity is a way to ensure regular income while also leaving a donation behind, but the coronavirus is squeezing some previously solvent schools.
Many colleges and universities are struggling to reopen safely and offer in-person classes during the pandemic. At risk is not just the health and safety of their students, faculty and staff, but in many cases the financial viability of the institutions themselves if they have to go to remote learning, which could prompt students and their families to demand reductions.
Financial hardships are inevitable for all but the largest universities with multibillion-dollar endowments, and a lack of paying students could force some closings.
That raises questions for supporters who have made donations to these colleges using the most popular planned giving tool: a charitable gift annuity.
These annuities are similar to commercial annuities, with one key difference. In a typical annuity, you would invest a sum and in return receive a regular payment until your death. After that, what’s left goes to the insurance company as profit.
With charitable gift annuities, donors still receive regular annuity payments, but whatever is left over goes to the nonprofit as a gift. They have been working this way since 1843, when the American Bible Society underwrote the first such charitable annuity.
Michele Murphy, a retired lawyer in Palm Desert, Calif., who has set up charitable gift annuities at two of the University of California campuses — Los Angeles and Riverside — as well as Loyola Law School, said she was worried about their fate.
But with colleges and universities struggling during the pandemic, Ms. Murphy worries that her annuities may not provide guaranteed retirement income. “In my wildest dreams and speaking as an extremely risk-averse person, I would never have expected that the future of these schools or our C.G.A.s could be in danger because of a pandemic,” she said, using shorthand for charitable gift annuities.
With all of the things to be concerned about right now, one bit of reassurance is that experts say these annuities should be relatively safe. Few nonprofits have defaulted on their annuity obligations. Experts say that donors should remain vigilant in how they select the nonprofits that will set up these annuities, but that the risk is still low.
That trend is smaller institutions struggling financially.
The total market for charitable gift annuities is about $4.3 billion, with about 1,600 charities issuing them, according to Dr. Clontz, who wrote his doctoral dissertation on charitable gift annuities. He said the number of these annuities was larger than any other so-called split-interest charitable vehicle, an investment that provides payments for the donor now and leaves what’s left to the charity later.
In fact, charitable remainder annuity trusts, which accomplish the same thing but are often larger and more complicated to set up and give the donor more control, have a total value of about $6.4 billion, but only about 14,000 exist, compared with over 117,000 charitable gift annuities.
“The market is quite large relative to other lifetime income gifts,” Dr. Clontz said.
What ensures that the annuity payments will be made is the nonprofit itself, and more specifically the unrestricted cash and marketable investments that it has. Just as a commercial annuity is only as good as the solvency of the insurance company that created it, the same holds true with a charitable annuity and the nonprofit organization receiving the gift.
Regulations of nonprofits that offer these annuities vary by state. California, New York and New Jersey are considered the most restrictive, with California requiring nonprofits to establish trusts to hold the annuity money, said Stephanie Buckley, senior regional fiduciary manager for philanthropic services at Wells Fargo Private Bank. That trust ensures that the annuity assets are kept separate from the general assets of the nonprofit.
Most nonprofits are also guided by the American Council on Gift Annuities, which establishes ethical guidelines but also sets the rates that annuities pay. Those rates ensure that the donors will be paid an annuity stream based on actuarial calculations of their age. That rate presumes that about half of the donation will be left for the nonprofit when the donor dies.
A recent survey from Crescendo Associates, which creates software for charities, found that over 80 percent of nonprofits followed the recommended rates.
The other rate that matters is the investment return; the recession has driven those rates down. That could be bad for donors expecting a tax deduction on what is eventually left to the nonprofit because a lower assumed rate of return means more money that needs to be paid back as an annuity and less left over at the end, said Russell James, a professor of personal financial planning at Texas Tech University.
In an examination of over 100 years of charitable gift annuities, Dr. Clontz said, only a handful of organizations defaulted on their obligations or had their annuity pools moved to different nonprofits when they ran afoul of the law. In all of these cases, the organizations were not operating as legitimate nonprofits. Instead they were selling gift annuities with false promises as a way to enrich themselves. Several were outright Ponzi schemes that offered unsupportable returns.
If anything, reputable nonprofits treat charitable gift annuities too cautiously. Joe Bull, the president-elect of the American Council on Gift Annuities and previously a gift officer at Ohio State University, said nearly all institutions that adhered to the council’s guidelines did not touch the annuity amount until the donor died.
“The annuity is backed by all the assets of the organization, and the charities don’t want to have to dip into other assets to make the payments,” Mr. Bull said. For many organizations, the gift annuities are treated like bequests that are locked in.
Consider George Washington University, which has an endowment of $1.7 billion. Charitable gift annuities constitute just 1 percent of its annual giving, and the university invests the entire amount of the annuity contract in its reserve fund, said Courtney L. Tsai, assistant vice president in the office of planned giving, development and alumni relations.
One downside is that donors don’t get to see what their gift does while they’re alive, but a gift annuity is a start or part of a bigger giving strategy.
“Many of our gift annuitants also make outright gifts during their lifetime and even create endowment funds during their lifetime,” which the remainder of the annuity can go toward, Ms. Tsai said.
Dr. Clontz put together a list of four questions to ask any nonprofit before setting up a charitable gift annuity. One, look at the institution’s charitable filings and determine how much of its assets are unrestricted; this entails excluding all the restricted endowment funds but also the value of buildings and equipment.
Two, check that the institution is part of the American Council on Gift Annuities — none of the institutions that turned out to be scams were, he said. Three, make sure the institution is not engaged in any large-scale, active litigation that could result in its assets being frozen to pay out a judgment.
And last, do not create an annuity with an organization that offers commissions to other organizations that refer annuity business to it.
For those still wary of colleges closing during the pandemic, Ms. Buckley of Wells Fargo said many of the smaller ones most at risk might not have charitable gift annuity programs, given the complexity of setting up and managing them.
