The joint statement by competitors was seen as an effort to restore public trust as President Trump has pushed for a vaccine before the presidential election.
Nine pharmaceutical companies issued a joint pledge on Tuesday that they would “stand with science” and not put forward a vaccine until it had been thoroughly vetted for safety and efficacy.
President Trump has repeatedly claimed in recent weeks that a vaccine could be available before Election Day — Nov. 3 — heightening fears that his administration is politicizing the race to develop a vaccine and potentially undermining public trust in any vaccine approved.
Heath advisers in Britain warn of a six-month battle against the virus as cases rise.
Three of the companies that signed the pledge are testing their candidate vaccines in late-stage clinical trials in the United States: Pfizer, Moderna and AstraZeneca.
Pfizer has said repeatedly over the past week that it could apply to the F.D.A. for emergency approval as early as October. On Tuesday, its chief executive, Dr. Albert Bourla, predicted in an interview on the “Today” show on NBC that the company would have an answer about whether its vaccine worked by the end of October, but acknowledged that did not mean its vaccine would be available to the public by then.
Moderna and AstraZeneca have been less specific, saying only they hope to have a vaccine by the end of the year. Last week, Moderna’s chief executive said the company was slightly slowing its enrollment in order to include more people from groups that had been most affected by Covid-19.
Pfizer and Moderna are each close to fully enrolling the 30,000 participants in each of their trials, with some analysts predicting they will be finished within the next two weeks. AstraZeneca is further behind in its U.S. trials, having begun enrollment on Aug. 31.
Drug companies have had to carefully navigate the political landscape. A successful vaccine could help restore the industry’s battered image and offer an end to the pandemic. But rushing a vaccine to market that winds up causing serious side effects — or simply does not work — could do catastrophic damage to their reputations.
The other six companies that signed the pledge were BioNTech, which is developing the vaccine in partnership with Pfizer, GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson & Johnson, Merck, Novavax and Sanofi.