Corrections that appeared in print on Wednesday, Sept. 16, 2020.
Charts with an article on Monday about endorsements of President Trump from New York City police unions misrepresented the percentage of police union leaders with a political affiliation other than Democratic or Republican. The length and labeling of the bar incorrectly indicated that the percentage was more than 5. A separate chart incorrectly indicated that the percentage of white police officers was larger than the 47 percent that it was labeled.
An article on Monday about Israel’s second lockdown misstated the distance that citizens are allowed to stray from their homes. It is 500 meters, not 500 yards.
An article on Tuesday about an Israeli settler who firebombed a Palestinian family described incorrectly the findings of a December report by a human rights group, Yesh Din, about investigations of crimes by Israeli civilians against Palestinians or their property in the West Bank. The group reported that only 8 percent of 1,252 cases of violence, property crime, seizure of Palestinian land and other offenses that it monitored between 2005 and 2019 had resulted in indictments. It did not report that only 8 percent of violent crimes — which the group said amounted to 36 percent of all the cases it monitored — had led to indictments.
An article on Sunday about SoftBank’s potential sale of the chip designer Arm to Nvidia referred incorrectly to the difference in the current valuation of Nvidia compared with that of Arm in 2016. Nvidia’s valuation is about 12 times bigger than Arm’s, not 260 times.
An article on Monday about a scandal that led to a fallout in The Intercept’s newsroom described incorrectly a copy of a document that an Intercept reporter sent to the National Security Agency for verification. The copy contained a crease, not markings showing where and when it had been printed. The column also referred incorrectly to demands for a more thorough investigation of The Intercept’s handling of the document. They were made privately, not publicly.
An article on Tuesday about restrictions imposed by the United States on Chinese apparel and tech imports misstated the penalties imposed against Changji Esquel Textile Co. Ltd., a subsidiary of Esquel Group. The Commerce Department placed Esquel Group on an entity list, which restricts its access to American products over accusations of forced labor. It is not subject to a withhold release order.
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about the sale of the New York Mets misstated the name of the buyer, Steven Cohen’s previous hedge fund. It is SAC Capital Advisors, not S.A.C. Capital Partners.
An obituary on Monday about the actor Kevin Dobson referred incorrectly to the character he played on the prime-time soap opera “Knots Landing.” He was a lawyer, not a detective.
An obituary on Monday about Florence Howe, a founder of the Feminist Press, referred incorrectly to “The Defiant Muse,” one of the titles published by that company. It is a series of anthologies of verse by women from countries around the world, including Vietnam. It is not solely a collection of Vietnamese poems.
