Kevin Christian and Brad Wilber scare us silly.
TUESDAY PUZZLE — True story: My parents got married in 1960, shortly after the release of the horror film “Psycho,” directed by Alfred Hitchcock. With no money to spend on a honeymoon, the young couple stayed home to begin their life together.
One evening they went to see the new Hitchcock film and, after coming back from the cinema, my mother decided to take a shower.
Those of you who have seen “Psycho” know where this is going, right?
My father — ever the prankster — sneaked into the bathroom and whipped back the shower curtain, bellowing at the top of his lungs. To say that my mother hit the ceiling would be an understatement.
My father is still alive and they are still married, despite this revealing event in their relationship, but it was a long time before my mother took a shower again.
Please welcome back the constructors Kevin Christian and Brad Wilber. And lock your bathroom doors.
16A. The ARIA “Fair lady, gracious gentlemen …” is from Igor Stravinsky’s opera “The Rake’s Progress.” I think I see Mr. Wilber’s hand here. He is an opera lover.
4D. We haven’t forgotten PSY’s hit, “Gangnam Style,” already, have we?
18D. The BRIS, usually performed by a mohel (doctors can do it as well), is the Jewish ritual of circumcision.
The title of the movie, as Mr. Christian explains in his notes below, is split between two symmetrical Down entries (4D and 60D), which reflect the broken nature of NORMAN BATES’s psyche. I loved how the two parts were clued completely separately from the movie to prolong the suspense.
The fabulous ANTHONY PERKINS (34A/38A) is given a nod, although I will say the entire cast was superb. And finally, the master himself, ALFRED HITCHCOCK, is given his due at 58A.
Kevin Christian: I like horror movies, if they’re intelligent and well done. “Psycho” is a classic, so I felt it was deserving of a tribute puzzle. (It’s my second movie tribute in the New York Times Crossword; I had an “E.T.” puzzle published in 2013).
I don’t remember when I first built a version of this grid. Eight years ago, maybe. I wasn’t happy with it. Two years ago, I noticed that the 60th anniversary of the movie’s release was two years away. I decided to ask for Brad’s help fixing the crummy fill. I figured it would be six months max working with Brad (it didn’t take that long), six months for Will to get back to us (it didn’t take that long) and we’d still be one year ahead of the anniversary date.
Brad came up with the idea to split PSYCHO into PSY and CHO and place them in those two symmetrical down spots, as a nod to the split personality of the main character. That’s why I like to collaborate with people on puzzles. Two heads are better than one. I would never have come up with that on my own. Kudos to Brad.
Brad Wilber: This puzzle has been biding its time in the vaults for a while, but my memory of the project is as Kevin says: I was invited on board to help spruce up the fill and to brainstorm with him about a revealer (eventually two three-letter words instead of one six-letter word).
I didn’t know if editors would go for a puzzle about fractured mental health, but on the other hand, it’s not every day that an iconic movie quote and associated names fit so neatly into a grid. Kevin had packed it all in beautifully, just like he did for our 2015 Dr. Seuss puzzle. I think I’ve seen “Psycho” just once; if I rewatch a Hitchcock film it’s more likely to be “North by Northwest” or “Rebecca.” But I surprised myself by loving the “Bates Motel” TV series with Vera Farmiga and Freddie Highmore.
