President Trump acknowledged that an authorized vaccine for “every American” may not be distributed until next year. An Iranian official says the country has become a “red zone” as cases and deaths surge.
President Alejandro Giammattei of Guatemala said that he had tested positive for the virus, becoming at least the fourth Latin American leader to be infected.
Iran is a virus ‘red zone,’ a health minister says.
Boris Johnson, confirming that Britain is in its second wave, raises the possibility of a new lockdown.
After weeks with little data, more U.S. states begin to share information on cases in schools.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Friday reversed a recommendation that people who have had close contact with someone infected with the coronavirus did not need to get tested unless they had symptoms.
The change came after widespread criticism of the earlier guideline, as well as reporting from The New York Times that the recommendation had come from political appointees in the Trump administration and skipped the agency’s usual, rigorous scientific review.
The Times reported Thursday that the guideline was posted on the C.D.C. website despite strenuous objections from the agency’s scientists.
Public health experts welcomed the change as consistent with research showing that people without symptoms can spread the virus. Some research has suggested that they are actually most likely to transmit to others starting around a day before the onset of symptoms, when the viral load can be the highest.
Emails obtained by The Times illustrate how a top Trump health official and his science adviser tried to browbeat career officials at C.D.C. at the height of the pandemic, challenging the science behind their public statements and trying to silence agency staff members.
President Trump amended his earlier statements, saying on Friday that the distribution of a vaccine to “every American” might not be until next year. He also announced that he would release $13 billion of aid to Puerto Rico for rebuilding its electrical grid and schools.
As part of Operation Warp Speed, my administration is manufacturing all of the most promising vaccines in advance, and actually it’ll be fairly long in advance. As soon as a vaccine is approved, the administration will deliver it to the American people immediately. Distribution will begin within 24 hours after notice, and the general — I think those are the words specifically you wanted us to use — “within 24 hours,” you’re all set to go and massive amounts will be delivered. We’ll have manufactured at least 100 million vaccine doses before the end of the year, and likely much more than that. Hundreds of millions of doses will be available every month, and we expect to have enough vaccines for every American by April. Today, my administration is making the largest emergency relief award in history to rebuild Puerto Rico’s electrical grid and educational system — we’re awarding $13 billion to permanently repair and replace thousands of miles of transmission and distribution lines that should have been done many years ago. This was beyond even the storm as it was just age and a lot of the salt, the salt from that ocean is a killer for electrical stations and power generation systems. We’re also going to be bringing back very, very major amounts of medical work. You know, you think that pharmaceutical, pharmaceutical manufacturing at levels that few places had, and a lot of it has left Puerto Rico, and we’re going to bring that back.
Mr. Trump sought on Friday to recalibrate his assurances on vaccine availability, acknowledging that authorized doses might not be widely available in the United States until next spring even if distribution starts earlier.
The president had said earlier that a vaccine would be available to “the general public immediately” once it is authorized, and although he held firm on that pledge, he acknowledged that it would take perhaps months from that point to distribute vaccines to hundreds of millions of Americans.
Because of fears that Mr. Trump would interfere in the process to improve his election chances and pressure the Food and Drug Administration to approve a vaccine before it was proved safe, the chief executives of all the leading pharmaceutical companies signed a pledge two weeks ago saying they would not release any vaccines until they were sure they were safe.
Opinion polls have shown that many Americans are already hesitant about taking a vaccine that is seen to have been rushed to market by the federal government for political reasons.
Mr. Trump’s estimates of how many vaccine doses would be available this year conflicted with projections by the chief science adviser for his administration’s Operation Warp Speed effort, Moncef M. Slaoui, a former chairman of global vaccines for GlaxoSmithKline and a widely respected figure in the vaccine field. He and other leaders of Warp Speed were present at Friday’s news conference but not asked to comment.
In interviews with CNN and National Public Radio, Dr. Slaoui has said he expected only enough vaccine to immunize 20 million to 25 million people by year’s end. Enough to vaccinate all Americans would be ready by about the middle of next year, he said.
Dr. Slaoui has publicly said he would resign if there was political interference in the process of delivering a safe, effective vaccine.
Iranian health officials warned for weeks that the country would see another wave of the virus if schools reopened and religious ceremonies proceeded. But the government ignored their advice, instead allowing crowds to gather for the Shiite ceremony of Ashura, universities to resume classes and a million students to sit for an indoor college entrance exam.
In February, during the earliest weeks of the pandemic, Iran emerged as a global hot spot, but the country’s health ministers initially denied the severity of the outbreak. Officials have repeatedly resisted the harsh shutdowns and quarantines enacted by other countries to curb the spread of the virus.
President Hassan Rouhani has said that Iranians must find a way to coexist with the virus and that shutting down businesses, schools and religious ceremonies was not feasible. And from the start, power struggles between the president and the military have hampered the country’s response.
On Friday, the health ministry said 144 people had died and 3,049 had tested positive for the virus in the past 24 hours.
An infectious-disease doctor at the main coronavirus hospital in Tehran posted a video on Instagram saying his hospital’s Covid-19 emergency triage team had seen over 200 patients a day in the past week, many of them students and teachers. He warned that at this pace, the country would soon face a crisis as hospital and medical staff members become overstretched and beds unavailable for new patients.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain spoke about efforts to combat the latest wave of coronavirus cases in Europe.
Obviously we’re looking very carefully at the spread of the pandemic, as it evolves over the last few days, and there’s no question as I’ve said for several weeks now, that we could expect — that we are now seeing a second wave coming in, we’ve seen it in France, you see it in Spain, across Europe. It’s been, absolutely, I’m afraid inevitable, that we would see it in this country. So Monday we brought in the measures that we did, the “Rule of Six,” to really try to restrict what people are doing, and to bring in a new buffer just make that absolutely clear, the “Rule of Six” — six indoors, maximum, six outdoors maximum. But the crucial thing is, at the same time, to observe the basic rules on social distancing — hands, face, space. That’s what is everybody’s got to do if we’re going to continue to beat this thing. I don’t want to get into a second national lockdown at all. Last thing anybody wants. I don’t want to go into a bigger lockdown measures at all. We want to keep schools open.
Roughly 10 million people in England face new virus restrictions amid a spike in new cases. The country’s once-vaunted testing system is on the verge of collapse. And Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain is contemplating closing restaurants and pubs to corral a second surge in Europe’s worst-affected country.
Mr. Johnson is also facing rising anger over his contradictory edicts. Over the summer, he offered people a government-subsidized discount at restaurants and pubs but spoke bluntly on Friday about the virus advancing across Britain.
“There’s no question, as I’ve said for several weeks now, that we could expect and we are now seeing a second wave coming in,” Mr. Johnson said in a television interview. “I don’t think anybody wants to go into a second lockdown, but clearly when you look at what is happening, you’ve got to wonder whether we need to go further than” the new law forbidding gatherings of more than six.
“It does seem ironic,” said Jonathan Ball, a professor of molecular virology at the University of Nottingham, “after encouraging mass attendance at pubs, cafes and restaurants,” that restrictions on those activities were being considered.
The R number, a measure of how many people on average a single patient will infect, rose to between 1.1 and 1.4, the government said on Friday. Any number over 1 is a worrisome indication that the epidemic is growing.
In the week ending Sept. 10, there were roughly 6,000 new daily cases outside hospitals and nursing homes in England, the government’s official statistics authority estimated, nearly a doubling from the week before.
President Alejandro Giammattei of Guatemala said Friday that he had tested positive for the virus, becoming at least the fourth Latin American leader to be infected during the pandemic. In a video address, the president said he was in stable condition and continuing to work. More than 3,000 people have died from the virus in Guatemala. The country’s pandemic response has been hindered by widespread poverty, proximity to hard-hit Mexico and the Trump administration’s decision to continue deporting Guatemalan migrants, despite the high positivity rates among the returnees.
Thousands of Hasidic pilgrims who set out to celebrate the Jewish New Year at the grave in Ukraine of a revered rabbi started heading home on Friday, after being prevented from entering from Belarus due to virus travel restrictions.
New Zealand recorded no new cases of the virus on Friday for the first time in more than a month, after an outbreak in Auckland in August threatened the progress against the virus. The country now has just 70 active cases. Of those, 37 are from community transmission and the rest are from overseas arrivals.
China’s CanSino Biologics and a military-backed research institute are preparing to start clinical trials of a two-dose vaccine regimen after scientists raised concerns that their current one-dose treatment failed to produce a strong enough immune response. The vaccine was promoted by Chinese state media as a front-runner in the vaccine race but struggled to get Phase 3 trials started in Canada.
A high school student in Attleboro, Mass., went to the first day of in-person classes on Monday despite testing positive days earlier. Roughly 30 people at Attleboro High School who came into contact with the student are now in quarantine. Attleboro’s mayor said that the student’s parents knew he had tested positive when they sent him to school.
Because of virus-related precautions, Baylor University has postponed its football season opener scheduled for Saturday against the University of Houston. The matchup was hastily arranged last week to fill a void after each team’s original season-opening opponent had to cancel because of unmet standards for playing during the pandemic. More than a dozen football games at the elite F.B.S. level have been canceled or postponed in the first three weeks of the season.
Northeastern University in Boston has agreed to refund most of the fall semester tuition of 11 first-year students who were dismissed earlier this month for violating the school’s virus rules by gathering in a room without masks or social distancing.
More than 1,000 students and employees at Liberty University in Lynchburg, Va., have been instructed to quarantine, according to the school’s virus dashboard.
New York City’s indoor pools will be allowed to reopen on Sept. 30, the mayor said Friday, so long as they do not exceed 33 percent capacity and follow all other city and state guidelines. Saunas, steam rooms and indoor spa pools in gym facilities remain closed.
Mask compliance has been generally high in most indoor settings in New York City, but confrontations have been playing out on buses, and dozens of drivers have been attacked after trying to enforce the rules.
A lockdown in Israel transforms celebrations for the Jewish high holidays.
As Israelis prepare to celebrate the holiest days on the Jewish calendar under a new lockdown, organizing prayer services is proving to be more of a mathematical brainteaser than a spiritual exercise.
Early voting kicks off in four U.S. states.
Early voting began in earnest Friday in four states: Virginia, South Dakota, Wyoming and Minnesota, a key Midwestern battleground that both candidates visited.
With the pandemic limiting indoor gatherings, elections administrators have urged voters to cast ballots either by mail or in person before Election Day. States have already seen record numbers of absentee ballot requests, and officials expect exceptional levels of voter participation before Nov. 3.
At a municipal voting center in northeast Minneapolis, voters waited 30 to 40 minutes in a line that snaked through an office park near Interstate 35W. The familiar “I Voted” stickers were replaced with a more precise “I Voted Early” model.
Darcy Berglund of Minneapolis said she had voted the first day that polls were open because she often travels back and forth to Iowa to care for her ailing mother.
In most places in states that allow in-person early voting, it means going to a City Hall or a local board of elections, though some larger jurisdictions will arrange for regional early vote centers. The pandemic has brought even larger early-vote locations, with some major league sports franchises opening their vacant arenas and stadiums.
People in Mississippi who have health conditions that might put them at higher risk of severe illness from the virus are not automatically permitted to vote absentee under the state’s current law, the state Supreme Court ruled on Friday.
Six members of a team directing the firefighting efforts in the Pacific Northwest went into temporary quarantine after a member of a resupply crew tested positive, the authorities said. The test result, which led to a shutdown of a command post in Washington State for about an hour on Thursday, came amid longstanding worries about the current hazards of sending thousands of firefighters into close-quarter operations.
California’s Department of Public Health has recalled more than 10 million N95 respirator masks after learning they had not cleared a national certification process, but the state’s stockpile still has “a more than sufficient supply,” according to a spokesman for the Governor’s Office of Emergency Services. More than seven million of the masks had already been distributed to frontline workers, and the recipients have been notified. The masks were manufactured by Advoque Safeguard, a company in Santa Clara.
Democrats and White House officials neared a deal on Friday on a stopgap spending bill to keep the government funded through Dec. 11, according to two people familiar with the plans, but the agreement remained unfinished amid a last-minute dispute over funding that Mr. Trump demanded for farmers.
U.S. customs officials in Boston seized a trove of some 20,400 counterfeit N95 respirator masks from Hong Kong this month, the agency said in a statement. The shipment, with an estimated value of $163,200, is the latest example of scammers attempting to profiteer from fake personal protective equipment.
Arguments ended Thursday in what may be the country’s longest-ever virtual jury trial, an asbestos-related lawsuit filed in Alameda County, Calif. Defendants complained that jurors appeared to be sleeping, working out and caring for children during the trial and that they got chummy with the plaintiff, helping him create a virtual backdrop for his video feed.
Reporting was contributed by Livia Albeck-Ripka, Peter Baker, Alexander Burns, Sarah Cahalan, Julia Carmel, Shaila Dewan, Sydney Ember, Nicholas Fandos, Farnaz Fassihi, Antonella Francini, David Gelles, Denise Grady, Ruth Graham, Katie Glueck, Christina Goldbaum, Jason Gutierrez, Rebecca Halleck, Anatoly Kurmanaev, Mike Ives, Andrea Kannapell, Isabel Kershner, Apoorva Mandavilli, Donald G. McNeil Jr., Constant Méheut, Zachary Montague, Benjamin Mueller, Kevin Roose, Anna Schaverien, David Segal, Michael D. Shear, Mitch Smith, Megan Specia, Liam Stack, Matt Stevens, Katie Thomas, Glenn Thrush, Maria Varenikova, Amber Wang, Sui-Lee Wee, Noah Weiland and Rachel Wharton.