Long lines of mourners waited outside the Supreme Court to pay their respects, but President Trump again made clear he would not honor her dying wish that filling her seat wait until the next president was chosen.
WASHINGTON — They came from far and near on a bright, warm, early autumn day, the powerful and the powerless, filled with appreciation and anxiety, to pay tribute to the daughter of a Brooklyn bookkeeper who changed the law of the land so that future generations would not have to face the obstacles that she overcame.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the young scholar spurned by every law firm in New York because of her gender before going on to become a champion of women’s rights and a liberal icon, was honored on Wednesday by a former president, by her colleagues on the Supreme Court and by long lines of everyday Americans who felt the influence of her long and storied career.
For a justice who came to enjoy her improbable late-in-life celebrity, it was a modest, unassuming farewell, but one that moved many in a country polarized by politics and suffering from a horrible pandemic. Among those who waited hours to pass below her flag-draped coffin outside the court building were many women, often with daughters or mothers, who saw in Justice Ginsburg a source of personal liberation.
But amid the mourning, there was no cease-fire in the partisan war that has erupted over her seat. While she told her granddaughter that her dying wish was to not be replaced until the next president was chosen, President Trump and his Republican allies pressed ahead to install a new justice by Election Day.
Mr. Trump, who said he planned to pay his respects to Justice Ginsburg on Thursday, made clear that he had a personal stake in rushing the confirmation process. He said it was because he expected the outcome of the election to be decided by the Supreme Court and he wanted to ensure that another justice would be there to support him in any legal disputes about the vote count.
Five of the eight current members of the court were appointed by Republican presidents, but Mr. Trump appeared concerned that one of them, Chief Justice Roberts, might side with the three remaining liberals, as he has on occasion, leaving a 4-to-4 deadlock.
The unabashed expression of self-interest came as Senate leaders in the Capitol just across the street spent much of the day lobbing charges of hypocrisy at each other, each side dredging up its selective history of outrages by the other side to justify its current posture.
Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, excoriated his Democratic counterpart, Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, for employing a parliamentary move to block committees from meeting more than two hours after the Senate convenes, which cut short a Senate Intelligence Committee briefing on election security. “We saw important Senate business hurt by what amounted to a temper tantrum,” Mr. McConnell said.
The president plans to announce his nomination at 5 p.m. Saturday, and advisers expect him to select Judge Amy Coney Barrett of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, a favorite of anti-abortion conservatives. The Senate Judiciary Committee may hold confirmation hearings as soon as Oct. 12, with a final confirmation vote the last week of October.
Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., the Democratic presidential nominee, warned that women’s rights would be undercut if Mr. Trump succeeded, alluding to fears that a more conservative court could strike down the Affordable Care Act.
But he did not echo calls seeking aggressive pushback, like packing the court, if Republicans push Mr. Trump’s nominee through. “We should go to the American people, make the case why this is a gigantic mistake and abuse of power,” Mr. Biden said instead.
Justice Ginsburg, who died at 87 on Friday, made her final return to the Supreme Court on Wednesday morning as her coffin was borne into the majestic building by police officers past dozens of former clerks lining the stairs. She was taken into the Great Hall, where her family, former clerks and fellow justices waited, all wearing black face masks and positioned at a distance from one another in keeping with pandemic guidelines.
“Today, we stand in mourning of an American hero,” said Rabbi Lauren Holtzblatt from Adas Israel Congregation in Washington, whose husband, Ari Holtzblatt, clerked for Justice Ginsburg from 2014 to 2015. She eulogized Justice Ginsburg as “a path-marking role model to women and girls of all ages” who had left a lasting legacy for generations of women.
Chief Justice Roberts, the only other speaker, recalled that Justice Ginsburg aspired to be an opera singer but pursued the law only to find herself the subject of discrimination because of her sex at law school and in the working world.
The ceremony was over in just 18 minutes and then, in deference to the pandemic, Justice Ginsburg’s coffin was taken outside where she lay in repose on the portico for the rest of day. She will lie in repose again on Thursday and then lie in state at the United States Capitol on Friday, the first woman so honored, before a private interment next week at Arlington National Cemetery.
Among the parade of politicians at the Supreme Court on Wednesday were former President Bill Clinton, who appointed Justice Ginsburg to the court in 1993, and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, as well as Vice President Mike Pence, Senator Bernie Sanders, independent of Vermont, and Mr. Schumer. The two senators are alumni of James Madison High School in Brooklyn, the justice’s alma mater.
Justice Ginsburg was that rare member of the court whose public profile transcended the normal obscurity of judges toiling in their chambers, venerated in recent years as a symbol of the women’s movement, cheekily called the Notorious R.B.G. and the subject of documentaries, books and a major motion picture.
Many of those who waited in line to pay respects did not know her but identified with her or felt she had helped change their lives.
Reporting was contributed by Luke Broadwater, Christopher Cameron, Emily Cochrane, Julie Hirschfeld Davis, Sydney Ember, Nicholas Fandos, Hailey Fuchs, Annie Karni, Aishvarya Kavi and Adam Liptak.