The former leaders of the state-run Holyoke Soldiers’ Home in Massachusetts were indicted by a state grand jury on abuse and neglect charges related to their work there.
“We believe this is the first criminal case in the country brought against those involved in nursing homes during the Covid-19 pandemic,” the state attorney general, Maura Healey, said at a news conference Friday. The men face felony charges and if convicted they could face years or even decades in prison, she added.
“We allege that the actions of these defendants during the Covid-19 outbreak at the facility put veterans at higher risk of infection and death and warrant criminal charges,” she said in a statement.
Each man was indicted on five counts for two charges; the specific charges were for caretakers who “wantonly or recklessly” permit or cause bodily injury and abuse, neglect or mistreatment of an older or disabled person. The criminal neglect charge carries a term of up to three years, and the serious bodily injury charge carries a sentence of up to 10 years for each count, Ms. Healey said.
Mr. Walsh’s lawyer, Tracy A. Miner, said in an email that he planned to plea not guilty.
A lawyer for Dr. Clinton could not immediately be reached for comment.
By then, the authorities were growing increasingly worried about the facility, which housed frail veterans of World War II and other conflicts. Within five days, eight veterans had died, others were sick with the coronavirus, and staff members were also falling ill. Flags in Holyoke, a city of 40,000 residents more than 90 miles west of Boston, were lowered to half-staff.
The office said that Mr. Walsh and Dr. Clinton, who were not taken into custody, would be arraigned in Hampden County Superior Court but did not specify a date. Dr. Clinton resigned after the release of the investigators’ report, and Mr. Walsh was placed on administrative leave on March 30.
Nursing homes, which house populations considered to be at high risk for the coronavirus, have suffered throughout the pandemic, and about 40 percent of coronavirus cases in the United States have been linked to them. At least 77,000 residents and workers have died from the virus at nursing homes and other long-term care facilities for older adults nationwide, according to a New York Times database.
The severity of outbreaks at nursing homes has drawn scrutiny for the officials who manage them in several states. In August, the Justice Department announced that it had requested Covid-19 data from states that issued orders “which may have resulted in the deaths of thousands of elderly nursing home residents."
