The political complexities of Abbottabad are inseparable from the tensions within the narrator’s family, and this fraught visit is just one of a cascade of scenes and stories that vibrate with the stressful contradictions of an American Muslim life. Like Akhtar’s dramas (“Disgraced,” “The Invisible Hand”), “Homeland Elegies” deals in ambiguities that were beyond the pale of public discourse in the years after 9/11. The many unacknowledged failures of American policy and the coarsening of popular attitudes form the matrix in which Akhtar’s stories grow. He has an unerring sense for the sore spots, the bitter truths that have emerged from this history.
At one point, the narrator identifies as part of the “Muslim world,” noting that “despite our ill usage at the hands of the American empire, the defiling of America-as-symbol enacted on that fateful Tuesday in September would only bring home anew to all the profundity of that symbol’s power.” Then, in the same paragraph, he switches, to “speak as an American” of how “the world looked to us … to uphold a holy image, or as holy as it gets in this age of enlightenment.” The paradox is that only people who see the United States as “the earthly garden, the abundant idyll” would have such a jealous compulsion to destroy it. On either side of the ideological one-way mirror, the spectacle of American exceptionalism mesmerizes.
The narrator finds himself thinking of Walt Whitman, and in particular the poet’s claims to be able to express through his “simple separate person” some kind of collective American experience. “My tongue, too, is homegrown,” Akhtar writes, “every atom of this blood formed of this soil, this air. But these multitudes will not be my own.” “Homeland Elegies” is about being denied membership to the Whitmanian crowd, a wound inflicted by 9/11 that has been painful for many American Muslims, particularly those who feel “at home,” or assumed they were, or aspired to be. The elegies of Akhtar’s title are sung for a dream of national belonging that has only receded since 2001.
The reader’s experience of the book is one of fragmentation. Akhtar tells stories that fracture and ramify and negate. Sometimes they’re comic, like the visit to an absurd Sufi ceremony led by an Austrian heiress. Sometimes they’re wrenchingly tragic. The narrator’s 9/11 tale is one of abjection: He wets himself in terror after being harassed by an Islamophobic man as he waits to give blood at St. Vincent’s Hospital in the West Village. To protect himself from further attacks, he steals a crucifix pendant from a Salvation Army store and wears it for several months, a camouflage that carries more than a tint of cultural shame. His Pakistani-American girlfriend is shocked when he confesses, years later. She could never wear a cross. “We bought flags,” she says.
The unease reaches a high pitch with the narrator’s trip to Los Angeles to take meetings after he wins the Pulitzer. A Black Republican film agent explains what he considers to be the fundamentally Jewish character of Hollywood, “founded by families from New York’s garment district,” who value “novelty, ephemerality, single use, mass production.” The agent tells the narrator that if he wants to get hired, he needs, as a Muslim, to “find ways to let them know up front that you’re not coming for them. … Israel, the rest of it.” The narrator splutters that “my favorite writers are all Jewish.” The absurdity of this, essentially a version of “Some of my best friends are Black,” is like that of a punchline in a brilliant but queasy racial farce, one written to make the audience look away, and wonder when they’ll be able to leave the theater.