The Home Edit won over Khloé Kardashian and Gwyneth Paltrow with a particular style of home organization. Now a new Netflix show will showcase its high aspirations and “low bar” ethos.
Photo illustration by Margeaux WalterCredit...
Khloé Kardashian’s color-coded hair-extension closet might sound like some kind of art installation about late-stage capitalism, but it’s actually a thing that exists in Kardashian’s Los Angeles home, and it’s exactly what it sounds like: a carpeted room dedicated entirely to 50 or so clip-in extensions arranged on uniform black hangers in order of lightest to darkest, beginning with a sheet of bleached-out, nearly white strands and culminating in a swatch of strawberry-tinged almost brown.
In January, Kardashian shared a picture of the room, with the caption “50 shades of blonde,” with her 120 million Instagram followers. The closet was an extreme example of a trend that had been apparent in celebrity and influencer culture for a while: aspirational organization, tidiness as a sort of luxury item. At the forefront of this work is the Home Edit, a Nashville-based home-organization company owned by Clea Shearer and Joanna Teplin, that was responsible for Kardashian’s closet.
Even if you’re not one of the Home Edit’s 1.6 million Instagram followers, you’ve almost certainly seen the aesthetic that it has, if not invented, at the very least codified; a look that can best be summed up as Pinterest organization porn: rows of pristine white shelves filled to no more than 75 percent capacity, pantries with paper towels artfully arranged in the shape of a pyramid and, its hallmark, items organized in order of Roygbiv (an acronym for the order of the colors as they appear in a rainbow — red-orange-yellow, etc.). If you search for the hashtag #pantry on Instagram, you’ll turn up 400,000 images, many of them kitchen closets organized in the style of the Home Edit.
This aesthetic has earned the Home Edit a roster of A-list celebrity fans like the Kardashians (Kim, Kourtney, Khloé and their mother, Kris Jenner), Reese Witherspoon and Gwyneth Paltrow — all of whom are not only clients but Home Edit evangelists. (Khloé Kardashian referred to Shearer and Teplin as her “soul mates.”) The Home Edit has a line of organization accessories available at the Container Store, a best-selling book title and another set to be published later this month. On Sept. 9, Shearer and Teplin’s show, “Get Organized With the Home Edit,” will debut on Netflix.
I first met Shearer and Teplin in February, at a cocktail bar in the Gramercy neighborhood of Manhattan connected to the hotel where they were staying. They had just come from meetings at Martha Stewart Living magazine and Instagram. It’s not hard to understand why someone would give them a TV show: Shearer and Teplin have a Penn-and-Teller chemistry, with Teplin the straight man and Shearer, who speaks about 90 percent more, the jokester. (It’s a dynamic exaggerated by their physicality. Teplin, a 5-foot-1 blonde, is a head and change shorter than the dark brunette Shearer.) When Shearer began to tell me about how she would look forward to spring break in middle school as an opportunity to clean her room, Teplin cut her off. “She’s so chill,” Teplin said, rolling her eyes. They spoke in an on-brand patois. “I’m surviving not thriving by 8 p.m. with a glass of wine,” Shearer said to me at one point.
But it wasn’t until Instagram introduced Stories, about a year into their business, that the Home Edit really gained traction. As with their aesthetic, Shearer and Teplin played with a subculture that was already popular on Instagram, one that’s come to be known as “wine mom,” in which women broadcast their not having it all together. They remember the first time they, as Teplin put it, “pulled back the curtain”: four years ago, en route to Dallas for business. “Until that point, all you saw was picture perfect, picture perfect,” Teplin said. “Let’s show people what it’s really like to fly with us, and all of our airport rituals, all of our things, and having to sit at the gate and watch people and poll people as they get off the plane” — they like to ask passengers getting off the plane they’re about to get on what they can expect — “and interview the pilot.” Immediately, they saw a “crazy” response.
Shearer, who is married to a photographer who often shoots country-music stars (it’s why they moved to Nashville), had a proximity to celebrity that has proved useful. Her friends Selma Blair and Christina Applegate helped spread the word about her business — in particular to Gwyneth Paltrow, who was their first big get, in 2017, after she enlisted Shearer and Teplin to redo the playroom at her house in East Hampton.
When I pointed out to Teplin that I never saw a free floater in any of their pictures, she replied, “Well, that’s for Instagram.” In other words, not all of the Home Edit’s output is meant literally. Teplin went on to explain that it’s enough to put that Coke Zero in the pantry with your other drinks or the fork in its rightful place in the utensil drawer; lining everything up so that it’s “picture perfect” is for their own satisfaction.
Chen was poking fun at herself, but there was truth to her comment. Instagram “has caused us to become slightly cartoonlike,” the fashion designer Tom Ford said last year. He was referring to clothes, but it applies to home décor as well. It’s not simply that you should make everything in your life beautiful so that you can document it on Instagram; now many people make things beautiful for Instagram.
When Netflix’s Riegg was describing the Home Edit’s show, this was part of his pitch: “They’re not trying to be anything other than who they are. There’s Instagram and then there’s real life.” Riegg meant that Shearer and Teplin have an obvious authenticity, which is an increasingly rare commodity in our Instagram-perfect world. But in the process, he had stumbled onto an inconsistency in the Home Edit. There’s probably no better illustration of the brand’s divergent identities than on its website, where a school-supply organization kit consisting of acrylic dividers meant to sort crayons into color order is on offer alongside a “Low Bar Lifestyle” slogan tee.
The whole reason the Home Edit’s routine about living a low-bar lifestyle resonates is because there are people on Instagram who are setting up unrealistic expectations about how perfect your life should look — a trend the Home Edit fuels. We want to buy a Low Bar Lifestyle T-shirt because there are people who keep showing off their color-coded drawers.
The experience inside the store was not unlike being at a bizarro Star Trek convention — Shearer and Teplin had created this weird little world, and many of the people there seemed fluent in its culture. (“Surviving not thriving,” one woman said as she picked up a French fizz-style cocktail.) When one woman finally got to the front of the line, she apologized for being wet from the rain and getting the authors wet in the process. Shearer shrugged it off, “That’s low-bar life!” In that moment, it was hard not to think just how nicely that low-bar life was working out for Shearer and Teplin.
