373 pp. Liveright Publishing. Paper, $15.95.
There are two kinds of prophets: One is the Moses-Jesus-Muhammad type, whom God instructs, “Go tell the people to act thusly.” The other is Abbie Mayer, whom God instructs to build a house on a mountain near an unspecified highway in Pittsburgh. Why God is interested in this particular residence we do not know. What we do know is that God said nothing to Abbie Mayer about not becoming a crooked real estate dealer.
This zany starting point of Jacob Bacharach’s new novel, “The Doorposts of Your House and on Your Gates,” is more fun than it sounds, even if the zaniness is considerably toned down from Bacharach’s first novel, the wonderfully frenetic “The Bend of the World,” which dealt in conspiracy theories, U.F.O.s and the occult (though much of it turned out to be just one character or other eating too many mushrooms). His second book deals less in the fantastical and more in the kooky and crooked.
Abbie Mayer, at the time God speaks to him, lives in New York City with his wife, Sarah, whom he is cheating on. He is an architect of some renown, particularly in the area of sustainable design, and a lot more, too, by his own telling: “I am many things: visionary, iconoclast, pathmaker. Genius, even.” Not genius enough to hide his infidelity from his wife, though, who discovers a doctor bill for an OB-GYN she doesn’t use, and, as she calculates, he shouldn’t be using either. Abbie’s mistress, we learn, is pregnant.
To fix his marriage (and find the place God showed him in his vision), Abbie suggests a fresh start: a move to Pittsburgh. It also happens that Abbie’s sister lives in Pittsburgh, where she and her business associate Phil — a Saul Goodman-esque type, or to quote Abbie, a “grand buffoon in a loud jacket” — are involved in some questionable land deals and building projects, and could use Abbie to offset the local wariness concerning the environmental impact of one of her projects. From there, the story spins out into a vertiginous mess of double-crossing real estate deals, within the span of which Abbie goes from prophet to glad-handing schemer to outright crook.
Then his son is born. Or he thinks it’s his — who really knows. The move to Pittsburgh hasn’t done much for his marriage, and even prophets, when inattentive to their wives, will suffer consequences. The tale of a prophet-cum-crafty land dealer then turns into the tale of a mad eccentric whose sad wife turns slowly alcoholic, and whose son, Isaac, raised with every comfort but for emotionally available parents, is formed in the father’s narcissistic mold — if slightly more endearingly.
Whatever his preferred prophetic expression, the question at the heart of this story is a serious one: Modern-day prophets, how are we to see them? Must they be sane? Must they be upstanding in their own lives? Or can they be mad, crooked, hubristic liars, unfaithful husbands, self-absorbed and inattentive parents and still bear urgent messages we’d do well to heed?
The narrative is told in two strands, separated in time by about two decades. The first deals with Abbie and Sarah’s arrival in Pittsburgh. The second, skillfully woven through the first, deals with Isaac as a grown-up, and the arrival of Isabel — although, as we later discover, she isn’t as new to the story as we think. This is one of Bacharach’s more playful tendencies: good old-fashioned plot twists. His greater strength, though, is his energetic prose, sure-footed and boldly effervescent. While the plot gets a bit dense at times, the author’s ear for the sidesplitting verbal tics of his quirky and deliciously offbeat characters makes this book well worth the read.