On a recent weekday, a woman in hot pink exercise wear and a matching fedora strode briskly but effortlessly down a sidewalk alongside the Grand Central Parkway in Jamaica, Queens.
The woman, Yolanda Holder, 59, an endurance racewalker known as the Walking Diva for her fashionable race outfits, has drawn attention as a first-time entrant to an unusual race held every summer in which runners circle a single block for more than seven weeks straight, 18 hours a day, breaking only between midnight and 6 a.m. to sleep.
“I’m doing it in style,” she said, as she walked the course: a half-mile loop around Thomas A. Edison Career and Technical Education High School that entrants circle more than 100 times a day.
Ms. Holder lives in Corona, Calif., but has spent much of the past decade traveling around the country entering long-distance races, whether conventional 26-mile marathons — which she has finished in less than five and a half hours — or ultramarathons of up to many times that distance.
Twice she has set Guinness Book World of World Records marks for most marathons or ultras finished by a woman in a calendar year. She finished 106 of them in 2010, then broke that record with 120 finishes in 2012.
But her biggest challenge so far is this Queens race, known as the Sri Chinmoy Self-Transcendence 3,100 Mile Race, which organizers call the longest certified foot race in the world.
There are six male and four female entrants, and all are runners except Ms. Holder. She says walking is less wearing and fatiguing than running, so she can get by with only a 15-minute nap or two, and continue logging miles until midnight to meet a daily average of about 60 miles required over the race’s 52 days to complete the 3,100 miles, well beyond the distance from New York to Los Angeles.
Ms. Holder laughed at this and repeated one of her mantras.
“I tell everyone, ‘Watch your back because I’m gaining on you,’” she said.
So far in the race, which began on June 18 and is scheduled to finish on Aug. 8, Ms. Holder has walked about 1,900 miles in in 33 days, sleeping only three and a half hours a night.
The race is organized by the followers of the Indian spiritual leader Sri Chinmoy, who died in 2007. His disciples remain devout and continue to practice his teachings of extreme physical feats of endurance and achievement as a path to spiritual enlightenment and transcendence.
Nine of this year’s 10 entrants are disciples of Mr. Chinmoy. Ms. Holder is not, but she was invited to participate because of her impressive athletic résumé, showing that she had “mastered the ability to withstand the mental and physical torture” to have a shot at completing the race, said Sahishnu Szczesiul, a race director.
Among the onlookers recently was Ashrita Furman, a disciple of Mr. Chinmoy.
“She’s not a disciple, but she has that feeling of self-transcendence,” said Mr. Furman, who is not an ultramarathoner but is rather the world’s foremost record-breaker. He holds the record for having the most Guinness World Records, having set more than 600, from pogo stick-jumping to underwater unicycling.
“She’s humble and very nice, but she’s as fierce a competitor as anybody out there,” said Mr. Babcock, laying a towel on the concrete so that Ms. Holder could lie down for a few minutes to take a short nap.
Ms. Holder, who is married with two grown children, began walking after her parents died from complications related to diabetes. She said she walked to honor them and to raise health and fitness awareness.
At age 50 she decided she would try to enter 50 marathons in 50 weeks, she said, and has completed two, or sometimes three, marathons per week.
She has continued, through heat waves and harrowing humidity, through rainstorms and various injuries, including mental stress. Bouts with dehydration, a stomach virus and numerous blisters have slowed but not stopped her. She noted that she had completed marathons on sprained ankles and with broken ribs.
On a recent day she walked past handball courts and Bengali teenagers playing cricket on the asphalt playground, and past a driver who parked his yellow cab to do some walking on the racecourse.
She said hello to some passers-by, but mostly maintained a calm concentration and a steady gait. Unlike many runners, Ms. Holder shuns headphones, opting instead for meditation and prayer while walking.
“The main thing is just believing in myself and accomplishing what I set out to do,” she said, adding that she is also inspired by her past failures.
Of roughly 540 distance races, she has failed to finish only five times, she said. She said she took the printed documentation of those disappointing results and framed them to display at home.
