WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — I am a recent convert to the whole “sharing economy” that encourages the use of apps like Uber or Airbnb, and so far it has worked out well for me. I have managed to both Airbnb in someone else’s home and Uber a ride without being murdered (my own neurotic fear), so as far as I’m concerned, I am still unbearably hip. Unless, of course, you ask my kids, who will just laugh and teleport to their next destination.
The comedian Elayne Boosler, who was just named by Rolling Stone as one of its “50 Best Stand-Up Comics of All Time,” has seen both sides of the crossword “sausage,” as she calls it. Ms. Boosler was a Wordplay guest columnist in 2013, and today she teams up with the constructor Patrick Merrell to make sure some of our favorite films are as up-to-date as possible. We’ve got you now, Ms. Boosler. You’re in the family.
Three movie titles get a modern remake: Robert DeNiro’s “Taxi Driver” becomes “UBER DRIVER,” for example. Similarly, W.C. Fields’s “The Bank Dick” becomes “The PayPal Dick.” Don’t forget to stop off at the concession stand for your movie snack at 60A.
■ 1A: I had “Top GEAR” instead of “Top CHEF” at first, but soon realized how wrong that was when I got stuck on the FLYPAPER at 4D.
■ 23A: The mnemonic EGBDF stands for “EVERY Good Boy Does Fine,” and represents the notes on the lines of the treble clef in music. And yes, some people may have learned it slightly differently.
■ 65A: “Guy with a lot of bookings is DANNO from “Hawaii 5-0,” at least in the 1968-1980 series starring Jack Lord.
■ 67A: Loved this clue, and it is so Elayne Boosler. To “Make litterproof?” sounds as if it has to do with preventing people from strewing garbage all over the place, but not today. Today, it is about SPAYing pets.
■ 8D: More animal-based wordplay. A dog leg is a break or crook in a road, but today it’s about FIREPLUGs and the ... uh ... editorials dogs might leave on them.
If baseball is a game of inches, constructing crosswords is a game of plancks. (And of course, great word. My clue would be: “Shortest pirate walk.”) The incredible specificity that goes into construction was a revelation. I thought I was concise in writing standup comedy, but you realize that crossword clues are basically a one- or two-word setup/punch line if you want them to be entertaining. What a practiced talent that takes. People think Twitter’s framework of 140 characters is too limiting; after months of writing discarded clues and answers, I now see Twitter as too much space to fill.
As with previous “Crosswords With the Stars” champion Lisa Loeb, who did a music-themed puzzle (of course!), you may be expecting a comedy-themed puzzle today. Or an animal- or pet-based puzzle to celebrate 15 years of my nonprofit animal rescue organization, Tails of Joy. As much as I twirled and spun and leapt and cha cha’d, it was not to be. I hope you still enjoy it.
Patrick Merrell: If you wanted to bottle the enthusiasm and effort Elayne put into this puzzle, you’d need a vat! Although the two of us live about as far apart as two contiguous U.S.ers can (she’s in L.A., I’m on the east coast of Florida), we were able to meet up in Orlando midway through our collaboration, after a show of hers at the Dr. Phillips Center. Her act was as brilliant as it’s ever been — smart, quick, topical, friendly, and with a good dose of local flavor thrown in.
Alas, the meeting was brief since she was jetting off to another gig soon after. The only opportunity to talk came as she worked a table in the theater lobby immediately after the show. It was to raise funds for her nonprofit animal rescue and advocacy organization, Tails of Joy.
