What Is General Relativity?
Einstein presented his general theory of relativity more than 100 years ago.
In Sobral, the weather was unusually cloudy, but a clearing in the clouds opened up only one minute before totality, the moment the moon fully eclipsed the sun. On Principe, it rained for an hour and a half on the morning of the eclipse, and Eddington took pictures through fleeting clouds, hoping that some stars would show up.
In the end, there were three sets of plates from which the deflection of starlight could be measured. How Eddington and his colleagues played them off against one another sealed the fate of Einstein’s theory.
The best-looking data had come from an Irish telescope at Sobral. The images indicated a deflection of 1.98 seconds of arc — more than Einstein had predicted.
Another Sobral telescope, known as an astrograph, also produced lots of star images, but they were blurred and out of focus, perhaps because heat from the sun had affected the telescope mirror. The images gave a value of 0.86 for the deflection, about in line with Newton’s formula, but with large uncertainties.
Finally, there was the Principe telescope, which recorded only a handful of stars, from which Eddington heroically derived a reading of 1.61 seconds of arc.
Which result should Eddington use? If he averaged all three, he would wind up in the unhappy middle ground between Newton and Einstein.
If he just depended on the best telescope, as the astronomers and historians John Earman and Clark Glymour pointed out in an influential essay in 1980, the figure of 1.98 would have cast doubt on Einstein’s theory of general relativity.
In the end, Eddington wound up throwing out the Sobral astrograph data on the grounds that it was unreliable. Both of the remaining plates “point to the full deflection 1”.75 of Einstein’s generalized relativity theory,” Dyson and his colleagues wrote in their official report.
“Dear Mother, joyous news today,” Einstein wrote when he got wind of the result.
Astronomers and historians have argued ever since about whether Eddington’s belief that he already knew the answer led him to fudge the eclipse analysis by leaving out the warped astrograph.
In 2007, however, Daniel Kennefick, an astrophysicist and historian at the University of Arkansas, concluded after a long study of the records of the eclipse expedition that it was Dyson, the astronomer royal, who had decided to exclude the results from the astrograph. Dyson was well known to be skeptical of Einstein’s new theory.
Eddington and Dyson were right. The experiment was repeated during an eclipse in 1922 and at many other eclipses over the years, always with the same Einsteinian result. With improvements in technology, today even small universities can do the requisite observations.
During the eclipse coming this month, Bobby E. Powell, a physicist at the University of West Georgia, will be redoing the experiment with his students at a site near Lexington, S.C. . His is only one of half a dozen universities that will try it. He hopes to develop a lab manual for individuals or schools that might want to do it during the next eclipse in American skies, in April 2024.
In modern times, some of the most precise measurements of light-bending have come from radio observations of distant galaxies. In 2009 Edward Fomalont, of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Charlottesville, Va., and his colleagues used a set of antennas known as the Very Long Baseline Array to obtain results that supported Einstein’s predictions to within .02 percent.
Astronomers in the meantime have learned to use the light-bending and -amplifying abilities of immense galaxies as telescopes — Einstein’s own telescope, if you like — to study exploding stars on the other side of the cosmos and to map the mysterious dark matter that pervades the universe.
In November 1919, news of Einstein’s triumph was announced to the world with all due pomp and circumstance at a joint meeting of Royal Society and the Royal Astronomical Society in London.
Presiding over the meeting, the physicist J. J. Thomson called general relativity one of the highest achievements of mankind, describing it “as a whole continent of new scientific facts.” Black holes and the Big Bang were still in the future.
Indeed, what emerged from the moon’s shadow that cloud-speckled day in May was an entirely new universe.