Hollywood is aggressively adapting material that doesn’t have a narrative or even any characters. But not all intellectual property is created equal.
A sharply handsome man in his mid-40s, Vinson has worked in Hollywood for 14 years, racking up 19 producing credits. He’s a journeyman producer who specializes in popcorn flicks; over all, his films have an average Rotten Tomatoes score of 30 (out of 100). Vinson may not win Oscars, but he knows how to get his projects into theaters. He has survived and advanced in Hollywood by quickly adapting to trends — what’s selling and what’s falling out of fashion. His filmography reads like a map of Hollywood’s shifting sands.
Vinson has produced a movie starring Pierce Brosnan as an aging master thief (‘‘After the Sunset,’’ 2004); a movie about Coast Guard swimmers with Kevin Costner (‘‘The Guardian,’’ 2006); and a psychological thriller with Jim Carrey (‘‘The Number 23,’’ 2007). He has made two movies about exorcisms, one with Laura Linney (‘‘The Exorcism of Emily Rose,’’ 2005), the other with Anthony Hopkins (‘‘The Rite,’’ 2011); a thriller about a psychic who helps the F.B.I. hunt down a serial killer, also with Hopkins (‘‘Solace,’’ 2015); and a romantic comedy with Anna Faris and Chris Evans, the guy who plays Captain America (‘‘What’s Your Number,’’ 2011). He has even made a dance-­competition movie (‘‘Battle of the Year,’’ 2013).
But at least those were stories. Vinson didn’t see how Legos could be the basis of a feature-­length film. He watched in disbelief as the movie raked in $69 million its opening weekend, grossed almost $470 million worldwide and was almost universally lauded by critics. ‘‘It was magical and fresh and really profitable,’’ he recalls. The movie was clever, telling the story of a Lego construction worker caught in a battle between good and evil, which is eventually revealed to be all in the imagination of a boy playing with his controlling father’s Lego set.
Vinson started looking for undervalued I.P. to guide his next movie. He wanted something an audience would already be familiar with, something that was culturally ubiquitous but could be made new again. He started his search in the public domain. He had succeeded with his Jules Verne and Brothers Grimm adaptations, and besides, old material like that had the advantage of being free. Nothing caught his eye.
Next he started looking around for a big-name console video game to acquire. Perhaps something in the mold of ‘‘Lara Croft: Tomb Raider’’ or the ‘‘Resident Evil’’ series, which has made well over a billion dollars at the box office. ‘‘The video-­game companies can be really hard,’’ Vinson says. ‘‘Ubisoft and Activision have their own in-house film-­development arms. A lot of the others are hard to get rights from. They feel like Hollywood can’t figure out how to make a good video-­game title. Why give it to them to have them screw it up? That can hurt game sales.’’ Not only were the companies difficult to bargain with, only a few titles even made sense for an adaptation. Vinson’s analysis revealed that megaproperties like Call of Duty and Grand Theft Auto sold tens of millions of units per installment, but after those top titles, sales dropped to levels that would make an adaptation risky.
So Vinson started looking at mobile games. A cursory investigation revealed that the very best selling mobile games didn’t move tens of millions or even a hundred million units — they could reach into the billions. He happened upon Fruit Ninja, a wildly popular series of games that, since its debut in 2010, has been downloaded well over a billion times. A million people play Fruit Ninja per day. He contacted Half­brick, the company that developed the game.
‘‘The call came completely out of left field,’’ says Sam White, Half­brick’s vice president for entertainment and licensing. The company had already been working on a TV series based on the game, but, White says, ‘‘a Hollywood film was like the holy grail.’’ Vinson found the mobile-­game developers at Half­brick to be more approachable than their console counterparts. They’re usually smaller, younger companies. They see Hollywood as a good opportunity to sell more games. And, most important, they aren’t protective of already existing characters and plotlines — generally because they don’t have any to speak of.
This environment has fostered, in some producers, a sense of desperation. When I asked Vinson if the changes his business has undergone over the past decade have inspired him to panic, he told me: ‘‘Absolutely. It’s forced me to look at everything as though it could be I.P.’’ Increasingly, that means non­narrative I.P.: stuff with big followings but no stories, or even characters, already cooked in.
‘‘The Angry Birds Movie,’’ which was based on a mobile game, was released in 2016 and took in over $349 million worldwide. The game itself consisted of flinging birds at pigs, but it at least provided its writer, Jon Vitti, with protagonists (the birds) and antagonists (the pigs). There was also Adam Sandler’s 2015 movie ‘‘Pixels,’’ a disaster story that united characters from classic 1980s arcade games. Allspark, a subsidiary of Hasbro, has scored two big successes with a pair of movies based on the Ouija board. The first installment, ‘‘Ouija,’’ cost an estimated $5 million to make but managed to earn more than $103 million in the worldwide box office; the sequel, ‘‘Ouija: Origin of Evil,’’ made $81 million on a reported $9 million budget.
Since 2008, Hasbro has been run by Brian Goldner. He founded Hasbro Studios in 2009, creating Allspark soon after. Hasbro has released five Transformers movies, with two more in the works; it has made two G.I. Joe films and has a third in development. Those toys were already made into cartoons in the 1980s, so refashioning them into live-­action movies for adults wasn’t much of a stretch. The same can’t be said for the I.P. that underlies other movies Hasbro has in development — Monopoly and Magic: The Gathering — or for those it is reported to have tried to develop: Candy Land, Hungry Hungry Hippos, Furby, Play-Doh.
If the Ouija films were successful, ‘‘Battleship’’ (2012) offers a cautionary tale about I.P. leading to narrative absurdities. Set off the coast of Hawaii, the film tells of an American Navy crew’s fight against extraterrestrial invaders. The aliens render the Navy’s radar systems useless through some sort of electromagnetic interference, forcing it to employ a grid-­based targeting method — just as in the board game.
This summer’s most prominent example of non­narrative I.P. is ‘‘The Emoji Movie,’’ a film that dramatizes the imaginary lives of emojis. The film’s director and co-­writer, Tony Leondis, told me that ‘‘The Emoji Movie’’ actually began with a quest for some other form of I.P. About two years ago, he was thinking about what his next project should be, and he asked himself: ‘‘What are the newest and hottest toys out there in the marketplace?’’ He looked down at his phone and realized they were right there in front of him: emojis. Everyone uses them.
Unlike board games, emojis don’t have rules to play with. Or mythology. They don’t even exist in the real world. So Leondis created a universe for them: The emojis live inside your phone and are on call 24/7, waiting to be sent to your screen when needed. Each has to make the same expression every time they’re summoned. He created a character, Gene, a ‘‘Meh’’ emoji who is born multi­expressional, violating the rules of the emoji universe. ‘‘The idea that each emoji has one expression only was the key to figuring out the whole story,’’ Leondis told me. ‘‘Then we asked ourselves about the world: What do the apps look like to emojis? What happens when you delete an app? And what would happen if emojis were wreaking havoc inside other apps than their own?’’ Leondis told me that production moved along at a breakneck pace — it was two years from pitch to release. A lot of studios, he told me, think ‘‘The Emoji Movie’’ has the potential to be the beginning of a multifilm franchise.
In his search to find a writer for his Fruit Ninja project, Tripp Vinson reached out to every major talent agency in Hollywood. In March 2016, he was introduced by an agent to the writing duo of J. P. Lavin and Chad Damiani. They have been in Hollywood for 15 years and have worked as partners for that entire span. They have never once had a script make it to the big screen.
Lavin and Damiani, both in their mid-40s, took very different paths to Hollywood. Lavin started as a playwright and earned an M.F.A. from Carnegie Mellon; Damiani was as an announcer for World Championship Wrestling in the 1990s. When W.C.W. was faltering, Damiani moved to Hollywood. Lavin was already there, trying to get his writing career off the ground. The two started thinking about reality-­show ideas. ‘‘ ‘Joe Millionaire’ had just come out. Only the worst ideas were selling,’’ Lavin says. ‘‘All I did was think about terrible reality-­show ideas.’’ The pair came up with a reality competition show called ‘‘Green Card.’’ The concept was simple: An ultra-­nerdy American guy is set up with beautiful contestants flown in from all over the globe, who compete for his affection. The winner receives a green card. (The State Department wouldn’t allow it.) There were other near misses for the duo in the reality field — a competition called ‘‘Jocks vs. Nerds’’ that a producer told them MTV liked so much it had considered putting the show on TV five days a week. (The show never aired.) They developed a hybrid scripted-­reality series called ‘‘Anchorwoman’’ (tag line: ‘‘Would you trust a bikini model to deliver the news?’’) that Fox canceled after its first night.
They also started writing spec scripts together. The first was titled ‘‘WASPloitation,’’ a comedy inspired by Martha Stewart’s prison sentence.  A zombie-­coal-­mining movie called ‘‘Dead Canary’’ was followed shortly afterward by ‘‘Kamikaze Love,’’ an action comedy about a down-on-his-luck bartender who falls madly in love with a Japanese woman who has been trafficked into the United States to marry a Yakuza boss. Every year, a Hollywood executive named Franklin Leonard conducts a survey of popular but unproduced screenplays called the Black List. In 2007, ‘‘Kamikaze Love’’ made the cut, receiving more mentions by studio executives than many movies that went on to be produced, including ‘‘Slumdog Millionaire,’’ ‘‘The Wrestler’’ and ‘‘The Wolf of Wall Street.’’ Sony Screen Gems bought ‘‘Kamikaze Love,’’ and in the years since, it has been passed from one Sony subsidiary to the next. Lavin and Damiani aren’t totally sure who has it now.
On the strength of that script, Lavin and Damiani started getting commissions to develop other people’s projects, a lot of them involving I.P. Brett Ratner enlisted the pair to write the adaptation to the comic-­book series ‘‘Youngblood.’’ The deal fell apart. They wrote ‘‘Max Steel,’’ based on the Mattel toy property for Paramount. The movie ended up being made, but not based on their script. Warner Brothers enlisted them to write a screenplay for another comic-­book movie called ‘‘Capeshooters.’’ They were attached to a script based on the video game Duke Nukem and another based on the 1964 kids’ book ‘‘Flat Stanley,’’ about a boy who survives being smushed pancake flat and uses his new condition for all manner of mischief.
With the story intact, Vinson, Lavin and Damiani started ironing out a pitch. They’re known around town for being good in the room. Lavin has a background in theater; Damaini does improv comedy and teaches clowning. Their presentation was 35 minutes — fast moving, full of laughs. ‘‘It felt a lot like how you develop clown work,’’ Damiani told me. ‘‘You play and improvise to keep the energy up — and register what works. I’m always looking for the hot spot — the person giving us the best energy. That might not be the big boss. It might be a junior. Keep them laughing, and it spreads.’’ They estimate that they gave 25 to 30 presentations, five of which were at different film divisions within Sony. They met with four different Chinese companies. To keep their act feeling fresh, they added seemingly improvised asides and digressions. ‘‘If it’s too polished, the execs feel like they’re at a TED Talk, and then you see the eyes go to the window,’’ Damiani says.
The paths that ‘‘Fruit Ninja’’ could take from here are practically infinite, anything from being spiked to having the Lego franchise’s wild success, which is perhaps best embodied by Bricksburg, the 15,000-­square-­foot facility in Hollywood where the producer Dan Lin was part of a team that created the entire Lego universe. It is a shrine to everything Lego — there’s a cactus made of Legos, a Lego bat signal — and to the possibilities of non­narrative I.P. This year has brought the release of ‘‘The Lego Batman Movie,’’ which will be followed by ‘‘The Lego Ninjago Movie’’ and, in 2019, by a sequel to the first film.
I visited Bricksburg earlier this year, and Lin, who is 40-­something but looks 20-­something, joined me at the end of the tour. He invited me into a secret room, tucked down a small passageway hidden by a trap door next to a water cooler, where he and his colleagues go for device-­free brainstorming. He told me about how he came up with the idea for ‘‘The Lego Movie’’ in 2009, after watching his 5-year-old son playing with the bricks — the sound effects and dialogue, the way he made those pieces zoom around the room. The company was interested, he discovered, in expanding their reach with children as they enter their teenage years, which they called, Lin said, ‘‘the dark ages.’’ Lin wanted to make something his son could watch. What resulted felt lightly subversive — the villain is named President Business — but also managed to uphold the basic tenets of the Lego brand: imagination, free play, creativity.
