President Trump posted a short video to his Twitter account on Sunday in which he is portrayed wrestling and punching a figure whose head has been replaced by the logo for CNN.
The wrestling video, which was also posted to the official @POTUS Twitter account, stirred criticism, disbelief and dumbfoundedness. Some journalists denounced its portrayal of violence as dangerous, saying it could incite attacks or threats against news media employees.
“I think it is unseemly that the president would attack journalists for doing their jobs, and encourage such anger at the media,” said Dean Baquet, the executive editor of The New York Times.
“He’s a genuine president expressing himself genuinely,” Mr. Bossert added.
A version of Mr. Trump’s video appeared last week on a Trump-dedicated page on the message board site Reddit, a popular meeting ground for some of the president’s most fervent supporters. The CNN logo is superimposed on what appears to be the head of Vince McMahon, a wrestling magnate and a friend of Mr. Trump, who in his prepresidential years often appeared as a guest on wrestling shows.
The president’s allies say that his attacks on the news media are justified, arguing that the president is merely defending himself from coverage that his supporters view as biased. Mr. Trump’s war of words with CNN is especially popular with his voter base.
Groups like the Committee to Protect Journalists, which usually focuses on countries where reporters’ freedoms are curtailed, say they are concerned that Mr. Trump’s campaign-trail rebukes of news organizations are now being issued from the pulpit of the White House.
Mr. Trump, who is spending part of the weekend at his Trump National Golf Club in Bedminster, N.J., posted the wrestling tweet just as prominent Republicans began appearing on the major Sunday news programs. On CNN, Senator Ben Sasse, a Nebraska Republican and frequent Trump critic, accused the president of “weaponizing distrust” toward the news media.
“There’s an important distinction to draw between bad stories or crappy coverage, and the right that citizens have to argue about that and complain about that,” Mr. Sasse said.
But Tom Price, the health and human services secretary, bristled when asked on the NBC program “Meet the Press” about Mr. Trump’s string of anti-media remarks.
Some White House aides said privately on Sunday that the president was being held to a double standard. They argued that Mr. Trump’s video was akin to a recent exchange on MSNBC, in which the host, Chris Matthews, was discussing Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, and jokingly praised the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini for ordering the execution of his son-in-law.
On Sunday, CNN issued its response.
In keeping with the online nature of many of Mr. Trump’s disputes, CNN also replied directly to the president on Twitter, highlighting a quotation from a recent White House briefing by his deputy press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders.
