MEXICO CITY — United Nations human rights experts called on Mexico’s government on Wednesday to establish an independent investigation into smartphone surveillance of human rights lawyers, journalists and social activists.
The hacking effort, using advanced spyware whose sale is restricted to governments, has generated a furor in Mexico. The attorney general’s office, one of the agencies that acquired the spyware, known as Pegasus, has opened an investigation.
But the Mexican government recently blocked a proposal for the country’s new anticorruption board to investigate the hacking — an inquiry that would have been more transparent than an ordinary criminal investigation.
By limiting the case to the attorney general’s office, the Mexican government is investigating itself with no outside oversight, the four United Nations experts said in a statement from Geneva.
The envoys — Michel Forst, David Kaye, Joseph A. Cannataci and Houria Es-Slami — are involved in issues that include the freedom of expression, privacy rights, involuntary disappearances and other human rights abuses.
There was no immediate response from the Mexican government to the statement. But the special prosecutor for crimes against freedom of expression, Ricardo Sánchez Pérez del Pozo, said last month that the Mexican authorities would seek technical help from outside agencies, including the F.B.I.
An investigation by The New York Times and forensic cyberanalysts first reported the details of the hacking effort last month, describing how Pegasus turned up on the cellphones of journalists and activists in 2015 and 2016.
Pegasus sends text messages to targets, encouraging them to click on a link. Once the link is opened, the telephone becomes a surveillance device.
After the Times report was published, five outside experts appointed by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to investigate the disappearance of 43 college students in the city of Iguala in 2014 found that they had received similar messages in March 2016.
The five investigators — human rights experts from Colombia, Chile, Spain and Guatemala — were granted diplomatic immunity.
The hacking efforts, confirmed by Citizen Lab at the Munk School of Global Affairs at the University of Toronto and the Mexican digital rights group R3D, also extended to Mexican opposition politicians and health activists who had been pushing to raise taxes on soft drinks.
The hacking allegations “are highly concerning and are evidence of the hostile and threatening environment that human rights defenders, social activists and journalists face in Mexico today,” the United Nations experts said.
NSO, the Israeli company that makes Pegasus, says that it sells the spyware to governments on the condition that it be used only against terrorists and criminals.
The Mexican government has denied that it used the software to spy on activists and journalists and argued that there was no proof against it because the spyware does not leave behind the hacker’s digital fingerprints.
Mexico’s opposition National Action Party and the Inter-American Commission have called for an outside investigation into the espionage. The United Nations envoys said the hacking targets should be allowed to participate.