HAUPPAUGE, N.Y. — Matthew Rodriguez is no longer a machine-gunner in the Marines, an infantry member in Afghanistan fighting to push back the Taliban in the town of Marja. He is now a father helping to raise three children, renting a house on Long Island and working for his friend’s family business as an electrician.
The reminders of his life at war, though, come almost constantly, delivered by way of recurring migraines and pain in his back and legs. They have also resurfaced when he was driving, when his experiences in Afghanistan and his military training kicked into gear, compelling him to speed up and zip through traffic instead of slowing down. Catching other drivers talking on the phone angered him. 
His behavior on the road added up to hundreds of dollars in fines for speeding and a suspended license, which led him on a recent Friday afternoon to the Suffolk County Traffic and Parking Violation Agency. Mr. Rodriguez was directed to a special traffic court the county has started for veterans, which officials say is the first of its kind in the country and where their service and its lingering consequences would be given special consideration.
Last year, a survey released by the United States Department of Veteran Affairs found that, among former service members who were homeless or at risk, help restoring driver’s licenses and resolving outstanding warrants and fines ranked as one of the highest unmet needs.
Suffolk County has the largest veteran population in New York State and one of the largest in the country. At the Touro Law Center Veterans’ and Servicemembers’ Rights Clinic on Long Island, veterans were often looking for help with traffic citations they could not afford to pay, said Ken Rosenblum, the clinic’s retired director. One veteran, he said, had $9,000 in unpaid fines.
At Suffolk County’s traffic court one afternoon, Mr. Rodriguez had joined a small crowd of veterans in the courtroom and was waiting for his number — 913 — to be called. He checked the clock; he had to pick up one of his children at 4:30. He had already paid more than $400 to restore his license, but he stayed because he had one last ticket that he hoped to clear.
Veterans advocates on Long Island encouraged officials here to create a court program exclusively handling the traffic cases of former service members after finding that Mr. Rodriguez’s situation was far from unique, and reflected a widespread problem among former service members.
Criminal court programs for veterans have proliferated across the country over the past decade, created in large measure to handle the wave of returning service members from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. The courts are meant to help rehabilitate military veterans, many of whom are dealing with post-traumatic stress and substance abuse issues, and to keep them from returning to the criminal justice system.
Advocates praised the program as “forward thinking,” stepping in to provide help before a problem spirals further downward.
Veterans face an elevated risk of death or injury in motor vehicle crashes, research has found. Post-traumatic stress can cause erratic driving or substance abuse problems. But the behavior behind the wheel also stems from military training that places a premium on evasive driving to avoid danger in hairy situations.
“Once you’ve been trained to do things that keep you alive in a combat zone, you don’t just untrain that,” said Scott Swaim, director of Justice for Vets, a national advocacy group.
At the first of the monthly court sessions, just after reciting the Pledge of Allegiance, veterans came up one by one to meet with a prosecutor and traffic officials. Speeding tickets were reduced to parking citations. Steep fines shrunk by hundreds of dollars, on the promise the veteran would attend a training program or seek other help.
John Diaz, who served in the gulf war, was one of those who had a speeding ticket reduced. His wife died of breast cancer six months ago, and he was pulled over by a Suffolk County police officer on his way to a widowers support group meeting. He was driving 65 miles per hour in a 55 m.p.h. zone.
The crowd in the court covered almost every branch of service — marines, sailors and soldiers — and several generations of conflict, from the recent wars in Afghanistan and Iraq to Vietnam. Some were never in combat.
Mr. Rodriguez grew restless as he waited for his number to be called. He kept checking the clock.
As he got one speeding ticket after another, he said, his car insurance “went through the roof.” For a while, he went without a car, riding his motorcycle instead, in rain and sometimes snow.
But he did not really mind.
“I felt so free on it,” he said.
Finally, 913 was called.
In September, a county police officer pulled him over while he was borrowing a friend’s car. His friend did not have insurance, and Mr. Rodriguez was cited for driving an uninsured vehicle. The violation, traffic officials told him, carried a maximum penalty of a $2,200 fine and having his license suspended for a year.
The officials decided to withdraw the ticket.
He thanked the judge and rushed from the courtroom. He had to pick up his son and had little time to spare.