349 pp. Pegasus Books. $27.95.
As we learn from “The Zoo,” Isobel Charman’s vivid, entertaining and scrupulously researched history of the London Zoo’s first years, the founders’ aim was to dispel human ignorance about God’s creatures. (Animals were firmly considered to be the work of an almighty hand; when the zoo was conceived in 1826, it would be 33 years before Charles Darwin’s “On the Origin of Species.”) For Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles, originator of the project and president of the Zoological Society of London, the animals were to be “objects of scientific research, not of vulgar admiration.” Vulgar admiration was for shabby, for-profit menageries. Raffles, an officer of the East India Company and the founder of Singapore, acquired the land in Regent’s Park but died of a stroke at 45 before the zoo opened in 1828.
Charman recounts the history of the zoo through seven profiles, starting with Raffles, then moving on to an architect who cared more about the comfort of people than of animals, a beleaguered veterinarian, a taxidermist who fell heir to the veterinarian’s failures, Charles Darwin, a head keeper and an aristocrat with a hippopotamus obsession. As the story unfolds, it becomes painfully clear that the most consequential human ignorance about God’s creatures was not knowing how to keep them alive. The beasts illustrated the vast extent of the British Empire, a plus for the patriotic. But those far corners of the empire were mostly warm, while the empire’s capital was damp, dirty and cold. After a few months of London’s sooty fog, the monkeys were coughing like Dickens’s orphans. Post-mortems of primates showed serious lung infections, not unlike those in Londoners of the time.
The Zoological Society’s purist vision for the zoo, riding the wave of the post-Enlightenment passion for collecting and classifying species, would transform by the end of the 19th century into something like the kind of zoo we know today — a staple of school field trips, a boon for desperate parents, a chance for city people to look a wild animal in the eye. Amazingly, the zoo was closed to the public until 1847, nearly 20 years after its founding. (Some well-connected folk were admitted earlier, but only if sponsored by a fellow of the Zoological Society.) Inevitably, a paying public was necessary to support staff and decent maintenance.
It’s the scenes of animal misery in those trying early years that remain in the reader’s mind. These include the suicidal kangaroos battering themselves against a fence (at least one succeeded), the elephant that spent nine months in a ship’s dark hold traveling from India to England by way of China, and an elderly lion poked in the eye by a woman wielding a parasol. For her previous book, “The Great War: A Nation’s Story,” Charman, a London-based television producer, expanded on a World War I documentary. In this mid-19th-century story the source of tension, as in her war narrative, is the casualties.
Charman ends with the 13th Earl of Derby, an eventual president of the zoo who, shortly before his death, negotiated the acquisition of a hippo from Abbas Pasha of Egypt. The 500-pound creature traveled to England on a Peninsular and Oriental lines steamship, sloshing around in a specially built 400-gallon iron tank. It was worth the effort: 10,000 people a day came that first summer to admire him.
Close to 90 percent of the animals now in large modern zoos are not snatched from their native habitat; they are the offspring of other zoo animals. They get excellent medical care and the right diet, but still what they experience is incarceration. Even the most enthusiastic of the London Zoo’s founders and staff could see the pathos in the animals’ situation. Lord Derby, who went to such lengths to pluck the hippo from its home on the Nile, couldn’t bear to see the higher primates “so sad in confinement.” Charman seems to agree. She dedicates her book to Tommy, a London Zoo chimp who lived in one early keeper’s home, kept warm for a while by the fireside. Soon, though, he sickened and died, his arms around his keeper’s neck.