Five months have passed, and the murder of Liberty Rose Lynn German, 14, and Abigail J. Williams, 13, in a wooded area near Delphi, Ind., remains unsolved.
But this week, investigators have new hopes for solving a double murder that the state police chief has said is proof that “evil lives amongst us.” On Monday, the authorities released a composite sketch of a suspect and a description: 5 feet 6 inches to 5 feet 10 inches, weighs 180 to 220 pounds, and has reddish brown hair. By Tuesday, they had 500 new tips, according to the F.B.I.
The authorities said the sketch brought momentum to the murder mystery, which has roiled Delphi, a city of around 3,000 residents about 60 miles north of Indianapolis.
The two girls disappeared on Feb. 13 after having set off near the Monon High Bridge, a historical abandoned rail bridge near a 10-mile park path known as the Delphi Historic Trail. Their bodies were discovered by a search party on Feb. 14 near the trail, about a half-mile upstream from the bridge, the police said.
On Feb. 15, officers distributed a photograph, found in Liberty’s cellphone, of a man walking behind them on the bridge, but the authorities did not call him a suspect until Feb. 19. On Feb. 22 they released the audio, calling the girl a hero for having the presence of mind to secretly record the voice and take the photograph.
The authorities announced a reward of up to $41,000 and sought the public’s help with tips. The Delphi Police Department, the Carroll County Sheriff, the State Police and the F.B.I. joined the investigation. Posters went up, and baseball events and bike rallies were held to raise support and awareness. Pink ribbons were tied around trees; highway billboards lit up.
The reward grew to more than $230,000 for information leading to arrests and convictions.
Sgt. Riley said in the interview on Tuesday that the sketch of the suspect had been made from information the authorities received from public tips, but he declined to say whether the information came from one or more people or how it was handed over.
Sgt. Riley said the sketch artist had started about a month ago to piece together the descriptions, frequently consulting the witness or witnesses to refine the drawing. Investigators also interview people offering descriptions to make sure they are not just trying to get someone into trouble, he said.
Sgt. Riley said that after the release of the sketch, extra personnel were brought on to help with the expected influx of information.
“We really, truly hope that this is the piece of the puzzle that we need to bring justice to our girls,” she said.