The shift from “Laguna Beach: The Real Orange County” to “The Hills” was the most portentous of the reality-show era. What began in 2004 as a sun-kissed, sometimes-bumbling lark finished in 2010 as a neo-romantic, industrial-smooth juggernaut. Teenagers who predated the constant self-broadcasting of the social-media era rapidly became television stars, doing their best to play the roles of teenagers who did not know they were being filmed. The genre had gone sentient. It would never look back.
In interviews for the new reality drama “Siesta Key,” which begins on MTV Monday night, Mark Ford — an executive producer here, as he was on “Laguna Beach” — said he was hoping to return reality TV to reality.
But the whole world is reality television now — optimizing behavior for broadcast is just part of everyday life. So in many ways, the sun-streaked conflict and misty boredom of “Siesta Key” is preordained, and also comforting. Relationships will be fractured, banter will be forced, footage will be shown at half-speed, skin will be tanned. The conversations largely lack dependent clauses, and have a cool rhythm of blankness.
“Siesta Key” takes place in and around an affluent island community just southwest of Sarasota, Fla. Siesta Key, the beach, was ranked No. 1 in America this year by both TripAdvisor and also a person who refers to himself as Dr. Beach.
The show follows the “Laguna Beach” model of languid attitudes and moist visuals, though its protagonists are mostly college-age, which means they can drink on camera. Its pheromonal center is Alex, a lothario with charms that barely register on camera, unless you count the size of his (parents’) house. He is torn between Juliette, a possessive college student who alternates between lashing out and gnawing on his face, and Madisson, who just graduated from college with an engineering degree but cannot engineer an end to her toxic long-running attraction to him.
It may yet be. Madisson’s good sense may kick in, and her younger sister Paige is a dissenter in the making — or worse, perhaps a future turncoat. Alex’s friend Chloe is the show’s rabble-rouser; by the second episode, she has already been bloodied in a brawl with one of her friends.
It’s both appealing and distracting that the cast members are still learning how to have conversations on camera. The genre is mature enough to be unforgiving of such naïveté, but it’s refreshing to see unscripted awkwardness, as when Alex spits out relationship koans in the hot tub: “I’ll try a little harder this summer, maybe. Maybe not.” It’s not an ominous late-reality-television threat. He’s just not sure.