WASHINGTON — The House approved on Thursday a bundle of spending bills, including $1.57 billion that President Trump requested to build a wall along the Mexican border, which could serve as the opening salvo in a new congressional battle to keep the government funded.
The nearly $790 billion package, which passed 235 to 192, would fund a slew of security-related government expenses and gave House Republicans a fresh victory on the cusp of a more than five-week recess. Five Republicans voted against the measure, and five Democrats voted for it.
But the legislation is almost certain to fail in the Senate, where picking up the tab for Mr. Trump’s signature campaign promise — a border wall, which he has vowed Mexico ultimately will fund — is a deal-breaker for Democrats.

Lawmakers have until the end of September to pass all necessary spending bills to avert a government shutdown. But the House currently is scheduled to work just three weeks in that time.
Known as the “Make America Secure Appropriations Act,” the House package consists of four of the 12 annual government spending bills. They include such priorities as $182.3 billion for the Department of Veterans Affairs and $13.9 billion for nuclear security. The House intends to take up the remaining eight bills in September.
The package also includes $29 million for increased security on Capitol Hill following last month’s shooting at a congressional baseball practice that injured Representative Steve Scalise of Louisiana, the Republican whip, and a handful of others. Mr. Scalise was discharged from the hospital and began rehabilitation on Tuesday.
The bulk of the funding — $658 billion — is for the Pentagon. That amount exceeds sequester caps imposed in 2011 in hopes Congress soon will agree to eliminate them. The defense funds include a 2.4 percent pay raise for the military and more than $34 billion to cover health care.
A 2016 RAND Corporation study commissioned by the Pentagon concluded that allowing transgender members of the military to serve openly would increase health care costs a mere 0.04 to 0.13 percent.
Republicans have struggled to pass substantial legislation this year, despite controlling the House, the Senate and the White House. A government shutdown would further expose Republicans as incapable of coalescing for the most basic tasks of governing.
Approving the government spending is an annual struggle, however, regardless of which party is in power. Congress has not met the deadline to approve all of its annual spending bills since 1996.
In May, Congress averted a shutdown by passing a short-term spending bill to keep the government funded through September. The measure had bipartisan support and denied Mr. Trump some of his early priorities, including funding for a border wall. At the time, he said that perhaps the United States needed “a good ‘shutdown’” to force through more partisan priorities.
In an unusual move this week, House Republican leaders turned to a procedural tool known as a “self-executing rule” to tack $1.57 billion for a border wall onto the broader spending package without taking a separate vote on it. Democrats slammed the tactic.
But though it increased conservative support for the bill in the House, the border wall funding could help tank the entire spending package in the Senate.
Senator Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont, the top Democrat on the Senate Appropriations Committee, joined other leaders in expressing concerns about funding “a very expensive, ineffective” wall in a letter to Republican leaders last month.
Senator Dianne Feinstein of California, a Democrat on the committee, said while she did not know the specifics of the House bill, Democrats take issue with the idea of paying for a border wall.
“In general, that’s a nonstarter,” she said.