Art & Design|Oops! A Gallery Selfie Gone Wrong Causes $200,000 in Damage.
Oops! A Gallery Selfie Gone Wrong Causes $200,000 in Damage.
The Selfie No-No Hall of Fame may have found its Babe Ruth.
Simon Birch, a British multimedia artist based in Hong Kong, has been displaying his latest immersive exhibition at the 14th Factory pop-up gallery in Los Angeles. In one room were placed a series of crowns on pedestals of varying heights — all very close to one another. They were the very definition of selfie bait.
So it was perhaps no surprise that a woman two weeks ago would get a bit too close to the art and, mid-selfie, lose her balance, sending pedestals and crowns crashing in a cascading domino effect. Damage estimate: Roughly $200,000, according to Mr. Birch.
A video of the incident, uploaded to YouTube on Thursday, has racked up nearly 300,000 views.
Our Los Angeles woman is hardly alone in the annals of the selfie-clumsy. At the “Yayoi Kusama: Infinity Mirrors” exhibition at the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in Washington, a huge hit featuring immersive mirrors, part of the museum closed for three days after a patron shattered a glowing LED pumpkin in February.
In 2015, in Cremona, a city in northern Italy, a sculpture — “Statue of the Two Hercules,” carved more than 300 years ago — was partially shattered thanks to a pair of overindulgent self-photographers.
In other instances that didn’t go well for the art: at the Academy of Fine Arts of Brera in Milan, also in 2014, a student decided to climb a sculpture from the early 1800s that was a copy of an ancient Greek sculpture, “Drunken Satyr.” The statue’s left leg fell off.
Last year, in Lisbon, a tourist in his mid-20s climbed a train station to take a selfie with a statue of Dom Sebastiao, a 16th-century king in Portugal. The statue crashed and shattered and he was arrested and charged with destruction of public property.
We could go on, but won’t. Advice for selfie-seeking museum goers: Keep your distance — the likes will come anyway.