One of the N.F.L.’s smartest players did the math and decided to retire after just three years in the league.
John Urschel, an offensive lineman for the Baltimore Ravens who received much publicity for his off-season pursuit of a doctorate in math at M.I.T., told the team on Thursday that he was hanging up his cleats at 26.
He added that he planned to return to school full time in the fall, “to take courses that are only offered in the fall semester” and spend time with his fiancée, who is expecting their first child in December.
Urschel’s decision came two days after the release of a study in which all but one of 111 brains of former N.F.L. players showed signs of chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative brain disease linked to repeated hits to the head.
The Baltimore Sun and ESPN, citing anonymous sources with the Ravens, said his retirement was related to the study.
Urschel, who had spoken about balancing concerns about the safety of the game and his love for it, left before the team’s first full practice of the coming season.
Urschel became the latest high-profile N.F.L. player to retire after just a few years in the league. A. J. Tarpley, a linebacker on the Buffalo Bills who played at Stanford University, retired last year after sustaining several concussions. The year before, San Francisco 49ers linebacker Chris Borland left the N.F.L. after one season, citing a fear of long-term cognitive damage.
Last week, the Carolina Panthers released Michael Oher, the lineman made famous in “The Blind Side,” the movie that told the story of his growing up with foster parents. Oher, who has been in the N.F.L. concussion protocol since September, was released after failing a physical.
Urschel played football at Penn State, where he studied mathematics and graduated in three years with a 4.0 grade point average. The Ravens selected Urschel in the fifth round of the 2014 N.F.L. draft, and he played in 40 games over the past three seasons. He sustained a concussion in 2015 in a head-to-head collision.
Urschel spent the past two off-seasons at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he studied advanced mathematics, including spectral graph theory, matrix algebra and computational finance.
“Right now, I spend most of my time thinking about discrete Schrödinger operators, high-dimensional data compression, algebraic multigrid and Voronoi diagrams,” he said on his M.I.T. web page.
He has also published papers in mathematics journals.
His penchant for numbers led NFL Network to call him the league’s smartest man.
His intelligence led many to question his decision to put his body and mind at risk by playing one of the most dangerous positions in football. In 2015, he wrote an essay in The Players’ Tribune, “Why I Still Play Football,” after Borland’s sudden retirement.
In the article, Urschel wrote, “objectively, I shouldn’t” play football.
The collision in 2015 knocked him out. Urschel told HBO’s “Real Sports With Bryant Gumbel” that his ability to do high-level math was temporarily affected.
Eugene Monroe, a fellow lineman on the Ravens that season, said he spoke with Urschel after he sustained that concussion. Urschel, he said, told him that he was unnerved that it had affected his ability to solve math problems.
Still, Monroe said he was not surprised that Urschel returned to the field three weeks after the concussion, “football ready,’’ as Urschel said on the HBO program, although it took him longer to recover his math skills.
Despite the severity of the concussion, Urschel said that he wanted to continue doing the two things he loved: math and football.
