New York|Mayor Offers $32 Million Plan to Ice Some Rats. Hopefully.
Mayor Offers $32 Million Plan to Ice Some Rats. Hopefully.
As long as rats have roamed the underbelly of New York City, mayor after mayor has seized the opportunity to act the general in a long-running war to turn back the rat armies.
And yet the rats remain.
On Wednesday, Mayor Bill de Blasio became the latest city leader to pick up his sword in earnest. Saying the city wanted “more rat corpses,” he declared a $32 million assault on the most problematic rat strongholds — parts of Lower Manhattan and Brooklyn’s Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood and along the Grand Concourse in the Bronx — and promised to reduce the number of rats in those areas by 70 percent by the end of next year.
“I don’t know any New Yorker who likes rats,” Mr. de Blasio said at a news conference filled with rat puns, references to rat history and mayoral praise for a rodent whose affinity for pizza made him a social media star.
It also calls for the City Council to pass legislation requiring medium and large buildings in the targeted areas to put out their trash for pickup early in the morning, ridding sidewalks of the overnight trash mounds that attract vermin.
Last month, the E.P.A. registered Bell Laboratories’ dry ice product, Rat Ice, allowing cities and states across the country to use it as a pesticide, said Mary Mears, a spokeswoman for the agency. New York State did the same last week.
Rats are a common complaint among New Yorkers, who logged more than 17,200 sightings via the 311 system last year, up from 12,600 in 2014, the mayor’s first year in office. Mr. de Blasio, who is running for re-election, said he had seen the vermin running around the public park outside Gracie Mansion. More than 10,000 complaints have come in so far this year.
For city leaders past and present, rats have presented a Sisyphean challenge.
“It’s a never-ending battle, but it’s the right thing to do,” said Joseph J. Lhota, whose door was labeled with the title of rat czar during his time as a deputy mayor in the Giuliani administration, and who now faces the equally daunting task of reforming the city’s subway service.
Mr. Lhota, who lost the 2013 mayoral election to Mr. de Blasio, said that now, as then, rats were more prevalent in the city’s parks than they were in the subway despite efforts to eradicate them with poisons and, in one notable experiment, a kind of birth control.
But while few would defend the rights of rats, the proposal to change rules for when garbage can be put on the street — from 4 p.m. the day before pickup, to 4 a.m. the day of — was met with some resistance from building owners and landlords, who were not told of the plan in advance.
A spokeswoman for Local 32BJ of the Service Employees International Union, which represents some building workers who take out trash and has endorsed Mr. de Blasio for re-election, said the union was reviewing the proposal.
Besides curbing the ickiness factor of rats running rampant in parks, the plan offers a number of health benefits, officials said, including preventing diseases such as leptospirosis, a bacterial infection spread by rat urine, which killed one and sickened others in the Bronx this year.