WASHINGTON — Actions by President Trump and his administration have created a historic ethics crisis, the departing head of the Office of Government Ethics said. He called for major changes in federal law to expand the power and reach of the oversight office and combat the threat.
Mr. Shaub called for nearly a dozen legal changes to strengthen the federal ethics system: changes that, in many cases, he had not considered necessary before Mr. Trump’s election. Every other president since the 1970s, Republican or Democrat, worked closely with the ethics office, he said.
A White House official dismissed the criticism, saying on Sunday that Mr. Shaub was simply promoting himself and had failed to do his job properly.
Mr. Trump’s repeated trips to his family’s business properties — he has visited one of them on at least 54 days since moving into the White House nearly six months ago, including nearly 40 stops at a family golf course — have caused discomfort for Mr. Shaub each time.
Mr. Shaub recommended giving the ethics office limited power to subpoena records, as well as authority to negotiate prohibitions on presidential conflicts of interest; mandating that presidential candidates release tax returns; and revising financial disclosure rules. But he acknowledged that some of these proposals would be difficult to pass in Congress.
There are signs that lawmakers are open to considering the ideas. Representative Trey Gowdy of South Carolina, the new Republican chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee, said he was preparing to meet with Mr. Shaub. The effort could be a test of what kind of appetite Mr. Gowdy has to challenge the Trump administration as the chairman of what is traditionally the most active oversight committee in Congress.
Representative Elijah E. Cummings of Maryland, the committee’s top-ranking Democrat, also wants to discuss the ethics office and ways to strengthen it.
Mr. Cummings is already drafting legislation with the hope of gaining Mr. Gowdy’s support, members of his staff said. It will incorporate some of Mr. Shaub’s proposals, albeit the less contentious provisions that stand a chance of passing in a Republican-controlled Congress.
Mr. Shaub’s relationship with Mr. Trump has been tense since even before Inauguration Day. He publicly pushed Mr. Trump to do as every other president in recent decades has voluntarily done and sell his assets before taking office to avoid conflicts of interest.
Instead, Mr. Trump put his hotels, golf courses, office buildings and marketing agreements with properties in Turkey, India, the United Arab Emirates, Britain and other nations into a trust controlled by his adult sons and other Trump Organization executives. Those measures did not satisfy Mr. Shaub.
Mr. Shaub also pressed the White House to turn over copies of ethics waivers it had granted to lobbyists who had joined the administration that allowed them to ignore requirements that they not take actions that could benefit their former clients. The White House initially questioned Mr. Shaub’s authority to ask for copies of the waivers, before backing down.
Hui Chen, who served until recently as an ethics expert in the Justice Department’s Fraud Section, said Mr. Shaub’s proposals would give the office greater independence and power to police actions by top federal officials.
“Anytime when we see a company with a chief compliance officer making what we call a ‘loud withdraw,’ it is considered a red flag for a company,” she said, drawing an analogy to corporate America.
Mr. Shaub wants Congress to clarify that the agency has clear ethics oversight authority over all parts of the White House and that its director may only be removed for cause.
Other changes would increase the agency’s enforcement abilities and autonomy. Mr. Shaub said he did not believe the office should be allowed to conduct extensive investigations, but advocated granting it limited subpoena authority so it could make sure ethics questions were answered.
His suggestion that Congress create new conflict of interest standards for the president, and require presidential candidates to disclose their tax returns to the Federal Election Commission and have them posted by the Office of Government Ethics, may be more difficult to enact.
He said he realized it might take years to get even some of his proposals enacted, perhaps dragging into the next presidential term. He is even considering recommending that the new rules, if enacted, not take effect until January 2021 — the end of Mr. Trump’s first term — to make the effort less partisan.
