When the Tony Award-winning lyricist Lynn Ahrens and her boyfriend, Neil Costa, moved to NoHo in the late 1970s, they were the only residents in their building (which was otherwise occupied by light industry) and, it seemed, the only residents on the block.
“We were loft pioneers,” said Ms. Ahrens, 68, whose Broadway credits include “Once on This Island,” “Ragtime,” “Seussical” and “Rocky,” and whose new musical, “Anastasia,” opened in April.
A row of urinals lined a wall of their loft, which was, perhaps, a touch more Marcel Duchamp than the couple had in mind. Pigeons flew freely about the space, and the elevator had the temperament of an opera diva, necessitating many, many journeys up 11 double flights of stairs.
Little by little Ms. Ahrens and Mr. Costa, an art director turned home designer and builder, renovated the expansive space (3,000 square feet), filled it with art and happily settled in, making peace with the recalcitrant furnace and with the fact that all their deliveries had to be left with an attendant at the building next door.
But after nearly 25 years, Ms. Ahrens and Mr. Costa, who married in 1989, decided it was time to move on, to an adult building — that is to say, a building with a doorman and reliable vertical transportation. What they wanted, as they explained to their real estate broker, was the downtown twin of a Midtown apartment owned by a close friend.
“We had no desire to live in Midtown, but we loved that apartment,” Ms. Ahrens said.
The good news: A week later, the broker reported back that she had found just such an apartment. The bad news: The apartment was in Midtown, in fact in their friend’s very building.
Even so, when they moved in 15 years ago, there was a period of adjustment after loft living. “For a little while, I wandered around going, ‘Oh. Rooms. Oh. Walls,’” she said.
The couple toned down two of those walls from maroon to cream and refaced the black brick fireplace, alterations that were in line with their new aesthetic.
“Maybe it’s just that I’ve gotten old, but I wanted peaceful, not such a downtown artsy feeling,” Ms. Ahrens said. “In the loft, we had leather furniture that was bright orange, and I loved it. There were a lot of paintings on the wall that were bright. When we got into Midtown, I wanted to let it chill in terms of palette.” Thus: microsuede sofas and basket-weave accent chairs that are cushioned in earth tones.
The feeling is restful but not sedate. This is thanks in large part to the many pieces of folk art: the cow and the birdhouse on the mantel; the wooden black-and-white cat on the coffee table that resembles Ms. Ahrens’s late cat, Alfie; the model of a building that sits atop an antique farm cupboard; and a life-size wooden chef standing sentry in a corner of the dining room, holding menus from the couple’s travels.
Theater posters, opening-night gifts, awards, framed letters (among them, an admiring note from Stephen Sondheim) and other career signifiers are generally confined to Ms. Ahrens’s office. One exception is an enamel, pearl-studded music box tucked into a bookshelf in the living room. A key plot point of the 1997 animated musical film “Anastasia,” it was a gift from 20th Century Fox, which produced the movie.
She and her husband also have a fine view of some other shows: the fireworks on the Fourth of July and the footwork across the way at the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.
Ms. Ahrens is a staunch believer in catnaps. No better tonic for her than a daily 20-minute snooze. “It helps me do what I do,” she said.
