When it comes to traditional financial advisers, Josh Brown of Ritholtz Wealth Management does not quite play to type.
Instead of schmoozing with clients over lunch, Mr. Brown brings in business via a storm of tweets and posts on his blog, The Reformed Broker, that he generates from a cramped, sublet office space in Midtown Manhattan.
As for Mr. Brown’s back office — the swarm of lawyers and compliance professionals that is the backbone of financial firms large and small — it, too, is virtual. Just a click on any type of screen connects a Ritholtz adviser to Charles Schwab or TD Ameritrade, where a team of operations experts keeps a hawk’s eye on the rapidly growing $532 million in client assets managed by Ritholtz Wealth, an independent financial adviser.
Much as Amazon has disrupted the retail industry by revolutionizing shopping habits, Schwab and firms like it have empowered a fast-growing vanguard of wealth advisers who offer independent and conflict-free financial advice by relying on easy-to-use technology.
Now, sitting on more than $4 trillion in assets, registered investment advisers are posing a direct threat to the old model of huddling with brokers from Merrill Lynch or Morgan Stanley and following their advice — for a hefty fee, usually — about which stocks, bonds or mutual funds to buy.
Able to farm out onerous back-office and custodial responsibilities to firms like Schwab, TD Ameritrade and Fidelity, brokers are leaving top Wall Street houses in droves to establish their own independent shops.
Founded on the principle of providing low-cost stock trades to individual investors, Charles Schwab’s growth in recent years has been propelled by its adviser segment, which offers a wide array of custodial services to registered investment advisers as well as access to the Schwab mutual fund supermarket.
Of the $2.9 trillion in assets that Schwab oversees, $1.3 trillion now comes from financial advisers — up from $863 billion in 2012. The rest belongs to individual investors.
More than 7,500 registered investment advisers use Schwab to park assets, giving it, according to the company’s calculation, a 29 percent market share and putting it far ahead of competitors TD Ameritrade, Fidelity and Bank of New York Mellon’s Pershing subsidiary.
Advisers can call on a Schwab expert for help in setting up a business or for legal advice in dealing with a complex trust, as well as execute quick and easy trades of individual securities or mutual funds.
Schwab even runs a training program for interns, who are then farmed out to select advisers.
What’s most crucial, though, for a wealth manager just hanging out a shingle, is the sense of security.
Whether you are a successful Wall Street broker going independent or starting a second career from scratch, being able to tell a client that the assets are with Schwab, Fidelity or TD Ameritrade offers a peace of mind that advisers say is absolutely critical to their business.
“Schwab put us in business when they developed their platform,” said Harold Evensky, a longtime financial adviser who writes books and gives speeches on the merits of independent investment advice.
A cluster of low-slung buildings in a northeast suburb of Phoenix is an unlikely hub for this wealth explosion — not least for Schwab, whose headquarters have long been in San Francisco. But because creating a back office for $1.3 trillion in assets is labor-intensive work, Schwab has been expanding its business in more affordable cities like Dallas and Orlando, Fla.
Overseeing this growing fief within Schwab is Bernie Clark, the head of adviser services, who, unlike the rest of the senior management team at the company, is not based in San Francisco.
A gregarious, backslapper of a man, Mr. Clark works out of the Phoenix office, and he exudes the can-do spirit of the traditional financial adviser one often finds teeing off at the golf course or holding forth at a rotary luncheon.
But instead of pushing stocks or a hot new mutual fund, Mr. Clark and the new breed of adviser he represents are preaching the virtues of transparent, low-cost planning strategies.
“Whether it’s price, access to funds or fiduciary standards, we are democratizing the industry,” Mr. Clark said.
Just outside of Mr. Clark’s office suite is a sprawl of cubicles where Schwab employees can be heard counseling financial advisers all over the country on matters large and small.
And unlike a Wall Street firm, where the trading floor, in its size, pride of place and all-around clamor represents the beating heart of the institution, the execution hub in Phoenix is a less exalted place.
Nicknamed “the hole,” it is a modest enclosure without the windows that pull the Arizona sunlight into the football field-size space where the Schwab back-office advisers do their work.
Above all there is silence: Since more than 95 percent of executions, be it the selling of a security or the buying of a mutual fund, are done electronically, there are no shouts or exclamations to be heard.
The Schwab trading floor may seem sleepy, but its work moves at hyperspeed. For advisers over all, the firm trades $1.5 billion per day in equity-related products, and exchange-traded funds represent the largest chunk — a third — of that amount.
Outside of Vanguard and BlackRock, which together control nearly 70 percent of the market for exchange-traded funds, few financial firms have played as prominent a role as Schwab in feeding the current E.T.F. frenzy.
According to Cerulli, a research firm, 80 percent of registered investment advisers rely on exchange-traded funds to give their clients exposure to various investment strategies. While Vanguard and BlackRock have been the two main choices for registered investment advisers, Schwab has introduced its own branded fleet of tracking funds, which it prices well below the peer group and in some cases offers free to clients.
Schwab’s $78 billion in exchange-traded funds is dwarfed by the nearly $2 trillion that Vanguard and BlackRock manage, but its growth has been rapid, up from just $8 billion in 2012. And its aggressive pricing on the Schwab platform give its funds an outsize influence, pushing competitors to keep slashing their own, already rock bottom fees.
With the back-office responsibilities of his investment firm safely outsourced to TD Ameritrade and Schwab, he has plenty of time to do exactly that.
