James B. Comey, the former F.B.I. director who was fired in May by President Trump, is writing a book about his experience in public service, including his tumultuous and brief tenure in the Trump administration.
Mr. Comey has been meeting with editors and publishers in New York in recent days, and is being represented by Keith Urbahn and Matt Latimer, partners at the literary agency Javelin. The book is expected to go to auction this coming week, and all the major publishing houses have expressed keen interest, Mr. Latimer said.
The book will not be a conventional tell-all memoir, but an exploration of the principles that have guided Mr. Comey through some of the most challenging moments of his legal career. Among those are his investigation into Hillary Clinton’s private email server during a contentious election, and his recent entanglement with the president over the F.B.I.’s inquiry into Russia’s interference in the 2016 election.
Mr. Comey has been unexpectedly thrust into the spotlight in recent months. When he was fired, Mr. Comey was four years into a 10-year term. He didn’t go quietly. Instead, he leaked the contents of memos he had kept that documented his conversations with Mr. Trump, including, according to Mr. Comey, a conversation in which the president urged him to drop the federal investigation into Mr. Trump’s former national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn.
Almost immediately after his firing, agents and publishers pounced, setting off speculation that Mr. Comey was contemplating writing a book. News outlets ran articles positing that Mr. Comey could land an eight-figure advance for a memoir.
Mr. Comey was reluctant at first to entertain offers, but he later decided that he had something to say beyond a rehashing of his career highlights and low points, according to his agent. His aim is to write candidly about his experience serving in multiple administrations, and to use moments from his career to draw lessons about ethics, decision making and leadership.
During the years he spent in the Justice Department, Mr. Comey was involved in a number of prominent and politically fractious investigations. He clashed with White House officials serving under President George W. Bush in 2004 when, as deputy attorney general, he refused to certify the legality of the National Security Agency’s domestic surveillance program. As the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, he prosecuted the lifestyle guru Martha Stewart for lying about her suspiciously well-timed stock trades, which resulted in multiple convictions.
But the episode that will be of greatest interest to readers is Mr. Comey’s account of his tenure as F.B.I. director under Mr. Trump and his role in investigating a murky and explosive controversy that is still unfolding. After Mr. Trump fired Mr. Comey in May, he said he had done so because of the way Mr. Comey was handling the investigation into whether any of Mr. Trump’s associates or campaign members had colluded with Russians in the Kremlin’s efforts to tip the election in his favor. The firing created a furor and resulted in the appointment of Robert S. Mueller III, a former F.B.I. director, as special counsel to oversee the investigation.
Mr. Comey’s book will go through the standard legal and governmental vetting to ensure that nothing classified is disclosed. But it may still contain some previously unrevealed details about Mr. Comey’s dealings with Mr. Trump. After all, Mr. Comey is known to be an assiduous note-taker.