The immense pay packages bestowed on corporate chieftains are often said to reflect feats of management that enrich company shareholders. An executive’s masterly performance justifies the compensation, in other words.
But what about managers who take home bounties amid leadership failures that harm other stakeholders? Should shareholders give these executives a pass because the company’s stock price rose on their watch?
That’s the question facing investors in the McKesson Corporation, the nation’s largest drug distributor and a company that finds itself at the center of the nation’s opioid epidemic. McKesson is holding its annual shareholder meeting on Wednesday, and investors will express their views on the company’s rich pay packages. They will also vote on a proposal urging the company to install an independent board chairman; currently, John H. Hammergren, McKesson’s chief executive, also heads its board.
What do opioids have to do with corporate governance at McKesson? A lot, according to some of its shareholders. They say that leadership lapses at McKesson have enabled the opioid scourge to spread across the United States and that the company’s executives have not been held to account for those failings.
In January, for example, McKesson paid a record fine of $150 million to settle Justice Department allegations that from mid-2008 through May 2013 it had repeatedly failed to report suspicious orders for controlled substances, including opioids, as required by law. Twelve of McKesson’s distribution centers had not maintained “effective controls against diversion of particular controlled substances into other than legitimate medical, scientific, and industrial channels,” the government said.
How ineffective were McKesson’s controls? The settlement cited one distribution center in Colorado that processed over 1.6 million orders for controlled substances. McKesson reported only 16 of those orders as suspicious in size or frequency.
In addition to paying the fine, McKesson said it would suspend sales of controlled substances for several years from its distribution centers in Colorado, Florida, Michigan and Ohio. It also agreed to conduct periodic auditing and hire an independent monitor to track its compliance — a first in a case of this kind, the Justice Department said.
But the January settlement was not McKesson’s first rodeo involving opioids and other controlled substances. In 2008 it settled similar allegations, paying $13.25 million to the government. Back then, it also agreed to ramp up its compliance program; this obviously didn’t work, given the subsequent settlement.
McKesson is also facing a lawsuit from the state of West Virginia about the flood of opioids it has distributed there. Exemplary reporting on that state’s opioid disaster by the Charleston Gazette-Mail also cited the company’s role in the tragedy.
More than 90 Americans die each day of opioid overdoses, the National Institute on Drug Abuse said, calling the problem a public health crisis.
Nevertheless, even as the company was failing to report suspicious opioid orders, Mr. Hammergren, McKesson’s chief executive since 2001, has enjoyed abundant pay.
Since fiscal 2008, the year of the first Justice Department settlement, Mr. Hammergren has received $692 million in realized compensation for his work. According to Equilar, an executive compensation data provider in Redwood City, Calif., this tally included annual salaries and bonuses, the value of McKesson shares vested during those years and the gains realized when Mr. Hammergren exercised options he had received. The total also includes his other compensation, such as life insurance and retirement benefits and the value of his use of the corporate jet for personal travel.
With compensation like this, Mr. Hammergren could have personally paid the $150 million fine to the government. He did not. Neither was Mr. Hammergren’s compensation diminished by the fine. That’s because the company excludes the costs of such settlements from a performance measure used to determine his executive pay. By backing these costs out from the pay calculation, McKesson essentially frees Mr. Hammergren of any personal responsibility for activities that result in regulatory fines.
Ms. Chasen said this practice was common to the industry. “This helps investors compare financial results to those of other companies in the same industry and provides information about our operating performance and comparison of past and future financial results,” she said.
Another McKesson executive who led its compliance effort has also received lush compensation. She is Laureen Seeger, and from fiscal 2009 through fiscal 2014, most of the years covered in the recent settlement, she received $5.2 million in bonuses.
In 2014 Ms. Seeger moved to American Express, where she is general counsel. Through an American Express spokesman, Ms. Seeger declined to comment.
McKesson has urged shareholders to vote against the proposal asking it to bring in an independent chairman. “The company’s governance structure is working effectively,” the proxy said, as evidenced by its strong financial performance under Mr. Hammergren.
The International Brotherhood of Teamsters General Fund, a longtime McKesson shareholder, put forward the proposal on the independent director.
Ken Hall, general secretary-treasurer of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, is planning to speak at the McKesson annual meeting. In a phone interview Wednesday, he said that his home is in West Virginia, and that he had witnessed the devastation of opioid addiction.
Still, exercising their rights as shareholders can raise awareness that the McKesson board has not been aggressive enough about tackling leadership missteps related to opioids. It will be interesting to hear what the shareholders have to say on the matter and, if they express displeasure, whether the board will respond.