A mob stormed Venezuela’s opposition-dominated National Assembly on Wednesday with the apparent acquiescence of government troops and carried out a startling attack on lawmakers and journalists.
Bloodied lawmakers were treated for broken ribs and head injuries, and journalists said the attackers had stolen their equipment. The episode in Caracas, which coincided with Venezuela’s Independence Day, was a sharp escalation of lawlessness in a country roiled by a failing economy and daily street demonstrations.
Opposition lawmakers said the attack had been carried out by so-called colectivos, bands of armed men in plain clothes who take their cues from the government of President Nicolás Maduro to thwart demonstrations and intimidate dissidents. While National Assembly lawmakers have been assaulted before, the attack on Wednesday was remarkable because the throng of assailants appeared to face no resistance from National Guard forces charged with securing the compound.
The assault came amid an intensifying political fight over Mr. Maduro’s effort to convene a constituent assembly that could render the elected National Assembly powerless. The standoff has stoked unprecedented violence in recent days.
Earlier on Wednesday, a Venezuelan police officer who had carried out a brazen attack from a commandeered government helicopter last week warned of a “new phase” in a would-be insurrection against Mr. Maduro’s government.
“We are not assassins like you, Nicolás Maduro,” Mr. Pérez said, pointing his finger at the camera. After the attack, he said, he made an emergency landing in a remote area and returned to Caracas. The video showed Mr. Pérez, looking gaunt, sitting against a white wall with a Venezuelan flag in the background and a short-barreled rifle by his side.
Venezuelans have reacted to the subplot he has introduced to Venezuela’s crisis with a mix of bemusement and suspicion. Mr. Pérez, an elite officer who has dabbled in acting, was vague about what he called “the second phase of our plan.” No evidence has surfaced to suggest that he leads a significant dissident group in the security forces, as he claimed to do in a video posted on the day of the attack.
Some Venezuelans even suspect that he is a plant by the government, used to justify harsher tactics against dissenters and to divert attention from an escalating power struggle among senior government officials.
In recent days, a rift has widened between Mr. Maduro and his attorney general, Luisa Ortega, who sharpened her criticism of the president’s plan to let a constituent assembly of handpicked loyalists write a new Constitution. The effort is widely seen as a ploy by a deeply unpopular leader to consolidate power by disbanding the National Assembly, which is controlled by his opponents. Ms. Ortega has denounced the plan as an affront to the country’s democratic principles.
The Supreme Court, which is loyal to the president, held a hearing on Tuesday that was expected to lead to Ms. Ortega’s removal; she refused to attend. The court and the National Assembly made dueling nominations for deputy attorney general on Tuesday, making it unclear who would replace Ms. Ortega if she were removed.