SAN FRANCISCO — Uber drivers have won a tentative victory in their long-running legal battle to be classified as employees rather than independent contractors.
A federal court in North Carolina gave conditional certification on Wednesday to a class-action lawsuit by several Uber drivers that was brought under the Fair Labor Standards Act. The plaintiffs can now seek out the approximately 18,000 drivers who opted out of arbitration in their contracts with the company and are thus eligible to join the case. Uber has more than 600,000 drivers in the United States.
Jerry H. Walters Jr., a lawyer for Uber, declined to comment. The company said in a statement that it was “disappointed with this decision, particularly because a Federal District Court recently denied conditional certification in another case”; that ruling was handed down last month in Florida.
Almost from the beginning of Uber’s meteoric rise as an alternative to traditional taxis, the role of its drivers has been contentious. Many of them felt that they were captive to Uber’s rules and demands and should thus be accorded the protections and benefits of traditional employees. Uber has always challenged that notion.
A 2013 class-action suit filed in California suffered a setback in September when an appeals court said most Uber drivers must go to arbitration rather than court to settle claims. A significant settlement now appears unlikely in the California case.
Drivers in the North Carolina case still have a long road ahead of them. The Federal District Court for the Middle District of North Carolina noted that requirements for conditional certification for class-action status were “modest.” The plaintiffs needed only to show a reasonable basis for their claim that there were other employees similar to themselves.
“The bar is not super-duper-high,” Mr. Maslo said. But he noted that the court could have been more restrictive by, for instance, allowing only Uber drivers in the state, rather than the entire country, to join the class.
After the discovery phase of the case, the court will make a final determination as to whether the plaintiffs can proceed in a true class-action case.
Uber said it would push hard to decertify the class.
The drivers who opted out of arbitration, which Uber’s contract gave them 30 days to do, are in an unusual position. A growing number of employers, from start-ups like WeWork to major retailers like Kmart and Sears, require their workers to agree that any dispute will be heard not in court but in arbitration — a secretive process that is often lopsided in favor of the employer. Few companies provide any opportunity to opt out of the arbitration clauses.
Such clauses have thwarted dozens of class-action cases before they gained any momentum.
As the arbitration clauses have spread, so have concerns among labor officials who worry that they allow widespread problems to fester because the process prevents employees from sharing their experiences with others who might be in similar situations.