An effort to hold someone accountable for JPMorgan Chase’s loss of more than $6 billion in the so-called London Whale trading scandal is coming to an end, with federal prosecutors in Manhattan moving on Friday to dismiss all criminal charges against two former bank employees.
The prosecutors filed a motion to dismiss charges against the bank employees, Javier Martin-Artajo and Julien Grout, saying that recent statements by a key cooperating witness, Bruno Iksil, had thrown the reliability of his testimony into doubt.
Mr. Iksil was called the London Whale because of large derivatives trades he made while working out of the bank’s London office. He was expected to testify that he had resisted attempts by Mr. Grout and Mr. Martin-Artajo to try to hide the losses, which first became public in 2012.
But Mr. Iksil’s potential testimony was put in doubt by a deposition he gave in a civil case brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission over the trading loss, a lawyer for Mr. Grout said. In the deposition, Mr. Iksil disclosed that he had written a 400-page memoir that would cast doubt on the core of the federal government’s case.
Mr. Iksil recently set up a website where he wrote in great detail about his views on the trading scandal, which became an embarrassment for Jamie Dimon, JPMorgan’s chief executive.
The move to dismiss the case was another blow to the legacy of Preet Bharara, the former United States attorney in Manhattan, who was fired this year by President Trump.
Preet Bharara, then the United States attorney in Manhattan, announcing the unsealing of charges against Mr. Martin-Artajo and Julien Grout.
Last month, a federal judge threw out much of the evidence in a major stock manipulation case against financier Benjamin Wey because of a botched raid by the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the auspices of one of the prosecutors in Mr. Bharara’s office. Two years ago, Mr. Bharara was forced to dismiss about a dozen insider trading convictions after a federal appeals court drastically curtailed the ability of prosecutors to pursue certain cases.
“We are pleased by the very decent decision by the U.S. Attorney to dismiss this case after four years of difficult litigation,” said Edward Little, the lawyer for Mr. Grout and a partner at the firm Hughes Hubbard & Reed.
The decision by Mr. Bharara’s office to strike the deal with Mr. Iksil under which he was to testify as a cooperating witness was questioned because he was the most closely identified with the trading losses.
The original criminal complaints filed against Mr. Grout and Mr. Martin-Artajo described Mr. Iksil as something of a lone dissenter within the bank when it came to dealing with mounting losses on a series of derivatives trades that went bad in 2011 and 2012.
When the trading losses came to light in 2012, they prompted questions about the risk management controls at the nation’s largest bank and about Mr. Dimon’s stewardship. The episode led to an internal investigation, a heated congressional hearing and to JPMorgan paying out $1 billion in penalties to civil regulators, including the S.E.C.
Mr. Dimon later described his dismissive remark as “stupid.” The bank’s board slashed his bonus for 2012 by about 53 percent, to $10 million, saying that Mr. Dimon bore “responsibility for the failures” that led to the losses.
The bank and Mr. Dimon, a member of President Trump’s chief executive advisory group, have since moved past the scandal.
Mr. Dimon ranked 25th in a 2016 survey of the best-compensated chief executives by Equilar for The New York Times. The value of his pay package rose 49 percent, to $27.2 million, from 2015 to 2016.
Even before Mr. Iksil’s conflicting statements on the trading losses, prosecutors were having difficulty pursuing the case. Both Mr. Grout and Mr. Martin-Artajo live outside the United States and neither had appeared in an American court to answer the charges.
Prosecutors said in the motion to dismiss that “efforts to secure their appearance, including through extradition, have been unsuccessful or deemed futile.” A federal judge must still approve the motion.
A lawyer for Mr. Martin-Artajo could not be immediately reached on Friday.
Mr. Little said that Mr. Grout looked forward to the S.E.C. dismissing the civil case against him as well.
