If Justin Trudeau tweets to encourage people to check out the Soulpepper Theater Company on Canada Day, who am I to say no? The Canadian prime minister knows whereof he speaks, having once taught drama, among other subjects — let that sink in for a second, dear American reader. But the tweet also shows that by promoting Canadian culture, Mr. Trudeau cannily understands how soft power works.
Soulpepper is an institution in Toronto, where it was founded in 1998. You would think that with a multivenue complex and a training school, as well as many of Toronto’s performing-arts awards, the Doras, on its mantel, the company would bask in its success and continue to exert its influence at home. But this summer it has dispatched 65 artists with support staff to New York for a monthlong residency that will feature plays, musical revues and cabaret evenings, all presented in repertory on the Pershing Square Signature Center’s three stages.
Hey #nyctheatre fans, 65 Canadian artists will be showcasing Canadian theatre in NY this Canada Day for #SoulpepperNYC. Don’t miss it!
Partaking of an hourslong tasting sample on Saturday — Canada Day — was a thought-provoking experience, and it was not just about what happened onstage. When a foreign company comes to New York to display its wares for a month, you start pondering things besides dramaturgy, lighting or acting.
The first line of inquiry is how little we know about Canadian stage works in the United States.
Quick, what comes to mind? Right now that would be “Come From Away,” the hit Broadway musical about the planes detoured to Newfoundland after 9/11. But after that it’s a jumble involving “The Drowsy Chaperone,” the superstar director Robert Lepage, Cirque du Soleil and its neo-circus legacy, the Stratford Festival — and “Slings & Arrows,” the television series that brilliantly satirized Stratford. Take a deeper dive, and the playwrights Michel Tremblay and Daniel MacIvor may turn up.
Even given the United States’ myopia and reflexive laziness when it comes to opening up to other countries’ cultural exports, the lack of exposure to this northern neighbor’s theater feels odd, especially considering the outsize influence Canada has always had on pop music and comedy in the United States. Admittedly, some of the most dynamic, boundary-pushing Canadian theater has been in French — that language being closely associated with art, identity and politics in Quebec — and overall stage productions can be a bear to move. But we don’t even see American productions of many Canadian works, besides rarities like “Come From Away” or the wonderful Off Broadway musical “Ride the Cyclone.” In view of the steady stream of British imports hitting our shores — some of them epically British, like “The Play That Goes Wrong” — you have to wonder: Why are there not more Canadian shows in New York?
I am obliged to report that a day watching Soulpepper offerings did not provide any answers. The most utterly Canadian offering I caught was “True North,” a mix of songs and poetry aided by projections that aims to delineate the country’s identity. The overall impression was: Brrrr, it must be cold up there, judging by the number of references to snow, ice and hockey. More seriously, one got the feeling of a country proud of its vastness and wildness, but quietly elegiac about these qualities rather than boastful. There was no sense of a Manifest Destiny, which may help explain Canada’s disinterest in asserting superiority.
Sadly, the show’s song list shunned recent material by Canadian superstars like the Weeknd or Justin Bieber, or even Carly Rae Jepsen’s “Call Me Maybe,” arguably among the decade’s best hits. These songs might have provided a welcome counterbalance to the more somber, possibly predictable selections by the likes of Buffy Sainte-Marie, Neil Young and Joni Mitchell — whose “Both Sides Now” was given a heartbreakingly conversational rendering by Hunter Cardinal, a first-year student at the Soulpepper Academy.
Soulpepper also brought its commercial smash “Kim’s Convenience,” set in a deli run by a Canadian-Korean family. This comedy by Ins Choi did so well for Soulpepper that it has been adapted into an equally successful CBC sitcom. At the very least, “Kim’s Convenience” is but one illustration of a country justifiably proud of the way it has been handling immigration.
Politics were never far from the surface on Canada Day at the Signature Center, even if nobody overtly pointed out that since January, Canada has de facto supplanted the United States as a beacon of tolerance and openness. “As long as that difference doesn’t reinforce smugness” — God forbid! — “it’s created opportunities for us,” said Brad Lepp, Soulpepper’s communications director.
The reality is that many projects such as this one — funded by the theater company, private donors and the Canadian government — barely make a ripple in the United States, and have more of an impact back home. We may not see more Canadian plays in New York, but Canadian artists will return transformed, in some unquantifiable way, by the experience, and will draw from it for their next projects. Would that be a failure? Hardly.
I can only hope that the United States will adopt the poutine skins offered at a buffet, sponsored by the Canadian consulate in New York, that concluded Canada Day at Signature. At last a mad genius has found a way to turn poutine, that dastardly Québécois combination of French fries, gravy and cheese curds, into finger food by layering it on top of potato skins. Let’s not forget that the most direct path to Americans’ heart is via the belly.