When Mayor Bill de Blasio received from the State Legislature a two-year renewal of mayoral control of New York City’s schools, the longest extension of his tenure, the victory came with an unwritten concession.
As part of the arrangement, the mayor agreed to an increase in the number of charter schools in the city and promised to make it easier for those already in existence to function, City Hall officials said on Thursday.
The issue of charter schools loomed large over the end of this year’s legislative session in Albany, resulting in a standoff between the Republicans who lead the State Senate, who receive ample campaign support from charter schools’ advocates, and the Democrats who dominate the State Assembly and are backed by public school unions.
The contours of the disagreement were clear: The Republicans were holding out for an expansion of the number of charter schools allowed in the state, linking such an increase to renewal of mayoral control of the schools, which was to lapse June 30. The Democrats refused that demand.
Negotiations over the issue had foundered by the scheduled end of the session, and lawmakers left Albany with the matter of mayoral control unresolved. With the clock ticking, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo — a Democrat, but nonetheless a regular beneficiary of campaign backing from the supporters of charter schools — summoned legislators to return for a special session to take up the issue. Charter schools, his office insisted, would not be part of the conversation.
But shortly after a last-minute deal was announced last week to extend mayoral control — just a day before it was to expire — Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, suggested that a side deal was in the works.
The agreement will allow more charter schools to open without actually raising the limit on their numbers, and without new legislation in Albany.
To accomplish this, the deal allows for the reuse of so-called zombie charters — charters that are not in use, perhaps because schools have closed, but that still count against the limit on how many such schools there can be. Those charters can now be reissued, allowing up to 22 new schools to open. The change was reported by The Wall Street Journal.
The deal also calls for a number of other accommodations to the charter sector: Processes for requesting building improvements and rental reimbursement will be streamlined; the city’s Education Department will no longer put one charter school at multiple locations unless the school agrees; and the city will provide MetroCards to students at charter schools that open before busing begins for the year.
The Senate majority leader, John J. Flanagan, a reliable foe of Mr. de Blasio’s, issued an effusive statement on Thursday that praised the agreement with City Hall.
“I thank the mayor for his openness in addressing this important issue and for demonstrating his support for both children who are currently in a charter school and those who would like to be,” Mr. Flanagan, a Long Island Republican, said.
Another potentially significant change for the charter sector came in the form of proposed rules, released last month, that would create different ways for teachers at certain charter schools to earn certification and start teaching before the process is complete.