With a tweet and very little else by way of detail, the entrepreneur Elon Musk on Thursday raised the prospect of speedy, hassle-free travel along the busy section of the Eastern Seaboard between New York and Washington, D.C.
On Twitter, Mr. Musk said he had been given “verbal” government “approval” for his vision, in which one of his companies, the Boring Company, would build an underground transportation system connecting New York City to Philadelphia to Baltimore and on to the nation’s capital — enabling people to make the trip in the unheard-of time of 29 minutes.
Mr. Musk’s tweet was enticing enough, even without details, that it prompted a bombardment of follow-up questions and a great deal of skepticism. Who would pay for it? How long would it take to build? How would it be built? There were no answers.
In his replies, Mr. Musk let slip a few more thoughts.
Mr. Musk’s planned 29-minute trip is considerably shorter than the current options. A drive from Washington to New York can take about five hours. Amtrak’s Acela, its high-speed counterpart to regional train service, cuts the time down to about two hours and 45 minutes. A nonstop flight from Kennedy Airport in New York to Ronald Reagan National Airport in Washington is currently the fastest option, at one hour and 15 minutes.
Musk watchers have heard this before. Mr. Musk, a serial entrepreneur who was a founder of PayPal and the electric car company Tesla Motors, first unveiled his idea for a similar plan in 2013 when he unveiled a project called the Hyperloop — a high-speed system that would take people to San Francisco from Los Angeles in 30 minutes. That would take a speed of almost 800 miles an hour.
Reuters reported that engineers in the next few weeks will conduct a crucial test of the Hyperloop concept, an idea to have passengers and cargo packed into pods and sent through an intercity system of vacuum tubes.
Hyperloop One, the Los Angeles-based company developing the technology, is gearing up to send a 28-foot-long (8.5 meter-long) pod gliding across a set of tracks, Reuters quoted a spokeswoman, Marcy Simon, as saying. Ms. Simon did not immediately respond to an email on Thursday.