Bo Pilgrim, a small-town Texan who transformed a tiny feed and seed store into one of the biggest chicken producers in the United States and put himself in its logo — in the form of a silhouetted profile under a black, buckled Pilgrim’s hat — died on Friday at his home in Pittsburg, Tex. He was 89.
The Erman Smith Funeral Home in Pittsburg announced his death on its website.
Mr. Pilgrim — he was born Lonnie but everyone knew him as Bo — founded the Pilgrim’s Pride Corporation, which, though best known in the Southeast, achieved a national reputation for high-quality chicken, turkey and egg products.
At its peak, the company had operations in 17 states and Mexico, more than 35,000 employees and thousands of trucks. Mr. Pilgrim was its face and voice, offering a dry wit in television and radio commercials.
But he also oversaw the company through difficult times involving a bankruptcy, a product recall over bacterial infections, animal-cruelty allegations and an ethics scandal in which Mr. Pilgrim handed out $10,000 checks to lawmakers on the floor of the Texas Senate.
Pilgrim’s Pride won industry renown as an innovator. The hard-core Chili Appreciation Society International thought so much of the company’s chicken chili that it awarded it third prize in an against-the-odds cook-off against the predominant variety, beef. The recipe was subsequently entered in The Congressional Record.
Another innovation was the boneless whole chicken. Mr. Pilgrim himself labored for months to perfect a method of removing all the bones from the carcass with no incisions other than those originally used in processing.
“People seemed fascinated with the concept,” Mr. Pilgrim recalled.
The boneless whole chicken won the company national and even international attention. Numerous publications, including Good Housekeeping, interviewed him.
But the product ultimately failed to catch on with consumers, and it was discontinued, though not without a promotion campaign that was recognized with an award by the Texas Public Relations Association.
Pilgrim’s Pride was rooted in Pittsburg, about 130 miles east of Dallas, and the company remains there, one of the area’s largest employers. The plant features a roadside attraction — a kind of shrine to Mr. Pilgrim that the locals call the Hat, a 37-foot-tall painted bust of the man himself, looking every bit the glasses-wearing, gray-haired executive he was — in a suit jacket, white shirt and tie — except for the Pilgrim’s hat atop his head.
Below the bust is another sculpture, a life-size depiction of a younger Mr. Pilgrim, sitting on a bench reading the Bible alongside a favorite chicken named Henrietta.
Lonnie Pilgrim was born on May 8, 1928 — named in honor of his father, Alonzo, he said — in Pine, Tex., a town of 80 to 100 people at the time. The fourth of seven children (two others died in infancy), he was called Bo by relatives from an early age. His father owned one of two stores in the town, called the Pine Grocery and Post Office.
When his father died of a heart attack in 1939, his mother, Gertrude, took over the store and ran it for the next 20 years.
When his mother remarried soon afterward, Bo, then 13, felt betrayed and left home to live with his paternal grandmother and aunt on a farm with no running water or electricity.
It was his older brother, Aubrey, and a partner who bought the feed store in Pittsburg, and when the partner sold out, Aubrey invited Bo to join him. The store added a warehouse, from which they could sell truckloads of feed.
“All we had in the beginning were a two-wheel buggy, a shovel, some burlap sacks and Bo’s big ideas,” a longtime associate recalled in Mr. Pilgrim’s memoir, “One Pilgrim’s Progress: How to Build a World-Class Company and Who to Credit,” published in 2005.
The subtitle alluded to Mr. Pilgrim’s robust Baptist faith, which he later exhibited in his everyday business and personal interactions and imparted as a Sunday school teacher for a half-century. Classes were often held in the boardroom of the community bank he had bought several decades earlier and renamed the Pilgrim Bank. He was its chairman emeritus at his death.
Drafted into the Army, Mr. Pilgrim was sent to California, where he saw huge feed operations that inspired him on his return to Texas to push the company to invest in larger facilities and expand into processed and prepared chicken products. Pilgrim also became a major egg producer.
But in 1966, Aubrey Pilgrim died of a heart attack at 42, and, aware of his family’s history of heart ailments, Bo Pilgrim began a campaign to live healthier. The company developed what it called the first lean chicken, with less fat and cholesterol and without artificial color. Pilgrim’s Pride later marketed nutritionally enhanced eggs.
It was in the 1980s that the company began advertising in earnest. “I was the logical spokesperson,” Mr. Pilgrim wrote.
The company thrived, surviving a highly publicized gaffe when, in 1989, in an effort to support a bill weakening workers’ compensation laws, Mr. Pilgrim handed out $10,000 political contribution checks to eight Texas state senators two days before a scheduled vote. The episode led to changes in the ethics law.
Pilgrim also survived a late 1980s business downturn in which the company was losing $1 million a week, a result of sharply rising feed costs and a glutted chicken market. Fearing bankruptcy, Pilgrim agreed to sell out to Tyson Foods, the world’s largest poultry concern, but Tyson backed out of the deal and Pilgrim recovered.
Pilgrim doubled in size with the acquisition of ConAgra’s poultry division but subsequently experienced a host of setbacks, including a huge product recall involving an outbreak of listeriosis, a damaging episode of avian flu, environmental violations, charges of cruelty to chickens and raids involving immigrant workers.
Pilgrim was forced into bankruptcy in 2008 but emerged the following year after repaying creditors and salvaging some value for stockholders.
Mr. Pilgrim retired in 2010, and the company is now controlled by a unit of JBS, a Brazilian multinational.
Mr. Pilgrim, whose net worth reached $1 billion, and his wife of 61 years, the former Patricia Redding, lived in what they called Chateau de Pilgrim, a French Baroque mansion south of Pittsburg, often called “Bo’s town.” Local residents referred to the house as Cluckingham Palace.
His explanation for this concession to grandeur? “The Louis XV period of style,” he wrote, “was noted for very well-mannered dignity, symmetry and functional practicality,” features that appealed to his sense of order.
He is survived by his wife; his sons Ken and Patrick; his daughter, Greta Henson; a sister, Sue Hester Kellam; six grandchildren, and three great-grandchildren.
