EAST HAMPTON, N.Y. — A seaplane was waddling toward the runway. A helicopter that had just touched down was gliding to a place on the tarmac where its passengers could climb out. Patricia Currie pulled out her cellphone out and snapped a photograph.
“It’s coming in left and right,” she said.
“It” was the late-afternoon parade of aircraft at the East Hampton Airport on Friday. Ms. Currie said that because of a Supreme Court decision last week, there was no stopping it.
On June 26 the justices refused to review an appellate court ruling that invalidated restrictions on late-night and early-morning flights and thus noise — noise that opponents like Ms. Currie describe as a roaring, buzzing, round-the-clock nuisance, sometimes waking them up, sometimes shaking their houses.
The Town of East Hampton, which owns the airport, turned to the Supreme Court after the town’s restrictions on flights were invalidated by a federal appeals court last fall. To reduce noise from the airport, the town in 2015 imposed a year-round curfew between 11 p.m. and 7 a.m. The town also banned aircraft it defined as “noisy” after 8 p.m. and before 9 a.m. and set a limit on the number of trips that “noisy” aircraft could make in any single week between May 1 and Oct. 31.
Legal challenges followed, with aviation groups complaining that under the town’s definition, most helicopters and business jets were considered “noisy.” At issue was whether a 1990 federal law limited the town’s authority to impose rules at the airport.
But he said the decision was “better for our cause, which is to close the airport.” He said the airport no longer served its original purpose as a landing strip for local recreational pilots in small planes.
She said that helicopters seemed to arrive at all hours. She said one woke her up at 1 a.m. on Wednesday. That followed what had sounded like a jet approaching at about 11:45 p.m. on Tuesday.
Some pilots cheered the decision, as did the National Business Aviation Association. “This decision reaffirms the longstanding policy that America has a national aviation system, not one subject to a patchwork quilt of local regulations,” the group’s president, Edward M. Bolen, said in a statement.
The decision vexed residents who say noise from the airport has become a part of their daily lives, and it also frustrated local officials. Larry Cantwell, the East Hampton Town supervisor, said the Supreme Court’s decision not to take the case — and thus let the appeals court decision stand — left local governments with almost no options.
He said the town would file an application with the Federal Aviation Administration for noise restrictions. The town had argued that it was not required to do so because it had stopped taking federal money for the airport several years ago.
At the airport on Friday, the helicopters and business jets arrived as a small group of opponents watched, among them Ms. Currie and Sheryl Gold.
Ms. Gold said that jets barely clear her house on the way in.
Just then, a small jet landed, and a moment later, a helicopter on the tarmac climbed into the air, just high enough to clear a parked jet. The helicopter descended on its way to a corner of the airport where a half-dozen helicopters were already parked. The noise drowned out Ms. Gold.