Just two months before they were to begin classes, 499 young men and women who had been accepted to the University of California, Irvine, received letters informing them that their acceptances had been rescinded.
The letters that went out starting last week left students scrambling to either appeal the decision or make other plans for the fall.
Associated Students of the University of California, Irvine, a student government organization, said in a statement to the school’s enrollment staff on Thursday that the acceptances of some applicants had been rescinded even though they had not made any of the mistakes that would have endangered their admission.
The statement included the testimony of some worried applicants. The accounts were mostly anonymous and shared stories of confusion, desperation and dead ends.
The students’ situation is hardly unique; horror stories of revoked acceptances surface with some regularity. It happened at the Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health in 2017, at Tulane University in 2016, and at Carnegie Mellon University in 2015, among others.
The University of California system previously had a major problem when about 28,000 students received acceptance letters to U.C. San Diego in error in 2009.
In those cases, however, the mix-up seemed to have stemmed from administrative mistakes or technological glitches. At U.C. Irvine this year, both the acceptance letters and the rescinded offers were sent on purpose.
The reason: Too many of the approximately 31,000 students who received acceptance letters said they would attend. The university had to trim the list.
About 7,100 freshmen were accepted and planned to register at the university this fall, approximately 850 more than the university had planned for, The Los Angeles Times reported on Friday.
It trimmed its list in accordance with normal policies, according to a statement from Thomas Parham, the university’s vice chancellor for student affairs.
“Acceptance into all University of California campuses is provisional, contingent on meeting the contractual terms and conditions that were clearly outlined in your original admissions offer,” said the statement, which was dated Friday and addressed to applicants.
Those terms and conditions required that students maintain acceptable grades through their senior year of high school and turn in all of the required transcripts and test scores on time. This year, the statement said, the school applied its policy more stringently than it had in the past.
Mr. Vasich, the university spokesman, said that U.C. Irvine recognizes, in many cases, that if a transcript or test score does not arrive by deadline, it may not be the student’s fault.
As of Friday afternoon, he said, 64 acceptances had been restored through the appeals process. He said the university would review its practices to avoid a repeat of this year’s episode.