Politics|Beekeeper, Baker, Photographer … Senator?
Beekeeper, Baker, Photographer … Senator?
Senators, unlike celebrities, actually are just like us.
When not working, they cook, bake, go running, practice yoga, shop for antique rugs and indulge in other pastimes to clear the head, fuel the soul and keep themselves healthy. Even the leaders have their distractions; the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, loves to tailgate at University of Louisville football games, and to watch the Washington Nationals play baseball. When he can fit it in, Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, tools around on a bike. Here are several of the more interesting pastimes that senators enjoy.
Mr. Toomey began reading about beekeeping last year after a college buddy and established beekeeper piqued his interest. He became “fascinated with these creatures” and their complex social system. When his son Patrick discovered a new beekeeping technology, he decided to go all in, with homegrown honey. He spent the spring landscaping for the arrival of his hive, including building a water source to keep bees out of his pool. Things are now buzzing along.
Beekeeping is a long tradition in Mr. Toomey’s home state.
Mr. Toomey once handled the queen bee cage “a little too rough” and angered the bees, as evidenced by their “dive bombing” him. He was pleased to be wearing his protective hood, which he would not model for us.
Ms. Ernst, a member of the military since she was in college, was deployed to Kuwait during the Iraq war and is no stranger to long marches with heavy gear.
As a senator, she has turned that experience into a hobby, leading runs and walks around the Capitol, sometimes at the crack of dawn, with staff members, military liaison and really anyone who is willing to put on a rucksack and march at a brisk pace around the Mall and beyond.
How is ruck marching like lawmaking?
It is actually a popular hobby. In March she participated in the Bataan Memorial Death March, a marathon-length march through the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico, wearing a 46-pound rucksack.
Ms. Collins learned to cook growing up in Caribou, Me., at the arm of her mother, Pat Collins, who took copious notes while watching Julia Child on television. She also loves to bake, and her specialty is all manner of muffins, particularly ones with Maine blueberries. She keeps a fabulous nonstick muffin pan in her homes in Bangor and Washington, as well as in her rustic cabin at Cold Stream Pond in Maine, so it is basically nonstop muffin time.
Muffins in the life of a lawmaker?
“Some muffins are too caky. I am a firm believer that you should not have a cupcake for breakfast!” Maine blueberries only, of course, but given the short growing season, frozen is fine. In fact, frozen ones produce less juice in the baking, but do turn the batter a bit blue. Recipes? She has tried a number of them, but her go-to is from her mother’s cookbook “Fifty Years of Cooking 1948-1998” and involves a pat of shortening, giving the muffins a biscuitlike quality.
“I have been sort of an amateur photographer,” Mr. King said. “I remember having a Kodak as a kid, and I remember when I was about 10 years old I had a friend with a darkroom” who would “put the paper in the liquid and something magical would appear. Digital makes it so much easier.” He has a minor fixation with his Instagram account, where he posts every two or three days.
He did an Instagram post of him at a remote town hall the other night that was hot stuff, per his “likes.” But he finds Maine “one of the most photogenic places on earth,” where sunsets and lobster traps are among his popular shots. A personal favorite, a lighthouse, was taken the other day from the deck of a ferry coming into the dock in Islesboro, Me. He also likes to take photos of the Capitol at various times of day.
Ms. Heitkamp took up Pilates at the suggestion of a friend after she lost the governor’s race in 2000. She enjoyed it so much that the same friend said she ought to become certified to teach. She did, and went on to serve as a fill-in teacher at the local church. Her day job keeps her too busy to substitute these days, but she remains adept at bossing around a reporter on a mat, with lots of focus on breathing.
Yoga and Pilates have been used, Ms. Heitkamp said, as replacements for opioids to treat veterans.
What do people think of Pilates pedagogy from a pol?
One winter day, Mr. Coons was summoned to the White House to meet with David Axelrod, a senior adviser to President Barack Obama, to discuss his potential run for the Senate. As Mr. Coons listened, snow began to fall rapidly outside, greatly worrying him, as he had a wedding to perform that evening back in Delaware. Suddenly, Mr. Axelrod said proudly, “The president wants to meet you.” Mr. Coons said, “I appreciate that, but I can’t. I have a commitment back in Delaware.” Before the White House aide’s shock could wear off, Mr. Coons was dashing out the door. He made it back just in time, “drenched in sweat.” Mr. Obama got over it.
The senator hails from a musical family; her father had a swing band and taught her at an early age to play boogie-woogie. Childhood music lessons paid off in college in the 1970s at Michigan State University, when she would alternate between the piano and guitar during bar gigs as part of the duo Dale and Debbie. It beat waitressing, but when Dale bowed out, Debbie found playing alone in the bar as a young woman a tad too “interesting.” These days, she plays her baby grand at home in Lansing whenever possible, and can still belt out some Carole King.
In 2014, when Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, complicated some spending legislation in a manner that forced his colleagues to work all day and night on a Saturday, Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota, got her hands on a keyboard. Ms. Stabenow got a bipartisan Christmas carol singalong rocking. “It was fun, and to be honest it was in the middle of a crazy and difficult time and it really brought people together,” she said. “That’s what music is for me. It crosses party lines. It humanizes all of us.” (Senator Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee and another lawmaking pianist, took a turn.) She has also teamed with Senator Tim Kaine, the Virginia Democrat and harmonica player, at lawmaker retreats.
