Martin Landau, the tall, intense, sometimes mischievously sinister actor best known for his role in the television series “Mission: Impossible” and his Oscar-winning portrayal of Bela Lugosi in the film “Ed Wood,” died on Saturday in Los Angeles. He was 89.
Mr. Landau starred in “Mission: Impossible,” a hit suspense drama on CBS, as Rollin Hand, a versatile covert-operations agent, from its debut in 1966 until 1969.
After the show’s third season, he and Barbara Bain, his wife and co-star, left because of a contractual dispute. But the series had served its purpose. Because Mr. Landau’s character was a master of disguise, morphing into a different character every week, casting people began to think of him for a variety of roles — and not only villains, which he had so often played earlier in his career.
Almost two decades later, after some lean years, Mr. Landau enjoyed a career revival in feature films. In Francis Ford Coppola’s “Tucker: The Man and His Dream” (1988), he was cast as the title character’s amiable hustler of a business partner as they challenged the Big Three automakers in the 1940s. The film brought him an Academy Award nomination.
He received another nomination the next year for Woody Allen’s “Crimes and Misdemeanors,” in which he played a successful, upstanding ophthalmologist and family man who gets away with the arranged murder of his mistress.
Then, in 1994, he played Lugosi, the faded horror star — now elderly, poor and morphine-addicted — in Tim Burton’s “Ed Wood.” Johnny Depp played Wood, the enthusiastic but inept 1950s filmmaker, who befriends and employs Lugosi.
Mr. Landau’s performance earned him the Oscar and the Golden Globe for best supporting actor, as well as awards from the National Society of Film Critics, the New York Film Critics Circle, the Los Angeles Film Critics Association, the Chicago Film Critics Association, the Boston Society of Film Critics and the Screen Actors Guild.
He was also a serious alumnus of the Actors Studio in New York. He once told an NPR listener that he had never had trouble learning lines. “I think of them as thoughts and ideas” that the character needs to express, not as dialogue, he explained.
Martin Landau was born on June 20, 1928, in Brooklyn, the son of Morris Landau, a machinist, and the former Selma Buchman. He attended James Madison High School and Pratt Institute, and originally planned to be an illustrator.
His stage debut was in the summer of 1951 in “Detective Story” at the Peaks Island Playhouse in Maine. That same year he made his Off Broadway debut in “First Love” at the Provincetown Playhouse in Greenwich Village.
Television was a major part of his career early on. His first screen acting job was in a 1953 episode of the NBC series “Molly” (originally “The Goldbergs”). He appeared on numerous series during the 1950s, including golden-age anthologies like “Playhouse 90” and many westerns, before making his feature film debut as a soldier in the Korean War film “Pork Chop Hill,” released in 1959.
That same year he appeared in his first truly memorable role, in Alfred Hitchcock’s “North by Northwest,” as a spy’s henchman who is both menacing and, as Mr. Landau chose to play him, attracted to his boss (James Mason).
Before being cast in “Mission: Impossible,” Mr. Landau also appeared alongside Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton in “Cleopatra” (1963), as a loyal Roman soldier, and in “The Greatest Story Ever Told” (1965), as the Jewish high priest Caiaphas.
After leaving “Mission: Impossible,” he and Ms. Bain moved to London, where they starred from 1975 to 1977 in “Space: 1999,” a science fiction series in which he played the commander of a lunar colony and she its chief medical officer.
He returned to the stage in 2003 in “Sixteen Wounded,” at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven, playing a Jewish baker who unknowingly befriends a Palestinian terrorist.
Mr. Landau married Ms. Bain in 1957. They had two daughters and divorced in 1993. He is survived by his daughters, Susie Landau Finch and Juliet Landau, and a granddaughter.
