Gus Trowbridge spoke to sixth graders at the Manhattan Country School, which he modeled after Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s vision of an integrated society.Credit...Ruby Washington/The New York Times.
Gus Trowbridge, who transformed the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s dream of an integrated society, where character would trump race and class, into a progressive New York City private school that became a national model for diversity, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan. He was 82.
The cause was vascular dementia and cancer, his daughter Katharine Carroll said.
In 1966, after nearly a decade of teaching English and social studies to the offspring of the city’s economic elite, Mr. Trowbridge and his wife, Marty, founded Manhattan Country School in a townhouse on East 96th Street — an unofficial but demonstrable boundary between two disparate East Side neighborhoods, Yorkville and East Harlem.
The school operated with a flexible curriculum; assessed tuition as a percentage of income on the basis of parents’ ability to pay instead of a fixed annual fee; and eventually assembled a student body in which every racial and ethnic group constituted a minority.
In the decades since its founding, Manhattan Country School has become a prototype for private schools that embrace a public mission.
Of the 350 children who applied to Manhattan Country School this year, 40 were admitted. Parents pay tuition ranging from $500 to $42,000 a year based on a percentage of their income.
There were a number of bumps along the way, of course.
A few parents initially balked at subsidizing poorer families. As views on race evolved in the 1970s, some black parents demanded separate black studies courses. Mr. Trowbridge persuaded most of them that the subject was already integral to the curriculum.
Another group demanded that gender issues be given the same priority as race. School officials agreed.
Augustus Trowbridge was born in Manhattan on Aug. 14, 1934, the son of the Rev. George Augustus Trowbridge and the former Jean Whiting. His father hailed from vintage New England stock; his grandfather was a physicist and the dean of Princeton University’s graduate school.
After attending a prep school through eighth grade in Philadelphia where students wore uniforms, and which he remembered as “Dickensian,” he graduated from the Putney School in Vermont and earned bachelor’s and master’s degrees in American literature from Brown University.
He was joined at Brown by Martha Dwight, known as Marty, a flutist, music major and former classmate from Putney. They married. In addition to her and their daughter Katharine, he is survived by their two other children, Stephen and Mary Trowbridge, and by six grandchildren.
Mr. Trowbridge taught at the Dalton School in Manhattan, which also prided itself on a creative curriculum and community involvement, until he decided when he was 30 to found, with his wife, a school that prized even greater diversity.
While the proportion of nonwhite students in local private schools at the time averaged 3 percent, he set a goal of at least 30 percent (double the highest proportion of any comparable private school). The word “country” in the school’s name referred to its 180-acre working farm in the Catskills.
Among the others he recruited as sponsors or board members were Erik Erikson, the psychologist, and Franklin D. Roosevelt III, an economist and grandson of the president.
Mr. Trowbridge recounted the school’s origins in a book, “Begin With a Dream: How a Private School With a Public Mission Changed the Politics of Race, Class, and Gender in American Education” (2005).
Last year, Manhattan Country School moved from 7 East 96th Street to larger quarters at 150 West 85th Street, the former home of the Mannes School of Music.
Of its 265 students in prekindergarten through eighth grade, about four in 10 identify themselves as white. The same proportion report themselves as multiracial, and about one in 10 identify as black.
“Well, how do you feel in here? Good?” Mr. Trowbridge replied.
“Yes,” the student said.
