WARSAW — President Trump arrived in Europe on Wednesday for three days of diplomacy that will culminate in a meeting with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, which has the potential for global repercussions and political fallout back home.
Even his top aides do not know precisely what Mr. Trump will decide to say or do when he and Mr. Putin meet face to face on Friday on the sidelines of the Group of 20 economic summit gathering in Hamburg, Germany. And that is what most worries those advisers as well as officials across his administration as Mr. Trump begins his second foreign trip as president, stopping first in Warsaw to give an address on Thursday and then heading to Hamburg.
The highly anticipated conversation with Mr. Putin is in many ways a necessity, given the critical disputes separating the United States and Russia. But it also poses risks for Mr. Trump, who faces a web of investigations into his campaign’s possible links to Russia, as well as questions about his willingness to take on Moscow for its military aggression and election meddling on his behalf. The air of uncertainty about the meeting is only heightened by the president’s propensity for unpredictable utterances and awkward optics.
And it is not the only charged encounter awaiting Mr. Trump this week. Following North Korea’s launch on Tuesday of an intercontinental ballistic missile, he also faces new pressure to act on a threat from Pyongyang that has long confounded American presidents, and that he has few appealing ways to address. He is scheduled to meet in Hamburg with President Xi Jinping of China, as he complains that Beijing has not done enough to rein in North Korea.
If Mr. Trump’s first foreign trip, in May, was a chance for him to escape turmoil at home — staff infighting, a stalled agenda and the Russia-related investigations — his second will thrust him into the maelstrom. And at the center of it, Mr. Putin awaits.
Mr. Trump himself does not appear to be troubled by the meeting. He has told aides he is more annoyed by the prospect of being scolded by the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and other leaders for pulling out of the Paris climate accords and for his hard line on immigration.
Mr. Trump’s team said he might bring up Russia’s documented meddling in the 2016 election, but he is unlikely to dwell on it: Doing so would emphasize doubts about the legitimacy of his election. Aides expect him to focus on matters involving Syria, including creating safe zones, fighting the Islamic State and confronting Mr. Putin’s unwillingness to stop the government of President Bashar al-Assad from using chemical weapons against civilians.
Before the meeting between the American and Russian presidents, Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson said late on Wednesday that the United States “is prepared to explore the possibility” of expanded cooperation with Moscow in Syria, including a discussion of establishing no-fly zones.
Mr. Tillerson cautioned, though, that the United States and Russia “certainly have unresolved differences on a number of issues” regarding Syria, and warned that no faction — presumably including the Assad government — would be allowed to “illegitimately” retake or occupy areas liberated in the current offensives.
The G-20 Met This Weekend. How’s Your Summit Knowledge?
The Group of 20 summit meeting took place in the German city of Hamburg. What is the G-20, and what happens when its members meet? See how much you know.
A day before Mr. Trump left Washington, the White House announced that the meeting would be a formal bilateral discussion, rather than a quick pull-aside at the economic summit gathering that some had expected.
The format benefits both. Mr. Putin, a canny one-on-one operator who once brought a Labrador to a meeting with Ms. Merkel because he knew she was afraid of dogs, will be able to take the measure of Mr. Trump.
Mr. Trump’s aides are seeking structure and predictability. They hope that a formal meeting, with aides present and an agenda, will leave less room for improvisation and relegate Russia’s meddling in the campaign to a secondary topic, behind more pressing policy concerns that the president is eager to address.
Still, lawmakers in both parties are pressing the president to stand tough. They signaled their wariness last month with a 98-2 vote in the Senate to codify sanctions against Russia and require that Congress review any move by the president to lift them, a step the White House is resisting.
Cognizant of the perils, the White House has planned Mr. Trump’s itinerary to counter the perception that he is too friendly with Moscow. In Warsaw on Thursday, he will deliver a major speech and meet with Central and Eastern European allies, activities calculated to demonstrate his commitment to NATO in the face of Russian aggression. But there, too, Mr. Trump will be under pressure to do what he refused to in Brussels during his first trip: explicitly endorse, on European soil, the Article 5 collective defense principle that undergirds NATO.
His advisers say that he is eager to meet with President Andrzej Duda of Poland, a center-right politician who shares Mr. Trump’s skepticism about migration, and that he sees a chance to make lucrative energy deals with Mr. Duda’s government — perhaps at the expense of Russia.
But the substance and body language of his encounter with Mr. Putin will draw the most scrutiny.
Mr. Putin has signaled that he will press Mr. Trump to lift sanctions imposed on Russia for its annexation of Crimea, its interference in Ukraine and its election meddling, and to hand over Russian diplomatic compounds on Long Island and in Maryland that the United States seized last year.
The potential pitfalls are more than theoretical. White House officials recall with dread the images that emerged from Mr. Trump’s May meeting with Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov and Ambassador Sergey I. Kislyak of Russia in the Oval Office, which showed the president grinning, laughing and clasping hands with the Russian officials.
