During a summer of transit misery in New York City, a subway track fire in Upper Manhattan on Monday morning sent nine people to the hospital and snarled trains across the city.
A track fire near the 145th Street station on the A line around 7:30 a.m. halted service on several lines and prompted a cascade of delays, subway officials said. Beleaguered commuters flocked to other lines that were overcrowded and sweltering on a hot day.
Nine people were transported to hospitals to be examined, fire officials said. The fire was reportedly caused by trash on the tracks, fire officials said, and it was under control by about 9:15 a.m.
The subway is at nearly six million riders each day — the highest level since the 1940s. Those extra riders are cramming onto a system that is essentially the same size it has been for decades.
Subway riders posted photos of platforms along the nearby No. 1 line overflowing with people on social media. The mood was tense on board a southbound No. 1 train that was full to capacity. “If you push me, I’m going to push you back,” one man told another rider.
“We are reviewing the entire incident, we apologize for the inconvenience, and we appreciate our customers’ patience,” said Kevin Ortiz, a spokesman for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which oversees the subway.
The authority is working to reduce track fires on the subway by testing a new vacuum system, Mr. Ortiz said.
The track fire was the latest problem on a subway system where delays are skyrocketing and service has become increasingly unreliable in recent months. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo recently declared a state of emergency on the subways and pledged to fix the mounting problems.
On Monday morning, the track fire suspended service on the A, B, C and D lines. But there were other incidents that caused delays, too: signal problems in Queens, a sick passenger in Manhattan and an “unruly customer” in Brooklyn.
Last month, an A train derailed near the 125th Street station in Manhattan, injuring more than two dozen people. Subway riders had been concerned about rising delays, but the crash raised questions over the safety of the system.
Mr. Cuomo recently named Joseph J. Lhota to lead the transportation authority. Mr. Lhota is expected to outline his plans to fix the subway by the end of August.