Anita Dongre, in black, and an artisan group in the village of Barmer, India.
The Duchess of Cambridge, Priyanka Chopra and Sonam Kapoor have worn her designs. Last year, Fortune India ranked her No. 21 on its list of the country’s most powerful women. Her clothes and jewelry are sold in India, the Middle East and Africa.
But not — until now — anywhere in the West.
This month, Anita Dongre, a designer born and raised in Mumbai who opened her first store in India nearly two decades ago and has since expanded her fashion house to include five brands — AND, Global Desi, bridal, Pink City and Grassroot — finally came to America, opening the fifth brick-and-mortar location for Grassroot in SoHo, in Manhattan.
The move followed a year of success for Ms. Dongre, who achieved an astounding level of global visibility after the Duchess of Cambridge wore one of her designs during a royal tour of India and Bhutan last spring. Hours later, AnitaDongre.com crashed from an onslaught of orders, with the highest number originating in the United States. By year’s end, Ms. Dongre was the seventh-most-searched designer on Google, after Kendall and Kylie Jenner and Beyoncé. With such visibility, Ms. Dongre decided the time was right to set up shop in the United States, home to nearly four million peoples of Indian descent.
She decided to use Grassroot as her vehicle for entry because she believes that its combination of handwork at affordable prices will resonate with women, said Yash Dongre, Ms. Dongre’s son and the head of business for House of Anita Dongre. (Ms. Dongre’s sister and brother are also employees of the company.) “People care about what the clothes stand for,” Mr. Dongre said.
The Grassroot collections combine contemporary silhouettes, such as a strappy dress ($335), a drawstring top ($95) or a billow-sleeved shirt in blush pink ($225), with traditional techniques, such as bandhani, a tie and dye method used for creating patterns, jamdani, a way of weaving on the loom, or Chikankari embroidery.
Catherine, the duchess of Cambridge, wearing a dress by Ms. Dongre, during a royal visit to Mumbai in 2016.
Ms. Dongre, 53, a fast talker and vegetarian who keeps to a strict 9 p.m. bedtime no matter where she is, began designing for herself when she was 15. Though born and raised in Mumbai, she spent her summers in Jaipur, India, and would work with local artisans to customize outfits, bangles and mojari (a type of shoe).
She studied design at SNDT Women’s University in Mumbai, despite her family’s reservations, and began working immediately after graduation. In 1995, she started her company with the help of her sister, Meena Sehra. From the early years, Ms. Dongre incorporated artisanal techniques into her work, using block-printing, embroidery and more. But in the last few years, her perspective on the value of these traditions has deepened.
Ms. Dongre conceived of Grassroot about 10 years ago but kept it on the back burner because of time constraints. “I kept saying I would make Grassroot big one day,” she said.
One of Ms. Dongre’s dresses.
Two and a half years ago, she decided to meet with members of the Self-Employed Women’s Association, a trade union in the Indian state Gujarat. “I realized I could not keep wasting time” Ms. Dongre said. She opened the first Grassroot store in August 2015 and has worked with the association since, as well as with a nongovernment group called Women Weave to produce handmade pieces in limited quantities with artisans across India.
