BEAVERTON, Ore. — The only things missing were a white lab coat and an electrified hairdo as Tiffany Beers, 37, showed off an assortment of boots and shoes adorned with dangling wires and MacGyvered circuit boards.
Ms. Beers, an engineer by training and a senior innovator by title at Nike, works in the company’s vaunted Innovation Kitchen, so named because Bill Bowerman, a founder of Nike, used a waffle iron in a kitchen to create the “waffle sole,” a game changer for sneakers. But her office is littered with prototypes and drawings of projects believed so important to the future of Nike that journalists who decline to sign nondisclosure agreements, including this one, are barred entry.
So she had agreed to meet in the Blue Ribbon Studio, an arts-and-crafts space here on the Nike campus, outside of Portland, Ore. “The motor fit, it pulls everything at once, which is very different from how laces work, which pull everything incrementally,” Ms. Beers said, describing a shoe she referred to during its development process as the McFly, after Marty McFly, the character played by Michael J. Fox in the 1985 film “Back to the Future” and its sequels.
Wearing a black tunic and black pants, she showed off McFly prototypes, including a snowboard boot with a clunky dangling circuit breaker and white high-tops with a fly embellished on the tongue. Asked to describe her own sneakers, she looked down, then insisted that the visitor unsee them for reasons of corporate secrecy.
Notwithstanding that she could tell you about her current sneaker project, but then Nike would have to kill you, Ms. Beers is being sent by the company on something of a victory lap after her successful role as the lead engineer and product manager for the self-lacing McFly, which came onto the market last year as the HyperAdapt 1.0 sneakers.
The 1989 film “Back to the Future Part II” shows Marty McFly in the seemingly unimaginable year 2015, putting on Nikes whose laces tie themselves. This was the notion of Tinker Hatfield and Mark Parker, then both up-and-coming designers at the company.
In 2005, Mr. Hatfield, by now a design star of Nike, and Mr. Parker, now the chief executive, decided to make the shoes for real, and Mr. Hatfield chose Ms. Beers as the engineer to oversee the project.
She was new to the company then, and this was a side venture that she worked on here and there amid other assignments. “Back to the Future” fans had to content themselves with a limited-edition replica of the futuristic shoe called the Nike Mag, which didn’t self-lace, sold through a raffle that raised money for the Michael J. Fox Foundation. Then at the 2014 N.B.A. All-Star Game, Mr. Hatfield announced to reporters that the self-lacing shoes would be complete by 2015.
He intended to signal to the company that this was a top priority. “It’s not unheard-of for me to get things moving in unexpected ways,” he said. Ms. Beers learned the shoe was being fast-tracked when she read his interviews on the web. She had five weeks to get a shoe ready for Mr. Parker. “Tiffany was on the hot seat,” Mr. Hatfield said.
The HyperAdapt shoe, in which sensors inside the shoe detect the foot and activate a mechanism to tighten the laces, was a billboard release from the company, inciting both nostalgia and the desire for the new. There was frenzied demand for the shoes, which retail for about $720 on Nike’s website and in some Nike stores and feel as if there is a small computer under the arch of your foot, because there is one.
Nike has long associated itself with professional athletes. Now it is showing its commitment to technology, and, as a woman in engineering, Ms. Beers has emerged as a heroine in her own right.
She quit volleyball after a year because its demands on her time were too great, as she also worked full time through most of her college days at a factory that made the lids for Pringles cans and Sharpie markers.
After college, Ms. Beers longed for an experience outside the Midwest. She searched the internet for “Nike jobs” and found a posting for a product engineer. Besides the fact that she hates feet, working at the sneaker company was her dream job. She was called out to Oregon for an interview a few months later. Before her meetings, she hitchhiked to Mount Hood to go snowboarding.
She got the job and moved to nearby Portland in 2004, working on plastic airbags that go into the soles of Nike Air sneakers. She knew that the Innovation Kitchen was where it was at, and worked steadily toward getting a gig there.
Junior employees at Nike are encouraged to network with senior staff members and executives. In 2005, Ms. Beers introduced herself to Mr. Hatfield. Soon after, he called her back to his office and showed her an online petition with 30,000 names of people calling for Nike to make the “Back to the Future” sneakers. “He asked me if I could build that shoe,” she said.
Since undertaking the HyperAdapt project, Ms. Beers has become obsessed with studying people’s lace-tying behavior. It drives her crazy that people don’t adjust their laces throughout the day, loosening them when their feet swell during prolonged exercise or standing. “I call it lace toleration,” she said. She records her observations on spreadsheets.
She keeps spreadsheets to analyze her golf game. She has spreadsheets to better understand ingredient interactions in her baking.
And she keeps spreadsheets to try to make sense of the gender gap in sports, which she believes exist, at least in part, because of segregation on the practice and game fields. “I have a lot of questions about how we are training women athletes and why we are isolating the genders in teaching,” she said.
She also uses spreadsheets to keep track of her other job: She is a mechanic and the car racing pit crew manager for her husband, Olivier Henrichot, an amateur racer and a designer who also works at Nike. They met in the Innovation Kitchen, where they bonded over a love of their sporty cars — his a Corvette, hers a Camaro SS. She plans one day to get behind the wheel on the track herself.
“My whole life has been competing with the boys,” Ms. Beers said.