Brittany Haas and Benjamin Stephen Finkle are to be married July 2 at the Inn at Erlowest in Lake George, N.Y. Cantor Shira Ginsburg is to officiate.
The bride, who is 30 and will be taking her husband’s name, works in New York as an associate director of eyewear and e-commerce for Chanel. She is also the founder of Happily Ever Borrowed, a Manhattan company that rents bridal accessories. She graduated from Cornell.
She is a daughter of Janet M. Haas and Edward J. Haas of Nesconset, N.Y. The bride’s father, who is retired, was a senior account manager at Pall Medical, a company in Port Washington, N.Y., that manufactures surgical appliances. Her mother is an office manager at a private doctor’s office in Kings Park, N.Y.
The groom, 29, is a manager of financial planning and analysis in New York for David Yurman, the American designer jewelry company. He graduated cum laude from Cornell.
He is a son of Lisa A. Finkle and Bruce D. Finkle of Delmar, N.Y. His father is the president of the Wustefeld Candy Company in Green Island, N.Y.
Ms. Haas and Mr. Finkle were introduced in February 2013 through the dating app Coffee Meets Bagel. Coincidentally, their profile photos were each taken on Machu Picchu, the Incan city in Peru.
They met over drinks a week later at a cocktail bar in Manhattan, where they both lived, and realized they had graduated from Cornell two years apart.
Two weeks later, Mr. Finkle picked up Ms. Haas at her Chelsea apartment, and before entering received the obligatory warning that what he was about to see — bridal magazines and veils strewn everywhere — was her work and by no means an indication that she was in a rush to get married.
Six months later, however, it was Ms. Haas who became wary when Mr. Finkle began talking about getting more serious. “I knew that this was the girl I wanted to be with,” he said.
Ms. Haas, who knew “he was the perfect man” for her, was not yet ready. She broke off the relationship shortly thereafter.
Three months later, he had trouble understanding just where she was going when she began making nice comments and liking photos on his Facebook page.
He called her. “Do you want to get together and talk?” he recalled asking her.
She accepted his invitation and told him that she had made a mistake in breaking up with him, and that every guy she dated since had not come close to measuring up to him.
By June 2014, they were dating steadily again, and in July 2015, they moved into a Brooklyn apartment together.
She went up to her apartment and found more roses, with yet another note directing her to go up to the building’s rooftop garden.
She found a trail of rose petals that led to Mr. Finkle, who, on bended knee with ring in one hand and a bottle of Champagne in the other, proposed.