In 1967, the NBC journalist Frank McGee spent nearly a month living with soldiers of the 101st Airborne Division in Vietnam. Though the troops were often engaged in heavy combat, McGee had a different interest: the experiences of African-American soldiers.
McGee’s reporting, which resulted in the NBC documentary “Same Mud, Same Blood,” focused on Platoon Sgt. Lewis B. Larry, an African-American from Mississippi, and the 40 men, black and white, under his command. “Our history books have taken little notice of the Negro soldier,” McGee said in the documentary. “How do the troops of this war, black and white, want its history written?” The answer isn’t easy.
Black soldiers were nothing new in the American military, but Vietnam was the first major conflict in which they were fully integrated, and the first conflict after the civil rights revolution of the 1950s and early ’60s. Executive Order 9981 officially desegregated the armed forces in 1948, but many units remained segregated until late 1954. Other changes were afoot: The few years before McGee’s report saw passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
And yet, like changes back home, integration on paper did not translate into full equality and substantive integration. As in the United States, white soldiers — particularly from the South — resisted. And troops in Vietnam couldn’t help being aware of rising racial tensions, marked by the nearly simultaneous riots in Newark and Detroit during the summer of 1967.
These positive depictions of race relations are all the more remarkable when compared with the domestic racial situation, in which urban riots had come to be expected every summer.
But was it really that simple? True, black and white soldiers formed close bonds of friendship in Vietnam, especially on the front lines. However, McGee’s claim that the military had eliminated “race as a factor in human existence” is too rosy. It reflected the belief of many white liberals that racial discrimination was a personal issue between whites and blacks, and not the result of a social structure that systematically discriminated against African-Americans.
Unquestionably, African-Americans were disproportionately punished. A 1972 Defense Department study found that they received 25.5 percent of nonjudicial punishments and 34.3 percent of courts-martial in Vietnam. Not surprisingly, given these numbers, African- Americans were overrepresented in military prisons: In December 1969, they represented 58 percent of prisoners at the infamous Long Binh Jail, near Saigon.
Eventually, the racial tension and violence that had convulsed the home front during the summer of 1967 erupted in Vietnam. In large part this was because of the inability or refusal of military leaders to address adequately complaints of racial discrimination, but there was a potent domestic factor at work as well. The assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. in April 1968 was the catalyst for rioting in more than 60 American cities, and it challenged the belief that racism and discrimination could be ended through personal relationships and peaceful protest — both at home and in Vietnam.
Incidents of racial tension were uncommon in the early years of the war, but following King’s assassination they became a weekly if not daily occurrence. Tensions tended to be noticeably higher on rear-line military bases. On Aug. 29, 1968, hundreds of black prisoners overwhelmed prison guards at Long Binh Jail, captured the stockade commander and set the mess hall and administration building on fire.
In September 1969, Time’s Wallace Terry, who had spent more time with black soldiers than any other journalist and had previously reported on the positive nature of black-white relations, came out with a decidedly bleaker assessment. There was, he said, “another war being fought in Vietnam — between black and white Americans.” He asserted that racial incidents on American military installations in Da Nang, Cam Ranh Bay, Dong Tam, Saigon, and Bien Hoa had become commonplace.
The situation raged out of control in some units. Official military reports reveal that among members of the III Marine Amphibious Force at Camp Horn, in Da Nang, there were at least 33 incidents of racial violence in the two months between December 1969 and January 1970. Racial violence was occurring almost daily.
Eventually military leaders took notice. However, they largely focused on the responsibility of black soldiers for these incidents. The actions of white soldiers were all but ignored, while the black troops’ complaints of discrimination went unaddressed. In late 1969, Deputy Assistant Secretary Bennett drew up recommendations that acknowledged that ignoring complaints of racial discrimination contributed to racial tension and violence. But military leaders ignored his recommendations, and when Bennett’s successor, Frank Render III, reached similar conclusions, he was promptly fired.
Even when blacks’ complaints of discrimination were received, they were often not taken seriously. Of the 534 received by the Pentagon’s Office of the Inspector General in 1968-69, only 10 were deemed legitimate. Equally troubling, another study commissioned by the Army found that between 1966 and 1969, commanders had failed to report 423 allegations of racial discrimination.
While McGee was right to highlight black and white friendships as an important element of the soldiers’ experience in Vietnam, it was far from the whole story. Military service in Vietnam remained, as Terry reported, “a place of discrimination.” One could leave the United States, but one couldn’t leave its racial heritage behind.