President Trump’s announcement on Twitter Wednesday morning that transgender people would be barred from the United States military “in any capacity” marked a sudden reversal of a policy that had evolved rapidly under the Obama White House.
Here is a look at The New York Times’s coverage of the events leading to the lifting of the transgender ban in June 2016, and what has happened since.
Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel said that the military should “continually” review its prohibition on transgender people in the armed forces.
“Every qualified American who wants to serve our country should have an opportunity if they fit the qualifications and can do it,” Mr. Hagel said in an interview.
 President Barack Obama, who in 2011 had repealed the “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy that banned openly gay men, lesbians and bisexuals from serving in the military, had refrained from commenting on transgender people in the armed forces, even as he had been pressured on the issue by activists for L.G.B.T. rights.
Mr. Hagel’s successor as defense secretary, Ashton B. Carter, announced that the Pentagon would move to allow transgender people to serve openly, making good on Mr. Hagel’s promise of continual review.
In announcing the plan, Mr. Carter acknowledged the many transgender people who were already serving in the military.
“We have transgender soldiers, sailors, airmen and Marines — real, patriotic Americans — who I know are being hurt by an outdated, confusing, inconsistent approach that’s contrary to our value of service and individual merit,” he said.
In previous months, lawmakers had begun to openly champion the cause of transgender service members.
Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., speaking to the Human Rights Campaign, a gay rights group, argued that transgender people should be allowed to serve in the armed forces.
The study predicted that service members would not seek to transition were the procedures not covered by the Pentagon, and that they would likely have higher rates of substance abuse and suicide as a result.
Mr. Trump’s victory in November was greeted with alarm by many in the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community, who feared reversals of political advances.
“All across America right now there are millions of people who are terrified,” Mara Keisling, the executive director of the National Center for Transgender Equality, told The Times.
Two transgender cadets — one at West Point, the other at the Air Force Academy — were denied their commissions because of a loophole in the Pentagon’s transgender policy, which officials said only covered active-duty service members.
The policy, which had been released in October, was written by Brad Carson, an undersecretary of defense under President Obama.
A year after Mr. Carter lifted the Pentagon’s ban, Mr. Trump’s defense secretary, Jim Mattis, delayed a plan to allow transgender recruits to join the military.
Congressional Republicans were also attempting to roll back the Obama policy. In early July, the House narrowly rejected a bill that would have stopped the Pentagon from paying for gender transition and hormone therapy.
“After consultation with my generals and military experts, please be advised that the United States government will not accept or allow transgender individuals to serve in any capacity in the U.S. military,” he wrote in a series of tweets.