They looked like really lame band names but were, instead, potential sketch ideas scrawled on a whiteboard in the writers’ room of the comedy series “Baroness Von Sketch Show.” On a hot June day here, the four “baronesses” — the 40-something creators and stars Aurora Browne, Meredith MacNeill, Carolyn Taylor and Jennifer Whalen — were gathered at their downtown production offices inside a nearly deserted office building that’s slated for demolition. They sat at a boardroom table dotted with coffee cups, hand cream and vitamin pills, batting around their own pitches and fielding others from the show’s writing staff.
On Wednesday, Aug. 2, IFC will bring the first 13 episodes of the group’s gently jabbing social satire to American audiences — or at least to those viewers who can’t navigate YouTube. The show, which has spent two seasons on the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, has gathered an online following through the posting of bite-size observations on the micro-absurdities and macro-neuroses of modern life: Fitbit tyranny, the way moms say hello, product design for women (“A slim bottle because women are slim!”), office book clubs where no one has read the book (twist: The office is a publishing house).
At home, “Baroness Von Sketch Show” has cleaned up at the Canadian Screen Awards and earned comparisons to Canada’s last big sketch comedy export, the 1990s series “The Kids in the Hall.” One major difference: “Baroness” is created by women (not men who often dress up as women) and almost entirely written and directed by women, too.
Comedy, an entertainment zone notoriously dominated by the male point of view, has opened up in the decades since “Kids,” but progress has been fitful. Even with the prominence of Tina Fey, Mindy Kaling and the sitcom “Broad City,” the baronesses — friends and Toronto comedy scene colleagues — noticed a lack of female sketch on mainstream TV (Amy Schumer aside). So they decided pool their expertise to design a sketch show for a smart, urban, platform-agnostic audience — and they did so with a shared sense of now-or-never urgency.
Ms. Taylor (the cerebral one, and the showrunner) and Ms. Browne (the one who pushes the joke toward the dark and dirty) met at the improv theater Second City in downtown Toronto in the mid-90s. They became good friends, living on different floors of the same apartment building. Both worked the city’s comedy circuit for years, writing and appearing onstage and onscreen. Often, they crossed paths with another Second City alumna, Ms. Whalen (the one who is known to take an unwieldy idea and distill it to a cleanly written half-page). All three had experienced what Ms. Whalen described as “development hell”: selling hot pitches that sat on network shelves until they cooled and evaporated.
In 2012, she had mentioned this gap to Ms. Taylor, who was in Halifax, Nova Scotia, writing for “This Hour Has 22 Minutes,” the CBC’s “Daily Show”-style faux newscast. Ms. MacNeill was working in the ensemble, and the two began to polish the pitch for a female-driven sketch show that would be naturalistic, observational and shot on location with a single camera. They wanted to be out of a studio and in the real-world strangeness of “The Office” and “Little Britain.” Ms. Taylor pulled in Ms. Whalen and Ms. Browne, who were also excited.
After days of carefully rehearsing the pitch to appear off the cuff, they sold it to the CBC. Within a year, they were shooting on the streets of Toronto with Ms. Taylor as showrunner but all four equally involved at every step, right into the editing suite. They hired two permanent writers and rotated a large team of contributing writers and story editors, veteran and untested, and mostly women.
Last summer, the sketch “Welcome to Your 40’s” started upticking online. Now at 1.8 million Facebook views, it follows a woman (Ms. MacNeill) at the gym on her 40th birthday who’s relegated to the region of the locker room where aggressive middle-age nakedness is the norm.
Jennifer Caserta, the president of IFC, said she found the series “ridiculously relatable” and saw it fitting cozily into the network’s lineup (the show is a natural stepsibling to the similarly minutiae-obsessed “Portlandia,” albeit more Ann Taylor, less trucker jacket). So far, IFC’s only note has been about changing a reference to a Canadian cocktail called a Caesar (it involves clam juice) to the more American-friendly Bloody Mary. In June, the network brought the group out to Los Angeles for a panel hosted by Ms. DeLaria, who also guest-stars this season. Ms. Whalen said she couldn’t believe they got picked up at the airport in a car, and all four gushed about the quality of the hotel.
