Update: The woman was released by police without charges hours after her arrest. See our latest story here.
The police in Saudi Arabia arrested a woman on Tuesday who appeared in a video posted online in which she wears a miniskirt and crop top, exposing her legs and midriff in violation of the country’s strict dress code for women.
The video of the woman, identified online only as Khulood, prompted a debate on social media soon after it was uploaded to Snapchat over the weekend. It was rapidly shared across the internet by people who supported her display and — perhaps more interesting — by those who opposed it, resulting in an official investigation.
In the short clip, filmed mostly from behind, the woman is shown walking through the ruins of an ancient fort in Ushaiager, a town in Najd Province. Najd is the birthplace of the country’s ultraconservative Wahhabi religious movement.
Saudi law imposes stringent rules on women’s appearance and behavior. Saudi women are required to wear a black garment, called an abaya, that covers everything but the face, feet and hands. They must also keep their heads covered, and they are not permitted to drive or to socialize with men who are not related to them.
An unidentified spokesman for the Riyadh police cited by the Saudi online news site Sabq said the woman had told the police that she visited the site in Ushaiager with her legal guardian — a male relative, usually a father or husband, but sometimes a brother or son, who has the legal authority to control a woman’s movements — and that the video had been put online without her knowledge.
The video, and the debate on social media that followed, exposed a rift below the country’s tightly policed surface.
Some people on Twitter called the woman brave and accused Saudi Arabia of hypocrisy for often celebrating the beauty of foreign women while denigrating that of its own citizens.
Some supporters of the woman in the video posted images of Ivanka and Melania Trump, who during President Trump’s state visit to Saudi Arabia in May wore dresses that exposed their legs and did not cover their heads.
Other Saudis condemned the woman not just for flaunting her figure but also for flouting the kingdom’s well-known rules.
“She shouldn’t be out in a conservative country looking like this; she should respect the laws, or her destiny will be known,” wrote one person who shared the video despite those comments.
The Saudi news site Okaz reported that the authorities in Ushaiager had requested that the provincial governor and the police prosecute the woman.
The news media, unlike most of the country’s Twitter users, blurred the image of the woman’s body to avoid violating the law.
