Then Pope Francis and President Trump weighed in, offering statements of support and thrusting a global spotlight onto a heart-rending case that has become a cause célèbre in Britain.
Their last-minute interventions drew attention to a profoundly difficult bioethical matter, but, experts said, they may have made a tragic situation even worse. Not only has the family exhausted its legal options, but numerous doctors have affirmed that no treatment is likely to reverse the child’s severe brain damage. Those doctors include a neurologist in the United States who had raised the couple’s hopes that an experimental therapy might save their son.
Nor is money the main issue, contrary to many of the confusing messages and news reports on the matter.
The couple’s lawyers declined to comment on Tuesday, and it was not clear if Ms. Yates or Mr. Gard, or the hospital treating their son, would take action in response to the pope or to Mr. Trump, who on Monday weighed in via Twitter. What is clear — based on a review of the extensive legal record in the case, including statements from numerous medical experts — is that the couple have been through extraordinary ups and downs, even by the standards of other families with terminally ill children.
Charlie Gard, born on Aug. 4, 2016, was a few weeks old when his parents noticed that he had trouble lifting his head. He was not growing and had to be put on a feeding tube. His breathing became shallow. On Oct. 11 he was admitted to Great Ormond Street Hospital in London, where he has lived ever since.
The baby was given a diagnosis of encephalomyopathic mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, which is thought to afflict just 16 children around the world. The disease blocks the mitochondria — the power stations in virtually every human cell — from creating energy. Deaf and kept alive by a ventilator, Charlie cannot grasp objects and suffers from persistent seizures.
In late December, while researching her son’s condition, Ms. Yates learned about nucleoside therapy, a treatment that has been used on patients with a less severe mitochondrial condition known as TK2 mutation.
She got in touch with the neurologist in the United States, who said there was a “theoretical” prospect of success, but acknowledged that nucleoside therapy had never been tested on a patient with the form of the disease, known as RRM2B mutation, as severe as Charlie’s.
Great Ormond Street Hospital was initially open to the idea, but then Charlie began to experience severe seizures, leading to a diagnosis of epileptic encephalopathy, a severe brain disorder. With that, doctors concluded that nucleoside therapy would only prolong the child’s suffering.
The parents received this message in a meeting on Jan. 13, a judge later found, but it is not clear if the situation was conveyed to them clearly. Later that month, the parents began a public campaign — one that eventually raised 1.3 million pounds, or about $1.7 million — to pay for the treatment, including travel to the United States.
On Feb. 24, the parents went to court. Justice Francis interviewed the neurologist — identified in court papers only as Dr. I — who, after reviewing records of the baby’s brain activity, conceded that the baby’s brain was more damaged than he had known; that the baby was in the terminal stage of his illness; and that “it is very unlikely that he will improve” even if the therapy were administered.
Justice Francis did not agree. Factoring in the “serious prospect” that Charlie might feel pain and the “consensus across the board, including from his parents, that Charlie’s current quality of life is not one that should be sustained without hope of improvement,” he ruled on April 11 that the hospital could withdraw all treatment except for palliative care.
An appellate judge, Lord Justice Andrew McFarlane, found that the King case was exceptional because that boy’s parents had put forward a “viable alternative treatment option,” which he said Charlie’s parents had not done. He praised their “composure, focus and dignity,” but upheld Justice Francis’s ruling. Britain’s highest court agreed, as did the European Court of Human Rights, in a judgment on June 27.
At this point, medical and ethical experts say, the few avenues to treatment for Charlie appear to be closed, and it seems to be just a matter of time before his parents accept that there is nothing more to be done.
Professor Truog, of Harvard Medical School, noted that the United States was generally more individualistic than Britain. As a result, people tend to be more open to the idea of taking heroic — and frequently quite expensive — long-shot measures, making these sorts of “end of life” ethical disputes a familiar aspect of medicine in the United States.
