YOUNGSTOWN, Ohio — President Trump was in his element and bathing in the adulation of the crowd. People shouted and cheered and whistled and jumped up on chairs to see him. Finally, the president even invited one of them to take the microphone for a minute.
For a president who has not gotten a lot of love lately inside the Beltway — where they have definitely not yet dealt with it — hitting the road in recent days has been a political booster shot. Three out of the last four days, the famously homebody president with the low approval ratings has escaped the Washington free-fire zone to seek more appreciative audiences.
He started on Saturday with sailors at the naval station in Norfolk, Va., headed to the hollows of West Virginia on Monday for the Boy Scouts national jamboree and then visited a veterans center and addressed a rally in Youngstown on Tuesday night. He treated each of the stops almost as if they were campaign events. And if that produced grumbles about politicizing the military and the Scouts, he had no need to worry at the Covelli Centre in Youngstown, a 7,000-seat arena filled to the rafters as more watched on screens outside.
The deal-with-it crowd waved “Make America Great Again” signs and chanted favorites from last year’s campaign, including “Build the Wall,” “Drain the Swamp” and “CNN Sucks.” Fresh from his narrow procedural victory on health care, the president beamed.
The procedural vote in the Senate meant that the health care debate is just starting, and by the time he returned to Washington later in the evening senators had already rejected one plan to repeal President Barack Obama’s program and replace it with a Republican version. But Mr. Trump used the friendly Ohio setting to issue a warning to balky Republican senators.
Mr. Trump returned to Ohio almost exactly a year after accepting the Republican nomination in this state. Ohio was one of the key battlegrounds that put him over the top in the Electoral College in November. But it is also the state run by one of his most vocal Republican critics, Gov. John Kasich, who stayed away on Tuesday.
But for Mr. Trump, it was an affirming evening.
Just after he said how safe it was, a scuffle broke out in the seats as a protester unfurled a handmade sign saying “Trump/Pence Must Go.” Supporters of the president tried to wrestle it from the protester before a police officer physically shoved him out of the arena.
 Mr. Trump asked.
A few moments later, another protester was led out, this one looking like a teenager.
Just hours after he denounced his own attorney general as “VERY weak” on Twitter, Mr. Trump took on those who have criticized him for crossing lines that his predecessors have avoided. “Sometimes they say, ‘He doesn’t act presidential,’” Mr. Trump said as the crowd laughed. “And I say, hey, look, great schools, smart guy, it’s so easy to act presidential. But that’s not going to get it done.
His incoming communications director said the other day that the strategy was to let Mr. Trump be Mr. Trump. And for the last few days, the president has returned to the road to do just that.
In other words, his message to Washington was clear: Deal with it.