An Israeli college student has drawn a storm of criticism for using artifacts that she initially claimed were taken from the Auschwitz-Birkenau memorial site in Poland in an artwork for a college exhibit.
The student, Rotem Bides, told Israeli news outlets this week that she had collected the objects during five visits to the site of the former Nazi concentration camp in what is now southern Poland.
Images of the artwork posted to Ynetnews, an Israeli news outlet, showed shards of glass, a charred tin can, two spoons and a sign explaining the significance of the site and warning visitors not to remove anything from the grounds.
Ms. Bides said that her grandparents were Holocaust survivors — one grandfather was in Auschwitz — and that the art was intended to explore her personal history.
Ms. Bides later told The New York Times that the items “are not from the Auschwitz camp and not from the Auschwitz museum, but from the nearby area,” but she declined to elaborate. The Auschwitz-Birkenau Memorial and Museum is a sprawling site covering hundreds of acres.
Ms. Bides may face more than just college discipline. Representatives of the Auschwitz-Birkenau Memorial and Museum condemned the reported theft, and said in a Twitter message that her use of the artifacts was disrespectful.
Lukasz Lipinski, a press officer at the museum, said staff members were working with Polish prosecutors to ascertain whether the items were stolen from the site. The items did not appear to have come from any formal display, he said, but might have been picked up somewhere on the property.
The site is protected under local and international historic preservation laws, and unauthorized removal of anything found on the grounds would violate those laws. The buildings and relics there are on the Unesco World Heritage List.
The memorial site has had problems with theft. Most notably, the iron sign over one entrance, bearing the motto “Arbeit Macht Frei” — “work makes you free” — was stolen in 2009; it was recovered in pieces three days later. Earlier this year, two British teenagers were fined for stealing small items from the grounds during a school trip; an Israeli couple were convicted of taking home rusted cutlery they found in the mud at the site in 2011.