Four years ago, Lucas Denton was shopping at the Scratchbread Bakery in Bedford-Stuyvesant when he noticed a large man, seemingly unfamiliar with that part of Brooklyn, gesticulating and speaking loudly on the sidewalk in what Mr. Denton described as “an Elven language.” His impulse was to welcome him to the neighborhood, he recounted recently, “and maybe calm him down a touch.” Mr. Denton, then in his late 20s, had developed an appreciation for fashion but food culture remained alien to him; so it signified nothing when the man said that his name was Claus Meyer.
One of the most celebrated chefs in the world, Mr. Meyer was expanding his empire in New York, but epicurean glamour had long ceased to be a meaningful driver of his ambitions. In his native Denmark, he had started a philanthropy called the Melting Pot that taught prisoners how to cook, and he later opened a restaurant and a number of cafeterias in Bolivia to train poor young people for jobs in the food world. Mr. Meyer mentioned that he wanted to do something similar in New York and Mr. Denton told him that perhaps the worst and stupidest thing he could do was open a fancy restaurant in an underserved neighborhood.
A tall, thoughtful graduate of Bard College, Mr. Denton spent his adolescence battling addiction and chronic homelessness and had been volunteering with substance-abuse and literacy programs in Brownsville, Brooklyn, which for decades has had some of the highest rates in the city for poverty, violence and failing health. Any impulse toward good works, he instructed Mr. Meyer, ought to be directed there.
The correspondence that followed between the two resulted in a collaboration, the Brownsville Community Culinary Center, which is to open to the public in early August, with the public defined as the people of Brownsville, a neighborhood that has not had, residents maintain, a restaurant with seated service in perhaps 50 years.
The crux of the initiative is an educational program that will put students, most in their 20s and early 30s and from the community, through 40 weeks of kitchen classwork and apprenticing, for which they are paid a stipend. The intention is to prepare them for careers in the food and restaurant industry as they make the meals to be served at the center, which will be run as a nonprofit.
The first cohort of 12 began in mid-June. This week, on the afternoon I visited, students were making biscuits, chicken patties, lentil patties, a curried soup. The menu for the restaurant and adjoining cafe is informed by the traditions of African-American and Caribbean cooking and was developed with a great deal of input from local residents. On an exploratory mission, Mr. Meyer cooked at the senior center in the Van Dyke Houses.
A $22, three-course, prix fixe menu will be offered in the evenings; Sunday roasts will be offered in the hours after church.
A crucial component of the course is making sure that students pass a Health Department test for a food handler’s certificate. Larry Singleton, who is 36, had easily passed the test the day I met him. When the program began, he was commuting to the center for two hours each way, from a homeless center in the Bronx. He recently found out he qualified for a housing subsidy that would allow him to live in Brownsville, where he could be closer, as well, to his 3-month-old son.
“I had to use everything within me to get here,’’ Mr. Singleton said, which he meant in both the literal and existential sense. He was working diligently on his knife skills, vowing to make — and never buy — whipped cream again. Things were going well.
Overseeing much of the center’s operation is a former Manhattan restaurateur, Philip Hoffman, the executive director of Melting Pot. Early on, he and his colleagues realized that student success would depend on what sort of support could be provided to people whose lives were constrained first by the immediate challenges of poverty, then by the ancillary demands of the city agencies, courts and social-service organizations with which the poor constantly interact. Two social workers were brought in to help.
The immense difficulties of coming of age in Brownsville took on a tragic clarity right away. One eager student, Leonard Reddick, had come to the center through the Osborne Association, which helps those who have been through the criminal justice system establish themselves. Mr. Reddick was 29 and had two children, with a third on the way, when he arrived to interview for a slot at the culinary center wearing a tank top. It was suggested to him that he might have chosen something else to wear, so he returned the following morning wearing a suit.
On Tuesday, June 20, he had a great day in a baking class, having persuaded the teacher to switch the curriculum to doughnuts. Mr. Reddick loved doughnuts, and on that day he completed a perfect batch. That night he was shot and killed while he was with his mother, Teresee Reddick, outside her apartment building.
Ms. Reddick said he had argued with his assailant, a woman he had known since childhood, the day before because he had told the woman’s niece that he thought it was dangerous for the niece and her friends to be out on the street by themselves. The woman surrendered and was charged with murder.
