Book Review|Do Grants, Professorships and Other Forms of Institutional Support Help Writers but Hurt Writing?
Do Grants, Professorships and Other Forms of Institutional Support Help Writers but Hurt Writing?
In Bookends, two writers take on questions about the world of books. This week, Siddhartha Deb and Benjamin Moser discuss the intersection of writing, academia and funding.
Institutions have expanded the bureaucratic demands they make on writers in exchange for a salary.
“I haf nofing left, nofing, nofing!” says the protagonist of Vladimir Nabokov’s novel “Pnin.” A successor to “Lolita,” the work that crystallized and fossilized Nabokov’s reputation in English, and based on Nabokov’s own journey through various teaching positions in the United States, particularly at Wellesley College, “Pnin” is an early depiction of an intellectual’s uneasy relationship with the organization that feeds him. Timofey Pnin should be grateful for the opportunities that have come upon his way as a Russian exile in a prosperous postwar United States, and he sometimes is, and yet his eccentricities and abilities are all too often at odds with the institution providing him with a living.
Nabokov’s is an early portrayal of the challenge provided by the interaction between writer (since it was based on his own experience) and organization, in spite of Nabokov’s relatively privileged position as a white male cashing in on American anti-Communism and Europhilia. Since then, with the triumph of neoliberalism after the end of the Cold War, the conflict between artist and institution has only grown stronger. There is an ever greater expansion of the bureaucratic demands made by institutions on writers in exchange for a salary as well as an insistent pressure to professionalize that makes Pnin’s cantankerousness or saccharine outbursts quite unimaginable in a contemporary setting.
Unless teaching at one of a few select places, writers are increasingly required, apart from their teaching duties, to attend meetings, serve on committees and be on email 24/7. They are also expected, in an era when students are customers, the university a brand and everything a matter of opinion, often to put aside whatever knowledge and expertise they might have acquired in order to assuage the varying sensibilities of their customers. Otherwise, as in the case of the poetry professor in Wisconsin attacked for teaching material with L.G.B.T. content, one might be taken to court in order for an F to be changed to an A.
Is there any time left for writing after this? Not much, unless the writer manages to find a grant, of which there are few around, most of them likely to favor those already quite successful. Even in Britain, whose elite universities were once home to elbow-patched, tweed-jacketed writers never burdened with the expectation of production — E. M. Forster famously spent more than two decades as an honorary fellow at King’s College, Cambridge, without ever publishing another novel — technocratic administrators have managed to extend their control over writers to a dispiriting degree.
The writer Marina Warner depicted a few years ago, in two devastating pieces for The London Review of Books, the resulting conflict in artists trying to live in two worlds — “at the university and in a room of their own.” Her account, of quitting a once prestigious position at Essex University, features an ex-military vice chancellor, a centralized system of evaluation called REF (“Research Excellence Framework”) and a “Tariff of Expectations,” reminders that the dystopian future is already here and has been around for some time.
“Outside grants are becoming the only way to earn time off to write,” Warner notes. They remain so for many. I know that I remember with gratitude every organization that has given me a grant for my writing — the Society of Authors, the Radcliffe Institute and the Howard Foundation at Brown. Such grants amount to more than money; they represent a shared vision in an idea, a project, a faith in the very act of one’s withdrawing to a room to work on a book. Yet they can’t change the fact of applying for them being a gamble, or the truth that we live in a world where teaching institutions increasingly demand more and more, until one might exclaim, with Pnin, that one has nofing left for one’s writing.
Money clearly communicates the still-prevailing attitude: that writing is not a real job.
It is an old commonplace that a nation’s principal glory is its art; but it has rarely followed that a nation’s principal glory is its artists. Even in antiquity, those who lavished praise on art looked down at those who made it. “While we delight in the work, we despise the workman,” Plutarch wrote, approvingly.
Even after the Renaissance, when the artist began to gain a status above that of plebeian craftsman, the separation between art and artist remained. Art was expensive. Artists were cheap. The greatest masters, unable to support themselves from art alone, often had some other, “real” job. Shop signs by Watteau and Aelbert Cuyp have come down to us; Hobbema ended his days as a measurer of imported wines; Jan van Goyen dealt in tulips.
Art alone rarely provided a living, and the situation is not much different today. Many writers enjoy teaching or journalism or translation or editing, but many do these jobs because it’s hard to survive on writing alone. Money clearly communicates the still-prevailing attitude: that writing is not a real job.
The attitude doesn’t extend to other professionals, but the ancient rhetorical division between art and artists persists. Doctors and engineers are not expected to have another job. And does anybody ever ask if something that is good for doctors is bad for medicine, or fret that helping engineers harms engineering?
The result is that only a handful of writers can live without supplemental income — and even that is begrudged. A professorship is not a sinecure. It’s a job. Fellowships are competitive, and almost always one-time windfalls: not enough to free a writer from the obligation of extracurricular employment.
Why not treat writers more generously? In a society growing mingier by the day, writers seem to rank low on the list of those with claims to assistance. Yet entire societies are degraded and destroyed when hacks and liars are rewarded: Kellyanne Conway recently bought an $8 million house.
To claim to cherish artistic and intellectual achievement while condemning artists and writers to poverty is to empower fraud, and to deprecate those values — beauty and justice, empathy and altruism — that we derive from literature. These are the values that enrich society most, and depend on money least.
But literature is not made by society. It is made by individuals who, like anyone else, have bills to pay. Those whose job it is to enunciate other values often find themselves punished for the attempt, though we all need those values: Nobody wants to live in a world whose only measures are financial.
So does the world owe writers a living? We have grown so used to subordinating everything to money that the question seems absurd. But it is easy to imagine a society in which art — like health care and education, care of the poor and the elderly — is a public good: in which we delight in work and workman both.
Benjamin Moser is the author of “Why This World: A Biography of Clarice Lispector,” a finalist for the National Book Critics’ Circle Award, and the general editor of the new translations of Clarice Lispector at New Directions. A former New Books columnist at Harper’s Magazine, he is currently writing the authorized biography of Susan Sontag. He lives in the Netherlands.