The comedian, actress and musician Bridget Everett will be on the big screen this summer in “Patti Cakes” — she plays the boozy mom of an aspiring white female rapper from New Jersey. (It’s in theaters Aug. 18.) She is perhaps best known, though, for her appearances on “Inside Amy Schumer” and “Trainwreck” and for her musical performances with her band, Bridget Everett and the Tender Moments.
A native of Manhattan, Kan., Ms. Everett has been living in another Manhattan — on the Upper West Side, currently — for the past 20 years. Here, she shares her recent beauty discoveries and explains why Tae Bo has a special place in her heart.
I just turned 45. Up until two months ago, I was using Aveeno Daily Moisturizing Lotion everywhere. I decided to get proactive about my wrinkles. I bought a whole bunch of stuff in France when I was there. I went to a pharmacy looking for the French equivalent of Sally Hansen, but they saw me coming and probably thought, “Sucker!” Now I’m using this variety pack of things on my face, and I actually think they’re a little more effective than my Aveeno.
I also got this Nuxe Huile Prodigieuse oil because all the people in France were like, “That’s what you need to have.” I spray that on my décolletage. It’s supposed to look shimmery, but I just look like I’m sweaty and walked through one of those ’70s prepool misters. I want to look like Nicole Kidman, but I look like Mary Slaney after a marathon. The truth is, I didn’t really have a job that paid until this year. I’m trying to blow through all my money as quickly as I can.
I do use more basic stuff. I like Dr. Bronner’s peppermint Castile soap. I like it because it makes me tingle down there. I want to be fresh up top and down below, too.
It’s a pretty random combination. I use a MAC concealer and mascara. I’m just catching up on that highlighting trend. It happened, like, what — five years ago? I like to do things when they’re way over, and then I’m at the start of something fresh when it comes back. I use a Milk Makeup highlighter on my cheeks. Then I use the Benefit Hoola bronzer. I was using it all over my face like George Hamilton, but then someone told me you’re only supposed to use it for contour.
I’m really into Armour lip glosses. The founder is Theo Kogan, the former lead singer of the Lunachicks and a smoking hot beauty. If I could wake up with anybody in the morning, it’d be her and her husband.
Milk also came out with this glitter stick for Pride. I’ll use it onstage.
Natural hair color? Good question. I think it’s sort of like the color of a Pekingese. I definitely get highlights — the blonder the better. If I’m in New York, I go to Shaun SureThing in the West Village. If I’m in L.A., I go to Mèche — it’s highfalutin.
I use Pureology Hydrate Sheer shampoo. I sweat like I played a dozen rounds of tennis, and I have to keep my fine hair motivated. I love Oribe Dry Texturizing Spray. I put that on my roots. There is also this Kevin Murphy Powder Puff that I like.
I have a collection of dry shampoos, actually; I buy them based on packaging. I don’t go to fancy dinners or shop for expensive clothes, but my dog gets raw food, and we go into Ricky’s and I get my really nice packaging.
I don’t need fragrance. I smell like Bridget. That’s really working well for everybody.
I go to Cindy’s Nails on the Upper West Side. I do a regular manicure and pedicure mostly because I can’t get down to do it myself, but also it’s nice to be touched. I love chrome nails. I actually love it when they get chipped. I’m about to go to Nantucket with these chipped chrome nails. The people there won’t know what to do with themselves.
I’m pretty sure everybody wants to hear my diet and fitness tips. My friend Amy Schumer sent me to a doctor who has me on these multivitamins and vitamin D. Most important, I try to do the 10,000-steps-every-day thing, which is so cheesy. And I do go to the gym and do elliptical.
I stay pretty true to Tae Bo Tuesdays in my living room or wherever I am. I put on Billy Blanks’s best hits. You can do a Power Blaster in 25 minutes. The last time I was in shape was through Tae Bo.
My best friend from home was telling me how much energy she has since getting a Nutri Ninja, so I got one. Then Matt, who’s in my band, said, “You should start your day with a handful of greens.” I was like, “God, you have to be kidding me.” But I do it. I force it in my mouth before I even have coffee.
I hate to say it, but with all this, I’ve been feeling a lot better lately.