Dr. Jen Gunter, an obstetrician and gynecologist in the San Francisco Bay Area, didn’t mean to pick on Goop, Gwyneth Paltrow’s lifestyle and wellness e-commerce company. In fact, she’s a fan of Ms. Paltrow’s acting.
But she doesn’t think much of the stories posted by Goop on health and sex. One that sent the doctor to her blog earlier this year was the suggestion in a Goop story that women insert jade eggs into their vaginas to improve their sex lives.
Another Goop story that said bra-wearing may increase the chance of breast cancer also irked Dr. Gunter. “It’s breast size that increases the risk of breast cancer,” she wrote in retort.
What about another practice recommended by a doctor interviewed on Goop: cleansing the body with goat’s milk as a hedge against parasites?
Goop, which held the In Goop Health conference last month in Culver City, Calif., for acolytes who paid between $500 and $1,500 a ticket, had 1.8 million unique American visitors to its website in June, a 62 percent increase from the previous June, according to comScore, an analytics company.
Comparatively, Dr. Gunter’s blog is small potatoes. It is hard to navigate and antiquated in design, and failing to meet comScore’s threshold of about 50,000 unique visitors a month, its web traffic is too meager to be measured.
However, after posting a few viral essays in recent years, Dr. Gunter has emerged as the most ardent critic of Ms. Paltrow’s website, routinely responding with snark and medical data to its pronouncements on diet and female genital health.
The post was intended to take a stand for open discussion about alternative approaches to health and wellness, said Elise Loehnen, the head of content for Goop. The doctors interviewed by Goop are “highly vetted” and offer advice based on “evidence from their own practices,” Ms. Loehnen said, adding that Goop’s wellness stories include a standard disclaimer.
“I am not strangely confident about vaginal health; I am appropriately confident because I am the expert,” Dr. Gunter wrote. She then cited her credentials, which include a medical degree from the University of Manitoba, a residency at the University of Western Ontario and a fellowship in infectious disease at the University of Kansas Medical Center. The post has generated 157,000 page views, Dr. Gunter said. Other medical professionals have written in support of her.
Dr. Gunter, who works as a gynecologist and obstetrician for Kaiser Permanente in San Francisco, began to blog in 2010, around the time she published a book, “The Preemie Primer.” She has long written about “snake oil,” she said, focusing on trends and products marketed to women to better their sex lives or vaginal health. “Every single day I am talking to women about how you shouldn’t use this product and why you shouldn’t use that product,” she said.
She said she doesn’t check the Goop website every day. She usually ends up there after she has grown frustrated with political tweets.
“I try to shift my indignation to something I can do something about,” Dr. Gunter said.