There is a scene toward the end of “War for the Planet of the Apes” that is as vivid and haunting as anything I’ve seen in a Hollywood blockbuster in ages, a moment of rousing and dreadful cinematic clarity that I don’t expect to shake off any time soon. I’ll tread lightly, but I don’t think anything I say here can spoil its power.
Two groups of humans have just battled, and the victors, having slaughtered the enemy, burst into raucous cheers. It’s the kind of thing we’ve seen in movies dozens of times before: the cheapening of mass death into an easy win for the good guys. Except that in this case we, the humans in the theater seats, are not the only ones watching. A crowd of apes is also present, an emerging society whose national epic this film and its companions have marvelously and improbably become. The apes pause to witness the aftermath of the carnage they have narrowly escaped, and their wordless, shocked response, registered above all on the face of Caesar, their leader, is an eloquent rebuke to a species that has abandoned any but a biological claim to the name human.
Recall that “ape not kill ape” is the political and moral foundation of ape civilization, handed down by Caesar, their Moses, though he hasn’t always obeyed this commandment. The spectacle of people’s rejoicing in the destruction of their own kind is upsetting, and as the audience absorbs the apes’ shock, we become aware of another, deeper unease. We are now, three movies into this reborn franchise, entirely on the side of the apes. The prospect of our own extinction, far from horrifying, comes as a relief. At last the poor planet will catch a break.
Or, to put it another way, Koba was right.
If you saw “Dawn of the Planet of the Apes” — the second chapter in the series so far, bridging “Rise” and “War” — you may recall that poor, abused laboratory chimp’s evolution from victim to nemesis. The damage Koba had suffered at the hands of humans made him intolerant and fanatical, an embodiment of political extremism who needed to be checked, and ultimately destroyed, by Caesar, whose political temperament tended toward moderation and compromise. Their conflict was mirrored by a struggle on the human side between a genocidal, ape-hating military commander and a rival leader who believed in coexistence.
“Dawn,” like “Rise” before it, rested on a hopeful, slightly hokey message of interspecies harmony. In spite of their differences and mutual suspicions, maybe the two primate societies, one coalescing while the other slid toward chaos, could share the Earth, or at least the stretch of Northern California forest where this franchise plants its allegorical flag.
Andy Serkis (famously known as Gollum in “The Lord of the Rings”) reprises his role as the talking chimpanzee Caesar in "War for the Planet of the Apes."
Times change. “War for the Planet of the Apes,” directed by Matt Reeves, is the grimmest episode so far, and also the strongest, a superb example — rare in this era of sloppily constructed, commercially hedged cinematic universes — of clear thinking wedded to inventive technique in popular filmmaking. The distinction of this run of “Planet of the Apes” movies has been its commitment to the venerable belief that science fiction belongs to the literature of ideas, and its willingness to risk seeming to take itself too seriously. Each episode has pursued a stark ethical or political problem, and each has shifted the moral ground from human to ape.
“Rise” was about how people treat and mistreat animals, about the tension between recognizing them as sentient beings and the long habit of exploiting and confining them. “Dawn” was a wishful parable of decolonization and counterinsurgency, concerned with the competing but equally legitimate claims of two tribes occupying adjacent territory. “War” — which, in spite of its title, is less a war film than a western wrapped around a prison movie — vindicates Koba’s view of humanity as irredeemably cruel and deceitful.
The memory of Koba’s own treachery is kept alive, as some of his followers have drifted from militant anti-Caesarism to collaboration with the enemy species. There is a new nemesis in town, a renegade colonel played by Woody Harrelson, who goes full Heart of Darkness, staging a one-man remake of “Apocalypse Now” in a medical base he has refashioned into a concentration camp. He has Marlon Brando’s clean-shaven dome, Robert Duvall’s mirrored sunglasses and Dennis Hopper’s manic verbosity. The horror! The horror!
Really, though, it’s a lot of fun, in spite of the somber picture I’ve been painting. Mr. Reeves, who also directed “Dawn,” has a dark vision, but also a light touch when necessary, and, above all, a commitment to creating a world that is coherent as well as fantastical. This world is also intensely and somewhat unimaginatively masculine. The default setting for primate social organization in these movies, human and otherwise, is patriarchal, and while a few female apes and a young human girl appear on screen, the filmmakers’ inability to flesh out the familial and affective dimensions of an otherwise richly rendered reality is frustrating.
But still, the motion-captured, digitally sculpted apes are so natural, so expressive, so beautifully integrated into their environment, that you almost forget to be astonished by the nuances of thought and emotion that flicker across their faces, often seen in close-up. Andy Serkis’s performance as Caesar is one of the marvels of modern screen acting, and it’s complemented by those of Karin Konoval, reprising her role as the wise orangutan Maurice, and Steve Zahn, as a sad-clown sidekick named Bad Ape.
He is a grayer, sadder hero now, and in “War” he succumbs for a while to a vengeful impulse at odds with his essential high-mindedness. You could say that he is putting his humanity at risk, or that he’s only human, after all, but of course both descriptions would be absurd. We’ll have to come up with a new vocabulary, but while we still have this one — and while flesh-and-blood people are still directing digital gorillas and chimps — I’ll just say that it’s good to see a movie so thoroughly humane.