U.S.|Family Asks: Why Did Minneapolis Police Kill Australian 911 Caller?
Family Asks: Why Did Minneapolis Police Kill Australian 911 Caller?
MINNEAPOLIS — Family members and friends of a woman who was killed by a Minneapolis police officer voiced anger and frustration on Monday that the authorities had not offered any explanation of how an unarmed woman’s own call to 911, to report a possible assault, led to her being fatally shot in the alley behind her home.
The woman, Justine Damond, 40, an immigrant from Australia who described herself as a spiritual healer and was due to be married next month, was fatally shot in the abdomen on Saturday in a quiet residential area of southwestern Minneapolis.
News reports identified the officer who shot her as Mohamed Noor, 31.
“Our hearts are broken, and we are utterly devastated by the loss of Justine,” her fiancé, Don Damond, told reporters outside his house. His voice choked with emotion, and his son, Zach, 21, gripped his shoulders as he spoke.
City and state officials have said little about what happened and have not formally confirmed the officer’s identity. Nor have they commented on news reports, citing anonymous sources, that said Officer Noor was sitting in the passenger seat of a patrol car when he fired, shooting across his partner in the driver’s seat and hitting Ms. Damond, who stood outside the car. Both officers have been placed on paid leave.
Relatives, friends and activists critical of the police said that at the least, the city should release a recording of the 911 call and explain why the two officers had their body cameras turned off. The death of Ms. Damond occurred a little over a year after an officer in a Twin Cities suburb fatally shot Philando Castile during a traffic stop, an episode that heightened scrutiny of law enforcement in the region.
A City Council newsletter from last year said that Officer Noor joined the police force in 2015, completed his training in 2016 and became the first Somali-American officer assigned to the precinct covering southwestern Minneapolis. The newsletter said he had worked in property management and held a degree in economics and business administration from Augsburg College.
Ms. Damond, formerly Justine Ruszczyk, lived most of her life in the Sydney area, where she became a veterinarian, according to her website and family friends.
She later sought to combine Western medicine with holistic healing and traditional practices from around the world, a mix of influences that was on display in an earnest, often funny talk she gave, while barefoot, to an audience just two weeks ago, at the Lake Harriet Spiritual Community, where she taught meditation and yoga and offered personal counseling.
“Her interest in supporting people to heal and transform themselves developed after she saw family members suffer greatly from depression, alcoholism and cancer,” her website says.
She moved to Minnesota about three years ago, friends said, met Mr. Damond, and took his surname.
