WASHINGTON — The Trump administration insisted on Monday, in a show of unity with one of the Republican Party’s biggest financial backers, that its plan to rewrite the tax code would be a collaborative and ultimately successful process.
In a scene that demonstrated the pressure the administration is under to deliver on that promise, Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, appeared with representatives from the political network funded by Charles G. and David H. Koch to stress that there was little daylight separating the White House, Republicans in Congress and the well-financed conservative groups that are planning to devote tens of millions of dollars to the process.
“This is a pass/fail exercise, and we will pass tax reform,” Mr. Mnuchin said in a question-and-answer session with Tim Phillips, the president of Americans for Prosperity, the Koch group that funds grass-roots political activity across the country. More than once, Mr. Phillips mentioned that the group’s activists in 36 states were ready to be deployed, and that there was no higher priority for them this year. “We’re going all in,” Mr. Phillips said.
Ideally, the administration would like a bill on President Trump’s desk by Thanksgiving.
“That, I think, is an aggressive schedule, but that is our timetable,” said Marc Short, the Trump administration’s legislative affairs director and a former executive for the Koch political organization Freedom Partners, who was also on hand for the event.
The issue is so important to Mr. Trump, administration officials said, that he plans to travel the country holding campaign-style rallies to promote an overhaul.
While overhauling the tax code is generally considered to be one of the most challenging legislative lifts for lawmakers to pursue, Mr. Short predicted that the House and Senate tax-writing committees would begin marking up legislation shortly after Labor Day. The House and the Senate, he said, would then pass bills in succession in October and November, sending the tax legislation to Mr. Trump’s desk before December.
As lawmakers and the White House work toward a plan that can pass both houses of Congress, conservative political groups are trying to impress on them that failure is not an option after the collapse of Republican attempts to repeal the Affordable Care Act. In addition to the Koch efforts, groups like the American Action Network and the Business Roundtable are beginning multimillion-dollar television and radio campaigns meant to coincide with Congress’s August recess.
Corry Bliss, the executive director of the American Action Network, said the group was prepared to spend $5 million in August alone — and $20 million by Christmas — on a campaign that included rallying activists to lawmakers’ offices. “Every time a member has a town hall, Republican or Democrat, we’re going to be there with a presence, holding them accountable, urging them to keep their promise to cut taxes,” he said.
Although Republicans have worked through some of their divisions on how to revise the tax code — deciding to shelve, for example, a controversial tax on imports proposed by Speaker Paul D. Ryan — significant differences remain.
Mr. Short said that the White House was still pushing to cut the top corporate tax rate to 15 percent from 35 percent. House Republicans had proposed cutting it to 20 percent and many tax experts think that even that number is overly ambitious with the import tax gone and with the Affordable Care Act taxes still in place.
On Monday, Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah and chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, told Reuters that even getting the corporate tax rate down to 25 percent would be a challenge.
And the administration is also forging ahead with a proposal to eliminate the deduction that Americans can take on their state and local taxes, which members of both parties are already raising objections to.
The deduction is a considerable source of financial relief for people who live in high-tax states along both coasts. Those states also tend to be dominated by Democrats and others who voted decisively against Mr. Trump. States that would be less affected tend to be those vast stretches of red that Mr. Trump swept last year, from Florida to Wyoming.
The state and local tax deduction was on the chopping block in the House Republican tax blueprint and in Mr. Trump’s tax outline, but like any significant change to the tax code, getting rid of it comes with political peril. Resistance to its repeal has already spurred bipartisan backlash.
Last month, a bipartisan group of 70 members of Congress sent a letter to Mr. Mnuchin warning that eliminating deductions for state and local taxes would be a tax hike on middle-income taxpayers in states such as California, New York, New Jersey and Illinois. Seven House Republicans from blue states signed the letter, suggesting that if other Republicans feel the same way, then yet another big plan to raise tax revenues will have to be jettisoned.
Mr. Mnuchin said that the loss of such deductions was the price to pay for substantially lower tax rates that he said would mostly benefit middle-income families.
Thus far, Republicans are refusing to publicly scale back their ambitions on taxes, but many veterans of previous attempts to change the tax laws think that there is little chance that something of such magnitude will be enacted. As long as the Trump administration remains fixated on health care, a budget will not be easy to pass. Also confronting Congress: The debt ceiling must be lifted by the end of September.
