In a criminal courtroom in downtown Manhattan on Wednesday evening, a group of prosecutors were screaming for revenge.
The play was put on by the Theater of Law, a new collaboration between New York University’s Forum on Law, Culture and Society and the company Theater of War. The company plans to bring the play to prosecutors’ offices, law firms, bar associations and victims’ rights groups in cities like Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami and Orlando, Fla., to spur conversation about fairness in the criminal justice system, particularly as mandatory minimum sentencing makes a comeback under Attorney General Jeff Sessions. This production was performed for an audience of prosecutors, including Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus R. Vance Jr.
Bryan Doerries, the artistic director of Theater of War, has been presenting classical plays to targeted groups for a decade. Beginning in 2008, he staged scenes from Sophocles’ “Ajax” — about the mythological Greek hero’s suicide during the Trojan War — for veterans as a way to help them process what they experienced in Iraq and Afghanistan. The shows were no less than lifesaving.
“The Oresteia” has all of the elements of a great episode of “Law and Order”: romantic affairs, murder and vengeance. Eventually, the intrafamily crimes of the House of Atreus culminate in a proper trial, and Athena acquits Orestes in the murder of his mother.
Unsurprisingly, the audience of local prosecutors was largely unimpressed with the verdict. So were the Furies. “It sounded like commentators after the O.J. verdict,” said Zachary Carter, the city government’s top lawyer and former United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York.
For some prosecutors, whose professional groups often resist sentencing reform legislation, it’s become less clear that the punishments doled out by the legal system offer victims the emotional satisfaction they crave, let alone reflect a truly fair punishment.
You don’t have to look far to find such examples. Fate Vincent Winslow was sentenced to life without parole for selling two dime bags of marijuana. Kalief Browder spent roughly two years in solitary confinement for allegedly stealing a backpack. A Minnesota woman was charged with murder last year for sharing her fentanyl patch with her boyfriend, who accidentally overdosed. And an Iraq War veteran faces deportation after trying to light a beer bottle on fire.
