Donald J. Trump’s approval ratings are the lowest at this stage of a presidency since modern polling began in the mid-20th century. But his party’s base still appears highly supportive, which has discouraged Republicans in Congress from abandoning the president and his legislative agenda.
Even the most recent Russia revelations seemingly haven’t dented support for Mr. Trump among Republicans, who continue to approve of his job performance at very high rates — 82 percent in an ABC News/Washington Post poll released Sunday, for instance.
But numbers like these may mask a decline in support for Mr. Trump among his original party base.
A new working paper by the Emory University political scientists B. Pablo Montagnes, Zachary Peskowitz and Joshua McCrain argues that people who identify as Republican may stop doing so if they disapprove of Trump, creating a false stability in his partisan approval numbers even as the absolute number of people approving him shrinks. Gallup data supports this idea, showing a four-percentage-point decline in G.O.P. identification since the 2016 election that is mirrored in other polling, though to a lesser extent.
One example is the MSNBC host Joe Scarborough, a former Republican member of Congress and an increasingly vocal Trump critic who has announced that he is leaving the party. If most people who have stopped identifying as Republicans are Trump disapprovers like Mr. Scarborough, we could observe stable party approval ratings for the president despite waning popularity with his previous party coalition.
Individual news media polls typically do not have a measure of how respondents previously answered questions about party identification, so Mr. Montagnes and his co-authors had to estimate a range for Mr. Trump’s G.O.P. approval rating among those “missing” respondents — people who previously identified as Republican but no longer do so. If all of them approve of Mr. Trump, the resulting estimate would be the upper bound on his partisan approval rating. If all such respondents disapprove of him, that would be the lower bound.
These lower-bound estimates are likely to be much closer to reality — Pew Research Center data show that disapproval of Mr. Trump was 84 percent among people who switched from identifying or leaning Republican in December 2015 to identifying or leaning Democrat in April 2017.
When the Emory political scientists use the Gallup data to account for Republicans who have stopped identifying with the party since the election, they find that partisan support for Trump could be substantially lower than it appears. The lower bound is often from 70 percent to 80 percent instead of the 80-to-90 range that Gallup polls typically show. Given the decline in Republican identification since last November, they find, “the lower bound on Trump’s partisan approval rate is much lower” than partisan approval at a comparable point in the Obama presidency and is lower than it was even during Mr. Obama’s second term.
This finding contains an important lesson for interpreting presidential approval polls. Mr. Trump remains popular among the people who currently identify as Republican, but there is a group of “missing” former Republicans who most likely disapprove of him and are excluded from that calculation altogether.