The Reader Center is a newsroom initiative that is helping New York Times journalists build deeper ties with our audience.
The Times’s newsroom is making significant changes to its editing operation, including the elimination of a stand-alone copy desk. Last week, copy editors sent an open letter to the newsroom’s top management, raising concerns about the effect of cuts on the quality of coverage.
Our executive editor, Dean Baquet, invited readers to ask questions about changes to editing in the newsroom. Here is a selection of the questions, which have been condensed, and his responses.
I have read that The Times is eliminating its “stand-alone copy desk.” Can you explain what that is?
When a reporter crafts a story — or decides which stories to pursue — she or he works closely with an editor we call a “backfielder.” After the story is written, it goes to a free-standing group of editors who read it for style, language, accuracy. Then another editor looks over that editor’s shoulder. In some cases there is even a fourth editor.
That system was designed for print, which allowed for much more time in producing a story. It also did not contemplate a world where not all the best journalism would involve the written word.
Our goal with these changes is to still have more than one set of eyes on a story, but not three or four. We have to streamline that system and move faster in the digital age. If the Supreme Court issues a major ruling at 10 a.m., our readers expect to hear about it within minutes. And they’d like an analysis not too long afterward. And maybe a video on the history of the case that led to the ruling. Or a multimedia analysis of what the ruling says about the court’s leanings so far.
So we have to change our editing system to accommodate the changes in journalism. And we have to hire more journalists who can do all the tasks I just described. The only way to do that is by streamlining editing and using the savings to change the staff.
Maybe a simple, obvious question, but aren’t you concerned that this decision will reduce the day-to-day quality of the content?
— Mike Briddon, Reading, Mass.
Editing is vital to The Times. It separates us from the competition. It is one of the reasons readers trust our information. And it elevates our language. But our current editing system was designed generations ago for the rhythms of print alone. Several editors touch a story before it gets to the reader. A generation of executive editors have actually complained that there are too many editors touching the same story.
At the same time, we are producing different kinds of journalism besides traditional stories. We produce video, and multimedia graphics, as well as spot news published as soon as news breaks. And our readers experience us on the phone, not just in print and on the computer.
For all of these reasons, we need a different editing system that allows us to move faster and produce different kinds of journalism. At the end of this process, The Times will still have more editors than any similar institution. But it will use the savings from these cuts to bring in more reporters and other journalists who can build a report that acknowledges the changing world of journalism.
We will continue to care tremendously about the quality of our report, and we will be watching closely to make sure that our stories are still up to the standards our readers expect.
I understand that this was a financial issue. Did higher level employees such as yourself consider taking salary cuts?
This is actually not primarily a financial issue — we are mostly shifting resources, not cutting them. We are making these changes to modernize an editing system that now has to accommodate many different kinds of storytelling. We will come out of this with a newsroom that is almost the same size.
But I should make clear that this has been difficult for me and the entire newsroom. I’ve spent a big chunk of my life here, as a reporter and as an editor. And I know how much these editors have given to the place. It may be necessary, but that does not make it less painful.
What percentage increase in the number of typos or other structural errors will be seen as an indication that the new policy isn’t working?
The goal, of course, is to have no typos or structural errors — and certainly, no more than we have today. While we are eliminating the free-standing copy desk, we are not eliminating copy editing. The main news desks will have increased numbers of editors so they can make sure that The Times remains the best-edited news organization in the world.
Do these changes signal a concession to the perpetual waning of print journalism — and that NYT structured as a traditional news organization cannot survive? Are these cutbacks/changes seen as the end or the beginning of greater and more fundamental changes at the NYT?
If anything, these changes may make the print version of The Times better. We are creating a group of editors whose job is largely to edit and craft the best possible print report.
As for change, yes, The Times will continue to change. Remember, this is an institution that has constantly evolved. It created new feature sections in the 1970s and 1980s. It put color on the front page in the 1990s. And it has created a powerful video operation today.
If The New York Times fails to capture mistakes in this era of fake media attacks, will your new cuts not have an impact on your reliability? I would rather have you raise my rates than make these cuts.
— Mary Rehwald, Ashland, Wis.
This is so generous. And it shows why we have the best readers in the world. I don’t believe these changes will lead to more mistakes. If they do, you might hear from me. Thank you so much.
If your stories lag in grammar, punctuation and style, is there a plan in place to bring copy editors back?
If we find our report suffering, we will indeed make changes. But remember, we are not eliminating copy editing. Many of our copy editors will remain in all our departments. We are eliminating the free-standing copy desk. We will continue to aggressively edit The Times.
How much of the daily editing load goes through the masthead?
The most important stories are read by the masthead. These include stories for the front page, and sensitive investigative stories. That will continue.
Are there no other ways of cutting costs than to sabotage the very purpose of legitimate journalism?
These cuts are designed to improve our journalism. I believe that the savings from reducing the number of editors can be used to hire more reporters.
I truly value editing. But I also believe that The Times needs to invest more in reporters who can cover the world at a tumultuous time.
We still have more foreign bureaus than ever, and more journalists around the country. We have more investigative reporters than ever before, and our Washington bureau is now far larger than ever.
Why aren’t you reducing the number of backfielders? Many are not as good as the copy editors. (For the record, I was both.) Also, there are too many chiefs — why aren’t you cutting all the unnecessary management levels?
There are actually very few layers of management at The Times. There are department heads, and a masthead. In our current system, backfielders are the editors who assign stories and discuss with reporters how those stories should be framed. Backfielders also do the first edit before stories go to the copy desk. Some traditional backfielders will, no doubt, be among those taking the buyout.
It’s my impression that the very act of reading and responding to this email would have been the public editor’s responsibility before that role was cut.
I actually think it is healthier for me to have to answer these questions. I value our readers. It is good for me to speak directly to them.
I recently started subscribing to your paper, primarily to support the level of quality news reporting available. Why should I continue to subscribe if you are already starting to cut corners?
Why subscribe? We have more foreign and national bureaus than any other newspaper. We will use the savings from these cuts to hire more reporters who can break big stories, cover Washington and do in-depth journalism around the world. We are shifting resources, not cutting. Please stick with us and let me know how it looks to you in the future.
Will the changes remove any checks and balances that help assure stories’ accuracy or eliminate any fact-checking steps?
We will still copy-edit. There will still be checks and balances. Every story will still have more than one set of eyes on it before it gets to the reader.
I don’t want to underplay this change. It will cost some people their jobs. And the people who work at The Times are emotional about it. I’m emotional about it, having been here since I was a young reporter.
But The Times has changed its editing system many times. There was a time when a powerful centralized desk decided where stories were played in the newspaper. That changed years ago. When I came to The Times as a reporter in 1990, backfields were smaller and copy desks were large. Somehow, backfields grew over time, and copy desks shrank. All of these changes were made with little debate or discussion.
The main reason we are doing this is to build a new system that can handle a drastically increased flow of news. But there is one more reason. Somehow, over a decade, we reduced the number of reporters. Only a fraction of the newsroom is now engaged in gathering information, as opposed to editing and structuring. At a time when the country is demanding more investigative journalists, more D.C. reporters, more visual journalists — we have to free up some room to change the newsroom.
It is painful, but we can’t build a future without shedding some of the past. That’s the way the great newspapers have survived. We are a reflection of the times we live in.
What are the steps in the editorial process without copy editors? Does a reporter’s story go straight to press?
A story will still be read by an editor, with another looking over her shoulder. It is rare for an article to go straight to press.
How were the current employees, particularly reporters and copy editors, provided an opportunity to provide valuable input on both the specification of the problem(s) as well as creative solutions?
We tested two different editing systems on major news desks and met with the editors frequently to see which system worked best. It was an open and transparent test. Some things worked. Some failed. In fact, the system I preferred lost out. It was widely known in the newsroom — to many editors — that we were doing this. And I’ve told the newsroom for more than a year that The Times had too many layers of editing and that it would have to cut back.
I was a copy editor and later news editor of The Chicago Tribune. In light of The Times, and other news organizations, being accused of disseminating fake news, do you really think fewer “eyes” on stories is a wise move at this time?
I don’t think having fewer eyes on a story has anything to do with arguments about what is fake news. That’s never been an editing issue. And remember, we will still have far more editors than any other paper. I say that as a former reporter for The Tribune myself.
Has the NYT done any comprehensive statistical analysis of work performed by copy editors before making the decision to eliminate a stand-alone copy desk? For example, how often are factual errors caught, questioned, changed or referred back to reporters or other editors? The same for errors in spelling, grammar, NYT style; general tone and possible bias of articles and headlines; readability and organization of articles.
We didn’t really need to do this. We live it every day, and there is no question that the copy desk catches factual errors and problems with tone or judgment. In testing the different editing systems we found that the error rate did not go up. Remember, we are eliminating the central copy desk. We are not eliminating copy editing. Many of the people who read copy at The Times are former copy editors.
Has any other organization used this structure effectively?
Many. In fact, we are the only paper with such an elaborate system of editing. Almost everyone else — including The Wall Street Journal — changed their editing system long ago to eliminate the centralized copy desk. To be honest, we’re behind on this change.
Has The Times done real-time run-throughs? If so, for how long? Does this make a better product, or is it mostly cost saving? Finally, how much would online-only subscription rates have to be increased to save the 50 or so copy desk positions slated for elimination?
As I said to an earlier reader, we did run tests of this system and others on various desks. This is not about cost savings. Or about turning over more money to our owners. The Times has long had the principle that quality comes first. But quality cannot be measured by the size of the editing staff. It is also measured by the number of reporters around the world, covering wars and economic upheaval. We are planning to increase the number of people doing that work.
Someone said the soul of The Times is in the copy desk. I don’t think any craft can claim the soul of the place. Some of it is certainly in Kabul right now. Or in D.C. covering a tumultuous government.
Was it ever considered by the leadership at the NYTimes to simply train the current copy editors on video and web design?
We are in fact providing extensive training to editors and others. We have created a team to train journalists for the future. And, yes, some copy editors have grabbed hold of the training and are learning new skills. But not all skills can be taught so easily. Our best video journalists have years of experience and training. They’ve dedicated their lives to it.
There was a time when newspapers thought anyone could learn to be a photographer, until we learned the obvious fallacy of that notion. The Times did not become a great photographic institution until it put photography in the hands of photojournalists.