321 pp. Random House. $27.
Pity the middle-aged American male adulterer, perhaps the most underrepresented and misunderstood figure in all of modern literature.
No, I’m kidding. Over the course of the past century, writers have spilled a disproportionate amount of ink on the subject of men and their cheating hearts, long before and after John Updike followed Rabbit Angstrom’s various pathetic, inexplicable infidelities.
As a literary theme, it’s about as played out as a dog barking in the distance on a dark and stormy night, but sometimes, miraculously, a writer manages to breathe some new life into the subject, even if it takes some hard-core CPR to do it.
Matthew Klam, author of “Who Is Rich?,” turns out to be one of those writers. Klam’s debut novel has been a long time coming — his first book, the story collection “Sam the Cat,” was published 17 years ago, to rapturous reviews from critics enamored with his dark and biting sense of humor.
His admirers have had to wait since the Clinton administration for his next book, but happily, it’s worth it. “Who Is Rich?” is funny, maddening and, despite the well-worn subject matter, defiantly original.
So who is Rich, anyway? The narrator of Klam’s (a little too) cleverly named novel is a 42-year-old illustrator for a liberal newsmagazine — think The Atlantic or The Nation, or any other periodical you’d find on the coffee table at the house of a well-heeled progressive’s shabby chic home — and a former underground cartoonist of slight renown. (The samples of his work scattered throughout the book, actually drawn by the accomplished artist John Cuneo, will put you in mind of the caricatures you might find on a Barnes & Noble tote bag.) Rich has a wife whom he resents and two children, the apples of his unfortunately wandering eye.
Rich sleepwalks through the class he’s teaching, and takes several bike rides around the sleepy college town he’s beginning to loathe (a “stinking fishy hellhole,” in his words). On one trip, subconsciously racked with guilt, he buys his wife a $3,000 bracelet, thereby wiping out their joint checking account. But after Amy breaks her arm during a softball game, he decides to make her the recipient of his misguided largess instead. It’s neither the first nor the last terrible decision that Rich will make.
It’s at times like this that the reader wants to reach into the novel and shake Rich violently by his shoulders, saying: “Yes. For the love of God, dude, yes.” But Klam doesn’t make it that simple. He’s no moralist, and he challenges us to hate Rich, knowing that we probably won’t be able to do so, at least not quite.
For one thing, the guy really does sincerely love his wife and kids, which is something, at least. He admits that he’s “scared to work on a crumbling marriage I’d be sure to hang on to for whatever remaining time we had here on earth.” He wants it both ways, which is irritating, but at least he’s honest about it.
Klam does an agile job balancing an existentially tragic story line with the morbid humor he’s displayed in his short fiction. Reflecting on the turn his career has taken, Rich observes: “Illustration is to cartooning as prison sodomy is to pansexual orgy. Not the same thing at all.” (The guy’s obsessed with sex, but let he who is without sin and all that.) Later, he notes that “I’d given up everything for cartooning, and for that alone I deserved to die.” It’s quite literally gallows humor — Rich is contemplating suicide at the time — but it shows how Klam can make his readers smile, briefly, and in spite of their better instincts.
He’s also gifted at discussing complicated themes without hitting his audience over the head. Rich is open about his resentment of Amy’s wealth, which is refreshing in a cathartic way. “I hated her life but thought I should have it,” he admits, in a moment of shocking candor from a pathologically dishonest man. Sex and money are taboo topics in polite company, but Rich is not a man who can be accused of excess, or even basic, politeness.
There’s no doubt that “Who Is Rich?” is difficult to read, and that’s by design. It’s an experience akin to listening to a semi-charming casual acquaintance reveal way too much information about his relationship woes — it’s horrifying, but you find yourself unable to turn away.
It’s a challenging novel, but Klam’s prose is so clean, so self-assured, that it feels a little like a miracle. Klam forces his readers to think about things many of us would rather ignore, and somehow makes us feel a reluctant sympathy toward a man who hasn’t earned it. Maybe it’s a love story; maybe it’s just a lust story, but either way, it’s a fine accomplishment. Here’s hoping we won’t have to wait another 17 years for the return of this singularly gifted writer.