Clearly, he is a hero.
The lump was a fawn, which the dog dragged onto the sand. There it lay, alive but barely moving.
Storm gently nudged the fawn’s belly. It scarcely responded. He nuzzled it again. Nothing. He pawed at its tiny hooves. Then the video ended.
The video footage has launched Storm to sudden social media stardom and sent him on a tour of morning TV talk shows.
Banish any thought that the dog, a 6-year-old English golden retriever owned by Mark Freeley, a personal injury lawyer from East Setauket, N.Y., might have simply been following his instinct to retrieve.
Definitely do not imagine that the dog was hungry.
Mr. Freeley said he left to get help. He called a group he knew, Strong Island Animal Rescue League. Frank Floridia, who runs the organization, arrived with leashes and nets.
The fawn paddled out again, this time about 250 feet. After a failed attempt by Storm to fetch it once more, Mr. Floridia took off his shirt and, in his sneakers and shorts, swam out and grabbed the deer.
The 3-month-old white-tailed deer had unexplained wounds on its head and one closed eye, he said. Mr. Floridia and his partner, Erica Kutzing, drove the deer to Save the Animals Rescue Foundation in Middle Island, N.Y., where it was in stable condition late Tuesday, said Lori Ketcham, a director of the organization. The fawn was being treated with antibiotics and was drinking baby goat formula from a bowl.
Many fawns that are brought to the animal rescue, Ms. Ketcham said, are there because of dogs — and not heroic ones. “I think the dog did a very good thing, but I’m very realistic about what dogs do — dogs tend to chew these little deer up,” she said.
The fawn will eventually be returned to the wild, she said. But it is recovering from many ailments, including subcutaneous emphysema, a condition in which air bubbles are trapped under the skin, making it feel like “Bubble Wrap,” Ms. Ketcham said. The illness can be caused by trauma.
Being in a dog’s mouth, Ms. Ketcham said, could be considered traumatic — but so could falling off a sandy cliff, the rescuers’ leading theory of how the fawn got in the water.
The family’s rabbit, Speedo, often sleeps on the dog’s back. Although Storm adamantly refuses to fetch, Mr. Freeley said, the dog seemed to know the stakes were high in retrieving the fawn.
