WASHINGTON — Haven’t seen it. Couldn’t tell you. Ask my office.
Congressional Republicans, well practiced by now in the craft of protecting an administration stalked by scandal, generally retreated to form on Tuesday when confronted with the extraordinary latest: an email last year, embraced by the president’s son, affirming the Russian government’s support for the Trump campaign and promising damaging information on his opponent.
The developments instantly roused a Capitol that can occasionally feel numb to Trump-size interruptions, jolting the overlapping investigations into ties between President Trump’s team and Russia and leaving Republican lawmakers to answer once more for the executive tumult that has shadowed the legislative year.
Yet the response from Republicans, at least initially, followed a familiar pattern: Approached for comment about Donald Trump Jr.’s email exchange and meeting, most senators declined to engage, expressed confusion about the questions or searched for plausible justifications for the conduct.
“Not right now,” Senator Patrick J. Toomey of Pennsylvania said.
“Talk to others about politics,” said Senator Bob Corker of Tennessee, typically more willing than most Republicans to tweak the administration.
Mr. Hatch was asked if he would have taken a meeting with someone who emailed promising Russian support and incriminating evidence during a campaign. He laughed.
Some of the most forceful Republican scolding came from a familiar duo: Senator John McCain of Arizona and Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina. They are often the likeliest to criticize the president on matters of Russia, though they, too, have remained broadly supportive of his administration and its agenda.
He was asked if he was confident that there was no collusion.
At the same time, some Democrats began pressing the case that months of Russia-tinged revelations had at last congealed into something unmistakable.
And on Tuesday morning, before the president’s son had released the email exchange in question, Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia entertained the possibility of treason.
Senator Mark Warner of Virginia, the top Democrat on the Intelligence Committee, dismissed any defense that Donald Trump Jr. was simply being politically naïve in taking the meeting. “Lying is not a rookie mistake,” Mr. Warner said, after noting the litany of Trump camp reversals from those who did not disclose or accurately recall meetings with Russians.
The more meaningful constituency, though, will be the Republicans whom Mr. Trump has relied on to pursue his legislative agenda.
All year, they have been confronted with this ritual: a disquieting report, a blizzard of questions, an awkward distancing that often neither condones the behavior nor condemns the administration that propagated it.
The same adjectives find their way into circulation: Troubling. Concerning. Problematic.
Senator Richard M. Burr, Republican of North Carolina and the chairman of the Intelligence Committee, deflected questions on Tuesday about Donald Trump Jr., saying he did not want to draw conclusions during the investigation. Members of the Intelligence Committee and the Judiciary Committee have said they want Mr. Trump to appear before lawmakers to discuss the meeting.
But at least some consternation appeared to be building for a handful of Trump loyalists. One of Mr. Trump’s earliest supporters, Representative Lee Zeldin of New York, registered his concerns on Twitter.
Other reliable Trump allies showed little sign of dissent. Senator Tom Cotton, Republican of Arkansas and one of the least talkative senators in the company of Capitol Hill reporters, was pressed repeatedly on the meeting and the email exchange.
“No comment,” he said on a loop, never breaking stride.
As Mr. Cotton — an Iraq war veteran with two Harvard degrees and manifest ambition — reached a Senate elevator, a Bloomberg reporter dangled some bait.
Mr. Cotton smiled, slipping into a faint laugh.
