Each morning, Crispin Hernandez, then a dairy worker in upstate New York, would wake up at dawn and shuffle cows one by one into milking chutes, then sanitize and massage their teats before affixing a milking machine to each udder.
It was dirty work with caustic chemicals that sloshed over the standard-length gloves his employers provided. Elbow-length gloves, which can better protect fingernails from withering and palms from iodine stains, were items that workers had to buy — from their bosses, he said. When Mr. Hernandez gathered his colleagues to discuss protesting conditions, he was fired, he said.
Then he learned there was almost nothing he could do about it.
In New York, an 80-year-old law precludes agricultural laborers from collective action. The law, which also affects other groups like nannies, has contributed to deep exploitation, advocates say, among the mostly immigrants in New York who till fields, milk cows and thresh wheat.
In State Supreme Court in Albany on Thursday, lawyers for the New York Civil Liberties Union will argue that the law violates New York’s Constitution, which permits all workers to organize. The organization filed the lawsuit on behalf of Mr. Hernandez and two advocacy groups. The New York Farm Bureau, a lobbyist group for the agriculture industry, will argue that farm work is different from other industries because of its seasonal nature and the animals require constant care. That makes labor organizing, like strikes, untenable.
In May of last year, when the suit was filed, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said the state would decline to fight it, agreeing with the workers that their rights were being unconstitutionally violated. But in the fall, the farm bureau received permission from the court to step in for the state and defend the law, a riposte in a case that advocates believed was, at last, all but won.
The New York Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit on behalf of Mr. Hernandez and two advocacy groups. The case goes before the State Supreme Court on Thursday.
Marks Farms, the dairy farm that Mr. Hernandez was fired from in Lowville, N.Y., did not respond to an email and a call requesting comment.
In June, the Workers’ Center of Central New York and the Worker Justice Center of New York, advocacy organizations that are part of the lawsuit, produced a report titled “Milked,” which documents what it said were abuses against immigrant dairy workers, such as wage theft and dangerous workplaces where laborers have been trampled and gored. Workers, who often live in housing provided by their bosses, are frequently undocumented and fear reprisal if they speak up, the report found.
That portrait of working conditions has been strongly contested by the industry’s advocates. In a statement released by the farm bureau, David Fisher, the current president of the farm bureau, cited a 2016 Cornell University study that asked 205 Hispanic workers and 36 managers about conditions on dairy farms in New York and found about two-fifths said they had no difficulty in their jobs. “The mere suggestion otherwise may fit the activists’ narrative, but is not a fair and accurate portrayal of life that was documented on farms in this state,” Mr. Fisher said.
Farm laborers are rightfully excluded from organizing, according to Mr. Fisher, in part because agricultural work does not fit the 9-to-5 workweeks of other industries.
“Mother Nature dictates the time clock. Yes, there are long days spent picking fruit in the summer heat. However, rain can also keep farmers out of the fields. To make up for the lost time on one day, farmers and their employees may have to work more hours the next day to get ripe food from the farm to market,” Mr. Fisher said in the statement, which reflects what the bureau plans to argue in court.
The federal law that permits workers the right to organize, the National Labor Relations Act, was enacted in 1935. But to get Congress to pass the law and implement other parts of his New Deal, President Franklin D. Roosevelt compromised. Farmworkers were exempted to appease Southern politicians whose constituents relied on agriculture, areas where farmworkers were largely black. Those exemptions are still federal law. New York’s state law was modeled on the federal law and enacted in 1937.
Donna Lieberman, the executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union, said the law, both federal and state, is a Jim Crow-era holdover. The New York’s law “really does contravene the basic principles that are ingrained in both our state Constitution and our U.S. Constitution,” she said.
