Before the Los Angeles Lakers became an N.B.A. glamour team, their forebears dominated pro basketball far from the flash of Hollywood.
The Minneapolis Lakers, playing in a 10,000-seat arena and featuring the league’s first superstar, center George Mikan, won five championships in the N.B.A. and its immediate precursor — three of those titles consecutively — in the league’s first decade.
John Kundla, who was 31 when he was hired by the Lakers and coached those teams, died on Sunday at a nursing home in Minneapolis. He was 101 and the oldest living member of the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Mass., having been inducted in 1995.
His death was confirmed by his son James.
Although he largely slipped from basketball fans’ memories over the years, his total of five championship teams in the N.B.A. and its precursor ties him with Riley and Gregg Popovich for third place behind Jackson’s 11 and Auerbach’s nine. He was the only N.B.A. coach to have guided teams to championships in his first two seasons and the first to win three consecutive titles.
Kundla had played for the University of Minnesota and was the head coach at the College of St. Thomas (now the University of St. Thomas) in St. Paul when he was named the Lakers’ coach in their inaugural season, 1947-48, in the old National Basketball League.
Seeing little future for the pro game, he took the job only when he was guaranteed $6,000 a year for three seasons, about twice what he was earning as a college coach.
Kundla coached the Lakers to the 1948 N.B.L. championship. The following fall, the Lakers joined the Basketball Association of America, which was created in 1946 and which the N.B.A. considers its forerunner.
Kundla coached the Lakers to the B.A.A. championship in 1949 and then, after it merged with the N.B.L. to form the N.B.A., to titles in 1950, ’52, ’53 and ’54.
Low-key and well-liked by his players, he was adept at getting supremely talented athletes to play unselfish and fundamentally sound basketball in an era before the N.B.A. adopted the 24-second shot clock, which inspired a high-scoring running game.
Mikan, at 6 feet 10 inches and 245 pounds, overwhelmed defenders with his hook shots and rebounding, earning him the nickname Mr. Basketball.
Kundla’s Lakers also featured the Hall of Famers Vern Mikkelsen, the prototype of the power forward; Jim Pollard, known as the Kangaroo Kid for his leaping ability, at what would become the small forward spot; Slater Martin, a model for the modern point guard; and the burly center Clyde Lovellette. Kundla outlived all of them.
John Albert Kundla Jr. was born on July 3, 1916, in Star Junction, Pa., near Pittsburgh, the son of immigrants from Eastern Europe. His father was a coal miner and steelworker.
His mother, Anna, moved with him to Minneapolis when he was 5 to escape coal country.
A 6-foot-2-inch forward, he started as a sophomore for the Minnesota basketball team that tied Illinois for the Big Ten title in 1937.
After Navy service in World War II and one season at St. Thomas, Kundla became the coach of the fledgling Lakers.
They defeated Auerbach’s Washington Capitols for the B.A.A. championship in 1949; the Syracuse Nationals in the 1950 playoff finals, when the league had become the N.B.A.; the Knicks in 1952 and ’53; and Syracuse again in 1954.
Kundla’s teams lost their dominance in the late 1950s, following Mikan’s retirement. Elgin Baylor, the future Hall of Fame forward, was drafted by the Lakers in 1958, but they were swept by Auerbach’s Boston Celtics in the 1959 N.B.A. finals.
Kundla retired from the Lakers after that season and coached the University of Minnesota basketball team from 1959 to 1968. His championship Lakers teams were all white at a time when the N.B.A. was first starting to welcome black players. But he was the first basketball coach at Minnesota with black players on athletic scholarships, and two of them, Lou Hudson and Archie Clark, became N.B.A. All-Stars.
In his last years, Kundla had been a resident at an assisted living community in Minneapolis, where he followed the N.B.A. on television.
In addition to his son James, Kundla is survived by his sons David and Tom, his daughters Kathleen Dahlman and Karen Rodberg, and six grandchildren. His wife, Marie, died in 2007.
The Lakers, who moved to Los Angeles in 1960, had long overlooked their roots in Minneapolis. But in April 2002, they raised banners at their home arena, Staples Center, with the names of the Minneapolis Lakers Hall of Famers and the years in which they won their championships.
Kundla, Mikan, Mikkelsen, Martin, Lovellette and the widow of Jim Pollard were on hand to accept commemorative championship rings.
