WASHINGTON — The Treasury Department imposed financial sanctions on a host of current and former senior Venezuelan officials on Wednesday and threatened to take more stringent action if President Nicolás Maduro proceeds with plans for a constituent assembly on Sunday that critics consider a danger to democracy.
Steven T. Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, ordered assets in the United States frozen for 13 well-connected Venezuelan figures and barred Americans from doing business with them. Among those targeted by the administration were the interior minister and heads of the army, police and national guard, as well as government officials involved in the coming assembly.
In a conference call with reporters, administration officials urged Mr. Maduro to cancel the Sunday assembly or face tougher actions. Among the possible options could be measures targeting oil sales. “Anyone elected to the National Constituent Assembly should know that their role in undermining democratic processes and institutions in Venezuela could expose them to potential U.S. sanctions,” Mr. Mnuchin added in his statement.
The constituent assembly elections planned for the weekend are seen by critics as a way to cement Mr. Maduro’s hold on power by rewriting the constitution and possibly dissolving state institutions. Protests against the government have led to arrests and violence. The administration cited opposition estimates that as many as 15,000 civilians had been wounded in recent protests and over 3,000 arrested, with 431 political prisoners still behind bars. The administration also cited accusations of torture and other human rights abuses by the Venezuelan security services.
Among those hit with sanctions on Wednesday were Nestor Luis Reverol Torres, the minister of interior, justice and peace; Carlos Alfredo Perez Ampueda, the national director of the Bolivarian National Police; Sergio Jose Rivero Marcano, commander general of the Bolivarian National Guard; and Jesus Rafael Suarez Chourio, the general commander of the Bolivarian Army.
The move won support across the aisle in Washington. “Today’s announcement of sanctions against 13 senior government and military officials is an important step to hold Venezuela’s leaders accountable for their actions,” Senator Benjamin L. Cardin, Democrat of Maryland, said in a statement.