In his first public speech as the nation’s top securities cop, Walter J. Clayton sought on Wednesday to send a message that he would not shy away from looking out for the interests of mom-and-pop investors.
But the new Securities and Exchange Commission chairman offered few specific policy recommendations in his roughly 25-minute speech, beyond calling for the creation of an advisory board to review transparency in the bond market and a continued crackdown on stock swindles.
The nomination of Mr. Clayton, a former Sullivan & Cromwell partner, by President Trump to be chairman of the S.E.C. drew criticism from many Democrats on Capitol Hill and investor advocates because his legal experience largely has come from representing big corporate clients.
Critics said Mr. Clayton’s professional experience doing corporate work for big Wall Street banks like Goldman Sachs Group and Alibaba, the Chinese e-commerce giant, might cause him to put the interests of corporate America before those of ordinary investors.
But in a lunchtime speech to the Economic Club of New York at the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan, Mr. Clayton, who is known as Jay, tried to balance his concern for investor protection with reducing regulatory burdens that deter private companies from going public.
“Investors should know the S.E.C. is looking out for them,” Mr. Clayton said.
In a brief question-and-answer session after the speech, he said that he supported enforcement actions against companies that engage in foreign bribery to get contracts despite a paper he co-wrote in 2011 that questioned whether regulators and prosecutors had become too aggressive in pursuing actions under the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.
The S.E.C. chairman opened his remarks with an approving nod to his predecessor, Mary Jo White, who, like Mr. Clayton, had come to the commission from a large law firm, in Ms. White’s case, Debevoise & Plimpton. But Ms. White also had a law enforcement background, having previously served as the United States attorney in Manhattan.
The agency, however, needs to “have a realistic vision for how rules will be implemented” and should listen to investors and others to determine if rules and regulations are working as intended, he said.
Several times during his remarks he referred to ordinary investors as “Mr. and Ms. 401(k),” a recognition that the bulk of the savings Americans have stowed away rests in corporate 401(k) investment plans as opposed to traditional corporate pension plans.
Mr. Clayton said an important focus of the S.E.C.’s enforcement effort would be rooting out “fraud and shady practices” that especially target ordinary investors.
He did return to a theme that has been a talking point since he was nominated — steps the commission can take to encourage more companies to go public.
In some cases, he said, “increased disclosure and other burdens” may be contributing to companies deciding to remain private as opposed to filing for initial public offerings.
Ordinary investors should not be shut out from participating in the capital formation of the country’s growing companies, he said.
Recently, Mr. Clayton and the S.E.C. extended a rule that permits small companies considering going public to delay the filing of sensitive financial information to all private companies. He said the ability of large companies to keep sensitive information private before filing a formal initial public offering prospectus might encourage more corporations to go public.
With more Americans retiring, Mr. Clayton said there needed to be more focus on transparency in the bond market and the relative safety of those securities as opposed to stocks. He said this is necessary as older investors tend to allocate more money to bonds and other fixed-income products in order to reduce market risk.
Mr. Clayton said he was looking into creating a Fixed Income Market Structure Advisory Committee to review issues involving the sale and marketing of bonds to retail investors.
