Whether or not the four board members believed him, they voted unanimously to grant him parole when he first becomes eligible on Oct. 1, after nine years in state prison on charges stemming from a 2007 armed robbery in a Las Vegas hotel room. Appearing on a video link from Lovelock Correctional Center, Mr. Simpson spoke to the board in Carson City as, officially, just another inmate who looked like a good bet for release, a 70-year-old who has been a model prisoner.
But of course, it is the 1994 knife murders of his ex-wife Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend Ronald Goldman, for which he was acquitted after one of the most-watched trials in history, that have cast the longer, darker shadow over his life and reputation. No celebrity so big had been tried for a crime so severe, and a generation later, he stands as someone who unwittingly helped shape the modern news media and popular ideas about the law, police, race relations and Los Angeles, the city he once called home.
Visibly grayer and more halting in his movements than when he was convicted, Mr. Simpson, wearing a light blue denim shirt, dark jeans and white sneakers, seemed to have lost none of his confidence in himself or his ability to persuade. Giving an account of the hotel robbery that, as one parole commissioner noted, “differs a little from the official record,” he continued to insist that he had not known that some of his accomplices were armed with guns; that the items he took had actually belonged to him; and that other people were to blame, but that “they got a get-out-of-jail-free card” for testifying against him.
Watching the parole hearing, streamed live on countless networks and websites, it is hard now to remember that in the mid-1990s, there was just one cable news channel, and social media did not exist. The internet, reality television and the media ecosystem of wall-to-wall coverage of anything sensational were in their infancy.
O.J. Simpson’s reaction after being granted parole.
The case made household names of defense lawyers like Johnnie Cochran and Robert Kardashian — whose family would go on to greater notoriety after his death — and legal analysts like Jeffrey Toobin, the author and writer for The New Yorker; Greta Van Susteren, who became a longtime Fox News host; and Harvey Levin, who later created TMZ. For millions of Americans, the trial served as an introduction to DNA evidence, a concept so new that expert witnesses had to explain it.
Mr. Simpson’s arrest and trial exposed a deep racial divide in views of the police and criminal justice. Many white people found his acquittal unthinkable, while many blacks rejoiced and hailed him as a hero. Today, in the era of Black Lives Matter and multiple videos of police officers using force against black people, that chasm is common knowledge, but in 1995, it was a revelation to many Americans.
He said the trial did at least wake some white people up to the vastly different perceptions black people have about the justice system, but he expressed dismay that the issue seems no better today.
In a predominantly black neighborhood in South Los Angeles on Thursday, people continued to root for Mr. Simpson. Vickie Williford, 56, whooped and jumped for joy on hearing the decision.
Before he was charged with murder and it became public knowledge that Mr. Simpson had repeatedly beaten Ms. Simpson, he was an admired, charming fixture at clubs and golf courses in Los Angeles, and at restaurants in Brentwood, his affluent, mostly white neighborhood.
But his arrest came at a time of huge mistrust in minority neighborhoods of the Los Angeles Police Department, which had a reputation, heightened by the videotaped beating of Rodney King in 1991, for racism and excessive force. Before a mostly black jury, Mr. Simpson’s defense team played to that mistrust, highlighting racist comments made by Mark Fuhrman, one of the detectives investigating the murders, to argue that Mr. Simpson had been framed.
The acquittal of four officers charged in the King beating led to riots in 1992 that left about 60 people dead, and three years later, officials feared that a conviction of Mr. Simpson would lead to another burst of violence.
But Los Angeles has changed, in no small part because of the aftermath of the King case. Police abuses still occur and inflame tensions in minority communities, but by most accounts they are rarer, and in many of those cases, the officers are themselves minorities, reflecting the effort to change the complexion of what was historically an overwhelmingly white and male department.
In 1997, in a civil trial, a jury found that Mr. Simpson was responsible for the deaths of Mr. Goldman and Ms. Simpson, and awarded their families $33.5 million in damages; he has paid a tiny fraction of that amount. Shunned by former friends and business associates, he moved to Florida, where — unlike in California — a “homestead exemption” law allows a person to shield significant assets, including a home, from creditors.
In 2007, while in Las Vegas to attend a wedding, he went with several people to a hotel room. He said he had been told that Bruce Fromong, a sports memorabilia dealer he knew, was there selling things that Mr. Simpson said had been stolen from him.
They took hundreds of items, Mr. Simpson was arrested, and suddenly he was back in the spotlight. It did not help his cause that the robbery occurred on the same day as the release of “If I Did It: Confessions of the Killer,” a book based on interviews Mr. Simpson gave, describing — in theory, strictly hypothetically — how he could have carried out the 1994 murders.
In 2008, 13 years to the day after his acquittal in the murder case, Mr. Simpson was convicted of multiple felony charges. He was later sentenced to nine to 33 years in prison. One of his lawyers at the time, Yale Galanter, said that the charges were excessive and suggested that the prosecutors and jurors had been influenced by the earlier case, which they denied.
After years of fading from view while he served his time, two high-profile television projects moved Mr. Simpson to center stage again last year. ESPN’s “O.J.: Made in America,” a multipart documentary that won an Academy Award, spanned his life story: poor child in San Francisco, sports star in college and the N.F.L., charming pitchman and actor, abusive husband, California defendant and, finally, Nevada convict. FX’s “The People v. O.J. Simpson: American Crime Story,” a mini-series dramatizing the murder investigation and trial, won several Emmy Awards.
But the Nevada Board of Parole Commissioners, while acknowledging the passions aroused by the murder case, insisted that it could not take them into account, and granted his release as soon as he becomes eligible. It could have denied him parole and made him wait years for another chance.
Mr. Simpson has said he wants to return to Florida, and officials there and in Nevada said they were trying to negotiate an agreement for that move. If he violates the conditions of his parole — which are likely to bar him from having weapons or associating with criminals — he could return to prison to serve out his full sentence.
