The history of women in Formula One is a short one. For decades it has been a man’s sport, with few women in important roles or behind the wheel. Only six women have driven during grand prix weekends, and of those only two actually participated in the race itself, with Lella Lombardi of Italy the last one. That was more than 40 years ago.
But out of the cockpit, things are beginning to change. Monisha Kaltenborn became the sport’s first female team principal when she ran the Sauber team. Although she stepped down last month, behind her is a rising generation of female talent.
Claire Williams is the deputy team principal of the Williams team, Ruth Buscombe is a senior strategy engineer for the Sauber team, Bernadette Collins fills a similar role at Sahara Force India, and Marga Torres Diez is a trackside power unit engineer, working on the championship-winning engines produced by Mercedes-AMG High Performance Powertrains.
In the team factories, growing numbers of women occupy roles in aerodynamics, composites and vehicle dynamics. Female drivers, however, are still rare.
Racing is a numbers game. Thousands of children around the world take up karting each year, and as the boys and girls climb the career ladder, there are only 20 drivers at the top of the international single-seater racing pyramid in Formula One, making success difficult for either sex.
In the early years of grand prix racing, when access to motorsport was as restricted by access to funds as it is today, female competitors were much less of a rarity. Motor racing as a pastime for the upper classes led to a small coterie of successful female racers in the 1920s and 1930s, and the manufacturers of the era were not blind to the promotional opportunities.
Invicta, a marque of the era, used Violette Cordery, a racing driver and distance-driving record-holder, to promote its cars with stunts, proving their reliability by driving from London to Monte Carlo in third gear and a 1927 round-the-world trip in which she drove over 10,000 miles in five months.
Danica Patrick of Indy-car racing and Nascar has shown how marketable a woman in the cockpit can be. Patrick’s reputation may exceed her racing results, but her presence in the sport has increased global awareness of Nascar.
Formula One currently lacks such role models in the cockpit, but the sport has its eyes on Colombia’s Tatiana Calderón, 24, who is racing in GP3 and is a development driver for the Sauber Formula One team; and Marta Garcia, 16, now in her first season of single-seater racing with MP Motorsport in the Spanish Formula 4 national championship.
Susie Wolff became the first woman in 22 years to take part in a Formula One grand prix weekend during the 2014 British Grand Prix, when she drove for Williams during a practice session. Wolff was a development driver for the team and never raced the car.
But Wolff’s impact on the future of women in motorsport extends far beyond her time spent in the cockpit, both during her seven years racing in the Deutsche Touring Masters, or D.T.M., championship, or the four seasons she spent with Williams. She is an ambassador for the F.I.A. Women in Motorsport Commission, and founded Dare to Be Different, which is aimed at inspiring young girls interested in careers in motorsport, providing networking opportunities and mentoring.
Wolff’s program is not the only one aimed at promoting futures in science, technology, engineering and mathematics, or STEM, in motorsport to female students. The Women in Motorsport Commission has partnerships with 76 member clubs, promoting motorsport as a career option and giving support and training to young drivers.
Formula One also has its own international STEM program, F1 in Schools. It is actively attracting girls into exploring science and technology careers using the excitement and glamour of Formula One, and provides a grounding in all areas of the sport, including branding, sponsorship, engineering and design.
That shift is coming from the schools and from an effort within the sport to promote itself as a viable career for women.
“We have to go out and make sure that we’re actively promoting Formula One as a career destination for students more, that being primary, secondary or tertiary educations,” said Claire Williams of the Williams team.
The Mercedes-AMG team reports a similar increase in interest from female applicants in recent years.
Behind the scenes, women have long had a role in Formula One. Bernie Ecclestone, who ran the sport until 2016, when it was bought by the Liberty Media Corporation, had an inner circle of mostly female lawyers in charge of managing the hosting, broadcasting and promotion of each race.
Kate Beavan joined Formula One Management in 2003 as a commercial lawyer and is now global director of hospitality and experiences.
“Bernie gave you the room, the space to grow, and he did it in a very quiet way,” Beavan said. “If you strongly believe that you needed to do something in the business or you wanted to do something and you argued your case, he’d let you, and he’d let you grow sideways, upwards, and he quietly did that.
In a world where results are everything, the delivery is more important than the package. Francesca Venturi, a chassis designer for Ferrari, says the common goal of a team trumps any differences.
