Fashion|Should Lanvin Become ‘a French Michael Kors’?
Should Lanvin Become ‘a French Michael Kors’?
One designer exits, another enters. This week, the beleaguered French fashion house Lanvin announced that Olivier Lapidus would be its artistic director, following the departure of Bouchra Jarrar last week after only 16 months.
Ms. Jarrar, of course, took the reins of the house after the controversial firing of Alber Elbaz, the beloved designer who had returned its brand to prominence over 14 years.
It all makes for a somewhat complicated situation for Mr. Lapidus, 59 and a relatively unknown designer outside the French fashion world. (He is the son of the designer Ted Lapidus, and ran his father’s brand for 12 years after three years designing Balmain men’s wear). Especially because industry reports suggest that something of a strategic about-face is in the works.
There’s no question that brands need to evolve. And fashion tends to advance on the punctuated equilibrium model proposed by the paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould: A house moseys along under one designer in one aesthetic until he or she leaves or is fired, at which point environmental stress is created, a new designer comes in with a new idea, and the brand heads off in a different direction.
Considering the announcement of Mr. Lapidus’s appointment by Shaw-Lan Wang, Lanvin’s owner and president — “Far ahead of his time, Olivier Lapidus has always been interested in new technologies. As a precursor couturier, he now resonates with the aspirations of the company and will be able to take up the challenges of Lanvin in the 21st century” — Lanvin seems to be at that point.
And given the problems the house has had, and the fact that it intends to go in a new direction by choosing Mr. Lapidus, who recently introduced a web-only couture house named Création Olivier Lapidus, the scenario has a certain believability.
But it does raise the question: Is this actually a new direction?
What exactly was meant by “a French Michael Kors” was never specified in the article, and the phrase seems to have come from an anonymous inside source.
But maybe it refers to the pyramid business model on which Michael Kors, like so many American luxury brands, is built: one with a high-fashion line at the pinnacle, which rains style cred down on less expensive lines, from Michael Michael Kors to a variety of licenses, as well as a ubiquitous line of handbags, with accessible price points to support them.
Or perhaps it refers to the Kors signature style, which combines extreme simplicity in the sportswear sense with extreme luxe in the material sense and a resolute refusal to get neurotic, in the belief that all women ultimately want to look “pretty and rich,” as Mr. Kors once told me.
Maybe it is even referring to his star-making role on “Project Runway”? Well, probably not that.
Either way, given the financial challenges now facing Michael Kors — despite the fact that it had one of the most successful share listings of 2011 and was a runaway success story for a while — using it as a pattern for Lanvin seems a surprising choice.
Michael Kors has been grappling with plummeting sales and tepid profits after a rapid expansion effort, amid declining North American mall traffic and deep discounting tactics that have resulted in the Kors label losing much of its luster with core consumers. In May, the company said that it would close as many as 125 of its full-price retail stores, paying a high price for a damaging degree of overexposure. It downgraded its sales forecasts for the rest of the year, and its share price has fallen 17 percent so far in 2017.
Even beyond the cautionary tale of the financials, however, there’s another, even more important reason that becoming “a French Michael Kors” is a bad idea, and it’s simple: Michael Kors already exists. It has colonized a very specific territory.
Success for any fashion brand comes from being able to define a point of difference: An approach to definition of dress that is all its own, and that gives consumers a reason to come to it, as opposed to anyone else.
There’s no question Lanvin needs a new approach: In 2012, at the zenith of the label’s success, revenue was 235 million euros, or about $268 million at current exchange rates. But in June, Lanvin reported revenue of €162 million for 2016, a 23 percent fall from the year before, with a net loss of €18.3 million. But the approach needs to be a genuinely new one.
And such approaches take time to gestate, internally and externally. Presumably Mr. Lapidus knows this. Here’s hoping that the owners of the house that hired him know it, too.