Federal investigators, while declining to prosecute, still questioned City Hall’s conduct. Was the administration doing favors for contributors?
Less than six months after Bill de Blasio became mayor of New York City, a campaign donor buttonholed him at an event in Manhattan. The donor, Harendra Singh, one of the earliest contributors to his mayoral campaign, ran a restaurant on city property and was having problems with the lease. Could the mayor help him?
That encounter, on June 3, 2014, set the wheels of government turning in an extraordinary way on behalf of Mr. Singh. City officials at the highest levels became involved, ultimately drawing the interest of federal investigators focused on what they saw as a pattern of trading favors for campaign contributions.
At the mayor’s direction, an aide sent a series of emails that night to Stacey Cumberbatch, the commissioner of the city agency that handles leases on city-owned real estate, saying that Mr. de Blasio wanted her to meet with Mr. Singh. The mayor, the aide wrote, asked that Ms. Cumberbatch brief him on the issue before she met with Mr. Singh, who operated Water’s Edge, in Long Island City, Queens.
The mayor then took it a step further — calling Ms. Cumberbatch, her lawyer said, while she was in a staff meeting at her agency, the Department of Citywide Administrative Services, known as DCAS.
Mr. de Blasio said that he wanted her to meet with Mr. Singh, asserting that the restaurateur did a lot of good for the public, according to the lawyer, Jim Walden. The mayor told her that he was not asking her to do anything specific, Mr. Walden said, but that he wanted her to help Mr. Singh if she could.
Mr. de Blasio’s efforts to aid Mr. Singh became a major focus of a federal investigation into the mayor’s fund-raising and a range of actions he took on behalf of donors — an inquiry that overshadowed and hamstrung his administration for more than a year.
Mr. Singh was arrested in September 2015 in an unrelated political corruption case on Long Island; the charges, which include bribing a former deputy town attorney in Oyster Bay, were filed just as the city was close to reaching a settlement with him over the lease. He later began cooperating with the federal prosecutors and F.B.I. agents investigating the mayor’s fund-raising.
Still, Mr. de Blasio’s efforts on behalf of Mr. Singh illustrated in stark terms the transactional form of governing that had largely been absent under Michael R. Bloomberg, a billionaire who eschewed campaign donations during his 12 years as mayor.
Being a donor afforded Mr. Singh access to a mayor eager to put the city bureaucracy at his service. Emails, city documents and interviews with the participants show how Mr. Singh was attended to by members of Mr. de Blasio’s inner circle and other top officials. Over 15 months, meetings were arranged, and City Hall officials were given progress reports. And when the talks were not proceeding to Mr. Singh’s liking, the city’s team of negotiators was suddenly replaced.
Although the case did not lead to corruption charges, there was still significant collateral damage. Ms. Cumberbatch was moved to a job at NYC Health & Hospitals last January. The city called it a transfer, but she told co-workers that she was forced out. Ricardo Morales, a DCAS deputy commissioner who was in charge of the negotiations with Mr. Singh, was fired in February as part of what the city said was an agency reorganization.
A lawyer for Mr. Morales, Robert Kraus, has filed a notice of claim against the city in advance of a wrongful-dismissal lawsuit, alleging that he was fired in retaliation for standing up to City Hall. Mr. Morales said the level of attention from top officials sent a clear message. “It’s obvious there’s a push from City Hall to assist this guy,” he said. The notice of claim was first reported by The Daily News.
Henry Berger, the mayor’s special counsel, who was assigned to monitor the city’s handling of the Singh case, said the level of attention Mr. Singh received had nothing to do with his being a campaign contributor.
But others, including Ms. Cumberbatch, believed that Mr. de Blasio was seeking special treatment for a campaign donor.
Mr. de Blasio’s connection to Mr. Singh goes back at least as far as 2010, when Mr. de Blasio, who was then the public advocate, began raising money for what was considered a long-shot bid for mayor. Mr. Singh gave the de Blasio campaign $2,500 in December 2010 — becoming one of just 21 people who donated that much or more that year.
The following March, Mr. Singh held a fund-raiser at Water’s Edge and collected $5,750 in contributions from other people to Mr. de Blasio. By the time Mr. de Blasio was elected in November 2013, Mr. Singh, his wife, his parents, his employees and other associates had given the mayor a total of about $33,000.
Mr. Singh ran a group of restaurant and catering companies in New York City and on Long Island, and he had operated Water’s Edge since 2008. The restaurant, on a barge in the East River that was adjacent to a city-owned pier, leased the space from the city.
But Mr. Singh had been fighting with the city over the lease’s terms, including whether he was obligated to pay for the reconstruction of the pier. He also disputed the results of an audit that found that he had been underpaying rent, with arrears and late charges totaling about $1.2 million. And he was seeking a long-term renewal of the lease, which was to expire in 2017.
Mr. de Blasio made his first effort to help Mr. Singh in November 2011, arranging a meeting between the restaurateur and Edna Wells Handy, the DCAS commissioner at the time. Mr. de Blasio sat in on the meeting, which appears on his schedule as public advocate.
But the dispute persisted, and after Mr. de Blasio became mayor, Mr. Singh tried again — approaching him at the June 2014 event, a $1,000-per-couple fund-raiser for a congressman, Steve Israel, where the mayor was a featured speaker.
That night, an aide to the mayor, Javon Coney, sent an email to Ms. Cumberbatch. “I wanted to give you a heads up that the mayor ran into Harendra Singh this evening,” he wrote. “The mayor would like you to meet with Harendra asap since it is a time-sensitive issue that he has.” He provided Mr. Singh’s phone number and email address.
Ms. Cumberbatch replied seven minutes later, promising to contact Mr. Singh.
The next day, Mr. Singh sent Mr. Coney a packet of information. Mr. Coney forwarded it to Ms. Cumberbatch, and her staff called a meeting to discuss it the same day.
It was at about this time that Ms. Cumberbatch received a telephone call from the mayor. Sally Renfro, Ms. Cumberbatch’s chief of staff, who has since retired, said that she remembered her boss taking the call, and returning to express surprise.
She put Mr. Morales, who started working at DCAS in mid-June, in charge of the Singh negotiations. She also told him about the call from the mayor.
Mr. Morales, who received the city’s Ethics in Government Award in 2009 for work as the Housing Authority’s general counsel, said that Mr. Singh brought up his ties to Mr. de Blasio at their first meeting.
Mr. Morales and his staff worked to seek a deal with Mr. Singh, but tensions grew. Mr. Singh agreed to a plan to pay a reduced rent over several months, but then fell behind on those payments, according to the emails and other documents. The city sued Mr. Singh over the unpaid rent. And Mr. Singh filed a lawsuit against the city claiming that he was not liable for the pier repairs.
Mr. Singh complained to City Hall, and he accused Mr. Morales of using threatening language — a charge that Mr. Morales denied. Mr. Berger, the mayor’s special counsel, passed the complaints on to Ms. Cumberbatch.
“I said, ‘Negotiate, but be civil,’” Mr. Berger recalled.
Apparently frustrated by the pace of negotiations, Mr. Singh hired Neal Kwatra, a lobbyist and political consultant with ties to Mr. de Blasio.
Mr. Kwatra later did work for a nonprofit group, United for Affordable NYC, created by Mr. de Blasio to support his housing initiatives. Mr. Kwatra’s parents gave large donations to the de Blasio campaign, and his mother, Pam Kwatra, arranged for $10,225 in donations from other people. In July 2015, Mr. de Blasio appointed her to the board of the Economic Development Corporation.
Mr. Kwatra began talking and emailing directly with Mr. Berger. On March 24, 2015, Mr. Kwatra and Mr. Singh met with Mr. Morales and his team.
In the following weeks, Mr. Berger and Ms. Cumberbatch exchanged a series of emails, some of which also included Dominic Williams, the chief of staff of the first deputy mayor, showing that the case was being watched by others at the highest levels of city government.
Mr. Berger said that he did not recall speaking again with the mayor about Mr. Singh after the initial request to monitor the case. “He said, ‘Take a look at this and make sure we’re not doing anything wrong,’” Mr. Berger said.
The next meeting with Mr. Singh and Mr. Kwatra took place on July 17, when Mr. Morales’s team was to offer the restaurateur new terms for the pier reconstruction.
An email sent by Ms. Cumberbatch to Mr. Berger and Mr. Williams shows that the pier project was expected to cost $8.6 million, most of which would be paid by the city. Under the lease, Mr. Singh would be responsible for $3.1 million, but the city was offering to reduce his portion to $2 million in order to reach a settlement.
Just before the meeting, at the DCAS offices in the Municipal Building, Mr. Morales received a call from Ms. Cumberbatch.
“She said she got a call from City Hall and their desire was that the meeting go well,” Mr. Morales said.
At the meeting, in a wood-paneled conference room overlooking City Hall from the 20th floor, Mr. Morales described the new offer. Mr. Kwatra reacted in anger. “Kwatra looks at me, jumps up and says: ‘This is not good. I guess you didn’t get the memo from City Hall,’” Mr. Morales recalled.
Mr. Kwatra and Mr. Singh walked out of the room. The meeting had lasted just minutes. “Everybody in the room’s jaws dropped,” Mr. Morales said.
Soon afterward, Mr. Morales and his staff were taken out of the negotiations, and the talks were moved from the DCAS office to City Hall, where they were put in the hands of the mayor’s top political aide, Emma Wolfe, the director of intergovernmental affairs. Ms. Cumberbatch — who had not previously been directly involved in the negotiations — also took part, along with her agency’s general counsel.
By mid-August, a proposed settlement had been drafted, including a further reduction of Mr. Singh’s portion of the pier repairs, to $1.5 million.
She did not know it but Mr. Singh had been arrested that morning in the Long Island corruption case.
After federal prosecutors completed their investigation without filing charges, Mr. de Blasio defended his practice of asking city officials to respond to the concerns of campaign donors.
Eric F. Phillips, Mr. de Blasio’s spokesman, refused to say whether the mayor had further contact with Mr. Singh about his problems with DCAS after the June 2014 encounter or whether he discussed the matter with Mr. Kwatra. Mr. Phillips also refused to say what Mr. de Blasio’s role was in the decision to involve Ms. Wolfe in the negotiations.
Mr. Berger, in an interview, said that City Hall had not sought preferential treatment for Mr. Singh.
“My conversation with Stacey was explicit,” Mr. Berger said, referring to Ms. Cumberbatch. “There are two concerns: get the money he owes us and make sure the place doesn’t get empty.” He said that it was in the city’s interest to keep Water’s Edge running, so that the city could continue to receive revenue.
The restaurant closed after the arrest of Mr. Singh, who is still awaiting trial in the corruption case. Last month, a State Supreme Court judge in Queens rendered a judgment against Mr. Singh’s company for $3.1 million in unpaid rent and $3.4 million for costs related to the pier renovation. It was not clear whether the city would be able to collect.