For two months, Chicago’s status as a true two-newspaper town seemed tenuous. No longer.
On Thursday, an investment group led by the businessman Edwin Eisendrath and the Chicago Federation of Labor announced that it had acquired The Chicago Sun-Times, stymying a bid by the newspaper publisher Tronc, which owns The Chicago Tribune, and its chairman, a former majority owner of The Sun-Times.
“When the big guy decided to eat the little guy, this group of people stood up and said, ‘No more,’” Mr. Eisendrath said at a news conference in Chicago.
Mr. Eisendrath’s group, which also includes private investors, acquired The Sun-Times and The Chicago Reader, a free weekly paper, from Wrapports Holdings. Terms of the deal were not disclosed, but a person with knowledge of the deal said the purchase price was $1. The group also secured more than $11 million to fund the newspaper’s operations.
Mr. Eisendrath’s group, ST Acquisition Holdings, effectively wrenched the paper away from Tronc and its chairman, Michael W. Ferro Jr.
Tronc, which also publishes The Los Angeles Times and The Baltimore Sun, announced in May that it had entered into a nonbinding agreement to buy Wrapports. On the same day, the Justice Department’s Antitrust Division said it was investigating the possible acquisition and asked other prospective buyers to submit bids for The Sun-Times, The Tribune’s chief rival.
Seeking to make the sales process sufficiently competitive, The Sun-Times ran a full-page ad saying it was looking for new ownership. But in a letter to readers the same day, it also explained that it had reached an agreement with Tronc — a deal that “made the most sense” — after seeking arrangements with other media companies.
In late 2011, Mr. Ferro and other members of the Chicago community announced that they had purchased The Sun-Times and other media properties through Wrapports, which they had formed as a holding company. Last year, after Mr. Ferro took a $44 million stake in Tronc, formerly known as Tribune Publishing, he donated his stake in The Sun-Times to a charitable trust to avoid perceived conflicts of interest.
At Tronc, Mr. Ferro has exhibited a penchant for audacious business ideas. He not only changed the company’s storied name, he has aggressively pursued a technology-driven approach to journalism that has rankled some employees. Mr. Ferro and one of Tronc’s biggest investors, the billionaire doctor Patrick Soon-Shiong, also became embroiled in a public feud that culminated in Mr. Soon-Shiong’s ouster from the company’s board.
When Tronc announced its agreement to buy The Sun-Times, the company said it would continue to operate the newspaper as an independent newsroom. But the possibility that Mr. Ferro and Tronc might own two newspapers in Chicago concerned some in the city, including Mr. Eisendrath. He and the Chicago Federation of Labor, an umbrella organization that represents roughly 300 local unions, banded together and submitted the winning bid for The Sun-Times.
This was at least the third deal that Tronc has failed to see through under Mr. Ferro. Last year, the Gannett Company walked away from its proposed deal for Tronc after a heated takeover battle. This year, Tronc came close to buying the celebrity magazine Us Weekly from the publisher of Rolling Stone, but that deal also fell through.