Visitors to Epcot near Orlando, Fla. At 35, it is Disney’s third-oldest theme park.
LOS ANGELES — Disney’s third-oldest theme park, Epcot, is overdue for a serious sprucing up. And the company is finally ready to write the check, even as it continues to pour money into upgrades at other parks.
Mr. Chapek made it official on Saturday, announcing the company’s ambitious Epcot plans at D23 Expo, a biennial convention for Disney fans that attracts an estimated 100,000 people to the Disneyland Resort in Anaheim, Calif., over three days. A major new ride — themed to “Guardians of the Galaxy,” the hit Marvel movie series — is planned for Epcot’s front section, where a simulator attraction, Mission: Space, will be updated and expanded. A ride based on the Pixar film “Ratatouille” will be added to the park’s World Showcase area. And Epcot will serve as a stop for a new gondola system called Disney Skyliner connecting various hotels and parks.
Mr. Chapek also announced more than $1 billion worth of projects unrelated to Epcot. A version of the “Tron”-inspired roller coaster that has been a runaway hit at Shanghai Disneyland is coming to the Magic Kingdom at Disney World. Also coming to that resort will be a luxury hotel designed to make guests feel as if they are staying on an actual “Star Wars” starship. A ride called Mickey and Minnie’s Runaway Railway will replace the dusty Great Movie Ride, which is at another Disney World park, Hollywood Studios.
In addition, Mr. Chapek said Disney Cruise Line would add another new ship, which would bring the company’s fleet to seven upon its completion in 2023.
Disney is counting on its theme park division to help offset slowing growth at ESPN. Last year, Disney parks generated $17 billion in revenue, a 5 percent increase compared with a year earlier, and $3.3 billion in operating income, a 9 percent increase.
In particular, Disney has been investing in Disney World. Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, wants to use technology to make the company’s parks more immersive and relevant to a new generation of children. The expansions are also designed to make each of Disney World’s four major parks — the Magic Kingdom, Epcot, Hollywood Studios and Animal Kingdom — an equally powerful draw for tourists. That might help better distribute crowds across the resort.
Most people, for instance, make a beeline for the 110-acre Magic Kingdom, where attendance totaled roughly 20.4 million last year, and then add on half-days at parks like Epcot, which hosted about 11.7 million visitors last year despite being more than twice the size of the Magic Kingdom.
Disney World, which is gearing up for its 50th anniversary in 2021, also faces stronger competition from nearby Universal Orlando, which is conducting a building boom of its own.
In 2012, Disney opened a $500 million expansion of Fantasyland at the Magic Kingdom. Animal Kingdom recently unveiled a $500 million addition, with an “Avatar” theme, that has been mobbed by visitors. (Lines for some of the new “Avatar” rides initially stretched for three hours.) Hollywood Studios is in the midst of what Bank of America Merrill Lynch has estimated is a $1 billion project to add myriad “Toy Story” and “Star Wars” rides.
Upgrades and expansions to Disney-owned hotels (Polynesian Village, Coronado Springs, Caribbean Beach) and Disney Springs, a shopping and dining district, are costing hundreds of millions more.
In the midst of all this, Epcot has not been entirely ignored. Last year, Disney gave an older boat ride housed in the park’s Norway pavilion a “Frozen” retrofit.
But large areas of Epcot have become painfully outdated. One ride scheduled to be replaced is essentially a 45-minute celebration of fossil fuel; slow-moving vehicles move past dioramas explaining the history of oil, natural gas and coal. A boat ride called Living With the Land takes riders past agricultural scenes.
Many Disneyphiles love that certain Epcot attractions (like Spaceship Earth, a jerky tour through world history that is housed inside that golf ball) have remained trapped in amber. But the recent popularity of the new “Frozen” ride has sent an unmistakable message to Disney’s corporate offices: Epcot needs more character-themed attractions to compete for the attention of children.
In many ways, Epcot is Disney’s quirkiest park. It was initially conceived by Walt Disney himself as a city called the Experimental Prototype Community of Tomorrow. The company eventually scrapped that plan after his death but kept an educational focus, dividing the park into two main areas, Future World and World Showcase, a constellation of pavilions representing the food, architecture and history of nations like Japan, China, Canada and France. The park was called Epcot Center until a mid-1990s rebranding.
Epcot has lately been best known as a type of festival grounds, with events aimed at older visitors that include a lavish flower and garden gathering in the spring and a popular food and wine show in the late summer and fall.