PARIS — With a warm clasping of hands, President Trump and President Emmanuel Macron of France cemented an unlikely but budding relationship on Friday, capped by a Bastille Day military parade in Paris meant to emphasize the alliance between the United States and its oldest ally.
Despite some wariness in the initial contacts between Mr. Trump, 71, and Mr. Macron — who at 39 is the same age as Mr. Trump’s eldest son, Donald Trump Jr. — the American leader’s two-day visit to France ended on a high note.
Mr. Trump had publicly supported Mr. Macron’s far-right opponent, Marine Le Pen, in France’s presidential elections. Mr. Trump and Mr. Macron have sharply differing views on a range of issues, most notably the Paris accord, the climate change pact that Mr. Trump renounced six weeks ago.
But Mr. Macron and his wife, Brigitte, beguiled Mr. Trump and his wife, Melania, with red-carpet treatment and catered to Mr. Trump’s well-known penchant for military displays of power, which were woven into the Bastille Day parade they attended before flying home. It was Mr. Trump’s first visit to France as president.
The two presidential couples celebrated their new relationship over dinner at the Jules Verne restaurant in the Eiffel Tower on Thursday night, where a filet of beef was likely the most appealing item on the menu for Mr. Trump.
Around 10 a.m. Friday, Mr. Trump and Mr. Macron arrived for the Bastille Day festivities in their motorcades. There were gasps from some attendees as Mrs. Trump emerged from the presidential limousine, her white dress with green floral print swaying back and forth.
Tanks rolled down the Champs-Élysées, the Arc de Triomphe framed behind them, memorializing the storming of the Bastille that helped set off the French Revolution. The parade also celebrated the 100th anniversary of America’s entry into World War I.
Mr. Trump sat between his wife and Mr. Macron on the presidential viewing stand, an overhang shading them from the baking sun. Mr. Trump talked excitedly to Mr. Macron as a variety of World War I-era tanks rolled to a stop near the viewing stand.
The American president, who has a fascination with displays of military strength, had hoped to have tanks and jets at his own inaugural parade, but he was told he could not. So the Bastille Day parade seemed like a natural fit for Mr. Trump, who sometimes appears bored at public events but who seemed transfixed at the performance in Paris.
Mr. Trump’s joy appeared to crest when warplanes made their appearance. He could be seen gesticulating and whispering to Mr. Macron as an array of jets thundered past, including one leaving trails in the colors of the French and American flags.
Dozens of soldiers on horseback galloped along in the parade route, passing by the two presidents in formation.
The United States Embassy said that nearly 200 American service members took part in the celebration. They included Air Force Thunderbirds and soldiers dressed in World War I uniforms.
Security was tight, with the streets near the parade area sealed off for blocks in a city that has been hit by several terrorist attacks over the past two years.
After two hours, the parade wound down with a musical interlude, including one honoring the victims of the attack in Nice a year ago.
In an homage to French-American cooperation, a military band played “Get Lucky,” the bouncy pop collaboration and 2014 Grammy winner created by France’s Daft Punk and the American singer Pharrell Williams. Video clips of the performance began trending on social media. They showed Mr. Macron smiling and nodding at the performance but Mr. Trump looking more bemused — perhaps a sign of the generational split between the two.
Mr. Macron and Mr. Trump stepped off the viewing stand, accompanied by their wives. They repeatedly grabbed each other’s arms, gripping hands for several moments before parting.
Mr. Trump also reached for Ms. Macron’s hands, a durable image after he had remarked on her physical appearance a day earlier as both couples were touring the city.