Some of the best teenage basketball talent in the country went to a gymnasium in Manhattan on a Friday night in April to show what they could do, and some of the country’s best-known coaches — Villanova’s Jay Wright, Georgetown’s Patrick Ewing, Notre Dame’s Mike Brey — had turned up to see the show. And so when it came time for the weekend’s marquee matchup, the coaches watched particular players, and the players sneaked glances at particular coaches.
Underneath the baskets, men with the video cameras simply went about their work. In this game, their focus was on several players who are projected as potential N.C.A.A. and even N.B.A. stars, including a 6-foot-5 forward named Scottie Lewis.
Lewis, 17, is one of the best college prospects in the Class of 2019. St. John’s offered him a scholarship after the first game of his freshman season at Ranney School in Tinton Falls, N.J. In the months after that — as word of his upside spread — nearly a dozen more programs did the same. But to the men with the video cameras and a growing number of basketball fans who religiously watch internet videos of promising players, Lewis was already a household name.
How popular was he? A video of his highlights posted online in February 2015 — before he entered high school — was titled, without a hint of understatement, “8th Grader Scottie Lewis is UNBELIEVABLE.” It has racked up more than a half-million views on YouTube, and it was later cross-posted on dozens of basketball websites. Shot by a company called City League Hoops, the 2-minute-48-second video showed Lewis, then 14 or 15, making acrobatic dunks and jumpers, blocking shots and performing spins in the lane — his every movement accompanied by a looping, forgettable soundtrack.
The highlight mixtape — usually a collection of dunks, blocks, long jump shots and flashy passes — is nothing new, of course, even if coaches often discount their value as a talent-evaluation metric. But in the past decade the phenomenon has grown, both in volume and in its focus on ever younger subjects, with the help of a group of companies devoted to documenting and spreading the word about basketball’s next big thing.
These days, even talented middle schoolers are spotlighted. A video featuring LeBron James’s 11-year-old son has been viewed more than two million times. A similar mixtape of a tiny seventh-grade guard from Chicago produced several multiples of that figure.
The increasingly professionalized internet mixtape business may trace its roots to 2005, when a 19-year-old junior college student in Northern California, Matt Rodriguez, and a few of his friends started a company called Ballislife.
Rodriguez and his friends, part of a group that liked to share highlight videos online, were drawn to the idea of discovering players before anyone else, and of documenting potential N.B.A. All-Stars when they were still relatively unknown teenagers.
Soon Rodriguez was devoting more than 60 hours a week to Ballislife while attending art school in Southern California. At the same time, he was developing relationships with top local high school players, most notably DeMar DeRozan, who became a guard with the Toronto Raptors, and traveling the country to chronicle the rise of future All-Stars like James Harden, Kyrie Irving and Kevin Love.
The popularity of the mixtapes Rodriguez created merely confirmed his instinct that there was an audience, and most likely a paying one, for the service he and his friends provided. In 2006, a montage of guard Derrick Rose playing in A.A.U. games generated around 30,000 views in a matter of hours on Ballislife’s nascent website.
These days, Rodriguez oversees a staff of 14 full-time employees and freelance contributors, and he studiously monitors a marketplace that now includes rivals with names like Courtside Films, CityLeagueHoopsTV and Home Team Hoops.
The mixtapes that the companies make are not reserved for elite players. Courtside Films offers a service in which players can send video clips and receive a highlight tape for $100, a fee that varies depending on the amount of footage. The company, which is based in Iowa but like Ballislife travels to events around the country, also hosts basketball camps at which it offers to create highlight tapes for high school players.
For an added fee, Courtside Films will also feature a player’s mixtape on its website and YouTube channel and promises to promote the player on its social media accounts.
Courtside Films also signs deals with prominent A.A.U. teams to produce mixtapes of their players. At the Under Armour-sponsored tournament in New York in April, for example, the company collected video of players from the Earl Watson Elite program, which features several major prospects, including the 6-1 freshman Nico Mannion from Arizona.
Mannion, 15, who was profiled by Sports Illustrated earlier this year, said he stumbled across his first online mixtape when he was in middle school.
To compete in a crowded market built on hyperbole — headlines on online mixtapes routinely include exclamation points and favorable comparisons to current N.B.A. All-Stars — Rodriguez has expanded Ballislife beyond video. The company now hosts a high school all-American game and a summer camp for fifth to ninth graders, and it also sells clothing and other branded apparel.
The good news for Rodriguez is that there seems to be a never-ending supply of talent; now, the race is to find the best players first. Nazreon Reid, a 6-10 incoming senior from New Jersey who has received interest from Kentucky, Kansas, North Carolina and other top colleges, remembered finding out the summer after sixth grade that he already had a mixtape online. He had only recently begun playing competitive basketball, and only because his mother had made him stop playing football.
