Good morning on this cloudy Wednesday.
The Newark riots began 50 years ago tonight.
The violence, which lasted for almost a week, started when a rumor spread across the city that white police officers had fatally beaten a black cabdriver. The resulting unrest left 26 people dead and hundreds injured.
Harriet Knevals was a 24-year-old schoolteacher in Newark at the time.
Each morning, in Room 109 at Quitman Street School, Ms. Knevals — then using her maiden name, Harriet Dolcemaschio — would ask her class of 20 prekindergarten students to sign in so they could learn to write their names. She’d host circle time, fill the classroom with art or music, and give lessons on the A B C.’s.
Ms. Knevals, who is white, was teaching a Head Start summer program, and her students came mostly from black, working-class families.
One morning, as Ms. Knevals and the children went about their daily activities in the room, which faced West Kinney Street and the Scudder Homes, they heard gunshots.
“I worried so much about my students,” she said. “I wanted to stay back and make sure they were safe.” But the National Guard members, she said, forced her from the building, saying they couldn’t guarantee her safety.
While stopped at a traffic light as she drove home, she watched a protester hurl a Molotov cocktail through the window of a store on the corner. She made it home safely to Short Hills, N.J., and watched the riots unfold on television.
The teachers returned to school several days later, challenged with figuring out how to explain the situation to 4-year-olds.
The teachers were a diverse bunch — different races, genders and sexual orientations, Ms. Knevals said. They were also friends outside the classroom and presented a united front during the racially charged riots.
The teachers had a shared goal for the children: “Make sure they understand that they’re safe,” she said.
You should have your umbrella ready — just in case.
There’s a chance of showers and thunderstorms after 9 a.m.
But wear something comfortable. The high could near 87.
• Scoreboard: American League subdues National League, 2-1.
• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Wednesday Briefing.
• Manhattanhenge returns to our skyline. The best places for watching are on 14th, 23rd, 34th, 42nd and 57th Streets in Manhattan, shortly before 8:20 p.m.
• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until August 15.
On July 11, 1804, Aaron Burr shot Alexander Hamilton during an early morning duel on the cliffs of Weehawken, N.J.
Dueling was, at the time, illegal in New York and New Jersey, but the Weehawken grounds — above the banks of the Hudson River, opposite what is now West 42nd Street in Midtown Manhattan — were isolated enough to make it a common battle spot. So Burr, the vice president, and Hamilton, the former Treasury secretary, journeyed by rowboat from Manhattan to the heights to settle their personal and political differences.
Hamilton ended up with a .554-caliber ball in his spine and, despite treatment from the New York City doctor David Hosack, died on July 12, 1804, in what is now the West Village.
