KABUL, Afghanistan — These are some of the terms Afghan men use to refer to their wives in public instead of their names, the sharing of which they see as a grave dishonor worthy of violence: Mother of Children, My Household, My Weak One or sometimes, in far corners, My Goat or My Chicken.
The activists’ aim is both to challenge women to reclaim their most basic identity, and to break the deep-rooted taboo that prevents men from mentioning their female relatives’ names in public.
“This is just a spark — the posing of a question mostly to the Afghan women about why their identity is denied,” said Bahar Sohaili, one of the supporters of the campaign.
“The reality is that women also remain silent — they don’t protest this,” Ms. Sohaili said, adding that she and other activists were discussing offline steps to bolster the social media discussion.
Members of the Parliament, senior government officials and artists have come forward in support, publicly declaring the identities of the female members of their families.
Farhad Darya, one of Afghanistan’s most renowned singers, put out a heartfelt message about his struggle to make sure he always mentioned his mother and wife by name in concerts and interviews over his decades as a performer.
The campaign also has its detractors. Some on social media have said it is against “Afghan values,” while others have deemed it too small to make a difference.
A #WhereIsMyName social media campaign poster in Afghanistan.
The denial of women’s basic identity in public is emblematic of how deep misogyny runs in this society, when even male schoolchildren often get into fights to defend their honor, which they are taught is besmirched if someone mentions their mother’s or sister’s name.
Hassan Rizayee, an Afghan sociologist, said the custom was rooted in tribal ways of life.
Reversing such deeply ingrained traditions will take a long time, he said, including changing what children are taught.
Somaia Ramish, a member of the Herat provincial council, recently wrote that women had been “erased systematically” throughout history and reduced to their relations with men.
Ms. Ghani has taken up a much more public role as first lady than Zeenat Karzai, the wife of the previous president, Hamid Karzai. A medical doctor by training, Dr. Karzai had very little public presence during the first years of Mr. Karzai’s presidency, and she took a back seat completely for much of the remaining years.
Ms. Ghani often accompanies her husband to meetings and on provincial trips.
Mr. Islami, the opponent of the campaign, said in an interview that he agreed with the idea of normalizing women’s identities in public but that he saw the social media push as the work of a “privileged few,” pitting women against men.
Others pointed to how social media can be deceptive when trying to gauge change in offline habits. Some online users want to be part of a viral wave without really taking the message to heart. That was illustrated best in one male user’s snide Facebook post.
