JERUSALEM — The president of the powerful American Israel Public Affairs Committee lobbying group flew to Israel for an emergency meeting with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, while other Jewish leaders canceled a dinner with him. One prominent Jewish donor demanded a refund for the $1 million in Israel bonds he had just purchased.
Jews around the world have been in an uproar in the week since Mr. Netanyahu yielded to pressure from his ultra-Orthodox coalition partners and suspended a plan to provide a better space for non-Orthodox men and women to worship together at the Western Wall in Jerusalem.
That new prayer space had long been a goal of the Reform and Conservative movements, popular in the West. And in another blow to those more liberal wings of Judaism, the government also approved a contentious bill enshrining the strictly Orthodox Chief Rabbinate’s monopoly over conversions to Judaism in Israel.
Together, those moves have reawakened a decades-old dispute over who is a Jew. And they have prompted an emotional debate over the nature of the relationship between the world’s Jews and the Jewish homeland — at a time when a right-wing Israeli government, under increased international criticism, has relied on support among the generally more liberal Jewish diaspora in the West.
The furor over the Western Wall agreement boils down to a refusal by Israel’s Orthodox religious authorities to grant any recognition to Reform and Conservative Judaism. The main prayer space at the Western Wall, known in Hebrew as the Kotel, has separate men’s and women’s sections, in the Orthodox tradition, and is run like an Orthodox synagogue.
The response to the government’s moves has been disappointment and rage, particularly among Jews in North America.
And the board of governors of the Jewish Agency, a quasi-governmental body that works to connect Israel with Jews around the world and that is led by the former Soviet dissident Natan Sharansky, flatly canceled a gala dinner with Mr. Netanyahu.
Mr. Netanyahu has tried to mitigate the backlash, freezing the conversion bill for six months in return for a withdrawal of a recent court petition from the Reform and Conservative movements to have their conversions performed in Israel recognized. But the anger has not abated.
“Prime Minister, you must know that the wholeness of the people is more important than the wholeness of the coalition,” said Sallai Meridor, a former Israeli ambassador to the United States and a former chairman of the Jewish Agency, referring to Mr. Netanyahu’s efforts to preserve his political alliance with the ultra-Orthodox parties.
The president of the United States-based Union for Reform Judaism, Rabbi Rick Jacobs, was grim. “This horse trading is going to affect the well-being, unity and diversity of the Jewish people,” he said in an interview.
Rabbi Jacobs said he was particularly concerned about the effects on American Jews and their fight against the campaign for a boycott and sanctions against Israel because of its policies toward the Palestinians.
Describing the clash as “a moment of truth, a fork in the road,” Rabbi Jacobs likened Mr. Netanyahu’s political maneuvering to selling world Jewry’s “birthright for a bowl of lentil soup,” an allusion to the biblical deal Jacob made with Esau.
The dispute is a symbolic one, over identity and belonging. It transcends politically divisive issues like Israel’s occupation of the territories Palestinians claim for a state. And it has prompted protests from Jewish groups not ordinarily critical of the Israeli government, like the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations, fund-raising federations and the multidenominational Canadian Rabbinic Caucus.
While Aipac has been criticized for lock-step backing of Israel, more than 80 percent of its supporters belong to non-Orthodox Reform or Conservative branches of Judaism, experts say, making the group sensitive to questions about Orthodox control of religious issues.
Many secular Israeli Jews, who usually care little about what goes on at the Kotel, chafe at the disproportionate power the ultra-Orthodox parties hold because of Israel’s system of coalition politics and the strictly Orthodox control over many aspects of life here, including marriage and divorce.
A poll commissioned by Hiddush, an advocacy group for religious freedom and equality, indicated that two-thirds of Jews in Israel opposed the suspension of the Western Wall plan and the conversion bill.
The legislation would complicate the conversion process, including private Orthodox conversions, for hundreds of thousands of Israeli citizens, mostly from the former Soviet Union, who are not considered fully Jewish under religious law. The bill would also block any future recognition of conversions performed in Israel by the non-Orthodox streams.
The timing of the government decisions, while the Jewish Agency’s international Board of Governors was meeting in Jerusalem, amplified the sense of insult.
But experts say the potential harm to Israel of a breach with American Jews, in particular, is not so much the loss of philanthropic funds, which amount to tens of millions of dollars a year. Rather, they say, it is the connection with Jews abroad that counts, especially those whose efforts help secure Israel billions of dollars in American military assistance.
