Pasta with heaps of melting mozzarella can take many forms, and most of them are baked.
Dishes like lasagna have their charms, but they’re wintry ones of the hot and bubbling variety. They’re perfect when you want to cozy up next to your oven in February, but a whole lot less appealing in the sticky heat of July.
This summery pasta is a wonderfully gooey exception. The only cooking you’ll need to do is to boil the pasta. Its residual heat will melt the milky, mild cheese as you toss all of the ingredients together.
There are myriad templates for pasta dishes of this type, many of them containing cubed mozzarella, tomatoes and basil, to make a pasta-rich riff on a Caprese salad.
This one is different. It skips the tomatoes but keeps the basil, blending the fragrant leaves — along with fresh mint, Parmesan, garlic and a little chile — into a vibrant, pestolike sauce. At the very end, pine nuts are added to the bowl for crunch, and more fresh herbs are tossed in for brightness. It’s both light and rich, with a garlicky bite. It’s also extremely fast and easy to make.
One thing to consider is the type of mozzarella you use. The softer and milkier your cheese is to begin with, the more it will melt and run, while firm varieties, usually those that have been salted, will retain more of their shape.
Both types work well here. Firm mozzarella will give you pockets of supple but not-quite-melted cheese. Ultra-creamy burrata collapses into a luscious sauce, mixing with the pesto and turning it all a speckled light green. Buffalo mozzarella usually splits the difference; its more tender core melts while its outer skin tends to stay intact. In any case, it’s important to let the cheese come to room temperature before adding it to the bowl so it doesn’t cool the pasta.
While the cheese is warming up on the counter, I like to marinate it in some of the pesto mixture so it can absorb as much flavor as possible even before meeting the other ingredients.
This dish is best served immediately after all of the ingredients are tossed together, while it’s hot or at least warm, and the cheese is still nice and gooey.
It may be summer, but that doesn’t mean oozing cheese is any less alluring.
