The idea of shooting footage on film stock seems about as modern as using a rotary phone to call Mom. But in a white-box studio in — where else? — Williamsburg, Brooklyn, film school has become purposefully old-school.
At Mono No Aware (pronounced AH-wah-ray and named after the Japanese concept of “connection to the ephemeral”), every interaction seems like a crash course in historical technology, with workshops, monthly screenings, an annual arts festival and equipment rentals rounding out the offerings. About 400 students pass through this one-stop shop for analog filmmaking each year.
“For me, it makes more sense to shoot on something archival that will last 100 years rather than to a hard drive that will crash in four years,” said Steve Cossman, who founded Mono No Aware in 2007 and leads about half of its workshops. A filmmaker and animator by training, he also gives guest lectures at Yale, Duke, and New York University, and is an adjunct faculty member at Cooper Union.
On a recent evening, seven participants gathered for the first of a monthlong series in “Introduction to 16-Millimeter Filmmaking.” Hailing from three boroughs, they included a Ph.D. student filming a segment to accompany her thesis, a retiree who described shooting home videos on film in the 1970s, a professional photographer with her own 16-millimeter camera and a 13-year-old who, with three other Mono No Aware workshops under his belt, was the veteran of the group.
Mr. Cossman drew diagrams on a whiteboard as he discussed exposures, types of film and how the development process transforms strips into prints. For the second half of the two-hour workshop, Ja’Tovia Gary, a documentary filmmaker, taught students how to load film stock into cameras.
At times, film instruction offered broader lessons for life. “Nothing should ever, ever be forced — and not just because the cameras are mine,” Mr. Cossman said.
More students, some abuzz with ambitions of shooting at 6 a.m. to “capture the morning light,” filtered into the following session to master light meters and camera-holding positions.
That rarefied filmmaking courses draw such a diverse group of people is a testament to the entrepreneurial savvy of Mr. Cossman, who is able to offer many workshops at below operational cost through partnerships with companies like Cinelab in Massachusetts, one of the few places in the country that still processes black and white reversal film, and local filmmakers and artists who lend rare equipment and studio space. A five-week course on two-dimensional cutout animation, for example, costs $275 with equipment and processing fees included. The organization has raised $68,792 through a Kickstarter campaign and plans to open a nonprofit motion picture lab to house all processing facilities under one roof by mid-2018.
Mr. Cossman isn’t the only person in the film industry who has a sweet spot for traditional shooting techniques. Movies like “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” and television series like “The Walking Dead” on AMC and “Westworld” on HBO were shot on celluloid. Kodak recently built a film processing lab in Queens.
But even for die-hard enthusiasts, the brave new world of old technology involves a learning curve. For Shane Fleming, the 13-year-old whose personal film collection includes nearly 200 titles in various analog formats, the biggest challenge of occupying the director’s seat was not the planning of every shot but waiting for more than a week to see the results.
“I will have aged visibly by then,” he said.
In a media landscape dominated by companies with Insta and Snap in their names, the world of analog transcends stock loading and film cutting to offer a more intangible lesson: patience.