Yuval Sharon has instigated a mobile opera involving 126 performers, 24 limousines and six composers. He’s produced a headphone opera, set among commuters passing through one of the country’s busiest train stations. He’s encased Debussy’s ill-fated lovers, Pelléas and Mélisande, in a box of frosted glass. He’s organized a recital with a twist, staging Schubert songs and short Beckett plays on a single stage.
And, in 12 months, he’ll become the first American to direct a production at the Bayreuth Festival in Germany, founded by Richard Wagner in 1876 and still devoted to his operas. Its 2017 season opens on Tuesday, July 25; Mr. Sharon’s new “Lohengrin” will be the centerpiece of the 2018 proceedings.
“At the risk of sounding really cheesy, it is a dream come true,” Mr. Sharon, 37, said over lunch earlier this year.
Wagner courses through his artistic blood. Seeing “Siegfried” as a boy was a formative experience. He was Achim Freyer’s assistant for a controversial “Ring” cycle in Los Angeles in 2009, and recently directed “Die Walküre” in Karlsruhe, Germany.
The invitation from Bayreuth, for a collaboration with the artists Neo Rauch and Rosa Loy into which he steps following the withdrawal of Alvis Hermanis, comes at a time when Mr. Sharon can do little wrong. There have been acclaimed engagements at European houses, including Peter Eotvos’s “Three Sisters” at the Vienna State Opera and John Adams’s “Doctor Atomic” in Karlsruhe, which won the Götz Friedrich Prize in 2014.
There is his pioneering work leading the Industry, an experimental Los Angeles company he founded in 2012. It drew particular notice for “Hopscotch,” a breathtakingly complicated drama in 36 chapters in 2015 that was set in and around cars roaming the city’s streets. And, unusually for a director, he has partnered with symphony orchestras: His three-year term as an “artist-collaborator” of the Los Angeles Philharmonic began this past season.
Next season, building on their recent reincarnation of Lou Harrison’s “Young Caesar,” his partnership with the Philharmonic will take on Mahler’s “Das Lied von der Erde”; Andrew Norman’s new children’s opera “A Trip to the Moon”; and a sprawling new adaptation of Orson Welles’s “War of the Worlds,” a propaganda parable, with music by Annie Gosfield.
In September, the Cleveland Orchestra revives his part-live, part-animated production of Janacek’s “The Cunning Little Vixen,” and makes history by taking it to Vienna in October, in the first full staging of an opera at the storied Musikverein.
Mr. Sharon grew up in Chicago, and after studying English and dramatic arts at the University of California, Berkeley, was planning a career in the theater.
“At that time, I was already getting into opera, but I thought of it as a hobby, because I never really thought about it as a viable theatrical form,” he said.
A spell in Berlin in 2001 and 2002 teaching English and seeing opera most nights changed that. “I was exposed to so many different approaches that it totally blew my mind,” he said.
The trick was to find a place open to new ideas. Mr. Sharon felt that New York, where he worked at the New York City Opera and led its VOX program for new opera, was too set in its ways. He moved to Los Angeles in 2010, thinking consciously of that city’s history as a hotbed of musical experimentation.
Real disruption can be difficult in a genre that’s as comfortable in the past as opera. In the past half-century, directors have tried to shake up the art form simply by recasting standard works as provocations.
Instead, he sees opera as a form that has to change with the times. Hence the Industry. Often commissioning composers to write to a concept provided by Mr. Sharon, the company finds innovative, site-specific ways to present new work, and with more philosophical and aesthetic rigor than the host of companies that have tried to take opera out of the opera house.
The composer Christopher Cerrone’s gorgeous “Invisible Cities” did not fit “the framework of a traditional opera company,” Mr. Cerrone said in an interview.
But in 2013, Mr. Sharon gave it a production at Union Station in Los Angeles. The performers were disguised as members of the public, and the audience wandered around, hearing the music on headphones. It was a popular and critical success; “Invisible Cities” was named a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize in 2014, and has been released on DVD on the Industry’s own label.
With the preternatural optimism of someone who hunts for funding for the Industry’s projects and cajoles government officials to help put on his ambitious shows, he prescribes unyielding hope. Yet Mr. Sharon believes that hope today is challenged by the current political situation, and a Trump administration that he described as “reptilian” in an essay in January.
The Industry’s current project is a staging of Brecht’s “Life of Galileo” — about the battle between dogmatism and science, between conscience and persecution — around a bonfire on Cabrillo Beach in San Pedro, with a score by Andy Akiho. That stretch of sand is at risk of disappearing because of climate change and is a mere five miles from a golf course bearing the name of the president of the United States.
Mr. Sharon knows that the Angelenos who attend his “Galileo,” originally scheduled for September but now due in May, are unlikely to need much political persuading, but he sees no trouble preaching to the choir.
