Arts|Lena Dunham Says Her Dog Was Abused. The Shelter He Came From Disagrees.
Lena Dunham Says Her Dog Was Abused. The Shelter He Came From Disagrees.
Lena Dunham wanted her fans to know what had happened to her dog Lamby.
Ms. Dunham, the writer, producer and actor best known for the HBO series “Girls,” adopted Lamby in January 2013. But the cream-colored mutt stopped making appearances in Ms. Dunham’s social media feeds, replaced, it seemed, by two fresh-faced poodles, Susan and Karen.
So on June 21, Ms. Dunham disclosed on Instagram that Lamby had “suffered terrible abuse as a pup” and that, because of the resulting behavioral problems, she handed him over to a facility in Los Angeles.
It was, in hindsight, the perfect recipe for outrage on social media: Start with a cute dog made famous by his celebrity owner, throw in a claim of animal abuse and then add an animal shelter worker in Brooklyn with a bone to pick.
Robert Vazquez, who works at the BARC shelter, where Ms. Dunham got Lamby, took issue with Ms. Dunham’s account.
Mr. Vazquez could not immediately be reached for comment on Friday, but Vincent Spinola, BARC’s founder and director, said in an emailed statement that staff members at the shelter were saddened to hear that Lamby had been given away.
Ms. Dunham, no stranger to online criticism, is now being accused of lying about the dog’s past and of creating an environment that may have caused Lamby to lash out.
Ms. Dunham responded to the criticism on Instagram on Thursday night, praising BARC’s work and acknowledging that they had “a very different account” of Lamby’s early life.
For those who have expressed concerns, an update: The dog appears to be doing fine. Matt Beisner, the founder and an owner of the Zen Dog, the training facility that took Lamby in, said he was living a peaceful life with a new owner in Southern California.
Ms. Dunham wrote about Lamby in a 2013 article for The New Yorker, describing how, after years of wanting a pet, she adopted him, paying $150.
But soon, she wrote, Lamby’s behavior became erratic; Ms. Dunham wrote that he had trouble being alone, barked at night and bit her boyfriend.
Behavioral issues can be exacerbated if a dog and its owner are not a good match, said Kenny Lamberti, the acting vice president of the Companion Animals department of the Humane Society of the United States.
According to Mr. Beisner, that is what Ms. Dunham did. He said he worked with Lamby multiple times during her visits to Los Angeles, before she ultimately handed him over.
Mr. Beisner could not say for sure whether Lamby had been abused as a puppy, but he said dogs’ behavioral problems often stem from their experiences in the first 10 weeks of their lives.
“So from Lamby’s standpoint, he was acting out in part because of his own back story and wherever he came from before being rescued,” Mr. Beisner said.
Mr. Lamberti, of the Humane Society, said it sounded like Ms. Dunham did the right thing. He noted that finding a better home can be a good last option. He added that other would-be dog owners could prevent similar situations by putting careful thought into a dog’s needs, size and energy levels before taking it home.
According to Humane Society data, from six to eight million cats and dogs enter shelters every year, and about three million are euthanized in shelters. But Lamby got lucky. He was adopted by a former employee of the Zen Dog, and Mr. Beisner said everything sounds like it’s going well.
“From what I see in the pictures, he’s got a great life,” he said.