Mary Parsons works at a travel agency, which in 2017 is kind of like running a VCR repair shop or installing pay phones. It’s the opposite of “tough job but somebody’s gotta do it”: a relatively undemanding job that, increasingly, nobody’s gotta do. Mary is the central character of Catherine Lacey’s second novel, which has the effortless sparkle and speed of something written by an author with a dozen novels behind her instead of just one. It is funny and eerie and idea-dense — a flavor combination that turns out to be addictive.
Mary lives in a “poorly lit and irregularly shaped one-bedroom” for about $1,300 a month, which is to say she lives in New York City. She is sick with an undiagnosable illness that has reduced her body to a shred and her mind to smithereens. The only treatment that helps is a New Agey therapy called PAKing. To pay for PAKing — Pneuma Adaptive Kinesthesia — Mary needs a second job. Pinned to a health food store bulletin board she finds a flier advertising the perfect position: high pay, low time commitment, and legal. What’s not to love? Her application is accepted, and she is told to show up for an interview at precisely 1:23 p.m. That’s her first clue that something is amiss.
Kurt, as you may have guessed, is a certain kind of male idiot: too frivolous to be despicable, too self-aware to be blameless. It takes a skilled writer to summon such an individual in detail without dehumanizing him. It also takes a skilled writer to make Mary, saddled with the curse of being young and sick, as compelling as she is. “Passive” is too muted a word for the character. She’s less a woman than a particle of dust, floating and falling and drifting through life. When she’s not meandering, she’s sleeping. When she’s not sleeping, she’s engaged in emphatically boring activities, like drinking a glass of tap water or feeling guilty about not calling a relative. At no point in the book does Lacey describe Mary’s appearance, which is an excellent tactic for coaxing readers to project whatever they will onto the character. As I read, I imagined Mary as various embodied versions of nothingness: a ball of lint, a fog bank, those pebbles of compacted Kleenex that turn up in your pants pockets when you fail to empty them before laundering. Eventually, inadvertently, I began to picture Mary as me. Other readers will surely cast themselves in the role as they progress through the novel. I imagine this was part of Lacey’s master plan. We all have a little bit of Mary in us.
And probably a little bit of Kurt, too. After all, if you had the opportunity to design the perfect partner piece by piece, like modular furniture, wouldn’t you give it a whirl? Mary is an empathetic creature, and she feels for Kurt even as she is disturbed by his mission. Or whatever it is. A game? A trick? A scientific endeavor? A form of therapy? Or merely an elaborate kink developed by a person who hasn’t heard the word “No,” sexually or otherwise, in decades? The exact nature of Kurt’s quest is unclear until the final pages of “The Answers,” when all is revealed with a satisfying flourish.
The book jackets for both of Lacey’s novels describe her prose as “spiraling.” I don’t know what this means. “Spiraling” is one of those mealy words, like “lyrical,” that often stand as a euphemism for “prettily incoherent.” Lacey’s writing is neither. She has a riffy playfulness with language that you find in people who read an abnormal amount of fiction at an impressionable age, and she can sum up existential problems in devastating single sentences. (“Having a body doesn’t give you the right to have one that works correctly.”) For a young author, she already has themes. In this as in Lacey’s previous novel, “Nobody Is Ever Missing,” characters stumble upon fliers printed with cryptic entreaties. In both books women undergo mysterious procedures and hear voices and feel themselves haunted by past romances. Even the two book covers are fraternal twins, each depicting a female face in triplicate.
But the newer novel bites off a lot more than Lacey’s debut, and it does a much better job of chewing it. This is a breathtaking leap to witness, and a promising trajectory to follow. On the basis of “The Answers,” I’d read anything Catherine Lacey tried her hand at: science fiction, a screenplay, an epic poem … hell, a limerick. And as many novels as she possibly could.