TUESDAY PUZZLE — A fairly laborious workout today, but not because the puzzle is a slog. It’s because we are being asked to climb stairs in Michael Hawkins’s puzzle.
If the black squares in the grid look unusual to you for a daily puzzle, it’s because they are meant to suggest stairs. Not to worry, we get a break in the middle and take the ESCALATOR, but you’re going to need to climb to conquer instead of stoop.
Mr. Hawkins offers us three theme entries besides the black squares, which is less theme material than we’re used to seeing these days, but he explains more about his attempt to seek balance between theme and fill while giving a nod to an admired constructor in his notes below. They are also apparently a cry for real estate help, so if anyone has a nice home in Seattle within Mr. Hawkins’s budget, please help a constructor out.
The center theme entry is ESCALATOR CLAUSE and the bottom one is ON THE UP AND UP.
While light on theme, there are some nice Down entries, like FROWNED UPON, ICE CUBE TRAY and ROCK OPERA.
■ 15A: “Takes stock?” can indicate taking a closer look at your life, but today the answer is INVESTS.
■ 16A: TRICORN has not been in The New York Times Crossword for a while, but if you didn’t know about TRICORN hats, you either weren’t paying attention in grade school, or you were absent when they put on their Thanksgiving plays. Fear not, however: You can still buy them at Walmart, because this is a great country.
■ 19A: If you are too young to remember the 1963 film “IT’S a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World” and you are wondering why you should be required to know it, it is only the one film that managed to cram virtually every classic comedian and film star into it. If you are a student and worshiper of the history of comedy as I am, yes, it’s worth knowing.
■ 26A: I thought this was a brilliant clue and worth pointing out. “Place to find a pen and teller” does not involve the magicians Penn and Teller. If you actually go into a bank branch (Hi, kids!), they have pens for writing out deposit slips (Hi, grandkids!) and tellers who help you make these not-on-your-smartphone transactions.
■ 38A: They’re not selling things cheaply here. “It can go for a buck” refers to a female deer (DOE) going for a male deer (buck).
■ 46A: COSPLAY makes its debut in The New York Times Crossword. My eldest has found a nice community among COSPLAYers. These are the very creative people who make their own costumes and go to cons, or conventions, and mingle.
■ 9D: A clue that is almost a Tom Swifty! “Latin phrase used listlessly?” does not mean that you are giving up on life, it’s an indicator that the answer has something to do with lists. And adding the Latin phrase ET CETERA to the end of a sentence means that the list goes on. Even if you’re feeling listless.
■ 19D: I really liked this one, because it’s great, classic wordplay. Most people will think of photography when they hear the phrase “Freeze frame?” but in today’s puzzle, it’s the frame in which you freeze ice cubes, or ICE CUBE TRAY.
Patrick Berry’s use of stair-step blocks in his themeless puzzles inspired this puzzle’s creation. The large block count forced me to keep the word count lower than a typical early week puzzle, a constraint that challenged the balance between visual appeal and clean fill.
Since the acceptance of this puzzle I have become much more familiar with ESCALATOR CLAUSEs, which have so far failed to make a difference in the ultracompetitive Seattle-area real estate market. If you’re a crossword fan with a craftsman-style, Everett home you’d like to sell, please let me know!
