At Hanoi House in the East Village, the first spoonful of pho is a shock. The broth is a living thing, animal, drawn from a pot crowded with bones — long marrow bones, neck bones rayed like starfish, oxtail bones ringed with meat — and kept seething through the night. It’s deceptively crystalline, belying its lushness, and almost indolent in how it clings to the tongue.
You’re not allowed to temper the broth with torn basil or a twist of lime, as is the custom at other Vietnamese restaurants in New York. Instead, on the side, there are sheer petals of garlic pickled in rice vinegar — a small act of mercy lending a delicate, leavening sting.
This is pho bac, the noodle soup indigenous to northern Vietnam, darker and funkier than its sweet southern cousin. In Hanoi, it’s made with sa sung, dried marine worms, an ingredient theoretically unavailable here, although this hasn’t stopped John Nguyen, the chef, from occasionally slipping it in.
A couple of blocks away, at Madame Vo, the broth is equally limpid and marrow-deep. But here the carnality is countered by sweetness, brought on by first roasting the bones, then adding rock sugar and a bounty of aromatics whose profusion might be frowned upon in the more austere north. A side plate spills over with basil, lime, wheels of jalapeño and bean sprouts heaped like kindling. Squeeze bottles of sriracha and hoisin stand by.
This is pho nam, as it might be made in the Mekong Delta, where the mother of the chef, Jimmy Ly, was born, or on the Gulf of Thailand, once home to his mother-in-law. (He borrowed elements of his recipe from both women.) The flavors, in outline, may recall cheaper bowls in Chinatown. But here the effect is more holistic, rounded. And unlike the stiff cuts favored elsewhere, the meat — Angus brisket, eye of round simmered into submission and luscious, unorthodox short rib — yields and melts without hesitation.
Great Vietnamese food has always been elusive in Manhattan, beyond rumors of sandwiches sold at the back of pawnshops and isolated dishes on otherwise forgettable menus. The arrival of Hanoi House and Madame Vo, which opened nearly simultaneously in January and share a respectful yet open-minded approach to traditional Vietnamese cooking, is cause for rejoicing.
Each pho is beautiful. There is room enough for both.
Another gulped a few spoonfuls, then sat back, dazed and defeated. “I love it,” she said. “But I can’t.” Nevertheless, the bowl was soon empty.
Mr. Nguyen, 42, who runs the kitchen, was born in Saigon just before the city fell, the son of a northerner and a southerner united in marriage. His family fled a few years later and eventually took refuge in Orange County, Calif., today home to the largest Vietnamese population in the United States. He’s been a wanderer, spending time in high-end kitchens on both coasts, and was overseeing a seafood restaurant in Sichuan Province when the co-owners of Hanoi House, Sara Leveen and Ben Lowell, went searching for a chef.
How lucky they found him so that we could eat these impossibly airy, blistered spring rolls, the rice-paper skins made with a touch of tapioca starch; they pull off the trick of being crispy and chewy at once. Or this rugged fold of rice-flour crepe called banh xeo, golden with turmeric and plumped by coconut milk, shattering to reveal asparagus tips and sweet pea purée, fresh and bright.
Broken rice, whose rough shards were once disdained and cast aside for the poor, turns into satisfyingly sticky, earthy congee, saturated by white wine, lemongrass and the saline runoff of clams. Bo luc lac, filet mignon slapped with honey, soy and butter, is shining and unimprovable.
Best of all, rivaling even the pho bac, is bun cha, pork and betel-wrapped meatballs patched in black from the grill and submerged in a sweet broth that turns to smoke, as if the liquid itself had been charred.
The room seems to rest in an eternal dusk, with antique shutters and patterned tile reaching back to French colonial times. Above the kitchen hang propaganda posters that Ms. Leveen and Mr. Lowell picked up as souvenirs in Hanoi.
They brought inspiration for dessert back with them, too: che, served in alleyways in plastic cups with a tumult of ingredients snowed under shaved ice and christened with condensed milk. Here it’s been recreated as an American sundae. Ice cream is littered with crushed peanuts; condensed milk and coconut milk, velvet upon velvet; candied coconut and ginger, for a little fight with the teeth; wobbly aiyu (fig-seed) jelly and black grass jelly, one as sharp as lemon, the other close to medicine; and at the bottom, fleshy and floral, a whole lychee.
His wife, Yen Vo — Madame Vo to you — was born in a refugee camp in Thailand and grew up in Long Beach, Miss., on the Gulf Coast. Her after-school snack, half an avocado with condensed milk, is commemorated here in the form of a voluptuous shake. Another drink pairs lychee with house-made aloe vera jelly, in honor of her mother and her aunt, who used to drink the juice straight.
Some family traditions were at odds. “They add coconut milk” to their banh xeo, said Ms. Vo, 32. “We add beer.” Because Mr. Ly, also 32, is the chef, it’s his version that lands on the table, denser than the one at Hanoi House and mostly a vehicle for prawns and tombstones of pork belly.
“She’s secretive” was all Ms. Vo would say about the avocado sauce that accompanies cua lot rang muoi (fried soft-shell crab), improvised by her mother-in-law long ago. It’s a Southeast Asian take on guacamole, with a bite.
 He begged his mother to make it; she had to buy the recipe from the vendor, and it may require a subpoena to pry its details from her now. The mystery is part of the lure: snaking rice noodles and hunks of flank steak turned gloweringly incarnadine by an earthy-sweet sauce, infiltrated by peanuts and as thick as Italian ragù.
The restaurant is bright and modern, with marble-topped tables and, behind the bar, gleaming lucky cat Bearbrick figurines and saffron-hued cans of Café du Monde — the chicory coffee of Ms. Vo’s Mississippi childhood. A cyclo (bicycle taxi) with a lipstick-red hood, custom-made in Vietnam, sits in the window, and a mural of a woman who looks suspiciously like Ms. Vo greets guests wearing non la, the classic conical hat.
One evening at Hanoi House, a special of bun bo Hue, a chile-inflamed beef noodle soup, appeared with blocks of coagulated pig’s blood — as, one of my companions said approvingly, it should. But the blood had been cooked too long, past all flavor.
At Madame Vo, Mr. Ly has banished blood from his bun bo Hue. He and his wife don’t like it. “I always ask my mom to take it out,” she said.
Another diner noted the absence, along with that of “real” shrimp paste, profoundly pungent, the kind “that would be too much for you,” she said, nodding my way.
