Will this be the last we see of Melisandre? It wouldn’t be the first time her predictions missed the mark. But something in the fire tells us she has more of a role to play. Carice van Houten, who plays Melisandre, spoke in a recent telephone interview about that role, offering insight into Melisandre’s more human side and her thoughts on how she’d like to see her character exit. Following are edited excerpts from that conversation.
I’m don’t know if you’ve seen the news, but HBO was just hit by a cyber attack, and among the material stolen was a script for the next episode.
You’re kidding me. Really? Man. This world. It’s not so bad for us — we know more than anyone what’s in that episode — but for the viewers? They’re spoiling all the fun for them.  People were looking forward to seeing this, and it’s giving them pleasure. Just wait a week.
From what I understand, you shot Episodes 2 and 3 just six weeks after you gave birth?
Both scenes. It seems like yesterday, yeah.
What was it like playing Melisandre in that postpartum hormonal state?
It was sort of surreal because I just came from a really beautiful, intense, crazy bubble, and to move back to Westeros and talk about ‘winter is coming’? And I was so extremely tired. [The cast and crew] were very nice accommodating me, but when I had to go away to express milk, I did feel responsible, like I better not take too long because it’s a tight schedule, and we all need to go home at a certain time. So I felt the pressure, desperately looking at my baby’s pictures to get the milk to come, and then running back to the set. Nobody was pushing me, but I did feel rushed.
At least Melisandre’s robe would make it easier to do that between takes — unlike, say, Brienne of Tarth’s armor.
[Laughs] That’s true. I could just open my robe. I was in a very good situation, in that sense.
How would you say it affected your acting?
The fact that Melisandre is turning more human, more vulnerable and more transparent, I want to say — that went nicely with my own experience. The beauty of the show is that no character is black or white, or pure evil. They’re complex, real characters, and I was hoping that Melisandre would develop in a different direction. And it finally happened, so I’m really glad about that. It’s just nice as an actor to use your own neurosis, and for a long time, I couldn’t use any of it. Melisandre was always very confident, very secure, very determined, very spiritual, and those things are not at the top of my palette, to be honest, which is why she was a great challenge for me — to not play a character who was very much in doubt, or insecure, or neurotic.
Melisandre’s dialogue in Episode 3 raises a few questions. Do you think Melisandre knows how she will die? Does she know how Varys will die?
That’s a good question. This is just speculating, because no one ever tells me anything, but I have a feeling she might have seen something. But it could be like when psychics say they can see the future but they cannot see themselves.
It reminds me of the moment when she encountered Arya and said they would meet again.
I know, I agree. The writers are pretty clever, so I have a feeling we will meet again. I would be surprised if we don’t.
It’s interesting that both of them are able to masquerade as others. Arya can wear other people’s faces, and Melisandre, as we now know, wears a magical necklace to appear younger. Mel could stay in Westeros without Jon or Davos knowing it’s her.
Yes! Good point. [Laughs] But she’s also aware of the danger she’s in if she sticks around. Wherever she goes, I’m interested in knowing more about her. I’d like to see a little more about her life, her personal life, even more emotional stuff. There’s so much more mystery to unravel. There’s so much more story that we could tell. And she should get a nice dying monologue — 65 minutes long! With flashbacks and everything!