Containers of hagfish, known as slime eels, spilled onto a highway near Depoe Bay, Ore., on Thursday.
If you thought you were enduring a “summer of hell” commute, consider the repulsive mess created on an Oregon highway on Thursday in a collision of modern transportation and prehistoric fish.
Picture the scene from the 1984 “Ghostbusters” movie in which Dr. Peter Venkman, played by Bill Murray, complains about being “slimed.” Then multiply that a thousandfold, and you’ll get some idea of what happened on a coastal highway in Depoe Bay, Ore., about 100 miles west of Portland.
A truck hauling 7,500 pounds of hagfish, also known as slime eels, was traveling on Highway 101 around noon, transporting the fish to be exported to South Korea, where some diners consider them a delicacy.
Traffic was halted for road construction, but the truck driver was unable to stop. The truck’s load shifted, causing one of the containers carrying the hagfish to “fly across the highway,” the Oregon State Police said.
The other containers then spilled, leading to a chain-reaction crash involving four vehicles. Only minor injuries to the people involved were reported, the police said.
Workers used bulldozers and hoses to clean up the wriggling fish, which coated the road and cars in a slime that they produce copiously for protection and when they are stressed.
That section of the highway reopened seven hours later.
A “single hagfish can fill a 5-gallon bucket with slime, seemingly instantly,” Dr. Andrew Thaler, a deep-sea ecologist and population geneticist, wrote on the website southernfriedscience.com.
Hagfish have been documented escaping from sharks by choking them with “enormous amounts” of slime, Dr. Thaler wrote, adding that the slime is so tough that scientists are exploring ways to use it to create natural Lycra.
Eyeless and gray-pink, they are equipped with rows of sharp teeth to tear into carcasses. They are known to enter fish through the mouth or digestive tract and eat them from the inside out.
Mark your calendars: Hagfish Day is the third Wednesday in October.