To the closing arguments in the trial of his client, Martin Shkreli, the lawyer Benjamin Brafman brought a tale about a wild dog and a wagon, a metaphor about himself as a lifeguard, a Texas accent to mimic an investor, a poster that asked in all caps, “WHERE ARE THESE WITNESSES?” and a bag of Ruffles as a prop.
The government brought a PowerPoint presentation.
In their lengthy statements on Thursday — Mr. Brafman will conclude his on Friday — the two sides in Mr. Shkreli’s fraud trial demonstrated very different approaches.
Mr. Shkreli is accused of eight counts of securities and wire fraud stemming from his time at two hedge funds and a pharmaceutical company that he ran. The trial, at the Federal District Court in Brooklyn, is in its fifth week.
With 33 binders of evidence behind her on the government’s table, the prosecutor, Alixandra Smith, went through the evidence in detail in a summation that lasted four hours. She argued that Mr. Shkreli lost all of his investors’ money in one fund, then used the second hedge fund to funnel money into the pharmaceutical company Retrophin.
Mr. Brafman focused on the parts of the counts that require that the defendant had knowingly committed fraud.
And he presented posters showing that, in total, MSMB investors testified that they made more than three times their invested money once Mr. Shkreli paid them back with some combination of cash and Retrophin stock. He could have walked away, Mr. Brafman said.
In focusing on these issues, the lawyer was no doubt trying to distract jurors from much of the evidence Ms. Smith had just gone through, including emails submitted into evidence that seemed to indicate that Mr. Shkreli knew what he was doing.
“On paper, yeah, you know what? Doesn’t look great,” Mr. Brafman told the jurors.
Mr. Brafman also called him “one of the most brilliant minds of his generation,” bringing up the drugs that Mr. Shkreli had worked on and warning jurors that “you need to be right before you snuff that out” with a felony conviction.
The first three counts accuse Mr. Shkreli of defrauding investors at MSMB Capital, a hedge fund he ran starting in 2009. The prosecutors showed evidence that Mr. Shkreli had lied about the assets under management, how quickly investors could redeem funds, their ability to redeem funds and who the auditor was. Then, once they had put in money, he sent fake performance updates after having lost all of the fund’s money.
He sent statements until September 2012 — when, in fact, MSMB Capital shut down its brokerage firm account after a bad trade in February 2011, when “there was nothing left in the fund,” Ms. Smith said.
Counts four through six have to do with defrauding investors at MSMB Healthcare — a slightly weaker case, in terms of the evidence presented.
Here, Ms. Smith acknowledged that “the defendant was a little less clear” about the promises he made to investors about things like auditors. And, because even prosecutors agree that MSMB Healthcare did invest in Retrophin, the defense can and did argue that Mr. Shkreli included the Retrophin valuation as part of the investors’ holdings.
Count seven accuses Mr. Shkreli of misappropriating funds from Retrophin, including backdating forms to make it look as if MSMB Capital had invested in Retrophin when it had not. The count also says that Mr. Shkreli created settlement agreements and consulting agreements to pay off angry MSMB investors, forcing Retrophin to pay for his earlier errors. Mr. Brafman argued that the settlement agreements were appropriate — it was a way for Retrophin to avoid litigation by settling — and that the two consultants actually did help Retrophin.
The final count charges that Mr. Shkreli secretly controlled a huge portion of Retrophin shares, handing shares out to associates and telling them what to do with them.
The case may go to jurors as soon as Friday.