The media mogul Barry Diller and the Hudson River Park Trust have sought to replace a crumbling pier at West 13th Street in Manhattan.
With a telephone call to a wealthy developer last week, Mayor Bill de Blasio waded into the battle over a planned $250 million arts center on a pier in the Hudson River, known as Pier 55 and often called Diller Island, for its major sponsor, the entertainment mogul Barry Diller.
The mayor urged the developer, Douglas Durst, to drop his financial support for the lawsuits that have stalled progress on the project for several years. City Hall confirmed that the mayor called Mr. Durst.
The call appeared to be the first step toward negotiations between the Hudson River Park Trust, which runs the park and has sought to replace a crumbling pier at West 13th Street, and the opposition, led by the City Club of New York, a tiny civic organization.
A precondition for the talks, Mr. Emery said, would be that the park trust operate in a more open manner in the future that allows supporters and critics alike to articulate their positions.
The trust, however, asserts that it conducted a proper review, held public meetings and had the support of the local community board.
After a series of secret discussions with the park trust, Mr. Diller, the chairman of IAC/InterActiveCorp, agreed to cover most of the cost of building a replacement for the crumbling pier within the Hudson River Park and future operations.
Mr. Diller and the trust came up with a design for an exotic undulating platform with lush landscaping and three stages for dance, theater and musical performances.
The estimated cost of the project has soared to $250 million, from $130 million when it was first announced in 2014.
Both Mr. de Blasio and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who rarely agree on anything, have been outspoken in their support for the project.
It is unclear what a settlement might include. In its lawsuits, the opponents have raised environmental issues relating to the impact that a new pier sitting on 550 concrete pilings would have.
In recent conversations between city officials and the Durst Organization, which Mr. Durst runs, there has been discussion regarding Pier 97, at 57th Street, which the park trust has used for concerts and events, according to a City Hall official who spoke anonymously because he did not want to disrupt the talks. That pier is in front of three residential buildings built by the company: the Helena, the Frank and the pyramid-shaped Via 57 West.
In 2015, tenants at the Helena complained about the concerts and the Durst Organization went so far as to install noise meters in apartments facing the pier that measured the decibel levels. But a concert series on the pier ended after 2015, though Pier 97 is still the site of public events sponsored by the park trust, including the 18th Annual Blues BBQ on Aug. 19.
Mr. Durst had originally not been involved with the litigation over Diller Island, although he did have misgivings about the project. He had once been chairman of the Friends of Hudson River Park, a group affiliated with the park, and contributed $1 million to the group and the park.
But more recently, Mr. Durst quit Friends, which is now mainly a fund-raising operation, and has grown critical of the park trust.
The City Club, along with Tom Fox, a longtime advocate for the park, and Roy Buchanan, a professor and environmental activist, filed lawsuits challenging the Pier 55 project on procedural and environmental grounds.
Mr. Durst agreed to finance the lawsuits after an environmental organization dropped out.
The suits were largely unsuccessful until March when Judge Lorna G. Schofield of the United States District Court in Manhattan ruled that the Army Corps of Engineers had failed to adequately assess the impact of a new, larger pier in what is a protected fish and wildlife sanctuary.
But in May, after Mr. Diller and the park trust addressed several technical issues raised by Judge Schofield, the Army Corps issued a new permit for the project.