This is pretty much how Corey Ferrell, a commuter, sometimes feels upon docking at his Manhattan office following a heroic three-and-a-half-hour, one-way commute — by bicycle, two trains, and on foot — from Oxford, Conn.
About 180 miles to the west, in Bethlehem, Pa., Scott Ubert, a corporate chef in Manhattan, starts his extended day at 5 a.m. An hour later, coffee in hand, he drives 10 minutes to an open-air bus stop where he catches the 6:20 to the Port Authority Bus Terminal — two hours if the stars align. From there, he has a leg-stretching 20-minute walk to work.
“The ride is pretty comfortable,” Mr. Ubert said. “But just hope you don’t get one of the old clunkers.” Like nearly all “extreme commuters” — defined here as people who commute a minimum of two hours each way, five days a week — Mr. Ubert settles in, pulls out his iPhone and laptop and gets to work answering emails, texting and planning menus. He typically logs a 10- to 12-hour workday, returning home at close to midnight.
 “It’s really not so bad, and what we get in return is amazing.” What they get in return is a 3,100-square-foot, five-bedroom, four-bath colonial on one rustic acre, for which they paid $375,000 last year.
Escaping to the distant exurbs is not new, although the frontier for the New York area seems to be expanding deeper into regions like Bucks and Pike counties in Pennsylvania — even to Philadelphia; Dutchess, Rockland and Orange in New York; Sussex and Warren in New Jersey; and New Haven and Middlesex in Connecticut. These commuters are heeding the old real estate adage: “Drive until you qualify.” This suggests that you explore farther and farther out until reaching the off ramp where houses meet your style and budget.
It would be an overstatement to say extreme commuting is a major trend. After all, how many people can withstand 200 hours a month traveling back and forth? On the other hand, given the woeful state of New York City’s transportation network this summer, a five-mile commute can feel like hitchhiking to the Catskills.
For those who can, however, the motivations are similar: the need to leave an unaffordable city, expanding families, a search for better schools, tranquil environs and more real estate bang for the buck. And as employers become more open to flexible work hours, combined with technology that makes it easier to carry the office with you, the long-distance commute is expected to grow significantly.
There is little data on long-distance commuting. The United States Census Bureau defines “long commutes” as 60 miles each way, which is hardly breaking a sweat for today’s morning marathoners. In 2013, 21 percent of commuters spent 60 minutes or longer getting to work, half of those driving alone. New York State had the highest rate of long commuters, about 16 percent, followed by Maryland and New Jersey, at roughly 15 percent.
For Connecticut rail commuters, until recently, New Haven was where the earth dropped off: more than two hours each way. Today, terra firma extends north into the Naugatuck River Valley south of Waterbury, and east toward New London.
“We are now getting more middle- and upper-level executives with young families looking for prime waterfront property,” said Meig Walz of Coldwell Banker in Madison, Conn., which is about 15 minutes east of New Haven and halfway between New York and Boston. Four- and five-bedroom waterfront homes in Madison are in the $2 million range, half of what they would fetch in Fairfield County, and with lower taxes. Middlesex County, traditionally a region where city dwellers bought second homes, is seeing growth in full-time residents who commute, Ms. Walz added.
Observing this lifestyle, one might ask, what character traits dispose one to engage in a weekday ordeal of near allegorical sacrifice? Interviews with more than a dozen faithful reveal several things.
They hold good jobs, but not so good that they would put up with anything to hold them. They are family focused, yet appear unburdened by any guilt about seeing their children mostly when they are unconscious.
“We do a lot of stuff on weekends,” Mr. Ubert said.
Joe Nevins, 55, who works at an architecture firm in Midtown Manhattan, endures a commute that makes most others look like a stroll to the corner deli. Reveille sounds at 4 a.m. in his home in Chester, Conn., more than 30 miles east of New Haven.
A 10-minute drive takes him to Old Saybrook, where he boards the nearly empty 5:10 a.m. Shore Line East train to New Haven. Here he transfers to the 6 a.m. train to Grand Central, a little over two hours. Depending on meteorological conditions, he walks or takes the subway to his office, tacking another 15 minutes on the game clock. He lunges across the finish line about 8:10 a.m. The quitting time whistle sounds at 5:30 p.m., and the return trip finds him at his doorstep at 9 p.m.
“That return trip always seems longer,” he said, wearily.
Before buying his house in Chester — an 1,800-square-foot two-story barn for $317,000 — Mr. Nevins had another home in the same town. His commute went from part-time to daily two years ago.
Mr. Ubert, 48, and his wife, Alexia, 42, were living in an apartment in Weehawken, N.J., when they had their first child. Looking for a more serene setting, they explored Suffolk County, N.Y. But the cost of mandatory flood insurance in some areas after Hurricane Sandy, he said, put housing there out of reach. Suburban New Jersey, too, turned out to be a stretch.
“So we put a pencil on a map and drew 150 miles out,” he said. Looking west, they checked out Bethlehem, Pa., a city of 75,000 wedged between Allentown and Easton, which was founded by Moravians in the mid-18th century, and pitched their tent.
Jennifer Lehman may not have the longest commute in this determined fraternity — roughly two hours — but she is a clear winner when it comes to scenery and sociability. A recruiter in the professional services field, she lives in Newburgh, N.Y., about 60 miles north of New York City on the Hudson River. Ms. Lehman, 43, travels by car, boat and train to reach her office, which is blessedly only steps from Grand Central.
For eight years, she lived in a 300-square-foot Manhattan apartment, working at home several days a week. Seeking more breathing room, she moved to Newburgh, enjoying the same schedule. This ended three years later when she accepted a new job at a less-relaxed firm.
In the morning, a short drive takes Ms. Lehman to the 7:05 Newburgh-Beacon ferry. “It’s only 10 minutes, but it’s my favorite part of the commute,” she said, regarding the ferry ride.
Lengthy commuting is not cheap. For Mr. Ubert, Trans-Bridge Lines, based in Bethlehem, has dozens of runs from eastern Pennsylvania to the city and surrounding area that cost $432.75 monthly to the Port Authority Bus Terminal. Another is Bieber Transportation Group, in Kutztown ($439 from Allentown). Rail passes can be higher.
New Jersey’s Sussex and Warren counties, a bucolic region of farms and broad vistas, are significantly cheaper than other exurbs in the region. But bus service is spotty and commuter rail lines began to disappear in the late 1950s with the rise of the interstate highway system. The closest trains are out of Netcong, in adjacent Morris County. Regular bus service departs from nearby Dover. Most commuters drive, which can easily take two hours or more depending on traffic.
“There is a growing influx of young families attracted by the many lakes and sprawling countryside in Sussex County,” said Scott Turner of Coldwell Banker, in Sparta. Housing inventory is high and prices are somewhat sluggish owing to, among other things, stagnant population growth. The same applies to Warren County, which is bordered by the Delaware River and in the shadow of the Poconos.
“When the kids graduate from school around here, they leave,” Mr. Turner said.
A 3,000-square foot four-bedroom, four-bath home, some with swimming pools, goes for about $400,000, with annual taxes in the $10,000 range.
Mr. Ferrell, in Connecticut, an electrical engineer, has had an extreme commute for eight years. He considers the train an adjunct to his office, with a “hot spot” internet connection and adequate space to spread out papers.
His children are grown and out of the house. This, he said, frees up weekends so he and his wife can … take the train to Manhattan.
