The Trump administration announced new Iran-related sanctions on Tuesday intended to show its toughened stance toward the country despite having grudgingly recertified Iran’s compliance with the 2015 nuclear deal.
The sanctions, jointly announced by departments of State, Treasury and Justice, designated 18 individuals and entities that the administration said were involved in activities including missile development, weapons procurement, and software theft.
“The United States remains deeply concerned about Iran’s malign activities across the Middle East, which undermine regional stability, security, and prosperity,” the announcement said.
It came less than 12 hours after President Trump reluctantly agreed that Iran has been honoring the nuclear agreement that relaxed many sanctions on the country in return for verifiable curbs on its nuclear activities. Under an American law, the president must make such a declaration every 90 days.
That law has become a vexing issue for Mr. Trump, who railed against the nuclear agreement reached under his predecessor, Barack Obama.
Mr. Trump has called the nuclear agreement a disastrous giveaway to Iran and had suggested during the 2016 presidential campaign that he would tear it up.
But parties to the agreement also include Britain, China, France, Russia and Germany, which do not share Mr. Trump’s objections. An American withdrawal would leave the United States isolated on the issue.
Moreover, the nuclear agreement is monitored by the International Atomic Energy Agency of the United Nations, which has repeatedly found Iran to be in compliance despite Mr. Trump’s assertions that Iran is not adhering to “the spirit” of the agreement.
So Mr. Trump has sought to find new ways to challenge Iran, and his administration had suggested it would be adding names to its non-nuclear sanctions blacklist as part of that strategy.
Under the sanctions, American property of designated people and entities can be seized, and Americans are prevented from doing business with them.
Iran's foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, spoke to The New York Times as he wrapped up a trip to the United States at a time when the nuclear deal — and the economic benefits that it brings to his country — is in limbo.
The targets of the Tuesday announcement included individuals or groups that the United States said had supported efforts by Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps force to develop and produce drones, attack boats and other military equipment. The sanctions also were applied to organizations that the United States said were involved in Iran’s ballistic missile development.
Not all of the targets were Iranian. They included a Turkey-based supplier of marine equipment and a China-based procurement agent that the Treasury Department said had provided material and support to an Iranian military electronics company.
The announcement also criticized Iran for its incarceration of American citizens and other foreigners on what it described as fabricated charges, an issue that has long been in irritant in the estranged relations between the countries.
Iran disclosed on Sunday that it had been holding Xiyue Wang, an American citizen who is a Princeton University doctoral candidate in history, for nearly a year and has sentenced him to 10 years in prison on spying charges.
The disclosure shocked Mr. Wang’s colleagues at Princeton who said he could not possibly be a spy, and described Iran’s action as a colossal error. The incarceration of Mr. Wang, 37, also threatened to chill academic exchanges between the two countries.
Princeton officials have said they are working to secure Mr. Wang’s freedom and hope his conviction will be reversed in an appeal later this summer.
There was no immediate reaction to the new sanctions from Iran. But Iranian officials have made clear that they believe any unilateral American sanctions are a violation of the nuclear agreement and have threatened unspecified retaliation.
Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif of Iran, who has been in New York for meetings at the United Nations, said on Monday that the American sanctions policy has always been counterproductive.
“So if you want to see the results of sanctions, just 19,800 centrifuges is the net result of sanctions,” he said.