A worker at the Wayfair distribution center in Cranbury, N.J., in April. An economist, Michael Mandel, says e-commerce jobs pay more than traditional retail jobs.Credit...John Taggart for The New York Times.
Retailing is dead. Sales clerks are losing their jobs by the thousands. The employment picture for young people with only a high school education is going to get even worse. And all this is happening because of Amazon and its ilk, which are driving the shift among consumers toward e-commerce.
We’ve heard this story over and over in recent months: The echo chamber keeps repeating that the retail apocalypse is upon us.
And yet, according to one economist, Michael Mandel, it is all wrong. We have it backward.
Mr. Mandel is turning heads from Washington to Silicon Valley with a provocative and unorthodox argument: He asserts that the move toward e-commerce is creating more jobs than are being lost in the brick-and-mortar retailing industry — and that these new jobs are paying much higher wages than traditional retail jobs.
Mr. Mandel, chief economic strategist at the Progressive Policy Institute in Washington, contends that most economists are using the wrong job numbers to measure the e-commerce industry. He says that government numbers and conventional industry classifications don’t properly count all the jobs associated with e-commerce — in particular, the numbers miss large parts of the industry like fulfillment centers and distribution warehouses. As anyone who has noticed the growing volume of big brown boxes being delivered to people’s homes can imagine, facilities like that, which are tied to the e-commerce sector, are expanding rapidly.
Mr. Mandel has combed through the job statistics on a county-by-county basis and come to this counterintuitive view: From December 2007 to May 2017, by his count, the e-commerce industry has created 397,000 jobs in the United States, and this compares with the loss of 76,000 jobs in the traditional retail industry. And those jobs related to e-commerce, he says, pay about 30 percent more than the brick-and-mortar ones.
“To be honest, this was a surprise to me — I did not expect this,” Mr. Mandel told me.
Viewing e-commerce as an engine of jobs — not just any jobs, but good ones that are spread around the country — would be a new paradigm, for sure. But it’s one that admittedly requires a healthy dose of skepticism.
Of course, Mr. Mandel’s view flies in the face of established economic thought — and perhaps for good reason: His arithmetic relies on certain unconventional assumptions.
Is it possible Mr. Mandel is miscounting or perhaps double-counting?
In truth, his argument relies to some degree on the assumption that many of the new jobs created in a category known by the government as “general warehousing” are tied to e-commerce. That may be a good assumption — but it’s impossible to know for sure.
All of which is to say that we may not have as good a handle on the demographics of the job market as we think.
Mr. Mandel said he had been “very careful” to look only at changes in warehousing since 2007. “When I look at changes on a county-by-county level, they correlate very well with building of fulfillment centers,” he said.
But on the flip side, he also thinks it is possible that he has underestimated hiring in the industry. Some e-commerce hiring, he notes, is done through temporary agencies, and those jobs would not show up in the warehouse industry.
To Mr. Mandel, it’s not that e-commerce jobs are directly replacing traditional retail jobs. Rather, he describes a world in which some of what he calls “unpaid household labor” that we all do when we drive to the mall, park, shop and bring the goods home has been transferred into the labor market.
Nationally, since 2007, “the decline in shopping hours is 64 million hours a week,” Mr. Mandel said. “That’s the equivalent of about 1.5 million jobs,” some of which are now being created to staff the new fulfillment centers.
“Robots have been tough to do,” Mr. Mandel said, suggesting that they will come, but that it will take longer for them to replace humans than we think.
It feels a bit hard to believe to those of us who are inherent skeptics, but let’s hope he’s right.