A New York judge has ordered Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s office to turn over to The New York Times documents related to a corruption investigation of former state officials and upstate contractors that it has withheld for the last year.
The decision, issued last week but filed with the Albany County Clerk’s office on Thursday, compels the governor’s office to release, within 45 days, schedules, email and other records requested by The Times under New York’s Freedom of Information law. The Cuomo administration had fought to keep the documents secret on multiple grounds, including that disclosing them might compromise the criminal investigation.
“The chamber has failed to establish how disclosure would interfere with law enforcement investigations or judicial proceedings,” Justice Patrick J. McGrath of State Supreme Court in Albany County wrote of the governor’s office in his decision, which also denied the government’s claims that such disclosures might adversely affect the reputations of people named in the records.
Justice McGrath cited the text of the state’s Freedom of Information statute, or FOIL, in determining that the government’s arguments fell short of what was needed to deny information to the public. “The legislative declaration section of FOIL announces New York’s public policy that finds that ‘a free society is maintained when government is responsive and responsible to the public, and when the public is aware of governmental actions,’” he wrote.
The Times sought a wide-ranging group of records after reports emerged about an investigation into two former aides of Mr. Cuomo: Joseph Percoco, whom the governor has called a “brother,” and Todd R. Howe, a lobbyist who has long been connected to the Cuomo family.
The inquiry yielded a series of indictments brought by the former United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, Preet Bharara, involving accusations of bid-rigging and other crimes as part of the so-called Buffalo Billion project, a multiyear plan introduced by the governor in 2013 to re-energize the long-suffering city in western New York. Prosecutors have said Mr. Howe is cooperating with them, and the case against Mr. Percoco and several other defendants is expected to go to trial as soon as this fall.
The governor’s office did not say whether it would appeal the ruling. “We are reviewing the decision and evaluating our next steps,” Lauren Grasso, the state’s Freedom of Information law counsel said in an email.
