‘LAUGHTER IN THE PARK’ at Brooklyn Bridge Park (July 16, 4:30 p.m.). Every summer this free outdoor comedy series offers family-friendly stand-up from some of the best working comics in parks around New York City. This week’s show, at Granite Prospect on Pier 1 in Brooklyn Bridge Park, features stand-up from Sherrod Small, a stalwart of the New York stand-up scene and a host of the podcast “Race Wars”; Myq Kaplan, a stand-up and a writer who was a finalist on “Last Comic Standing”; Langston Kerman; Leighann Lord; and Gary Vider.
‘M.T.A. LOVE POEMS’ at the City Reliquary (July 15, 7 p.m.). To celebrate the release of a new zine of love poems dedicated to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (Kady Ruth Ashcraft wrote the verse, Layla Kenney provided the illustrations), this show features transit-themed comedy from some of New York’s most exciting comics. Performers include Josh Gondelman, a writer for “Last Week Tonight”; Joel Kim Booster, a stand-up who has appeared on “Conan”; Alyssa Limperis, a writer for The Scene, a Condé Nast video outlet; and Alise Morales, an editor at the website Betches.
MUSLIM FUNNY FEST at Comic Strip Live (July 18-19, 8 p.m.; July 20, 7:30 and 9:45 p.m.). Now in its third year, this festival was founded by Dean Obeidallah and Maysoon Zayid to feature Muslim comedians from around the world. The first show, “Legends of Muslim Comedy Halal Show,” is a clean, family-friendly show featuring Ramy Youssef, Wali Collins, Preacher Moss and more. Other performers in the festival include Negin Farsad, Eman El-Husseini and Gibran Saleem. “Ultra American,” the final show of the festival, is a one-man stand-up performance about the future of Islam in America by a comedian known only as Azhar.
PUNDERDOME at Highline Ballroom (July 18, 8 p.m.). The comedian Jo Firestone and her father, Fred, host this homemade pun competition, which attracts some of the best pun-generating talents in the city for a phenomenal show of wit and goofiness. For their third annual New York Post special edition, the pair have invited headline writers from that tabloid newspaper, which is famous for its punning titles, to compete with regular Punderdome champs in an ultimate battle of wordplay.
TIM & ERIC at the Town Hall (July 14-16, 8 p.m.). Tim Heidecker and Eric Wareheim have established a following with their grotesque comedy and deliberately low production values, inspired by the aesthetic of public-access television. Now, to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the debut of their breakout Adult Swim show, “Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job!,” the duo are touring with brand new live show, which will features videos, songs and other unpredictable bits.
