368 pp. Random House. $30.
How does one write a collective memoir, especially of events from a century ago? Adventurously — in free indirect discourse much of the time, and leaping nimbly among parallel narrative tracks. The lives and causes of the five protagonists in “Young Radicals” overlapped a good deal, but they also diverged in the course of the hectic years around World War I. With ingenuity and affection, Jeremy McCarter, the co-author with Lin-Manuel Miranda of “Hamilton: The Revolution,” weaves their stories together, describes the conflicts among them and renders a sympathetic but unsparing account of their shortcomings and defeats. “Young Radicals” does not pretend to scholarly authority or rigor. One might call it — without prejudice — pop history: It is rewarding as well as entertaining.
Walter Lippmann and John Reed were classmates at Harvard, where Reed was a cheerleader for the football team and Lippmann was a founder of the Socialist Club. Temperamentally they were opposites: Reed “big and loud and rough around the edges,” a hedonist and dabbler; Lippmann sleek and cosmopolitan but earnest and intellectually precocious. In a mock-epic poem about his fellow denizens in Greenwich Village, Reed spoofed Lippmann as “Our all-unchallenged Chief,” a brilliant prig “who builds a world but leaves out all the fun.” Soon enough Reed would be as politically earnest as Lippmann, but their sensibilities, even more deeply than their principles, would prove irreconcilable.
Lippmann moved in the opposite direction, increasingly close to power. As an editor of The New Republic, he found that official Washington was eager to talk to (and, he mistakenly assumed, listen to) liberal intellectuals about America’s proper attitude toward the European war. The magazine’s editorials obligingly made the case for the Wilson administration’s policies: at first neutrality, then preparedness, then belligerency. Lippmann was recruited for Wilson’s 1916 re-election campaign, then onto the government’s postwar planning staff and finally sent, with the Army, into Europe. His war was almost as exciting as Reed’s, but it ended in bitter disillusion, when Wilson accepted a horribly flawed peace settlement.
Lippmann thereafter retreated into a career of Olympian detachment and superiority as America’s most respected and respectable pundit. The one person who might have dragged him off this pedestal and forced him to learn the lessons of his misguided enthusiasm for the war was Randolph Bourne. A hunchback with misshapen features, Bourne was a lonely and marginal figure who made his name writing ardent essays in The Atlantic and The New Republic on education, immigration and culture. Those magazines had no use, however, for his ideas about the war. In a literary monthly, Seven Arts, Bourne wrote a series of brilliant and biting antiwar essays, diagnosing the liberals’ and pragmatists’ capitulation to war fever as a “dread of intellectual suspense.” John Dewey replied angrily but, as he later admitted, ineffectually.
It was one of the most important controversies in American intellectual history. Bourne was vindicated in every respect but unfortunately did not live to press his advantage — he died, only 32, in December 1918. If he had lived and become as influential as he seemed likely to, fewer liberal intellectuals might have supported America’s disastrous military interventions in Indochina, Central America and the Middle East.
The Wilson administration’s heavy-handed repression of wartime dissent brought together two of McCarter’s subjects: Reed and Max Eastman, a sometime poet and the editor of The Masses, where both of them published antiwar essays. The government put them on trial for obstructing the war effort. Eastman delivered a rousing speech, which won the day by producing a deadlocked jury. He later moved to the right, becoming one of the more interesting critics of the American and international left.
Alice Paul is probably the least well-known of McCarter’s five. A Quaker and Swarthmore graduate, Paul first encountered the woman suffrage movement when she went to England, where she was jailed and repeatedly force-fed (later a favorite tactic of her American jailers as well). In Washington Paul organized protest marches and started The Suffragist magazine. Soon she was deemed too militant by the National American Woman Suffrage Association and expelled. Her single-mindedness and courage were remarkable, though she was not quite brave enough, McCarter acknowledges, to welcome black women into her campaign on equal terms.
“If they did that,” Wilson said, “they would not be as intelligent as I believe they are.” Two weeks after their conversation, Paul sent the National Woman’s Party into the election campaign. Wilson narrowly won re-election and eventually agreed to support a federal amendment.
McCarter’s prose is sometimes a tad breathless. (“Walter Lippmann pushes through the crowds of frantic Belgians, the shouting men, the sobbing women, desperate for news. He scours the bulletin boards. They tell him nothing he doesn’t already know.”)  But for the most part, the prose maintains its balance even at high velocities. And although scholars may lift an eyebrow over his assumption of psychological intimacy with his subjects, he appears to have earned it, quoting liberally from the young radicals’ letters, journals and memoirs.
In its rhetorical intoxication, its dramatic representations of character and its effort to reproduce in its verbal rhythms the flow, sometimes torrential, of historical events, “Young Radicals” recalls Thomas Carlyle’s “The French Revolution.” Readers shouldn’t get too excited about this comparison. Carlyle did all those things supremely well. His book was a masterpiece, a thunderclap, a revelation. As a piece of historical writing, “Young Radicals” bears roughly the same relation to “The French Revolution” as a pleasing sketch by a fledgling artist bears to the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel. Still, one should honor McCarter’s ambition, as he has honored those of Bourne, Lippmann, Eastman, Reed and Paul.