The Hans Zimmer score for the new Christopher Nolan film, “Dunkirk,” suggests the ticktock of a stopwatch as a form of percussion — deliberate during the pregnant quiet as trapped British soldiers peer up at the sky, frantic during the lead-up to a bombing raid by German warplanes. The entire film has a pleasing metronomic composition, with three separate story lines that unfold over different timelines and overlap at meaningful junctures. There may be little connecting “Dunkirk,” a sweeping historical re-creation, to “Following,” Nolan’s low-budget feature debut, but his awareness of time — of its elasticity, of its effect on memory, of its potential for dramatic weaponization — is a critical through-line.
Over ten features, Nolan’s career has ramped up in scale and ambition, from early experiments in neo-noir to a Hollywood career that has oscillated between the brainy abstraction of “The Prestige” and “Inception” to the commercial sprawl of his “Dark Knight” trilogy. Yet to see his films in order — all of them are available on various streaming services — is to appreciate both that evolution and his continuity of vision. Time has marched forward, but Nolan hasn’t entirely changed along with it.
Although “Following” debuted in the United States in 1999, it wasn’t rediscovered and released until after Nolan’s “Memento” became a phenomenon a couple of years later, which is just the sort of achronology the director might appreciate. Made on a shoestring budget — a filmmaking autodidact, Nolan wrote, shot, and helped produce and edit the film himself — “Following” feels like a dry run for “Memento,” a noir exercise that plays with a morally ambiguous protagonist and clever structural gamesmanship.  The tables turn when a thief (Alex Caw) catches him in the act and the two become partners in voyeurism, using burglaries as an opportunity to poke around in other people’s affairs.
Nolan made a quantum leap forward with “Memento,” a cinematic brainteaser that covers a revenge scheme in reverse. As if the backward chronology weren’t enough, Nolan, working from a short story by his brother Jonathan, adds a protagonist (Guy Pearce) with “anterograde amnesia,” a condition that has wiped out his short-term memory and has prevented him from making new memories since his wife was murdered. He fills in the gaps through a system of tattoos, Polaroids and handwritten notes, but his dubious confidants, played by Joe Pantoliano and Carrie-Anne Moss, may be manipulating his condition to their own ends. It takes more than one viewing to put all the pieces together, but Nolan’s best films — and “Memento” is surely one of them — have a powerful emotional core that’s slow to reveal itself. Behind the gimmick, Nolan offers true insight into our capacity for self-deception and how memories, even false ones, inform our identities.
For his major-studio debut, “Insomnia,” Nolan again turned to the noir genre for a thriller about a morally compromised hero, but the film remains one of his least talked-about, despite a generally kind reception from critics and audiences. In remaking the Norwegian director Erik Skjoldbjaerg’s international hit from five years earlier, Nolan makes only a few minor tweaks, but the dark collaboration between a compromised detective (Al Pacino) and a man suspected of murder (Robin Williams) is still a sinister twist on the typical cat-and-mouse game. With an internal affairs investigation hanging over his head, Pacino’s detective investigates the death of a high-school girl in an Alaskan fishing village, but the accidental (or perhaps not-so-accidental) shooting of his partner complicates the case. As in Skjoldbjaerg’s original, the permanent daylight of the film’s Arctic locale becomes a symbol of the guilt and shame that cannot be tucked away in the darkness.
With “Batman Begins,” the first entry in his “Dark Knight” trilogy, Nolan quickly figured out how to square his thematic interests with blockbuster spectacles that might appeal to a mass audience. It’s not enough to say that Nolan’s Batman is merely “darker” than the Tim Burton version — which, itself, was several shades more gothic than the Adam West camp of the 1960s. More to the point, Nolan’s Caped Crusader became a colossal totem of early 21st-century fear and anxiety. By now, hard-edge superhero movies are so much the industry standard that they’ve developed their own clichés, but Nolan started the trend by expanding and challenging the perception of what the genre could be and how far we would allow our heroes to stray from the righteous path.
After “Batman Begins” completed his ascendence in Hollywood, Nolan began a “one for me, one for them” pattern of filmmaking that alternated between his more original and intellectually demanding films and his later chapters in the trilogy. Much like “Memento,” “The Prestige” looks at first like Nolan’s monument to his own ingenuity: The director sure saw much of himself in the early 20th-century illusionists (played here by Bale and Hugh Jackman), who thrilled audiences with their sleight-of-hand. But as the rivalry between the two men heats up and their actions lead to a series of compounding tragedies, the film grows into more than just an elaborate magic trick. Their dedication to the craft goes beyond obsession and into a realm of self-sacrifice that’s at once shocking and extraordinarily moving. “The Prestige” is also a good primer on how to watch a Christopher Nolan film: If you spend too much time getting hung up on the trick, you might miss the magic.
With the second and best of his Batman trilogy, “The Dark Knight,” Nolan made the unusual decision to bring the villain to the fore. As played with feral intensity by Heath Ledger, the Joker is a particularly modern form of chaos agent, a free-floating urban terrorist who has no goal beyond destruction for its own sake. As Batman tries to figure out how to fight crime while adhering to an honorable code of conduct, the Joker mirthlessly pursues a nihilistic agenda that’s just as rigorous and powerful. What makes the Joker such a terrifying villain, beyond Ledger’s lip-smacking derangement, is that he represents those acts of destruction and tragedy that defy explanation. In the context of summer escapism, Nolan conjures the real-world fears of encroaching evil.
“Inception” is Nolan’s best attempt to express abstract ideas through eye-catching special effects, a metaphysical crime picture that attempts to paint a picture of how the mind works. Leonardo DiCaprio plays a thief who extracts secrets from people’s subconscious minds while they’re in a dream state, but his latest assignment requires him to pull off the reverse: planting (or incepting) an idea rather than stealing it. Through this elaborate feat of corporate espionage, Nolan brings the architecture of dreams to visually spectacular life, all while stoking anxiety over how little control we feel over reality itself.
The last film in Nolan’s Batman trilogy, “The Dark Knight Rises,” completes his comprehensively grim metaphor for a post-9/11 world with a worst-case scenario: widespread terrorism and corruption, an expansive surveillance state, the ascendance of a fascistic strongman and the subsequent unwinding of civic values. As Batman retreats largely to the Batcave, Bane (Tom Hardy) emerges from the underground to impose order and security through iron-fisted, antidemocratic rule. More than the previous entries, “The Dark Knight Rises” turns mass entertainment into sweeping political symbolism, but the film is elastic enough to be read in many different ways, by people of all ideological persuasions.
Perhaps it was only a matter of time before Nolan attempted his twist on “2001: A Space Odyssey,” but what’s surprising about “Interstellar” is how openly emotional it is, to the point where love itself acts as an animating force in the universe. In a future when life on Earth appears doomed to extinction, a group of astronauts, led by a former NASA pilot (Matthew McConaughey), travels through a mysterious wormhole in search of a habitable planet. But that journey means abandoning his children and perhaps condemning them to death alongside the rest of humanity. Nolan handles space travel and planetary exploration with the requisite beauty, but “Interstellar” has none of the intellectual detachment of his other work. It’s about the intimate bonds of parenthood and partnership and the preciousness of time itself. Here, hours in one place can mean decades lost in another, and the ticktock pierces the heart.
