Illustrated. 387 pp. St. Martin’s Press. $29.99.
“Jane Austen at Home” is more than just an account of pokers, fire screens, writing desks, Jane’s round spectacles, handsome carriage sweeps in front of handsome houses, some very good and some very disappointing apple pies, the elm-lined walks of the Steventon rectory and the flimsy doors and uneven stairs of a rented house in Bath. But it’s not a great biography, and if it hadn’t been described as one on the cover, I would find even more to praise in these pages.
Lucy Worsley is a British historian the way Julia Child was an American cook. She is history on the BBC. She’s been popularizing innumerable aspects of it on British television, everything from “If Walls Could Talk: The History of the Home,” “Dancing Through the Blitz,” “Empire of the Tsars” and “Mozart’s London Odyssey” to “Reins of Power: The Art of Horse Dancing.” This last program focuses on manège, the royal art of making horses dance, a subject she encountered while researching her Ph.D. thesis on William Cavendish. (The project is, in Worsley’s own words, “bonkers.”) She has done these shows with a bright, impish smile, a wealth of information and open delight in dressing up and re-enacting.
In “Jane Austen at Home,” Worsley is shameless, occasionally ebullient (there are some un-Austenlike exclamation points) and sometimes a little breathless. (“This is, unashamedly, the story of my Jane, every word of it written with love.” “It was love; indisputably love.”) Worsley is also given to some speculative writing (“She must have”; “Whatever Mr. Austen’s hopes might have been”; “I believe that”), which is understandable since so much of Jane Austen’s insightful, acerbic correspondence was burned by her devoted, discreet, possibly envious, slightly overbearing older sister, Cassandra.
The thread that runs through Worsley’s chapters describing the many homes, the many residences, rarely grand, often inadequate (the unsteady little writing desk and the three hard chairs Austen turned into a makeshift sofa bother me more than I can say) and sometimes grim, is Austen’s longing for a place of her own, a safe haven in which she can live a little longer, afford a good lamp and comfortable seating and enough time.
