A few minutes into “A Wall Apart,” during the propulsive opening number, I noticed something that hadn’t happened at either of the other shows I saw over the weekend at the New York Musical Festival: My leg was moving in time to the beat.
With music and lyrics by Graham Russell of the soft-rock band Air Supply, “A Wall Apart” is a smart, high-energy exercise in idealism, a rock musical with love and politics on its mind. And if its second act suggests that it’s still a work in progress, that’s part of what the festival is for — putting a show on its feet and seeing where it stumbles.
Set in Berlin when it was divided during the Cold War, “A Wall Apart” is about three brothers who have to choose which side of the city to make their home before the border closes. Freedom in the West versus oppression in the East, yes, but it isn’t so simple if, like Kurt (Jordan Bondurant), the middle sibling, you have family on one side and a woman you love (Maddie Shea Baldwin) on the other. There is a definite “Romeo and Juliet”/“West Side Story” dynamic at play.
In a confident production directed and choreographed by Keith Andrews, an excellent cast breathes life into fully drawn characters (the book is by Sam Goldstein and Craig Clyde), while Mr. Russell’s music varies nicely from wailing guitar to gentle lullaby.
The show (which closes Sunday night) changes strategy in Act II, using a sort of ghost narrator — a character who won our affection when he was alive — to fast-forward the plot toward the fall of the Berlin Wall. That’s not a bad tack, but the creators overcrowd the story here, pulling focus from the characters we care most about and failing to build toward the climactic reunion. The final number is a reprise of the opening song, yet the energy that is so organic at the start feels ginned up by the finish.
“The Goree All-Girl String Band,” a country musical by Michael Bradley (book and lyrics) and Artie Sievers (music), ended its run on Saturday. Directed by Ashley Brooke Monroe, it arrived at the festival with an enticing star in Lauren Patten, an impressive new prize from the Kevin Spacey Foundation and an intriguing premise inspired by a true story: A group of female inmates in 1930s Texas form a band, hoping to get on a radio show whose fans include the governor. He has been known to parole musicians who catch his fancy. With any luck, they could be next.
Ms. Patten, who was such fun to watch as the leader of a team of teenage soccer players in the Off Broadway hit “The Wolves,” plays another leader here: Reable Childs, the convicted murderer who gets the band together.
The show is frustrating, though, because for all the lovely vocal harmonies of the prisoners, and for all the sweet sounds of their string instruments (cello, fiddle, bass, banjo, guitar), the songs are largely unmemorable, the lyrics and dialogue larded with clichés. And while this cast is abundantly talented (the other standouts are Kendra Jo Brook, Miche Braden and Nattalyee Randall), the characters are so thinly written and the plot so meandering that it’s hard to feel invested.
“Play Like a Winner,” on the other hand, is the kind of musical comedy that sucks you in whether it’s your cup of tea or not. It really is not mine, partly because of how easily it slips into catfight mode and how content it is to draw its queen-bee villain (Casey Erin Clark) in just two tired dimensions.
With book and lyrics by Erik Johnke and music by David Wolfson, this is a well-polished, occasionally foul-mouthed caricature of suburban soccer-mom life, aimed squarely at that audience demographic. Directed by Kevin Connors, the fine cast is led by Jessica Tyler Wright as the mother of a soccer newbie (a sardonic Zoe Wilson), ably abetted by Megan Kane and Frank Viveros as parents whose marriage takes one for the team.
The show (which ends its run Sunday night) starts with a corpse center stage: the coach (Nicolas Dromard), impaled by a bright flag. What follows is a flashback to how that happened, and toward the end it’s a little like playing Clue, where you know the victim and the murder weapon and you’re waiting to find out whodunit. So many soccer parents, so many suspects.