WASHINGTON — For Republicans — who control every corner of this city — this should be a time of elation, running up the score on accomplishments.
But their seven-year promise to repeal President Barack Obama’s health care law has become an embarrassing, popcorn-worthy drama that evolves hourly around the tweeted whims of President Trump, who provides congressional Republicans with neither a policy blueprint to follow nor a bully pulpit on which to lean.
The effort to rewrite the tax code — a durable Republican yearning — has been undermined by a budget fight in the House, an indecisive White House and the stalled health care effort, on which the tax changes were meant to rely.
Even something that once easily unified Republicans — the desire to place sanctions on Russia — has unraveled in the House, creating the appearance that lawmakers are protecting the White House from a bill it does not want.
An extended fight over the role of Congress in approving the use of force against the Islamic State set off another intraparty battle when Republican lawmakers joined Democrats to finally end the elastic post-9/11 authorization of military force against Al Qaeda, which has been used for every war ever since. Then, Republican leaders used their powers to strip the measure away in the dark of night.
Some Republican senators, like Dean Heller of Nevada, should be gearing up for fights with Democratic challengers next year, but instead are trying to duck primary threats inspired at least in part by a president of their own party.
The professional deficits have been topped with dejecting personal tragedies. Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican who has spent the better part of the last six months racing around the world defending a generation of American international positions, announced Wednesday night that he had brain cancer. The third-most-powerful House Republican, Representative Steve Scalise of Louisiana, lingers in a hospital bed, recovering from gunshot wounds sustained during a mass assassination attempt this summer.
Instead of preparing for a month at home of crowing about the accomplishments of a unified government, Republicans have been diminished to trying to confirm relatively minor nominees — Democrats are stalling them — and getting a spending bill or two passed. They have been forced to cut their August recess short, all because they have nothing particularly positive to celebrate.
Even former House Speaker Newt Gingrich, who was seen gliding through the Capitol on Thursday, normally loquacious on all matters of party strategy, politics and the possibilities of moon colonization, had nothing to say. He stared straight ahead when asked about Republican woes.
While congressional Republicans’ problems stem largely from the chaos at the White House, many reflect fissures within their party over government spending, social issues, immigration and the role of America in the broader international order.
And once again, rather than trying to forge bipartisan alliances with moderate Democrats, Republican leaders appear determined to go it alone with one-party bills that must unite the hard right with the center right.
For example, a spending bill passed by House appropriators that would provide millions of dollars for Mr. Trump’s proposed wall on the Mexican border sets up a potential fight on the floor with Republicans in the Senate, who earlier this year rejected a similar effort.
The same measure narrowly failed on a broader defense policy bill passed recently by the House, as some Republicans joined Democrats to reject it.
Some members of the House Freedom Caucus, many of whom were originally elected on a platform of reined-in federal spending, have said they will not vote for a bill that does not include substantial wall funding, as well as the transgender amendment, drawing fault lines around Mr. Trump within the party.
“What we haven’t been able to figure out is how to meld people with such different policy positions together to get the consensus, the majority it takes to pass bills,” Representative Bradley Byrne, Republican of Alabama, said.
Republicans blame Democrats for many of their woes: for slowing down nominations with procedural tricks because of their ire over health care, for not helping them to repeal the Affordable Care Act and for passing it in the first place. But increasingly, Republican senators are suggesting it would be better to work with the minority party to fix the law’s flaws.
Even in the House, Republicans and Democrats joined, at least momentarily, over the issue of congressional approval for authorizing war. The effort was led by Representative Scott Taylor, Republican of Virginia and a former Navy SEAL, who joined forces with Representative Barbara Lee, Democrat of California, demonstrating that foreign policy in the Trump era has provoked even more desire for a legislative role.
Appropriators in the Senate are also working in a friendly and bipartisan manner on bills, but it remains to be seen how the process will play out on legislation that will require 60 votes to pass. Still, some Republicans are using optimism as oxygen as they head home after yet another week of chaos and disappointment.
