Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson is moving ahead with plans to restructure his department, and has hired two consulting groups to assist with the process, according to a cable sent to embassies around the world.
In the cable, Mr. Tillerson said he had hired Deloitte and Insigniam to help oversee the reorganization. Insigniam had previously overseen an internal polling effort to get suggestions from the department’s rank and file about how to make the department more efficient.
The cable listed five committees that will analyze different aspects of the department and the U.S. Agency for International Development, with leaders from each organization among the committee members.
Among the committees are those dedicated to ensuring that foreign assistance programs align with national priorities, that there is a balance between the work done in Washington and in the field, and that the department’s computer system — famously poorly functioning — adopts cutting-edge technology.
Mr. Tillerson has made clear that he believes the State Department is badly mismanaged. In an interview last week, he said he was surprised at how poorly the government’s decision-making process compares with that of Exxon Mobil, where he worked for 41 years, leaving as the chief executive and chairman.
“It’s largely not a highly disciplined organization, decision-making is fragmented and sometimes people don’t want to take decisions; coordination is difficult through the interagency,” he said of the government.
Mr. Tillerson’s only direct experience with government service has been during the Trump administration, which has been slow at filling crucial leadership positions.
Mr. Tillerson has said he expected to come up with a reorganization plan by the end of the year and begin putting it to work next year, an unusually long process for such an effort but one that reflects his commitment to a top-to-bottom review.
The first major effort in the reorganization was an online survey, whose results were announced last month. The survey found that many of the 35,386 employees who responded complained that the department was poorly structured, had little accountability and treated its employees poorly.
Among the survey’s recommendations was that the issuance of visas, passports and other travel documents be transferred to the Department of Homeland Security, an effort that would require a wholesale transformation of the government’s overseas work force. Another recommendation was that foreign postings be extended by one year.