For almost 30 years, Blue Man Group has pervaded pop culture around the world with its eclectic, nonverbal percussive performances, zany lights and comedic movements. (O.K., fine. Dancing.) And of course, there is the blue body paint from head to toe.
Now, the Blue Men are joining the circus.
“We saw the potential for a marketing and distributing powerhouse like Cirque du Soleil to be able to distribute Blue Man Group and make their brand better known internationally,” said Daniel Lamarre, Cirque’s chief executive, in an interview. Cirque currently has 18 live shows worldwide.
“The acquisition of Blue Man, for us, is kind of a breakthrough to make clear to people that Cirque is going from a circus company to becoming a global leader of entertainment,” Mr. Lamarre said.
It just so happened that for a company looking to find a permanent home in an entertainment pillar like China (and other large markets), Cirque was a fit. Along with TPG, the Chinese investment firm Fosun owns a minority stake in Cirque, and Mr. Lamarre said the circus was trying to make heavy inroads into China.
Mr. Lamarre said that next week he was headed to China to announce a seven-city Cirque tour that is to start in October.
Conceptually, China is an ideal destination for Blue Man Group. One of the biggest challenges facing American productions in China is the language barrier, an obstacle that doesn’t exist for Blue Man’s mostly nonverbal shows.
“It’s been an explosion,” Mr. Routh said.
During the process of finding a prospective partner — “The idea of letting go of the reins is not an easy one,” Mr. Wink said — Cirque seemed like a match for other reasons. Mr. Wink said there was mutual admiration, even though the companies were in some ways competing over the same off-the-wall creative turf. Mr. Lamarre, in a separate interview, agreed.
Blue Man Group was founded in the 1980s as a sort of response to and rejection of performance and cultural norms. Cirque du Soleil’s founder, Guy Laliberté, was a fire-eater before creating Cirque in 1984, a show that sprang from cultivating street performers near Quebec. Both companies feature shows that have been traditionally nonverbal.
Blue Man Group has achieved a level of pop-culture success that would have been unthinkable in the 1980s. It reportedly brings in hundreds of millions of dollars a year, although a spokeswoman declined to confirm that number.
The group was the subject of a long-running and still oft-quoted story line in the sitcom “Arrested Development,” along with being referred to in countless other movies and shows. It starred in commercials for Intel, has been nominated for a Grammy and has even founded a private school in New York City called the Blue School.
However, Blue Man Group has had its own problems. In 2016, a musical collaborator since the group’s inception, Ian Pai, sued Blue Man for $150 million, contending that he had been underpaid for decades. A trial is set to begin in April.
There have been no discussions about combining Cirque and Blue Man onstage, nor has either side expressed hope for such a collaboration.
And as far as the Blue Man team is concerned, its shows won’t lose any of the screwball charm that has attracted more than 35 million viewers since the troupe’s founding.
