It was supposed to be HBO’s next big thing: a high-concept drama from the creators of “Game of Thrones,” set in an alternate America, where the Southern states had seceded from the Union and slavery continued into the present day.
Instead, the new series, called “Confederate,” has provoked a passionate outcry from potential viewers, who are questioning how HBO and the creators will handle this volatile mixture of race, politics and history. Several historians and cultural critics are also skeptical about whether the creators of “Game of Thrones,” David Benioff and D. B. Weiss, are the right people to address the subject and if it should be attempted at all.
“Confederate” arrives at a time when many minority groups feel their civil rights are under siege, and when issues surrounding the Civil War and its legacy — the propriety of displaying Confederate flags; the relocations and razings of Confederate monuments — continue to confront Americans almost daily.
To the show’s critics, its promise to depict slavery as it might be practiced in modern times is perhaps the most worrisome element of “Confederate.” They say that slavery, a grave and longstanding scar on the national psyche, especially for black Americans, should not be trivialized for the sake of a fantasy TV series.
“Racial history in this country is a very open, sensitive wound,” said Dodai Stewart, the editor in chief of Fusion, a social-justice culture and news site.
No scripts have been written, and not a single frame has been shot for “Confederate,” which will not make its debut any sooner than next year. But the show’s pedigree is already established: With “Thrones,” Mr. Benioff and Mr. Weiss are responsible for HBO’s most-watched series ever and the winner of the Emmy Award for drama series for the past two years.
The show joins a television landscape in which alternate-history narratives are becoming increasingly popular, as seen in dystopian programs like Amazon’s “The Man in the High Castle” (adapted from the Philip K. Dick novel) and Hulu’s “The Handmaid’s Tale” (from the novel by Margaret Atwood).
While this subject matter is delicate in its own right, there is particular concern about how it will be handled by Mr. Benioff and Mr. Weiss.
In their time on “Game of Thrones,” they have been criticized for what some viewers regard as the routine and insensitive depiction of rape, and an overreliance on sexual violence as a plot device.
“Thrones” features few black actors in prominent roles, other than characters who are, or once were, slaves, and includes a plotline in which a population of darker-skinned slaves was liberated by a white savior.
“‘Game of Thrones,’ to me, is just an exercise in violence and sexual abuse, and many other things that draw a crowd but don’t have much redeeming social significance,” Mr. Foner said in a telephone interview.
Mr. Weiss and Mr. Benioff have become two of the most important talents at HBO, which prides itself on creative freedom. Under their guidance, “Game of Thrones” has become a ratings blockbuster, delivering 16.1 million viewers across multiple platforms for its Season 7 premiere on Sunday.
As the show approaches its grand finale (no sooner than next year), a vital priority for HBO has been securing a new project from its creators.
The network declined to make Mr. Benioff and Mr. Weiss available for interviews. In the announcement for “Confederate,” they said they had been discussing the idea for several years and had considered pursuing it as a feature film before taking it to HBO.
Mr. Weiss and Mr. Benioff said in the announcement that they would be working on “Confederate” with the married writer-producers Malcolm Spellman (“Empire”) and Nichelle Tramble Spellman (“The Good Wife”), who are black. Mr. Spellman, reached by phone on Thursday, declined to comment for this article.
In “C.S.A.: The Confederate States of America,” a mock documentary from 2004, the writer-director Kevin Willmott explored the imaginary history of a Confederacy that wins the Civil War and expands across the Western Hemisphere.
But alternate history can also prove to be unexpectedly provocative. The marketing campaign for Amazon’s “The Man in the High Castle,” set in an America where the Axis powers won World War II, was condemned for its prolific use of German eagles, iron crosses and other fascist imagery.
“The Handmaid’s Tale” series, in which the United States has become a theocracy, and women are subjugated, was criticized for eliding issues of race in its fictional society and featuring a largely white cast.
Still, both of those shows had their respected literary source material to fall back on and quell the preliminary concerns of viewers.
Gavriel D. Rosenfeld, a history professor at Fairfield University and the editor of a blog called The Counterfactual History Review, said that some alternate histories were bound to be more controversial than others; some eras have more clearly defined heroes and villains.
