141 pages. Tin House Books. $18.95.
Years ago, a palliative care doctor told me that what he knew of a patient’s personality often had little to do with how he or she coped with dying. Generous people could become ungenerous, and brave people could become frightened. Angry people could become gentle, and controlling people could become Zen. Dying, in other words — like combat, like becoming a parent, like any transformative life event — doesn’t always reveal or intensify aspects of our character. It sometimes coaxes out new ones.
The book rings louder in my imagination the more time I spend apart from it, a kind of reverse Doppler effect. “Dying” is bracing and beautiful, possessed of an extraordinary intellectual and moral rigor. Every medical student should read it. Every human should read it. My own copy is so aggressively underlined it looks like a composition notebook.
Most memoirs about dying are memoirs about cancer. One of the reasons we read them, I think, is because we are looking for insights into how to tolerate the terror of our own impermanence, which in the case of a bad cancer diagnosis is no longer theoretical; death has been unloosed from the quarry in our consciousness where the beasts and the boogeymen live. And so we search for guidance: How do we survive with fear in our shadow? What do we do with ourselves as we wind down our time? What do we think about, and how do we plan for our exit?
Those who have the wherewithal to write about these questions usually have the wherewithal to think clearly about them.
It is this kind of truth-telling, served neat, that makes “Dying” so powerful and immediate; it is also what makes Taylor’s reassuring observations all the sweeter.
Would that all of us could remember this as we’re wriggling into our hair shirts of lament.
Regret is even pointless, Taylor writes, when it comes to her own illness. While she’s not above asking “Why me?” (whereas Christopher Hitchens couldn’t countenance this question without boredom), she realizes she could have died many times before this moment — like the day a speeding sedan hit her car just seconds after she’d parked it and stepped away.
Dying turns many of us into counterfactual historians. But the alternate universe Taylor imagines is unusually provocative.
It’s almost inevitable that dying makes you reflect on your past, which perhaps explains why “Dying” is not merely a meditation on the present, but a journey backward in time, all the way to Taylor’s girlhood.
I was unprepared for how involving this stretch of her reminiscence would be. Half of its appeal is its simple Aussie exoticism — there’s talk of kookaburras, jackeroos. But her personal story is also packed with drama. There’s the greedy uncle who annexed the family patrimony. The grandmother who suffered a nervous breakdown. The unstable and bellicose father, an airline pilot, who was only at home in the sky.
This may not be quite as glorious a description of life as Philip Larkin’s “million-petaled flower of being here,” but it has a startling offhand grace.
 They will surely miss her, too. But it’s at least something — maybe a tiny bit lucky, even — that this gorgeous piece of her remains.