Times Insider delivers insights into how we work at The New York Times. In this piece, the Times food reporter and columnist Tejal Rao shares her verdict on some new-fangled versions of the classic American cookie that was a rare luxury of her international childhood.
When a Times editor asked if I could taste a handful of new Oreo flavors and share my notes, for Maya Salam’s story about the company’s strategic expansion, I jumped at the chance. Growing up in Europe and the Middle East, my introduction to American food culture was through the Oreo, and I loved the cookie instantly and fiercely — from the crinkling sound of the plastic packaging; to the frosting, sweeter than anything I’d ever tasted; to the impossibly dark, intricately embossed biscuits, which tasted only vaguely of chocolate.
I still consider the classic Oreo to be a sandwich cookie of perfect proportion and sweetness, but my affection for it wasn’t entirely based on the way it tasted: It was about consuming something American, something cool and rare and glamorous that I might be cut off from at any moment. The cookies could be hard to find internationally in the ‘90s, and the only reliable source was a relative who transported them in his suitcase. It wasn’t until I moved to the United States that I understood Oreos were not, in fact, a luxury product.
My assignment was a simple Oreo taste test, but how could I set aside my deep attachment to the cookie, my true love for it? How could I taste with the composure and impartiality of a reporter?
I started by picking up the cookies from the aforementioned editor, Erin McCann, who was hiding a great quantity for a photo shoot. I took them to my desk on the fourth floor where I could concentrate, lining up two of each flavor. I took a bite of one, typed up some initial thoughts and sipped room-temperature seltzer before moving on to the next flavor. After I had sampled all of them, I went back and finished each cookie, this time looking for more details of flavor, texture and aroma. I used the remaining intact cookies to conduct an informal dissection, pulling the biscuits apart and nibbling the components individually, covering my keyboard in crumbs in the process. I hoped no one I knew would walk by and catch me studying broken cookies, digging at frosting with the tip of an oyster knife.
I was delighted by the gentle popping quality of the Firework Oreo, which thankfully didn’t taste like fireworks at all. It was full of crushed carbonated candy that created a fizzing sensation when it hit the tongue, much like Pop Rocks. But as it turned out, my Oreo fanaticism didn’t blind me to what I considered flaws in almost all the cookies. Each one promised excitement in the form of a specific, interesting flavor, but none really delivered on the promise, and some didn’t even seem built for eating.
The Blueberry Pie Oreo reminded me far too much of a blueberry muffin that had gone a little sweaty overnight in plastic wrap. The Mississippi Mud Pie Oreo was insulting to Mississippi mud pies everywhere. The Jelly Donut Oreo really illustrated the sandwich cookie’s structural limitations. And I wondered if the flavors were simply too ambitiously named. The cookie did not, and could not, taste like a doughnut, and perhaps it was unfair of anyone to expect it to do so. It was, after all, just a cookie.
By the time I’d finished eating and typing, I had a few hundred words to shape up, and the feeling of never ever wanting to eat another Oreo. I shook my keyboard over the trash can and banged at it to get rid of any remaining crumbs. But even when I moved on to another assignment, it was hard to focus on anything else: The distinct, maple-ish smell of Waffles & Syrup Oreos lingered for hours.