Monday, July 10: the day commuters are dreading. That’s when repair work at Pennsylvania Station begins, officially kicking off what Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo has called the “summer of hell” and disrupting regular train service from Long Island, New Jersey and beyond for at least eight weeks.
If you can work from home, you should. If you can plan your vacation around it, you should.
Sooner or later, though, you will probably need to get into New York City. When that day comes, here’s some information to help you.
Full schedules are available here.
Most L.I.R.R. branches will have at least one Penn Station-bound train rerouted to Brooklyn or Queens. The good news is your L.I.R.R. ticket will get you onto the subway at no cost during the morning rush.
One important note: The route that takes you to work may not be the same one to take you home. Be sure to check the Metropolitan Transportation Authority’s website to find how your evening commute will change.
Some Penn Station-bound trains will be rerouted to the Hunters Point Avenue station in Queens. From there, a 7 train will take you to Manhattan.
Some Penn Station-bound trains will end at Atlantic Terminal in Brooklyn. From there, you have a number of options to take you to work: The 2, 3, 4, 5, B, D, N, Q and R trains all go to Manhattan.
Trains may be rerouted to the Jamaica subway station in Queens, where you can take an E train to Midtown Manhattan or a J or Z train to Lower Manhattan.
Not in the mood for a crowded subway car?
The M.T.A. has set up a number of Park and Ride stations where you can take a bus into the city, but be forewarned, there are limited numbers of parking spots at each location. You can see a map of those here.
Those hoping to avoid land altogether can take a ferry from Glen Cove (see the map here), but again, parking will be limited.
You could always drive into Manhattan. But we wouldn’t recommend it — if even a few of your fellow stranded commuters have the same idea, the roads will most likely be a mess.
The brunt of New Jersey Transit’s disruptions will be felt by riders on the Midtown Direct lines. Except for a couple of early-morning trains, all routes on these lines will end in Hoboken. From there, commuters can get on a New York Waterway ferry, a PATH train or the New Jersey Transit No. 126 bus for no cost.
New Jersey Transit has created a guide specifically for the Morris and Essex lines: You can find that here. One piece of good news: Your rail tickets will be accepted on regularly scheduled New Jersey Transit buses, and even on some private bus carriers.
Important note: There will be no Morris and Essex trains leaving from Penn Station in the evening, so to take a train home, you will have to go to Hoboken.
Your trains will still end in Hoboken — but be ready for PATH trains and ferries to be swarmed with confused newcomers.
Rest easy: Your Penn Station-bound trains will still end up in Midtown. But be prepared for changes to the regular schedules, and delays, of course.
One caveat with the Northeast Corridor and North Jersey Coast lines: Trains that normally run to Hoboken will be routed to Newark Penn Station.
Trying to avoid the train altogether?
New Jersey Transit is increasing service on some of its most popular bus routes into New York City, particularly along the Morris and Essex lines. If your normal train commute is too hectic, it’s probably worth trying the bus. You can find more information on that here.
Good news for Acela Express riders: There will be no changes to your service, according to Amtrak.
On the Northeast Regional line, three round-trip trains between New York and Washington are canceled, although service between New York and Boston will be unaffected.
And on the Empire route, which connects New York City and cities upstate, three daily northbound and southbound trains will use Grand Central Terminal instead of Penn Station. You can see which trains will be affected here.
This story will be updated throughout the summer as routes change. Notice outdated information? Please let us know at callout@nytimes.com.