You’ve done it. The stage has been crossed, your cap has been thrown, and now, perhaps, your student loan grace period is officially counting down. But with your dorm packed up and college in the rearview mirror, you may be experiencing an unfamiliar disorientation.
Suddenly you’re the only person responsible for you — and that includes where you go, what you do, and crucially, how you pay for it. If you are feeling existential dread and wish someone had covered this phase of adulthood in a lecture, here are several podcasts to turn to for guidance.
Real Simple may be your mother’s favorite magazine, but they also have a podcast specifically for 20-somethings.
Each episode addresses an everyday dilemma that comes with being on your own for the first time. There are solutions to nearly any struggle you might encounter, like how to make friends after college, find a doctor you like, or cook something that isn’t frozen food. Some segments deal with less tangible challenges — the kind you may face if you move to a new city or are stuck on how to pursue your creative calling.
Is there a right way to take notes during a phone interview? Is your résumé hurting your job prospects?
This show covers everything there is to know about applying for the positions you want and plotting your career growth. Stephanie Dennis, a hiring recruiter based in Minneapolis, is very reassuring while she dispenses advice on how to find a mentor, negotiate a raise or receive feedback in a constructive way. Her insights make the world of work a lot more transparent.
Have you ever wondered: What exactly is a credit score?
On this podcast, Gaby Dunn, a co-host of the popular YouTube comedy series Just Between Us, asks all the basic questions a young college graduate might be too embarrassed to ask. In frank, uncomplicated and funny conversations with financial writers, psychologists, experts and other comedians, Dunn teases out the useful information you need on loans, medical bills, marriage, babies and, yes, even retirement. She asks the questions — “Are credit card rewards actually rewards, or just traps?” — so you’ll never have to.
In college, you can learn something new nearly every day. The real world is not always quite as dynamic. Enter nonfiction storytelling podcasts, which can be a fun introduction to new ideas and ways of thinking about the world.
A popular example is “99 Percent Invisible,” a show that explores how the man-made world affects how we live. The host, Roman Mars, reveals how design choices in architecture, technology and infrastructure shape society. The podcast is plenty playful, too, with detailed explanations of the history of silk tea bags, for example, or how inflatable tube men became a universal symbol for used cars lots.
The first episode of this show, hosted and produced by a young millennial, starts with the sounds of a commencement exercise — the perfect backdrop to a discussion about the existential dread of being handed a diploma without a clue about what comes next. The show’s creator, Megan Tan, uses her own growing pains to work through problems unique to those who graduated after the Great Recession. Many episodes, like “#37, Your Tax Return, Yourself,” explore a typical hurdle or professional milestone for people in their 20s through personal anecdotes. Find an episode that sounds relevant to an issue you’re having. You’ll feel seen.
To discover new podcasts each week, join The New York Times Podcast Club on Facebook.