Recruits at Parris Island have been subjected to severe hazing, far beyond that experienced in other U.S. military boot camps. Is this really the only way to create a warrior?
It was late at night on March 7, 2016, when Ghazala Siddiqui heard the phone ring and hurriedly reached for it, eager to hear the voice of her son. An indecipherable torrent of words spewed from the breathless caller.
The Siddiquis, who emigrated from Pakistan in the 1990s, hadn’t wanted their precious oldest child, and only boy, to join the Marines. Slender and unathletic, Raheel had always seemed most content designing video games on his computer. He graduated ninth in the class of 2014 from Taylor’s Harry S. Truman High School, a valedictorian with his pick of colleges, including a full academic scholarship to Michigan State. After months of deliberation, he decided on the University of Michigan’s Dearborn campus, where he enrolled in September 2014, lured by its new program in robotics engineering. But the following July, after his freshman year, Raheel drastically changed course, announcing to his family that he had decided to leave college and enlist in the Marines.
That call was the last time she heard her son’s voice.
Raheel Siddiqui was born and raised about 20 miles southwest of Detroit, in the vast suburban-industrial wasteland known as Downriver. There are three military recruiting stations in the area, once a hub of auto manufacturing which is now, like much of the Rust Belt, a region of Best Buys, Taco Bells and Walmarts. Taylor, a city of some 61,000 people, is both the largest and one of the poorest of the Downriver communities: a pocket of mostly white and African-American residents, nearly a quarter of whom live below the poverty line.
Military recruiters were fixtures at Truman High. The Marines, the most selective of the armed services, came to campus twice a week. ‘‘They targeted the kids that were more college-oriented and capable of being successful,’’ says Abraham, whose office was in the same building as the school’s R.O.T.C. program. They were also quick to reject students who failed to meet their standards, which include scores in the top third on the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (Asvab) test and no history of serious drug use, crime or tattoos that the Marines consider ‘‘undesirable.’’ Like many of his classmates, Raheel took the Asvab and scored high. With his talents, drive and rigid focus, he would very likely have struck recruiters as the ‘‘golden goose,’’ as one former Marine put it.
But the military never really interested Raheel. College was his goal. He polled his friends on Facebook: Where should he go for the most challenging engineering program? Michigan Tech? Michigan State? The University of Toledo? Raheel often crowdsourced big decisions. It wasn’t enough for him to choose; he had to make the best choice, says his classmate and friend Gabriel Goforth, who recalls that from time to time a squeaky anxiety would creep into Raheel’s voice. Failure seemed to terrify him. ‘‘He’d stress over the little things to make it perfect,’’ he says.
The University of Michigan-Dearborn was the most prestigious school to which Raheel applied, and in April 2014 he was accepted and given a $2,000 scholarship. It was not the full academic scholarship he was offered by Michigan State, but with the hefty financial aid he would receive, it was ‘‘technically a full free ride,’’ Raheel announced on Facebook. The assistance, however, came with strings: Should his grades dip below a C average, he wouldn’t receive any more money until they went back up.
‘‘I’m not fine,’’ Raheel texted back.
His solution, he told Pykor, was to withdraw from his classes and ‘‘start fresh’’ in the spring, which he did, finishing the semester with three As and a B. But as Pykor told me, withdrawing from his classes very likely meant Raheel would owe the University of Michigan the money it had given him to attend classes in the fall. It also could have jeopardized his aid package for the following year.
On June 16, 2015, Raheel posted on Facebook for the first time in a while. ‘‘I’m thinking about joining the military. Maybe the Marines.’’ Just three weeks later, on July 8, he signed his enlistment papers and entered the Marines’ Delayed Entry Program, which, lasting anywhere between a month and a year, is designed to stagger the number of recruits the corps can train at any one time. It’s also intended to indoctrinate ‘‘poolees,’’ as they are called, into the culture of the Marines. ‘‘The D.E.P. is all about selling the Kool-Aid,’’ says a lance corporal who also enlisted in the Marines in 2015, after his freshman year.  Like ‘‘ ‘Yeah, I’m always in my room playing Xbox,’ ‘There’s all this time to party’ ’’ — anything that will appeal to college kids.
Raheel spent close to eight months in the D.E.P. under the tutelage of his recruiter, who the Siddiquis said told them that Raheel was his most motivated poolee. Ghazala marveled at the changes in her son, who now woke each day at 4 a.m. to spend hours at the gym. Any doubts his mother had about his education were assuaged by Raheel’s own assurances: He said he had been told that he could continue his education while serving, and that, having chosen a technical specialty, working on Marine aircraft, he might not even have to fight unless he wanted to. (In fact, Marines I spoke to said it was nearly impossible to pursue an education during their first enlistment; once deployed, every Marine has to be prepared to fight if suddenly under attack.) At Raheel’s urging, Ghazala visited the recruiting office in Taylor, where she says that recruiters assured her that Raheel’s safety wouldn’t be an issue.
‘‘I feel like they’re really good at lying,’’ says the lance corporal, who was sold on the corps by recruiting videos that presented the Marines as ‘‘badasses’’ on humanitarian missions to save refugees or deliver food and water. Raheel told his parents that enlisting in the Marines would put him on the fast track to join the F.B.I., which, to their total surprise, had become his life’s dream. A few weeks before he left for boot camp, Raheel stopped by Truman to tell some of his old teachers about his plans. Abraham pressed him on his decision, but Raheel’s mind was made up.
There is an eeriness to Parris Island, particularly at night and early in the morning, when a dense mist rises from the swamps, twisting through the Spanish moss and drifting out toward the flat expanse of the base. Lying just off the South Carolina coast in Port Royal Sound, the island is four miles long and three miles wide, with 3,265 acres of dry land, surrounded by salt marsh. The base, which is one of two official Marine Corps training depots (its West Coast counterpart is in San Diego), is made up of a series of quads, each composed of identically nondescript barracks and administrative buildings ringing manicured fields. Overhead, a snaking maze of aboveground iron pipes pumps out whistling steam.
History, or what Marines call ‘‘knowledge,’’ lives on Parris Island. Everything about the place is an elegy to the corps, from the statue of Marines lifting the flag on Iwo Jima to the street names, each one its own small lesson: Boulevard de France, Cuba Street, Wake Boulevard, Saigon Drive. Inside the Recruit Chapel, a series of stained-glass windows depicts chapters of Marine heroism and sacrifice. In one, a platoon of Marines rests in the hand of God. In another, a ragtag band of soldiers and sailors stands before the gates of heaven guarded by stoic, crisply dressed Marines.
The Marines are America’s smallest conventional military force, with just 184,000 active-duty troops. They are also the military’s most insular warriors — with the possible exception of Navy SEALs — whose tight bond, or ‘‘esprit de corps,’’ grows out of the codes, traditions and reverence for suffering that Marines believe set them apart from civilians and all other military branches.
Central to this identity is the uniquely miserable experience of boot camp, where since World War II, as the historian Aaron O’Connell writes in his 2012 book, ‘‘Underdogs: The Making of the Modern Marine Corps,’’ ‘‘Recruits [have] learned in ways they would not forget that what made Marines exceptional was their ability to endure more pain than members of their sister services.’’ ‘‘Making’’ Marines, as the corps calls recruit training, is a three-part process, with boot camp being the first and most grueling test. Its purpose, unlike Army boot camp, is not to train war-fighters; for Marines, that comes in the second and third phases of training. Boot camp is meant to create the ‘‘warrior spirit,’’ as the corps puts it, over three months of group indoctrination intended to strip recruits of individuality and, through repeated exposure to pain and physical challenge, condition them to accept and perform violence.
The bedrock of Marine tradition is a long-ago era when buff, male and mostly white combat Marines launched amphibious early-morning assaults on enemy beaches armed with M1 rifles and Ka-Bar knives. Today’s far less homogeneous troops roll into battle in armored Humvees or tanks, with sophisticated high-powered weaponry and thermal-imaging goggles. Many never leave their base at all, waging war remotely while operating a joystick or writing code. In many ways, the Marines have become indistinguishable from the Army.
One misty night in December, I stood in front of a building on Parris Island called the ‘‘receiving barracks’’ and watched as a group of new, exceedingly young-looking recruits debarked from a bus and were immediately thrust into the alternate reality of the corps. A burly drill instructor in khaki, a wide-brimmed hat shading his face, approached. ‘‘GET ON THE YELLOW FOOTPRINTS!’’ he bellowed. The kids scurried to a long line of footprints painted on the asphalt leading up to the entrance, where, as the instructor commanded, they stood at attention. Then they streamed toward the building, up the few short steps and toward the silver hatches, a pair of large metal doors that only recruits are allowed to pass through, and only once, the day they arrive on the island.
Drill instructors, or D.I.s, are revered on Parris Island, where they roam the base with a special aura. ‘‘Nobody will counter them,’’ one senior Marine official told me. ‘‘Without them, there is no Parris Island.’’ Some D.I.s are not much older than the recruits. Only a small fraction have been to war. Almost all adopt the mien of an infantry grunt, though in truth, most D.I.s, like most Marines, aren’t combat troops but rather part of the corps’s expanding cast of supporting players: mechanics, air traffic controllers, technicians, clerks. Some Marines I spoke with described boot camp as a performance: The lead actors are the D.I.s, men and women who for the first time in their professional lives are embodying the macho warrior archetype they were taught to venerate as recruits.
To qualify for D.I. training, a Marine must have finished at least one term of enlistment and be given a clean psychological bill of health as determined by what the Marine officials insist is rigorous testing aimed at weeding out those Marines suffering from PTSD. They must also complete an 11-week drill-instructor school, where, as one former officer puts it, they are taught to ‘‘mold these guys into killers.’’ D.I. school, by all accounts, is almost as intense as boot camp. This is by design; every moment of a drill instructor’s schedule is tightly scripted and charted on what the corps calls its ‘‘training matrix.’’ ‘‘The system is very unforgiving on the D.I.,’’ says Gary Lee, a retired Marine sergeant major who helped design the training program in 1995. ‘‘They never get a break from their responsibilities.’’  Their voices croak with exhaustion and strain. They barely sleep.
In 1995, Charles Krulak became the commandant of the Marine Corps and decided this culture had to change. Krulak and his team came up with what they called the transformation process, which overhauled boot camp to incorporate an agenda based on the Marines’ ‘‘core values’’ — honor, courage, commitment — into every aspect of basic training. The goal, Krulak says, was to create ‘‘a smarter, more selfless, more adept and more educated Marine.’’ It channeled the violence of Marine Corps training into specific moments, the most important being the Crucible, a grueling 54-hour physical and psychological endurance test that comes at the end of the training cycle, and was intended as the final and, in Krulak’s mind, only arbiter of whether a recruit is ready to become a Marine.
In June 2014, Lt. Col. Kate Germano arrived at Parris Island to head up the Fourth Battalion, which trains the corps’s female recruits. She found a culture badly in need of reform. Two of her female drill instructors were facing courts-martial for mistreating recruits and, in one case, abusing other, lower-ranking drill instructors, a phenomenon known as ‘‘hat hazing.’’ Abuses toward the recruits included ethnic slurs, so-called hard corrections like pushing and shoving and refusing to give recruits bathroom breaks. Germano, who spent 2004 and 2005 as an adjutant and Marine Corps legal officer in Iraq, was so alarmed that she decided to give her subordinates a PowerPoint presentation on Abu Ghraib. ‘‘I saw a direct similarity between the culture in both places,’’ she says.
Germano believed that much of the failure rested with the depot’s regimental commander, Col. Daniel Haas, who had been at Parris Island since July 2013. (The Marines declined to make Colonel Haas available for a response.) Haas had a remote leadership style — ‘‘not the type of guy that will care and feed you,’’ one of his other battalion commanders later said — that clashed with Germano’s more hands-on approach, which included impromptu walk-throughs and counseling her subordinates to demand more of the female recruits to help them compete effectively with their male counterparts. While many of her Marines made changes, others perceived Ger­mano as meddlesome.
In April 2015, less than a year after coming to Parris Island and 11 months before Raheel’s arrival, Germano received the results of the battalion’s annual Command Climate Survey, in which lower-ranking officers and noncommanding officers evaluate their commanders. In her survey, Germano’s subordinates described her as ‘‘hostile, unprofessional and abusive.’’ Though Germano maintains she was none of those things, the commanding general of Parris Island relieved her of her command following an investigation.
Isolated in a remote corner of the depot, the Third had long been a rogue fief on Parris Island, its silent pact with Marine officialdom being that it would create the most disciplined recruits but would do so in its own way. It had operated in this manner for more than 60 years, and even in the era of values-based training, the Third was virtually unchanged.
Lt. Col. Joshua Kissoon, who commanded the Third Battalion while Germano was on the base, was a by-the-book Marine who publicly took a hard stance against hazing. Shortly after assuming command, he instituted a zero-tolerance policy on the touching of recruits by their D.I.s and put his staff on warning: Any violation of the rules would be investigated. Between 2013 and 2015, 221 preliminary hazing investigations were conducted across the depot’s four battalions; 69 of those were from the Third, and more were punished from that battalion than any other. This included three D.I.s who were recommended for courts-martial after an investigation first reported by Wade Livingston at The Beaufort Gazette in February 2015 revealed a ‘‘staggering level of misconduct and recruit abuse,’’ with recruits reporting that they were choked, kicked and punched in the face, and that they had their heads slammed against walls.
Some junior officers felt the D.I.s were being punished unfairly, though they themselves were never in the squad bays. (One later said his presence in the barracks ‘‘undermines’’ the drill instructors.) When Colonel Kissoon received the results of his own Command Climate Survey in April 2015, they were not much better than Germano’s. That spring, Kissoon began to take a softer line in some cases, according to Marines in the battalion. On his desktop, his subordinates later said, he kept a redacted copy of the command investigation that led to Germano’s firing. ‘‘This could happen to me,’’ he told colleagues.
It was into this environment of ‘‘inconsistent decision making,’’ as some of Kissoon’s officers put it, that a new group of Third Batallion recruits landed in April 2015. Most were straight out of high school. A few had been college students. Two had master’s degrees. Another had been living in his car. All now learned their survival depended on how they handled the cognitive dissonance between what they learned as official Marine Corps policy and how that policy was systematically ignored.
During the day, platoons were put through the standard exhaustive physical and tactical training, interspersed with classes or informal discussions on moral courage in battle. But the real making of Marines went on at night. When darkness fell, a D.I. would sometimes dump a bottle of Gain detergent on the floor and order recruits, both hands on their wooden scrub or ‘‘scuzz’’ brushes, to run across the length of the squad bay in a bear-crawl position, an exercise that they timed and called the Indy 500. Other nights, the drill instructors would create what they called a ‘‘hurricane’’ by dumping everyone’s things on the floor, sometimes covered with detergent, sunscreen or shaving cream. Over the months, recruits in the battalion lost consciousness, were revived and never told a soul. A few developed life-threatening rhabdomyolysis, a rapid breakdown of skeletal muscle tissue, often caused by overexertion.
‘‘Islam, sir,’’ Bourmeche replied.
The sergeant seemed intrigued. ‘‘There’s nothing wrong with recruit Bourmeche being a Muslim,’’ he said.
On July 14, 2015, Felix and several other D.I.s entered the squad bay in the middle of the night. It appeared they’d been drinking in the small office, or ‘‘D.I. hut,’’ at the far end of the barracks, where drill instructors on night duty sometimes slept. Felix was so drunk ‘‘he might not have known what he did the next day,’’ according to one member of Platoon 3054.
Bourmeche jumped down.
‘‘Column left!’’ Felix and another D.I. marched him into the shower room, where, as Bourmeche would later tell investigators, the drill instructors turned on the water and made him do push-ups, high-knees and crunches. Then, when he was thoroughly wet, they marched him into the laundry room.
‘‘Get in the dryer.’’ Bourmeche folded his six-foot, 157-pound frame into the Speed Queen. Felix said that the Marine Corps has ‘‘a way of weeding out spies.’’ He continued: ‘‘I’m going to find out who you really are.’’ Then he closed the door.
‘‘Who are you working for?’’ Felix called.
‘‘Nobody, sir!’’ Bourmeche answered.
Felix ran the dryer for half a minute and opened it.
Inside the dryer, Bourmeche began to cry. His neck and shoulder were burned.
‘‘No, sir,’’ Bourmeche answered.
Another D.I. shook his head. ‘‘We let a full-blood terrorist join the corps,’’ he said. Afterward, no one said a word. What happens on Parris Island stays on Parris Island — that had been the message all through boot camp.
Over the next few months, Weaver tried to push what he experienced to the back of his mind, but it was always there. He had believed the Marines was an ethical organization. Then a D.I. bashed his head against a wall for seemingly no reason. And another, after asking if he was a devout Christian, taunted him: ‘‘Say ‘goddamn.’ ’’ That fall, Weaver, then in his last phase of training in Pensacola, Fla., suffered a breakdown and was hospitalized with suicidal thoughts.
When the investigators submitted their findings to Cucinotta in January 2016, the training regiment’s executive officer, Lt. Col. Christopher Lynch, found the evidence persuasive enough to recommend that those involved be ‘‘sat down’’ or suspended from their duties. Cucinotta later claimed he agreed. (‘‘We disagree with Colonel Cucinotta’s testimony,’’ says Kissoon’s attorney, Colby Volkey.) As of February, however, none of those implicated in the investigation had been suspended. Four months after the hazing reports, Gunnery Sgt. Joseph Felix returned to the Third Battalion and assumed the title of senior drill instructor, this time for Platoon 3042, Kilo Company.
Raheel Siddiqui debarked from the bus on the night of March 7, 2016. It was late, and he was tired, unsure of what came next. He moved onto the yellow footprints, through the silver hatches and into the chaos and sleep deprivation that would define his first 96 hours on Parris Island. Four days later, a day traditionally known as Black Friday (even though in this case it was a Saturday), Raheel was assigned to Platoon 3042, arriving with the 60 or so other newly shorn and outfitted recruits at Kilo Company’s three-story red brick barracks. His squad bay, a cavernous room with beige-green walls and floors shiny from excessive scrubbing, was on the top floor.
As the recruits sat crossed-legged, Sergeant Felix stepped forward. ‘‘I am your senior drill instructor,’’ he said with the signature barking cadence D.I.s use to exert their authority, and then began his scripted pledge. He promised to treat them with ‘‘firmness, fairness, dignity and compassion,’’ and informed them that abuse would not be tolerated.
On the morning of March 13, less than 24 hours after being picked up by his platoon, Raheel announced to his D.I.s that he’d rather die than continue training. He would jump out the squad-bay window if he had to.
When a recruit threatens suicide, everything stops. At first the D.I.s tried to reason with Raheel: What would his mother think were he to come home without becoming a Marine?  ‘‘The future does not matter.’’ The Marines took Raheel’s belt and boot laces to prevent him from strangling himself.
Suicide threats are common during the early weeks of boot camp, though how many are serious is unclear. ‘‘Everyone knows saying you’re suicidal is a ticket off Parris Island,’’ Raheel’s platoonmate says. Sickness or broken bones, on the other hand, will get a recruit a long stint in medical, after which they will simply be assigned to another company and start training all over again.
Base officials determined Raheel didn’t qualify for emergency transport to the hospital. Instead, he was ‘‘cross-decked’’: They moved him, still without laces or a belt, to another platoon’s squad bay. Over the next 24 hours, he sat there cross-legged on a mattress in the middle of the room while a ‘‘shadow watch’’ of recruits shined a flashlight on his face and took turns monitoring him around the clock. At some point during this period, Raheel, who had to request permission to leave the mattress to use the bathroom, recanted his suicide threat and said he’d decided he wanted to be a Marine.
The next morning, Felix escorted Raheel to recruit liaison services, an office set up to ascertain if recruits had enlisted fraudulently (such as by failing to disclose a history of suicidal ideation), and to motivate struggling recruits to return to training. Drill instructors who accompany recruits to these sessions usually sit in a waiting area, but Felix ‘‘stood about 10 feet away,’’ according to the report, while Raheel provided what was referred to as a ‘‘voluntary statement’’ retracting his threat. ‘‘This recruit thought it was the only way to quit,’’ he said. ‘‘This recruit never meant that and regrets it.’’ The base’s mental-health unit deemed him to be at a ‘‘low risk for harm,’’ and Raheel went back to training.
It would be noted later, in the Marines’ report, that Raheel, shortly after saying he wanted to kill himself, confided to the military police who were going to escort him to the hospital that he ‘‘could not handle’’ being hit by his drill instructors. The allegation was noted and disregarded several times by what appeared to be several officials.
In reviewing the incidents of that week, the Marines made no mention of the four days after Raheel resumed training. His platoonmate, though, recalls them as torture. As one report noted, Platoon 3042’s senior drill instructor ‘‘taught his subordinate drill instructors that in order to be successful at training recruits, they needed to ‘hate recruits.’ ’’ They were called ‘‘bitches,’’ ‘‘faggots,’’ ‘‘maggots,’’ ‘‘little bitches,’’ ‘‘pussies’’ and ‘‘retards.’’ A Russian-born recruit was called ‘‘the Russian,’’ or ‘‘the cosmonaut,’’ and was asked if he was a Russian spy. Raheel was called a terrorist. Felix asked on one occasion if he needed his turban.
His platoonmate, who had been quietly making his bed and trying to stay out of the D.I.s’ line of sight, watched Raheel running back and forth. Suddenly Raheel grabbed his throat, crying, and fell to the floor. Some recruits thought he was faking. ‘‘I don’t know if he did it willingly, I don’t know if he was just exhausted, but he dropped,’’ the platoonmate says.
At this point, reports differ. Raheel appeared to be unconscious. A D.I. claimed he rubbed his knuckles across Raheel’s sternum to revive him. Other recruits and drill instructors say that never happened. The platoonmate I interviewed recalls seeing Raheel, on the floor, clutching his throat. Leaning over, Felix slapped him across the face. Five feet away, Raheel’s platoonmate thought at first the D.I. was ‘‘acting like an emergency responder,’’ trying to revive him. But then he slapped him again, so hard that the sound echoed across the squad bay.
An air ambulance was requested to take Raheel to a hospital in Savannah, Ga., 40 miles away, but the request was denied because of heavy fog. A second air lift was scuttled, and so Marines drove him to Beaufort Memorial Hospital, where after an hour of sustained effort in the emergency room, doctors decided Raheel needed higher-level care. Three hours after his fall, he arrived at the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston. It was too late: At 10:06, after more than an hour of attempts to save his life, Raheel was pronounced dead.
The following day, an autopsy was performed at the hospital. The medical examiner concluded that Raheel died of blunt-force trauma sustained during his fall. But the autopsy report, details of which were shown to me by the Siddiqui family, also found evidence of petechial hemorrhaging, which can be caused by anything from heavy coughing to vomiting or asphyxiation and strangulation. Several days later, J. Edward Allen, the Beaufort County coroner, wrote a final autopsy report concluding that ‘‘in light of the history provided and the autopsy findings,’’ Raheel had committed suicide.
A week after Raheel died, his body was sent back to his parents in Michigan. At the funeral home, the family stared down in horror at their son. His arms, chest, stomach and legs were purple. There were ligature marks, not unlike the ridges of a webbed military belt, around his neck, which had not been mentioned in the autopsy report. To Ghazala it looked as if her son had been tortured.
In Beaufort, a city with three military installations that collectively pump over $1.5 billion into the local economy, the news that a Marine recruit had died on Parris Island was met with studied silence. ‘‘Marine Corps boot camp isn’t the Boy Scouts,’’ one reader posted on the Facebook page of The Beaufort Gazette, which broke the story on March 20. ‘‘Stay home if you can’t handle some hazing.’’ Hazing had not been mentioned publicly at this point, but in Detroit, the Siddiquis’ Democratic congresswoman, Representative Debbie Dingell, heard through an anonymous tip that religious bias might have played a role in Raheel’s death. In April, Dingell wrote to the Marine commandant, Gen. Robert Neller, asking that an ‘‘unbiased inquiry’’ be made into the matter. Dingell recently told me that soon after she wrote the letter, she received anonymous calls telling her to stay out of Marine business. ‘‘Some of my own colleagues warned me, ‘You don’t want to challenge the Marines on their training methods,’ ’’ she said.
The official investigation into the death of Raheel Siddiqui lasted over a year and spawned two other investigations: a more thorough examination of the hazing allegations in the Bourmeche case and a broader hazing inquiry requested in spring 2016 by the Obama White House, after the president received an anonymous email from unnamed ‘‘concerned loved ones of innocent recruits’’ claiming their children were being abused.
On Sept. 8, 2016, the Marine Corps released the findings of these investigations. That same day, the corps announced that 20 Marines — including, it was later revealed, three teams of drill instructors, several junior officers, Kissoon and the depot’s new regimental commander, Col. Paul Cucinotta — had been relieved of duty and faced punishment pending the results of further investigation. (In early June, Kissoon appeared before the military’s version of a grand jury, and he is still awaiting charges. Six Marines, representing much of the chain of command, were granted immunity or other considerations to testify against him, according to Kissoon’s lawyer.) The reports were heavily redacted; in the 132-page command inquiry into Raheel’s death, the last 43 pages were entirely blacked out.
Of those involved in the three investigations, just six Marines have been formally charged with wrongdoing. Four Marines — one of whom was acquitted at trial, another who pleaded guilty, a third who made ‘‘a pretrial agreement with prosecutors,’’ according to a Marine spokesman, and a fourth who faces a general court-martial — had charges levied against them for abuse-related incidents elsewhere in Lima Company. Felix and another drill instructor, Staff Sgt. Michael Eldridge, were charged with a range of offenses including cruelty and maltreatment, drunk and disorderly conduct and failure to obey a general order. In Felix’s case, the charges also included obstruction of justice stemming from the dryer incident involving Bourmeche and the hazing of Raheel. Both face general courts-martial later this summer.
When I visited the Siddiquis’ small apartment late last fall, Ghazala, wearing jeans and a sparkly blue hijab, showed me photographs she took of her son’s body at the funeral home. ‘‘Why would they do this to my son?’’ she said, distraught, pausing over a photograph of Raheel’s neck. Taking me upstairs, she led me into his room, which was spotless, almost antiseptic, a shrine to a sometimes mischievous yet fundamentally obedient boy who prayed at least four times a day, dressed in colorful shirts and smiled so much and so often that those who knew him could never imagine him being depressed. Ghazala showed off Raheel’s academic awards and his orange Home Depot apron inscribed with good-luck messages written by every one of his colleagues. The dress-blue uniform he would have worn upon graduating boot camp hung in his closet, neatly pressed. The Marines had dressed Raheel’s body in it. ‘‘He was brainwashed,’’ Ghazala said, wiping away a tear. ‘‘He’s smart, intelligent, beautiful, excellent boy. Perfect. I am so proud of my son.’’ Ghazala spoke of him in the present tense.
No one from the family has agreed to be interviewed since last winter. ‘‘Their son is gone, there are no answers and they’re suffering,’’ says Khan, who told me that his office has received only 20 or so of about 220 pages they’ve requested from the investigation, and have had very little direct discussion with the Marines. For the most part, he says, they have learned about any progress in the case by reading the newspapers.
The island’s new commanding general, Austin Renforth, known as Sparky, who took control several months after Raheel’s death, insists they are rooting out the problem. Under his watch, officers play a more active role in supervising drill instructors, something many officials believe is essential to reforming the culture. Renforth, though, insists the problems on Parris Island aren’t cultural. ‘‘This place is such a fishbowl — when someone does something wrong it gets national attention, but it’s not systemic,’’ he says. That said, he allowed, ‘‘I have to make sure it never happens again.’’ Renforth doesn’t explain how he plans to do this, other than to say he wants everyone involved in making Marines to have ‘‘buy-in,’’ as he puts it.
Renforth is the epitome of a combat Marine: graduate of the U.S. Naval Academy, commander during the first gulf war and the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, son of a World War II veteran who himself went through boot camp on Parris Island in 1941. This is his first training command, and he says he was surprised that many of his D.I.s were not combat vets. A year ago, in the very beginning of his tenure, Renforth, who has five children, considered reaching out to Ghazala and Massood. He changed his mind. ‘‘I just didn’t feel it was my place,’’ he says.
