To get a handle on the party’s sheer enormousness, it was best to ascend the breezy battlements of the four-story, castlelike structure. High-definition projectors beamed pink and purple images on the fortress walls. Rays of light sliced through fog like Bat signals. And a sea of tiny heads, as big as a city block, bobbed beneath palm trees and airborne KV2 Audio speakers.
This was not Las Vegas, Miami or Zrce beach in Croatia. A quick westward glance revealed the tip of the Empire State Building glowing like a cigarette cherry.
After a year of false starts and legal imbroglios, the contentious nightclub Brooklyn Mirage opened last Saturday as a huge, architecturally ambitious destination for deep house and techno parties.
It is the outdoor component of Avant Gardner, an 80,000-square-foot development at 140 Stewart Avenue in an industrial corridor of the East Williamsburg neighborhood, a few grubby blocks from Queens. By fall, a warehouse (now filled with sacks of cement mix and construction equipment) will be transformed into an event space. Another area will become a 5,000-square-foot club. All told, it will hold 6,000 visitors.
“People think we’re trying to open a nightclub, but that’s not economically viable,” said Simar Singh, the head of strategy, marketing and development for Cityfox Experience, the party promotion company behind Avant Gardner. Along with raves, he said, the space could host corporate bookings, fashion shows, weddings and film screenings. “I want to do ‘Big Lebowski’ and make a Facebook invite for thousands of people,” he said.
Just before Brooklyn Mirage’s opening, Mr. Singh strolled the labyrinthine premises, past droning saws, extension cords and garbage-scented wafts emanating from a nearby junkyard. He pointed to a neon sign that read: “If Not Us, Who? If Not Now, When?” “After some of the things that happened last year, I found it quite inspirational,” he said.
In April, after intensive lobbying efforts, the New York State Liquor Authority granted Avant Gardner a liquor license despite a unanimous vote of opposition from the local community board, which chafed at plans for serving alcohol outdoors after 1 a.m. “You have a lot of regulations, but we have the same ones in Switzerland,” said Philipp Wiederkehr, a founder of Avant Gardner and Cityfox Experience, which began in Zurich.
The opening on Saturday faced a different threat: thunderstorms. But after organizers distributed hundreds of plastic ponchos, the skies cleared and a double rainbow appeared.
Darkness fell and the courtyard swarmed with revelers in floppy hats and floral shirts. Stephan Bodzin, a bald and bespectacled techno D.J., blended tracks as lights cascaded across walls carved with geometric patterns. The club’s mammoth scale provided a sense of freedom and displacement nearly impossible to find in Manhattan.
The crowd was an array of music nerds, hippie-fied Burning Man devotees, models with glittery faces, unrepentant man-bun enthusiasts, weekend warriors and juiced-up Eastern Europeans who looked like middleweight boxers. They bounced with bottles of Voss, queued up for $8 Stella Artois, communed in hidden antechambers, meditated in solitude, ate falafel and slipped into dark corners.
To breed a sense of exclusivity, the company recently introduced an app, Collective Visionnaire, with discounted pricing ($40 to $80) and limited invitations. “Some people might not know about techno, but this is where you should be,” said Erica Hartshorne, a marketing manager for an organic farm who lives in South Jersey. She was wearing feline ears. “I like cats,” she said.
