I didn’t buy a smartphone until I was forced to in 2013, when my ancient flip was put out of its misery by a spilled can of Vanilla Coke. As a new convert, I quickly came to believe my phone would soon improve my life. I began downloading apps that promised to make me better: more organized, better read, more cultured. I was convinced I could swipe my way to self-improvement.
Eventually, I learned about Duolingo, which turns the complex task of learning a new language into something like a video game. Users start by picking the language they want to study (there are currently 23 options available for English speakers, from Swahili to Welsh), after which they’re greeted with about 100 vocabulary and grammar ‘‘skills,’’ structured like a tree. Finish a skill, and you’re rewarded with a dopamine burst in the form of points. Then you do another one.
I did a couple of French lessons, which took all of five minutes. It was easy, and I was smitten by the possibilities. Maybe I’ll even take up German, I thought as I started the second lesson. I would become cosmopolitan and sophisticated, skipping across Europe and impressing local shopkeepers with my breezy fluency wherever I went. Maybe I would learn to differentiate among various wursts. Anything felt possible.
Of course, I soon lost interest and stopped using Duolingo, or for that matter, any apps that weren’t Instagram or Tinder. (Turns out, self-improvement apps are way more engaging when you’re just using them to distract yourself from other problems.) Then, one night, I couldn’t sleep. I tried reading a book, then I tried scrolling through the Facebook profiles of people I hadn’t talked to since high school, but neither worked. Soon it was 3 a.m., and I was still awake, but now I was also full of self-loathing.  For the first time in two years, I opened my Duolingo app, and I decided I wanted to learn Dutch.
By the time I finally fell asleep that night, I had completed the initial branches in the Dutch course tree. I could read useful phrases like ‘‘Goedemorgen, hoe gaat het?’’ (‘‘Good morning, how are you?’’) and useless ones like ‘‘De neushoorn heeft een hoorn en een staart’’ (‘‘The rhinoceros has a horn and a tail’’). The next day, I caught myself wading through the spiteful comments on a gossip blog and stopped to practice Dutch plurals instead.
The app eventually became a type of productive therapy, replacing other time-wasters in my life. Can’t sleep? Let’s learn more Dutch. In the mood to text an ex? Maybe I should start the Danish course instead. Fighting the urge to tweet that ill-thought-out opinion on current events? You’ll feel so much better reviewing Dutch prepositions.
I liked how structured it was, that I could measure my progress in terms of winning points and completing levels and outdoing my friends. I am a frustratingly left-brained person: I take comfort in things that can be quantified. But more than that, though the points gave me a sort of rush similar to getting a stack of Instagram likes, it never felt like an empty thrill. I had finally committed to a self-improvement project, and every time I leveled up in a language, I felt I was one step closer to fluency. I became obsessed.
Six months later, I was at a street festival in Toronto. I walked by a booth where a woman was selling stroopwafels, and I overheard what I hadn’t yet heard outside Duolingo: Dutch. I was only a few lessons away from finishing my course. I approached the booth, eager to try out what I’d learned. ‘‘Hoe gaat het?’’ I said, suddenly aware of my heavy Canadian accent warping the words. She just stared straight back at me and said: ‘‘Excuse me?’’ I quickly shuffled away.
Learning a language to fluency requires discipline, frequent practice, ideally immersion — much more than a simple language-learning game can offer. That’s fine, though. Fluency stopped being my goal a while ago, when I realized that trying to master several different foreign languages in the span of a few months would only be another stress-inducing, insurmountable project, exactly the sort of thing that led me to seek distractions in the first place. 
Any online time-waster offers an escape from the world, often by preying on your worst instincts: envy, pettiness, poor impulse control. But Duolingo offered an escape that made me feel connected to the better parts of the world, and of myself. I may not have become a globe-trotting polyglot, but language learning did trigger a curiosity into other lives lived. My phone hadn’t made me a better person, exactly, but at least it didn’t make me worse.
It took me about two weeks to make it through the Swedish course earlier this year — helped, of course, by never having to speak it out loud. To celebrate, I found a stream of ‘‘The Devil’s Eye,’’ the film by Ingmar Bergman. Five minutes in, I realized I couldn’t understand a word they were saying. I turned on English subtitles and watched the rest of the movie, phone comfortably in hand.