PARIS — On Sunday, the immigrants arrived.
They had left their former show homes — in the ready-to-wear season — in search of inspiration and aesthetic meaning (and commercial growth), hoping to find it in the hallowed frame of the first day of the Paris haute couture shows. From New York came Proenza Schouler. From London by way of Milan, Peter Dundas. From California, Rodarte.
And although couture has a reputation as the most traditional of all fashion forms, rule-bound and elitist, they were welcomed. Sometimes personally: Mr. Dundas, who left his post as creative director of Roberto Cavalli in October, held the debut of his namesake brand in a friend’s private home, built in the 17th century and filled with tapestries and antiques.
“We’ve never had anything like this here,” one of the owners said, seemingly not worried about the possibility that Champagne glasses sweating in the late afternoon sun might leave rings on mahogany side tables, nor about the risk of someone spilling something on the zebra-pattern needlepoint seat of an armchair from Versailles. It turns out President Emmanuel Macron is not the only new breath of fresh air.
And did the foreigners live up to the promise?
What they brought to the runway wasn’t couture, officially or otherwise, and they didn’t pretend it was — in the case of Proenza Schouler, it combined resort and spring 2018 ready-to-wear; for Rodarte, spring ready-to-wear; for Dundas, 2018 resort (and yes, this is the couture fall 2017 season, but it has become almost impossible to keep track of which designer is showing what or when — as good an argument as any for abandoning the pointless nomenclature). It didn’t involve the same level of handwork as couture, or employ the same number of artisans.
But at their best, these outsider collections had a clear connection to the idea of couture, an aspiration to that level of creation that was not pretentious (thank goodness), but palpable. And that had its own currency.
Certainly, this was true of Rodarte, where the almost cinematic sartorial fantasies of the sisters Kate and Laura Mulleavy, which sometimes seemed overblown and undisciplined in New York, had a new rigor in the leafy, rose-strewn courtyard of a 17th-century cloister. It was as if the setting — romantic and historic and timeless as it was — took some of the pressure off the clothes, and allowed viewers to simply glory in the details of their twisted prettiness as opposed to drowning in it.
Sheer frocks in swiss dot and tulle had skirts cut by an asymmetric ruffle falling below the knee; cropped motorcycle leather jackets were studded in pearls, as were the matching low-slung motocross pants; and feather coats came in bird of paradise shades. Tea dresses bristled with three-dimensional posies of baby’s breath, and negligee gowns cut on the bias bloomed with embroidered poppy appliqués. To leaven the fragility, there were big metallic bow cuffs and leather stiletto boots. The Mulleavys may have taken flight to France, but they, and their clothes, are still grounded in the New World, just to the east of kitsch.
And the connection was true of Proenza Schouler, where the designers Jack McCollough and Lazaro Hernandez cross-fertilized their past signatures (leather halters, peekaboo slicing, asymmetry, collage) with a certain French classicism, so that the basics of old couture — corsets and smoking jackets and intricate handwork — were knocked off their pedestals into the mosh pit.
They proceeded to shimmy and shake to their own easy tune. Oversize white jackets were given a nipped-in abstracted black waist and were paired with elongated slit skirts or flared lace trousers; skinny knits were tamped down by wrapped leather bra tops. Sleeveless sheer stretch jersey was layered over skirts composed of tiers of minute tulle ruffles, or dripped a single ruffle from neck to thigh. There were flapper dresses with seams picked out in hook-and-eye closures orbited by feather rings, and floral lace strung from tiny ribbon roses. They may have been complicated to make, but they looked slouchy.
Unfortunately, however, the connection was less true of the Dundas collection. Though Mr. Dundas said, backstage in a room piled with books, that he had come to Paris because it was where he learned fashion, and that he had his show in his friends’ home because it was “personal,” his first collection felt more like a greatest hits retread of his time at Cavalli and, before that, Pucci (and before that, Ungaro), than like a fresh start with a honed vision.
From sequin sweatshirt dresses splashed with a leaping panther to billowing caftan gowns, Lurex-embroidered silks cut long and flowing at the back and thigh-high at the front, faded denim mixed with leopard fur and fussy ruched taffeta or sheer cocktail frocks trailing long neon bright bows at the back, he’s been here before.
Mr. Dundas observed that the 28 looks were “what I’m into,” which he summed up as “the palace of Versailles meets Le Palace” (the famous Paris club of the late ’70s and early ’80s). Fair enough. But when a designer turns to his past work for inspiration, ideally it is to make it relevant for a new day and for an ever-evolving woman, rather than simply to repeat — to prove he knows it so intimately, he knows where it is going next. Emphasis on the last word.
The group has lowered its barriers to entry. As couture week began, that provided not only an injection of energy, but perhaps a lesson — both for those inside the industry and beyond.