Shabazz Palaces, the avant-hip-hop project of Ishmael Butler, releases a pair of allusive concept albums today: “Quazarz: Born on a Gangster Star” and its sequel, “Quazarz Vs. the Jealous Machines.”  The rappers’ tone is calmly matter-of-fact; the track is a slow, sparse but jumpy layering of cowbells and drum machines. The rap boasts that it was “recorded with tape hiss,” matching a video clip using glitchy VHS images: gateway to an analog dystopia. J.P.
Katie Crutchfield, the songwriter behind Waxahatchee, summons indie-rock guitar muscle on Waxahatchee’s album released today, “Out in the Storm.” She distills all the right lessons from bands like the Pixies and the Breeders in “Never Been Wrong,” a fierce and tuneful counter-strike against somebody’s mind games. Guitars, strumming and keening, rally behind her, fall away and rally again as she confronts both her antagonist and her own self-consciousness: “Everyone will hear me complain,” she proclaims in a cappella vocal harmonies. “Everyone will pity my pain.” J.P.
Kllo is Chloe Kaul and Simon Lam, cousins from Melbourne, Australia, and “Virtue” is a sterling new single from their album, “Backwater,” due in October. Ms. Kaul has an oozy, aspirated voice, and smears it tactfully atop Mr. Lam’s euphoric, quick-stepping production, which bridges fiery garage and joyous disco. J.C.
This electric collaboration between Brooklyn’s Fabolous, who’s been making other people’s songs his own for well over a decade, and the Bronx newcomer A Boogie Wit Da Hoodie pilfers the tropical chill of DJ Khaled, Rihanna and Bryson Tiller’s “Wild Thoughts” (which in turn pilfers the tropical chill of Santana’s “Maria Maria”). Both rappers are vivid. “You used to be my baby/Remember when you used to wear my chain and my bracelets,” A Boogie raps in his trademark floaty croon, followed by Fabolous, who warns, “Just ’cause I play it mellow, don’t think you can trade me.” J.C.
Declan McKenna, an 18-year-old English songwriter, seeks to be a nothing less than a voice for his generation on his debut album released today — "What Do You Think About the Car?" Musically, he’s got a strong throwback streak, from his reedy John Lennon-Liam Gallagher vocals to his melodic, midtempo guitar-strumming Britpop productions (abetted by James Ford of Simian Mobile Disco). “Humongous” is a song about being ignored and swept aside; it comes down to the question posed in its chorus: “Do you care?,” though it also holds some generational self-criticism: “I swear/You spend too much time on your phone and your hair.” And its last stretch — suddenly faster, compressed and frantically synthetic — insists that Mr. McKenna knows he can’t simply look back. J.P.
The only type of production mid-to-late-career Snoop Dogg should be rapping over is the sort the indie-rap survivor Count Bass D gives him here: luscious, velvety, soothing, slow funk. When inspired, Snoop is a sinuous rapper, seeking the comfort of a warm pocket, of which there are many here. J.C.
There are dozens of fabulous postbop bass players just beneath the radar. Until very recently, bassists have rarely led their own bands; their Rolodexes tend to be bigger than their renown. Gerald Cannon is one of those guys. He has put in years working with jazz heroes like Elvin Jones, Roy Hargrove and, most recently, McCoy Tyner, but has hardly led his own groups. Something happens, though, when an artist used to getting his point across subtly, from below, steps up. “Combinations,” the title track from Mr. Cannon’s new album, bears a distant resemblance to “Tricotism,” the bassist Oscar Pettiford’s classic composition; both are multipartite, tightly swinging tunes, with tilting and twining melodies. As the alto saxophonist Gary Bartz, the trumpeter Duane Eubanks and the pianist Kenny Barron take solo turns, Mr. Cannon swings buoyantly, raising the stakes here and there with an unanticipated break or a slide down the bass’s neck. His own solo plays games with the melody; it’s packed with energy, and pulls back the shroud on the piece’s sense of humor. G.R.