Girls gone wild, ladies on the loose, chicks out for kicks — the spectacle of women behaving badly is having its moment (again). In the 1930s, runaway brides ran amok with banter and high jinks; in the 1940s, femmes fatales did their men wrong with lipstick sneers and a bullet to the heart. The latest iteration of this type of movie often skews comic and generally involves a group of gal pals getting together for some “we time.” They find trouble and, here’s hoping, their bliss amid oceans of booze and maybe drugs, sometimes in the company of men, who are alternately helpful or hapless.
The affably amusing, sometimes spittingly funny comedy “Girls Trip” recycles much of the same naughty women idea used and occasionally abused in movies like “Bad Moms” and “Sisters.” As in the recent “Rough Night,” the women in “Girls Trip” are old college friends who, after going down their respective paths, are reuniting for better and, at times, for worse. In “Rough Night,” the regulation naughtiness ends up with the women, who are mostly white, accidentally (uh-oh) killing a man. That isn’t on the menu for the black women in “Girls Trip,” who, despite being fictional also exist in our world and so presumably would have a much harder time giggling their way out of spilling blood.
That makes “Girls Trip” seem tamer than a movie like “Rough Night.” But “Girls Trip” is also funnier; it’s also more appealing because it knows that there’s more at stake existentially for women, and especially for black women, than out-grossing men. The friends in “Girls Trip” have other issues to work on, all of which are grounded in ordinary life: how to live in the world with love and joy, how to nurture intimate relationships so they don’t slip away, how to balance professional and personal obligations without going nuts, how to perform fairly tricky sexual acts without embarrassing you or your partner right out of bed — you know, the usual.
An invitation brings the friends and story in “Girls Trip” together. It’s sent by Ryan (Regina Hall), an entrepreneurial self-help guru who is rapidly heading toward Oprah-level celebrity. With a megawatt smile, an affirmation for every occasion and a beautiful husband by her side (a thankless role, capably handled by Mike Colter), Ryan seems to have it all. She’s turned her life into a brand by selling other women on the idea that they can have it all, too, but now she’s not so sure. After being tapped to speak at the Essence Festival in New Orleans, she invites three friends along for a weekend of sharing, caring and boozing, topped with guest turns from the likes of Common and Sean Combs.
Enjoyment turns out to be contagious in “Girls Trip,” which consistently manages to rework and even reinvigorate some severely worn-out conceits, setups and character types, mostly by complicating gender roles with class issues. The struggler is Sasha (Queen Latifah), a former serious journalist turned flailing gossip blogger; the wallflower, Lisa (Jada Pinkett Smith), is a nurse and single mom; the cutup, Dina (Tiffany Haddish), well, it’s unclear what she does. She works, kind of, in an office or did — even her boss seems baffled about her status — but mostly Dina is the crazy snake in the can, the whoopee in the cushion and the movie’s biggest, rowdiest laugh generator.
Like most movies of this comic ilk, including the male-centric “Hangover” types, “Girls Trip” is effectively a narrative striptease. Characters — mostly ordinary, straight, middle-class types — take some of it off, the “it” being the cultural and social norms that define and often restrict them: the veneer of respectability, the accommodating smiles, the regulation control. At times this involves female characters testing, gingerly if fleetingly, the limits of that construct called femininity. “Girls Trip” adds complexity to the picture by bringing in class, even as it dispatches with whiteness, showing it the door so that these women can find themselves while rediscovering the power and pleasures of sisterhood.