John Vasilopoulos and Nick Tragaras stood before an assembly line of egg sandwiches. Mr. Tragaras slid the eggs and bacon from the griddle onto the buns as Mr. Vasilopoulos followed to wrap and stack.
It was a familiar rhythm for the owners of Cup & Saucer, a diner on the eastern edge of Manhattan’s Chinatown. But on Monday afternoon, after more than 70 years, the clink of metal spatulas flipping eggs and bacon will quiet for the last time as Cup & Saucer closes its doors.
“We really care about every customer who comes in; we get involved with them,” Mr. Vasilopoulos, 55, said over the weekend from behind the doughnut display as the narrow corridor of counter space filled up.
From that perch, he and Mr. Tragaras, 52, have watched the neighborhood ebb and flow over their 30 years of ownership. The family jewelry and wholesale shops that once dominated the area are long gone, and more expensive restaurants and bars have moved in. This time, Mr. Vasilopoulos and Mr. Tragaras said, the rent increase was too steep for Cup & Saucer.
Mr. Vasilopoulos and Mr. Tragaras have owned the restaurant since 1988, but Cup & Saucer has occupied the space since the early 1940s, Mr. Vasilopoulos said. In March, they learned their $8,200 a month lease would increase by $7,600 per month. Attempts to negotiate with the landlord, 99 Canal Realty, failed, they said.
Two calls to 99 Canal Realty seeking comment were disconnected last week.
As the news spread that the greasy spoon would be closing, the diner was inundated with well-wishers.
Haifa Olsen moved to the neighborhood a year ago from London and went to Cup & Saucer weekly for blueberry pancakes.
The diner sits just off the entrance to the Manhattan Bridge along the border of Chinatown and the Lower East Side, at the corner of Eldridge and Canal Streets. It opened in the early 1940s, when the area was dominated by immigrant families and businesses. It has had three sets of owners, Mr. Vasilopoulos said.
Both he and Mr. Tragaras are from Greece and immigrated in their youth. Mr. Vasilopoulos’s brother is married to Mr. Tragaras’s sister. They now live in Astoria, Queens, “with the other Greeks,” Mr. Vasilopoulos said.
Through it all, the diner, including the décor, has remained reliably the same.
And the customers returned again and again.
Dan Teran worked on Eldridge Street for six years before his office moved to the SoHo neighborhood of Manhattan. He came back for one last breakfast.
In their 30 years of working together, Mr. Vasilopoulos and Mr. Tragaras stuck to one rule: Mr. Tragaras worked the line, and Mr. Vasilopoulos stayed at the front of the diner.
The owners plan to take the summer off to regroup and possibly look for another space.
“We have to do something,” Mr. Vasilopoulos said.