JACKSONVILLE, Fla. — Blake Bortles felt as though Jacksonville’s offense wasted a dominant defensive performance last week.
Bortles threw two touchdown passes, including a 67-yarder to Donte Moncrief, and the Jaguars’ offense gave the defense plenty of help in a 31-12 victory over the Jets on Sunday. Bortles ended up with a career-high 388 yards passing, topping 375 yards for the second time in three games.
The defense “played incredible again today,” Bortles said.
He found T. J. Yeldon wide open for a 31-yard score in the second quarter and then beat a blitz with the deep pass to Moncrief down the sideline.
 The Jaguars had three turnovers that led to 9 points for the Jets.
The Jets’ rookie quarterback, Sam Darnold, was harassed early and often, getting sacked three times and nearly throwing three interceptions. Tashaun Gipson’s pick was overturned by a holding penalty on the other side of the field, and the Pro Bowl cornerbacks A. J. Bouye and Jalen Ramsey dropped potential interceptions that could have ended the Jets’ first two scoring drives.
Regardless, the Jaguars allowed 178 yards and 10 first downs and recorded their first safety since 2014. It was the team’s best defensive output since it held Cincinnati to 148 yards last November.
The Jets scored their lone touchdown after a fourth-quarter fumble by Yeldon, with Darnold completing a 2-yard pass to Jordan Leggett. It was hardly the “identity game” the Jets had wanted.
It was about what the confident Jaguars had expected. They improved to 6-1 in games following losses in Coach Doug Marrone’s two seasons.
Jacksonville’s biggest concern coming out of the victory was the health of running back Leonard Fournette, who reinjured his strained right hamstring. Fournette missed the last two games while trying to get back to full speed but tweaked the muscle during his return.
Fournette ran 11 times for 30 yards before leaving the game for good. Marrone said he was worried about the relapse.
“Any time you come back and you’re ready to go and then all of a sudden you get injured again, it’s not a good sign,” he said.
Jaguars center Brandon Linder was ruled out at halftime with a back injury. Jets cornerback Morris Claiborne left the game with a stomach illness, and linebacker Josh Martin was ruled out with concussionlike symptoms.