The daily bombardment of news about sexual violence is causing some women to relive their own trauma. Others are simply enraged. Carrying these emotions can be utterly exhausting.
Just on Tuesday, there was a barrage of stories about the allegations of sexual misconduct against Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh, President Trump’s nominee for the Supreme Court. If you flipped the channel, there was wall-to-wall coverage of Bill Cosby’s prison sentence for drugging and sexually assaulting a woman in his home.
On Thursday, you would have had to unplug completely to avoid watching senators and a prosecutor question Judge Kavanaugh and Christine Blasey Ford, who accused him of sexually assaulting her in the 1980s, when they were teenagers. Dr. Blasey said she was “terrified” to be at the hearing, held by the Senate Judiciary Committee, but provided a detailed account of an assault that she said she was “100 percent” sure Judge Kavanaugh had committed. Judge Kavanaugh vehemently and emotionally denied the allegation.
Victims of sexual violence, women and men included, are struggling to cope with the rapid pace of news that can provoke flashbacks to their own experiences, said Dr. Christine Nicholson, a clinical psychologist who works near Seattle.
Dr. Nicholson, who treats survivors of assault, said several of her clients had brought up the allegations against Judge Kavanaugh in their sessions. Their emotional responses to events of the #MeToo era vacillate between extreme anger and helplessness, she said.
Dr. Nicholson had been practicing for 10 years by 1991, when Anita Hill brought allegations of sexual harassment against Judge Clarence Thomas. While the hearings transformed the national debate around sexism, Dr. Nicholson said she did not hear the same complaints of persistent anxiety from her clients, probably because they were not constantly seeing breaking news on multiple platforms.
When survivors encounter a trigger that reminds them of their trauma, such as a news article about sexual violence, their response can include both emotional and physical pain, said Dr. Vaile Wright, the director of research at the American Psychological Association.
They often report headaches, stomach problems and an increased heart rate, on top of changes in appetite and sleep patterns, she said.
Although therapists generally discourage avoidance in people with post-traumatic stress disorder, Dr. Wright said it is healthy for survivors to limit their news consumption or set boundaries for when and how they tune in.
“It gives us some control over what feels like an uncontrollable situation right now,” she said.
There are also more active ways to cope, Dr. Nicholson said, like engaging politically or telling a personal story to put rage into words, as so many have been doing on social media.
Ms. Chemaly, who recently published a book titled “Rage Becomes Her,” said political movements powered by women’s anger were nothing new. During the temperance movement that began in the 1800s, many women pushed for bans on alcohol as a response to husbands who spent too much money on liquor and were violent while drunk.
In more recent history, anger over the inauguration of Mr. Trump, who has also been accused of sexual assault, prompted millions of people to attend Women’s Marches, taking to the streets en masse.
On Monday, protesters gathered in New York and Washington to demonstrate their opposition to Judge Kavanaugh’s nomination to the Supreme Court. 
Ms.  When journalists use flippant language to refer to sexual assault, or when news programs give outsize space to male commentators, it can feel both infuriating and exhausting, she said.
There are ways to make the news cycle less toxic. For example, Ms. Sow said, men who are not themselves survivors of sexual assault should take a step back and listen to what women have to say.
Alicia Garza, a founder of the Black Lives Matter movement and the head of Black Futures Lab, said men can also be instrumental in changing the tenor of the discourse around sexual violence. The debate can often devolve into interrogating survivors and overemphasizing the impact on the accused, she said.
Along with the feminist group Phenomenal Woman Action Campaign, Ms. Garza’s group helped organize a full-page advertisement signed by 1,600 men that appeared in The New York Times on Wednesday in support of Dr. Blasey. The advertisement resembled a similar one in 1991 showing support for Ms. Hill that was signed by the same number of black women.
Many women braced themselves on Wednesday for a hearing that they feared would echo the dismissive treatment of Ms. Hill by the Senate committee in 1991.
