Christine Blasey Ford and Judge Brett Kavanaugh testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee to address Dr. Blasey’s sexual assault allegation against the Supreme Court nominee.
• Christine Blasey Ford said she was “terrified” but delivered powerful testimony to the Senate Judiciary Committee about her accusation that Judge Kavanaugh sexually assaulted her.
• Senator Lindsey Graham exploded across the dais in an outburst unusual even for a highly partisan body. “What you want to do is destroy this guy’s life, hold this seat open and hope you win in 2020,” he said.
• Republicans deferred their questioning time of Dr. Blasey to a veteran prosecutor, Rachel Mitchell. Democrats used their questions to make broad points about the integrity of Republicans’ investigation, the treatment of the victims of sexual violence in the United States and Dr. Blasey in particular.
Judge Brett Kavanaugh, President Trump’s Supreme Court nominee, testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee and vehemently denied the sexual assault accusation made by Christine Blasey Ford.
This whole two-week effort has been a calculated and orchestrated political hit, fueled with apparent pent-up anger about President Trump and the 2016 election, fear that has been unfairly stoked about my judicial record, revenge on behalf of the Clintons, and millions of dollars in money from outside, left-wing opposition groups. This is a circus. The consequences will extend long past my nomination. The consequences will be with us for decades. This grotesque and coordinated character assassination will dissuade confident and good people of all political persuasions from serving our country. And as we all know, in the United States political system of the early 2000s, what goes around comes around. I am an optimistic guy. I always try to be on the sunrise side of the mountain, to be optimistic about the day that is coming. But today I have to say that I fear for the future. Last time I was here, I told this committee that a federal judge must be independent, not swayed by public or political pressure. I said I was such a judge. And I am. I will not be intimidated into withdrawing from this process. You’ve tried hard. You’ve given it your all. No one can question your effort.  The vile threats of violence against my family will not drive me out. You may defeat me in the final vote, but you’ll never get me to quit. Never. I’m here today to tell the truth. I’ve never sexually assaulted anyone, not in high school, not in college, not ever. Sexual assault is horrific. One of my closest friends to this day is a woman who was sexually abused and who in the 1990s, when we were in our 30s, confided in me about the abuse and sought my advice. I was one of the only people she consulted.  Those who make allegations always deserve to be heard. At the same time, the person who is the subject of the allegations also deserves to be heard. Due process is a foundation of the American rule of law. Due process means listening to both sides. I’m not questioning that Dr. Ford may have been sexually assaulted by some person in some place at some time. But I have never done this — to her or to anyone. That’s not who I am. It is not who I was. I am innocent of this charge. I intend no ill will to Dr. Ford and her family. The other night Ashley and my daughter Liza said their prayers and little Liza, all of 10 years old, said to Ashley, “We should pray for the woman.” It’s a lot of wisdom from a 10-year-old. We mean — we mean no ill will.
After riveting testimony from Dr. Blasey, Judge Kavanaugh took his turn before the Senate Judiciary Committee to proclaim his innocence — and outrage.
He opened the second half of the high-stakes hearing with a scorched-earth defense, denying he had ever sexually assaulted someone and denouncing a “frenzy” bent on destroying his nomination.
He condemned Democrats who he said had searched for reasons to sink him weeks before, only to turn to dark accusations. He pointed back at deep-seated liberal grudges, going back to the presidency of Bill Clinton and the victory of Mr. Trump as evidence of the animus. And he warned of dire consequences for the federal judiciary in decades ahead if nominees face a path like his.
And when he recounted his daughters praying last night for Dr. Blasey, he broke down in tears.
“My family and my name have been totally and permanently destroyed by vicious and false additional allegations,” he told the committee. But he vowed never to withdraw.
On Wednesday, Mr. Trump said that he was going to be paying close attention to the committee’s proceedings and indicated that he was still willing to jettison Judge Kavanaugh if Thursday’s hearing did not go well.
“I can always be convinced,” the president said shortly after.
During Judge Brett Kavanaugh’s hearing, Senator Lindsey Graham said that Democrats were part of an “unethical sham” in an effort to keep the Supreme Court seat vacant.
What you want to do is destroy this guy’s life, hold this seat open and hope you win in 2020. You said that, not me. You’ve got nothing to apologize for. When you see Sotomayor and Kagan tell them that Lindsey said, “hello” — because I voted for them. I would never do to them what you’ve done to this guy. This is the most unethical sham since I’ve been in politics.   You have interacted with professional women all your life, not one accusation. You’re supposed to be Bill Cosby when you’re a junior and senior in high school and all of a sudden you got over it. 
After sitting back all day while Ms. Mitchell questioned the witness, one Republican, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, exploded across the dais late on Thursday in an outburst unusual even for a highly partisan body.
Mr. Graham accused Democrats of trying to paint Judge Kavanaugh as “Bill Cosby when you’re a junior and senior in high school.” He said they were executing a cynical political ploy to deny Mr. Trump a Supreme Court seat — “the most unethical sham since I’ve been in politics.” And he said if they really wanted to get to the truth, Democrats would have come forward with Dr. Blasey’s account weeks before.
“What you want to do is destroy this guy’s life, hold this seat open and hope you win in 2020,” he said.
The main test for Dr. Blasey was whether she could appear credible before the senators, especially Republicans who have suggested that she is suffering from a case of mistaken identity — or that she has partisan motives.
She addressed the latter issue directly.
She also poked holes in the mistaken identity theory when she described how she and Judge Kavanaugh met when their social circles intersected. She remembered his friends, including Mark Judge, who she said was in the room, while practicing swimming and diving at Columbia Country Club in suburban Maryland.
“This is how I met Brett Kavanaugh, the boy who eventually assaulted me,” she said.
In stark contrast to his subdued appearance this week on Fox News and contrite testimony released on Wednesday, Judge Kavanaugh was sharp and emotional — fulfilling a wish of Mr. Trump, who felt he was too robotic on television. He addressed directly the portrait Dr. Blasey painted of him as a drunken young man who tried to rape her and muffled her screams as she pleaded for help.
“I liked beer. I still like beer. But I did not drink beer to the point of blacking out and I never sexually assaulted anyone.” Behaving like the lawyer he is, Judge Kavanaugh cited evidence — the testimony of other witnesses who said they have no memory of the assault, and his own “very precise” calendars from the summer of 1982 — in an effort to prove that he was never at a party with Dr. Blasey, and that the assault never happened.
Judge Kavanaugh has said repeatedly in his testimony that he never blacked out from drinking. But an email he sent in 2001, released during his confirmation hearings, implied otherwise.
“No,” Judge Kavanaugh said.
He does not mention drinking, and the email is from his adult life, not high school. Nonetheless, it could call into question his assertion that he never behaved in ways he did not remember the next day.
Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, asked Judge Kavanaugh if he is the basis for a character in Mr. Judge’s book named “Bart O’Kavanaugh,” who drunkenly passed out in a car during Beach Week. Judge Kavanaugh’s response: accuse his questioner of “making fun” of Mr. Judge, who struggled with alcoholism.
Another heated exchange came when Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, repeatedly pressed Judge Kavanaugh to answer whether he would support an F.B.I. investigation into Dr. Blasey’s remarks. Judge Kavanaugh repeatedly demurred, saying he would support whatever the committee chose to do.
“Personally, do you think that’s the best thing for us to do?” Mr. Durbin asked, exasperation seeping into his voice.
Judge Kavanaugh seemed to roll his eyes and stayed quiet for a long pause.
“You won’t answer?” Mr. Durbin asked.
In saying that he could not have sexually assaulted Dr. Blasey, Judge Kavanaugh repeatedly referred to his calendar entries and said he was out of town virtually every weekend in the summer of 1982 and was too busy working during the week.
But that was a curious defense. His calendar entries show plenty of socializing during the week that summer — and virtually no work. He went for “skis” — presumably “brewskis” — with two of the friends that Dr. Blasey said were at the disputed gathering on Thursday, July 1. On Wednesday, July 7, he has a notation “Columbia.” That could be Columbia University — later that month he wrote “Interview Brown” and “Interview Yale.” It could also be Columbia Country Club, where Dr. Blasey went for much of the summer to swim and dive.
He went with friends to a Baltimore Orioles doubleheader on a Tuesday, Aug. 3.
A Key Figure in the Kavanaugh Allegations: Who Is Mark Judge?
Selfie videos, male sexuality and filming young women. These themes appear in the videos and writings of Mark Judge that The New York Times reviewed, revealing a partial portrait of Judge Brett Kavanaugh’s high school friend.
“Would you like Mark Judge to be interviewed?” “That would be my preference. I’m not sure it’s really up to me, but ...” Mark Judge. It’s a name that keeps coming up in the Kavanaugh hearings. “Man, the old gym.” So just who is Judge? “And here’s something very interesting. This is the JUG room, Justice Under God detention, spent a lot of time in there. It’s locked right now but ...” In this self-shot video posted online, he’s walking around the campus of Georgetown Prep, the school he attended years earlier with Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh. “And I know they’ve asked me not to film here. They’ve told me not to film here. They’ve explained the legal ramifications of filming here. But, this is part of my past and these videos are part of my history, so — bring on the lawyers.” Christine Blasey Ford says Judge was in the room when, she alleges, Kavanaugh sexually assaulted her in the early 1980s. “She says that you tried to take off her clothes and she believes that you would have raped her if Mark Judge hadn’t climbed on top and everyone tumbled to the floor. And then she had an opportunity to get away.” Judge and Kavanaugh were close friends in high school and both have denied the episode occurred. Additional women have since come forward with accusations. “We’re starting to learn more about Mark Judge.” Judge is now a key figure in the Kavanaugh hearings. In other self-shot videos, Judge discusses things like spirituality and pop culture. “It’s about mysticism.” He also produced numerous short films. Many reviewed by The Times seemed like mood pieces. They don’t have dialogue, and almost all feature young-looking women, some almost naked, posing or staring at the camera. “I’ve been a journalist for — since college, and ...” Judge is a freelance writer, author and filmmaker. He has contributed to conservative news sites like The Daily Caller and The Weekly Standard, but also publications like The Washington Post and The New York Times. “I mean, I’m no Andrew Breitbart, but he is an inspiration.” He has written about topics ranging from culture and conservatism to masturbation and male sexuality. He has also written a number of books, including “Wasted: Tales of a Gen-X Drunk,” where he recounts drinking in high school and includes a character named Bart O’Kavanaugh, a suspected reference to Brett Kavanaugh. After the accusations surfaced, Mark Judge’s social media accounts appeared to be taken offline, and he has remained out of the public eye.
Tucked into Judge Kavanaugh’s emotional opening statement was a lament that a high school friend of his — Renate Schroeder Dolphin, though he did not name her — has been caught up in the frenzy surrounding his nomination.
Judge Kavanaugh told the panel that the reference had nothing to do with sex, but that he had gone to dances with Ms. Dolphin.
That isn’t how a schoolmate of Judge Kavanaugh’s described it.
A case of mistaken identity? Dr. Blasey: No chance.
Shadowy theories that Dr. Blasey could have mistaken the identity of her assailant have bounced through Washington’s conservative circles for days. And on Wednesday night, just hours before the hearing, Republicans on the Judiciary Committee released a document detailing their investigative work that showed they had interviewed two separate men who said they believed that they, not Judge Kavanaugh, assaulted Dr. Blasey. Even Judge Kavanaugh has speculated that perhaps Dr. Blasey was misremembering the incident.
“One hundred percent,” Dr. Blasey said.
Senator Lindsey Graham criticized Democrats after Christine Blasey Ford testified about her sexual assault accusation against Judge Brett Kavanaugh.
I’m really upset that they knew about this in August and never told anybody. I’m really upset that Dianne Feinstein believed this was a credible allegation that you wouldn’t do — Mr. — Judge Kavanaugh the service of saying, “I’ve got this. What’s your side of the story?” All I can say is that we’re 40-something days away from the election, and their goal, not Ms. Ford’s goal, is to delay this past the midterms, so they can win the Senate and never allow Trump to fill this seat. The friends on the other side set it up to be just the way it is. I feel ambushed as the majority. We’re going to hear from Mr. Kavanaugh — Judge Kavanaugh — and I’ve been a judge, a prosecutor and a defense attorney, and here’s what I’ll tell you: When it comes to where it happened, I still don’t know. I don’t know when it happened. She said she’s 100 percent certain it did happen. I bet you Judge Kavanaugh will say, “I’m 100 percent sure I didn’t do it.” And that’s the facts I’m left with. A nice lady who has come forward to tell a hard story that’s uncorroborated, and this is enough. God help anybody else who gets nominated. I’m not going to reward people for playing a political game, I think with her life. She is just as much a victim of this as I think Brett Kavanaugh.
After watching a morning of grueling testimony in silence, senior Republican senators said loudly that they stood by Judge Kavanaugh, with one Republican on the committee saying they had been “ambushed” by the Democrats and another proclaiming that he is ready to vote.
Mr. Graham said he was certain that Judge Kavanaugh would deliver an equally unequivocal denial of her account, and senators would be left where they began the day.
Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the chamber’s No. 2 Republican and another member of the committee, said senators were in much the same place they started the day.
But those senators were never thought to hold votes that were in play. Senators who do, including the Republicans Susan Collins of Maine, Lisa Murkowski of Alaska and Jeff Flake of Arizona, avoided reporters into the afternoon and said they would have nothing to say before the hearing with Judge Kavanaugh concluded. Privately, Democrats speculated that the consistency and forcefulness of Dr. Blasey’s testimony would put these senators in an unenviable bind with an election approaching.
Democrats turn the tables on the G.O.P.
With Republicans deferring to Ms. Mitchell, Democrats used their allotted time to make broad political points about the integrity of Republicans’ investigation, the treatment of the victims of sexual violence in the United States and Dr. Blasey in particular.
Dr. Blasey’s testimony inspired at least one woman to call into C-Span3 to share their own story of sexual abuse.
The caller, who identified herself as Brenda from Valley Park, Mo., tearfully told the host that Dr. Blasey’s appearance had caused an old trauma from her childhood to re-emerge.
“I’m a 76-year-old woman who was sexually molested in the second grade,” she said. She said her attacker had been a boy in seventh grade at her school.
James, who said he was “not a big Trump supporter,” said he found much of Dr. Blasey’s testimony to be inconsistent.
“I wish that dang prosecutor had said, ‘Listen, I need more than five minutes and I could take her to the woodshed,’” he said.
Republicans said they chose to turn over their questions to Ms. Mitchell, a sex crimes prosecutor, so that they could have a more targeted, coherent hearing. But as her questioning began, the arrangement appeared more halting and cumbersome than efficient, as it resembled a courtroom trial more than a typical Senate hearing.
The juxtaposition was jarring, particularly with Democrats using their time to cut straight to the heart of Dr. Blasey’s story. After Dr. Blasey’s opening statement gripped the hearing room, Ms. Mitchell immediately dug into granular details, asking the witness to read and correct messages she exchanged with a reporter at The Washington Post and a letter shared with Ms. Feinstein.
“The first two texts were sent by you on July 6, is that correct?” Ms. Mitchell asked. Dr. Blasey spent long moments reading printouts of both and began to work through technical corrections.
And with only five-minute blocks at her disposal, Ms. Mitchell was repeatedly cut off mid-questioning.
As the hearing neared a close, Senator Kamala Harris, Democrat of California, asked Judge Kavanaugh whether he would submit to a polygraph test the way Dr. Blasey did. He said he would, though it would be inadmissable in court and not much use.
But Judge Kavanaugh has written that polygraph tests do have a role to play in law enforcement. In a 2016 opinion for a unanimous three-judge panel of his court, he ruled that the Defense Department could withhold reports concerning the effectiveness of polygraph tests in response to request under the Freedom of Information Act.
A group of 10 women watching the hearings in Bangor, Me. — the home state of Senator Susan Collins, whose vote will be pivotal in Judge Kavanaugh’s confirmation, started out suspicious that Dr. Blasey had partisan motivations; some declared they believed her, while others said they were determined to approach the hearings with an open mind.
Jean Barry, a high school science teacher and a firm opponent of abortion rights, began listening to the hearing concerned about the timing of the accusations.
“So far she seems somewhat credible, like she’s telling us something that happened from her heart,” she said.
Emily McLaughlin, a sophomore at the University of Maine who was a treasurer for the college Republicans, said she believed Dr. Blasey, but wanted to hear from Judge Kavanaugh and wondered, too, whether she just had one beer.
During the short recess, the group had a lively back and forth. While most believed Dr. Blasey, some were waiting to hear further questioning and believed it was important to hear Judge Kavanaugh. They gathered again around the television as the hearings resumed, listening intently.
At the conclusion of her opening remarks, Ms. Feinstein said that the issue for the Senate to decide is not just whether it is true that Judge Kavanaugh, as a teenager, sexually assaulted Dr. Blasey, but also whether Judge Kavanaugh is being honest today about his past behavior.
Even before Dr. Blasey had come forward, Democrats had attacked Judge Kavanaugh’s credibility, arguing that Bush White House emails had shown that he had misled the Senate when he came before it as an appeals court nominee in 2004 and 2006, in distancing himself from various Bush-era controversies including work on other disputed appeals court nominees and Senate Republican staffers’ then-secret infiltration of internal Democratic computer files to learn which nominees they were likely to try to block and with what tactics.