Before boarding Marine One for a visit to North Carolina, President Trump again defended Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh, who has been accused of sexual assault by Christine Blasey Ford, a university professor.
They’re hurting somebody’s life very badly. And it’s very unfair, I think to — as you know, Justice Kavanaugh has been treated very, very tough, and his family — I think it’s a very unfair thing what’s going on. So, we’ll see. But I do think this: They’ve given it a lot of time. They will continue to give it a lot of time, and really it’s up to the Senate. I’d really want to see her. I really would want to see what she has to say. I think he’s an extraordinary man. I think he’s a man of great intellect, as I’ve been telling you. And he has an unblemished record. If she shows up, that would be wonderful. If she doesn’t show up, that would be unfortunate. Well, the F.B.I. has been very involved with respect to Justice Kavanaugh — they know Justice Kavanaugh very well. They’ve investigated him, I guess, six times and they’ve investigated him for this hearing. Look, if she shows up and makes a credible showing, that will be very interesting and we’ll have to make a decision. But I can only say this: He is such an outstanding man — very hard for me to imagine that anything happened.
WASHINGTON — The confrontation between Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh and his accuser devolved into a polarizing stalemate on Wednesday as Democrats and Republicans advanced competing narratives to convince voters that the other side has been unfair in the Supreme Court confirmation battle.
Christine Blasey Ford, the professor who alleged that Judge Kavanaugh sexually assaulted her when they were teenagers, said a Senate hearing set for Monday to hear her allegation would not be fair and Democrats insisted that an F.B.I. investigation take place first. Backed by President Trump, Senate Republicans rejected any F.B.I. inquiry, and said that Monday was her chance to be heard.
Dr. Blasey’s resistance to appearing before the Senate Judiciary Committee on Monday seemed to galvanize Republicans and drew wavering Republican senators back into Judge Kavanaugh’s camp. Barring new information or an agreement by Dr. Blasey to testify after all, Judge Kavanaugh may now have enough momentum to be confirmed as early as next week. Republicans set a committee meeting for Wednesday for a possible vote to move the nomination to the floor.
Hanging over the impasse were the midterm elections, now less than seven weeks away. Republicans were determined to confirm Judge Kavanaugh before then, knowing that if Democrats managed to win control of the Senate, it would be exponentially harder to approve any nominees sent by Mr. Trump. Conversely, for Democrats, a delay in voting on Judge Kavanaugh would increase the chances of blocking his confirmation and enhance the influence Democrats would have over who eventually fills the vacant seat.
In a statement, Lisa J. Banks, a lawyer for Dr. Blasey, said on Wednesday that her client was still willing to work with the Judiciary Committee, but was not convinced that a hearing featuring just her and Judge Kavanaugh would be adequate.
Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa and the committee chairman, said he was flexible on how to handle the questioning of Dr. Blasey but not on the date. He offered to hold a public hearing or to conduct the interview behind closed doors, whichever she preferred. He said she could be questioned by staff members rather than senators, and that he would even send lawyers to California to interview her, if she liked.
But he rejected Dr. Blasey’s request that the F.B.I. investigate her charges before any hearing and made clear that he would not postpone it past Monday. “It would be a disservice to Dr. Ford, Judge Kavanaugh, this committee and the American people to delay this hearing any further,” he wrote in a letter to committee Democrats.
The mood at the White House improved on Wednesday, and Mr. Trump referred to Judge Kavanaugh as “Justice Kavanaugh” three times during a seven-minute exchange with reporters. He again avoided directly attacking Dr. Blasey, but said he found her charges hard to believe.
“I think it’s a very unfair thing what’s going on,” the president said.
Still, he seemed to leave open the possibility that he might have to find another nominee if Dr. Blasey proved persuasive.
Democrats acknowledged that Republicans seemed to have reassured the members of their conference uneasy over the allegation and could confirm Judge Kavanaugh on the strength of their razor-thin 51-to-49 majority.
Still, the emergence of Dr. Blasey’s allegation may have cost Republicans the chance of winning support from any of the red-state Democrats they were hoping to enlist. Senator Claire McCaskill, a Democrat facing a competitive re-election in Missouri, announced Wednesday that she will vote against confirmation of Judge Kavanaugh.
Ms. McCaskill said she was concerned about the accusation against the judge, but based her decision on campaign finance law. “He has revealed his bias against limits on campaign donations, which places him completely out of the mainstream of this nation,” she said in a statement.
Dr. Blasey, 51, a university professor in Northern California who is also known by her married name, Ford, has accused Judge Kavanaugh, 53, of pinning her to a bed, groping her, trying to remove her clothing and covering her mouth to keep her from screaming during a party in the early 1980s when the two were teenagers in Maryland. Judge Kavanaugh has categorically denied the allegation, and the only other person Dr. Blasey said was in the room has also said he does not remember such an assault and had never seen Judge Kavanaugh behave that way.
Another high school friend, Patrick J. Smyth, came forward on Wednesday, saying he was one of two other people Dr. Blasey identified being elsewhere in the house at the time of the alleged assault. In a letter to the Judiciary Committee, Mr. Smyth said he did not remember anything like it.
With the conflict over the confirmation and the supercharged allegations taking place so close to the midterms, both sides were deeply anxious about the possible effect and were eager to blame the other. Republicans argued that they have given Dr. Blasey an opportunity to tell her story to the Senate, either in public or in private, while Democrats said the refusal to call in the F.B.I. showed that the president’s party was not really interested in finding the truth.
Senator Lindsey Graham, a Republican committee member from South Carolina and ally of the president’s who traveled with him on Wednesday to view hurricane damage, said that requiring an F.B.I. investigation before a hearing would not be “about finding the truth but delaying the process until after the midterm elections,” when Democrats hope to win control of the Senate.
As Judge Brett Kavanaugh faces an F.B.I. investigation into the sexual assault accusations against him, his remarks about drinking have come under scrutiny. Here’s what he has said.
“We drank beer. I liked beer. Still like beer. We drank beer and still do. Do you like beer, Senator?” Judge Brett Kavanaugh’s drinking habits as a young man are drawing attention after accusations of sexual assault. Kavanaugh has said he drank in high school. “I drank beer with my friends. Almost everyone did. Sometimes I had too many beers. Sometimes others did.” But says he never had so much he couldn’t remember what happened. “I did not drink beer to the point of blacking out.” He says he studied hard and did extracurricular activities. “Senator, I was at the top of my class academically.  When I got into Yale College, got into Yale Law School. I’ve worked my tail off.” Still some of Kavanaugh’s classmates paint a different picture. “There is no problem with drinking beer in college. The problem is lying about it. He drank heavily. He was a partier. He was a sloppy drunk.” In 1997, Kavanaugh’s friend Mark Judge published a book that detailed drinking in high school. When asked if the character “Bart O’Kavanaugh” was based on him, Kavanaugh said this: “Mark Judge was a friend of ours in high school who developed a very serious drinking problem. As part of his therapy or part of his coming to grips with sobriety, he wrote a book that is a fictionalized book and an account. I think he picked out names of friends of ours to throw them in as kind of close to what — for characters in the book.” There are yearbook references to Kavanaugh vomiting, but he says it isn’t necessarily because of drinking. “I’m known to have a weak stomach and always have. In fact, the last time I was here you asked me about having ketchup on spaghetti. I always have had a weak stomach.” In 2014, Kavanaugh gave a speech about his time at Yale Law School. In it he described a night out in Boston that included “bar-hopping” and “falling out of the bus onto the front steps of Yale Law School at about 4:45 a.m.” And then in 2015, another allusion to his youth. “What happens at Georgetown Prep stays at Georgetown Prep.” As the F.B.I. investigation into sexual assault allegations against him unfolds, it’s unclear whether Kavanaugh’s drinking record will come under greater scrutiny.
“It is imperative the Judiciary Committee move forward on the Kavanaugh nomination and a committee vote be taken as soon as possible,” Mr. Graham said in a statement.
For many Democrats, the insistence on quick action and the charge of obstructionism rang hollow given that Republicans refused to even meet with President Barack Obama’s Supreme Court nominee, Judge Merrick B. Garland, in 2016. Judge Garland never received a hearing, and the vacant seat resulting from the death of Justice Antonin Scalia was eventually filled by Mr. Trump’s first Supreme Court choice, Neil M. Gorsuch.
Three of the Republican senators who had insisted on postponing a committee vote on Judge Kavanaugh originally scheduled for Thursday until hearing from Dr. Blasey have now said she should testify on Monday.
The allegations against Judge Kavanaugh appeared to diminish his public standing, according to a new Reuters/Ipsos poll. Opposition to his confirmation rose by six percentage points to 36 percent in a survey that began before Dr. Blasey went public and continued through Monday after The Post article. Only 31 percent said they support his confirmation, which would rank him among the lowest nominees if he were eventually confirmed.
While Dr. Blasey and Democrats have called for an F.B.I. investigation before a hearing, it is unlikely the bureau would open a criminal investigation of Judge Kavanaugh because Dr. Blasey’s accusations do not involve a potential federal crime. Sexual assault would typically be a state crime, and the passage of more than three decades would make any prosecution problematic, according to legal experts.
Democrats pointed out on Wednesday that the F.B.I. was asked to investigate Anita F. Hill’s sexual harassment claims against Clarence Thomas when he was nominated for the Supreme Court in 1991. But Mr. Grassley said that happened when Ms. Hill’s allegations were still confidential and pointed out that she testified at a hearing only five days after her charges became public, much as Dr. Blasey is being asked to do.
The F.B.I. does conduct background checks on Supreme Court nominees and passes along information to officials running the confirmation process, but it does not make judgments on the credibility of the claims, according to Justice Department guidelines.
“The F.B.I.’s role in such matters is to provide information for the use of the decision makers,” according to background check guidelines issued in 2010 during the Obama administration.
