Joel Fagliano’s puzzle needs us all to speak up, please. Enunciate.
SUNDAY PUZZLE — It’s been eight months since the last Sunday puzzle by Joel Fagliano, which is about 245 minis, so we can’t blame him for the gap. His theme today reminded me of an old joke in which three people are waiting for a bus on a blustery day.
“Windy, isn’t it?” says one to another.
“I thought it was Thursday!” replies the next.

I hope everyone is avoiding the wrath of Hurricane Florence this weekend. If you’ve been thinking about adopting or fostering any pets, a natural disaster is an especially useful time to do so. Animals from endangered shelters are being shuffled to safer places, and rescue organizations can be even more stretched than usual.
I did appreciate the copious bright fill here; clues for DRAMA, STELLAS, ATMS, OBOE, NYET and SMURFS, among many others, made solving fly by. I had a silly issue with CABALA — clinging to that leading K, despite the very specific crossing clue — but this is the preferred Times crossword spelling. A few variations sneak in now and then, but I’m going to try to remember this one.
65A: This clue rang no bells — references to Hades, Persephone and her pomegranate seeds were all I could think of. But after solving via the crosses, ASPHODEL revealed itself, and it’s also part of the title of a really good, thoughtful love poem by William Carlos Williams.
72A: One of a few clues today involving hand-held tech, and a debut: This portmanteau combines “phones” and “tablets” to create PHABLETS, which are those devices you occasionally see clamped to people’s ears looking comically large, like panini makers. One day everything’s going to be either tiny enough to tuck inside an orifice or big enough to nestle inside.
9D: This is, surprisingly, a Times debut, and refers to one of those huge agricultural conglomerates that mass produces all kinds of American supermarket standards, CONAGRA. There’s some interesting trivia among its historical milestones, if you like food facts.
17D: Anyone thinking automobile tires here? I briefly imagined some job where they pay you to sleep (I know it must exist), but the people who are “always retiring” in this case comprise a PIT CREW, and I hope they are well remunerated.
45D: If you’re still resisting the siren song of the smartphone, I just sent you the “tip of the hat” emoji, trust me. This clue refers to texting, where an ellipsis, “…”, serves as a virtual indication of TYPING. Someone is crafting a careful message to you, or they got distracted mid “LOL” by some other widget on their sparkly little magic doodad.
64D: That question mark means we’re dealing with some cleverness, eh? So I had “salad,” um, something, for a while here and assumed this had something to do with the theme, or maybe just a random roughage pun, which are important to mental clarity (they clean the cobwebs right out). I was thinking “green juice” as in kale and spinach macerated for health; I should have been thinking “green juice” as ecologically sound electricity, the kind that comes from SOLAR PANELS.
77D: This is another debut. If you travel enough, you know it, but even if you go to stadiums or government buildings with any regularity (and probably a lot of schools these days) you probably make this move reflexively when you see the wand and pat-down coming: ARMS OUT.
88D: This clue — “Something made to be destroyed” — made me first think of weaponry, like bombs, which I hope doesn’t reflect badly on my psyche.  The clue history for this entry reads like a notepad on a very corny standup comedian’s bedside table.
There are six mangled homophonic puns in this puzzle, at 23A, 35A, 48A, 69A, 82A and 99A. This isn’t a groundbreaking gimmick, as Mr. Fagliano freely admits in his notes, but it’s very fun. To illustrate, I have an insidery one for you (this one isn’t in the grid — it just popped into my head while I was trying to gracefully explain what Mr. Fagliano calls “add-a-sound”): What would you call a news radio sound wave? A sine of the times. This is a plain old homophonic pun. But what would you call the publisher of The New York Times? A scion of the Times. Say it slowly, with precision. Get it? Because all our publishers are descendants of the last publisher.
So, let’s look at 35A, “Convert a morgue worker into a spy?” If you know a common and crossword-friendly term for “morgue worker” then you’re in — to convert one is to TURN THE CORONER.
82A refers to a television show that might be outside your wheelhouse — it was in an Erik Agard grid a few years ago, and it’s had a long run and produced several notable alumni. As far as the clue goes, you definitely would not want to embark on a multipart academic endeavor with at PROJECT RUNAWAY.
The rest aren’t too hard, or horrid — just remember Lebron’s nickname and the West Coast Portland, and then there’s a couple with politics.
Excited to be back in the Magazine pages! Given how many tiny crosswords I make these days, setting my mind to a Sunday puzzle was refreshing.
Because this is a fairly established theme type — add-a-sound themes have been pretty much done to death — I knew I needed to make the puzzle stand out for solvers in some way. Theme-wise, that meant making every example as amusing as possible. Crossword jokes are never going to be high comedy, but they should still make the solver smile when they uncover each example. A lot of that comes in carefully planning the theme set before you start building the grid, making sure you have a good joke to go with each answer. 
The other way I tried to make the puzzle stand out was with the fill. I used only six theme answers instead of trying to jam in seven or eight, which allowed me to increase the length of each answer and make the word count lower. Sunday puzzles at the max word count of 140 can often feel like a chore to finish, particularly if the fill is stale and familiar. For this one, I tried to make the puzzle free of the normal three- and four-letter crutch words and use longer, more fresh and interesting vocabulary. In the past, this might have meant using seeded entries of pop culture names or modern slang, but I’m increasingly focusing instead on filling with regular words (CLUMSY, BEER, TYPING, etc.) that can become fun entries when clued in an imaginative way. I think that makes for a more enjoyable experience for every type of solver.
Hope people enjoy it!
What’s that? You say you’re fenestrated?
