Style|Now Women Are Supposed to Worry About Their Jawlines Too?
Credit social media and the virtual office for the beauty world’s newest concern: the softening jawline. Here, the latest steps people are willing to take for an Instagram-ready jaw.
It was during a WhatsApp call that Debra Reynolds, a marketing executive in Manhattan, started noticing her softening jawline. “It was all I could see in the mirror,” Ms. Reynolds said. “In meetings I was aware of constantly pushing my chin out like a duck.” It was then that Ms. Reynolds, 47, turned to Matthew White, a facial plastic surgeon, to remedy the problem.
The surgery, which Dr. White calls the Golden Angle Lift, creates the tighter, more defined jawline and lower face that to many signals youth and beauty. “The day after surgery, when Dr. White removed the bandages, my jawline looked like Angelina freaking Jolie,” said Ms. Reynolds of her surgery, which she said cost about $18,000.
Dr. White said that his focus is on supporting the three key ligaments that define a youthful jawline and redraping the connective tissue — in some cases repositioning fat pads — rather than simply cutting and pulling back the skin. The result is a more natural yet sculpted look.
“We are learning that the bone structure of the face is more important than we ever knew before,” Dr. White said, citing a 2017 study of facial skeletal aging published in JAMA Facial Plastic Surgery.
AirSculpt, a procedure invented by Aaron Rollins, a plastic surgeon in Los Angeles, is a more targeted form of liposuction. Unlike liposuction, which removes fat by scraping and suctioning it out, AirSculpt uses a smaller and more precise cannula that works in a superfast corkscrew-like motion to cherry-pick targeted cells.
“I can pluck each individual fat cell out — its almost like using photoshop on the face,” said Dr. Rollins, who founded a chain of surgical clinics called Elite Body Sculpture. The procedure costs about $5,000 for the jawline area.
“It’s a paradigm shift in our ability to contour the jawline because you are literally going to the tissue planes that need to be treated, creating a controlled thermal injury,” Dr. Kolker said.
The procedure, which costs $7,500 to $10,000 for the jawline, activates the body’s natural healing response, building more collagen to gradually tighten the treated area. This fall, Dr. Kolker will start offering Embrace RF — that is, FaceTite combined with Morpheus8, a more advanced version of an external radio frequency micro-needling treatment that works on the surface layer of the skin to enhance results.
For the surgically disinclined, Jeannel Astarita, an aesthetician and founder of Just Ageless, in the Howard Hotel in SoHo, often recommends Ultherapy, a noninvasive therapy that uses ultrasound delivered through the skin to heat the deep dermis and is said to trigger skin lifting and tightening.
Those who want something less invasive have options like a facial by Mila Moursi, an aesthetician in Beverly Hills who has been credited with keeping Charlize Theron, Jennifer Aniston and Jane Fonda camera-ready. At Ms. Moursi’s spa and at Barneys New York, clients can experience her Signature Firming Treatment ($250), which involves manual massage and microcurrents to enhance the jawline.
Amid all of the options, Gracia Tapia, a patient of Dr. Rollins, is glad she invested $5,000 in her jawline procedure. The change in her appearance prompted Ms. Tapia, 39, a probation corrections officer in Riverside, Calif., to start exercising regularly and to be more mindful of what she eats; she has lost 70 pounds.
