WASHINGTON — House Republicans will investigate reports that Brock Long, the administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, repeatedly misused government vehicles to commute from Washington to North Carolina, where his family resides.
Representative Trey Gowdy, Republican of South Carolina and the chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee, wrote to Mr. Long on Monday requesting documentation and other information related to his use of government vehicles and about the agency personnel who may have accompanied him on the trips.
Mr. Gowdy learned of the potential misuse last week from news reports, but he delayed starting an inquiry as FEMA girded for what was then Hurricane Florence, which was bearing down on the Carolina coast. For Mr. Long, who is already under investigation by the Department of Homeland Security’s inspector general, news of another federal investigation will only complicate an already precarious balancing act as he marshals an ongoing rescue effort and what will be a sprawling recovery program, even as he tries to convince investigators he did not knowingly violate agency rules.
After The Wall Street Journal reported later on Monday that the investigation into Mr. Long had been referred to federal prosecutors to determine if charges should be pursued, Mr. Long issued a new statement saying he was focused on storm recovery, not the investigation.
The White House has said it is aware of the inspector general’s investigation and will review the inspector general’s report when it is completed.
The investigations stem from frequent commutes by Mr. Long, a hurricane expert with years of emergency management experience, between the agency’s headquarters in Washington and Hickory, N.C., where his wife and two sons live.
Several former and current officials who insisted on anonymity to discuss security matters said the FEMA administrator must have access at all times to classified communications equipment. In some cases, that requires sending a government car equipped with special capabilities with Mr. Long when he travels. Several FEMA aides accompanied Mr. Long on his trips home and stayed at nearby hotels at taxpayers’ expense.
Questions about his travel have followed Mr. Long for days, as he sought to project confidence in the Trump administration’s response to the slow-moving storm. On Sunday, Mr. Long pushed back on reports that Kirstjen Nielsen, the secretary of homeland security, had asked him to step down because of his travel.
Mr. Gowdy gave Mr. Long until Oct. 1 to produce relevant documents, and an aide said that Mr. Gowdy would wait until that date to proceed with other potential investigative actions.
Mr. Gowdy, who is retiring at the end of the year, has used his gavel selectively since taking over the Oversight Committee last year. But he considers excessive spending, particularly on executive branch travel, to be an issue of concern. He previously studied official travel taken by Scott Pruitt, the former administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. And amid a rash of reports last fall about Trump administration officials’ use of private planes, Mr. Gowdy and Representative Elijah Cummings of Maryland, the committee’s top Democrat, jointly investigated travel by senior officials across the federal government.
Mr. Cummings said Monday that he supported an investigation but called on Republicans to simultaneously open an inquiry into the federal response to last year’s deadly hurricanes in Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands. Committee Democrats issued a report this month accusing the Republicans of blocking a “credible” investigation.
