Justin Theroux was crouched in the passenger seat of a black Chevrolet Suburban creeping through the Lower East Side of Manhattan, looking exactly like you would expect Justin Theroux to look, wearing a black T-shirt, gold aviators and a black Wu-Tang cap pulled low.
It was around 11:30 p.m. on a sweltering Wednesday in August, and he was out on the town with his boys, in this case, the director Cary Joji Fukunaga and the night life impresario Carlos Quirarte. Nights like this happen a lot these days. Mr. Theroux, as you may have heard, is single again.
The evening began with a spirited dinner at Lilia, the impossible-to-get-into pasta temple in the Williamsburg neighborhood of Brooklyn. Conversations touched on fake news (“There are now actually people who believe the world is flat,” Mr. Theroux said) and D.N.A. ancestry kits (“Part Italian, part French,” he said, to which Mr. Quirarte added, “and 100 percent hot,” without missing a beat).
Sipping a double Tito’s with soda and three limes (never two, never four), Mr. Theroux joked that he wanted to keep the giant robotic sex toy that his character wears in “Maniac,” Mr. Fukunaga’s mind-melding new Netflix psychological thriller, as a souvenir.
After dinner, the crew took an Uber S.U.V. back to Manhattan. In the front seat, Mr. Theroux got a text from Alexander Skarsgard, who was at the Flower Shop, a faux-dive bar on Eldridge Street that draws slumming actors and models.
A little past midnight, Mr. Theroux and friends were whisked past the velvet rope and headed downstairs to the mock hunting lodge, where he joked with a model in denim micro-shorts and bro-hugged Mr. Skarsgard by the pool table, before grabbing a cue and challenging a young couple to a game.
Crouching to break, he connected with authority, scattering the balls violently around the felt. With the barest hint of a smile, Mr. Theroux coolly rose to chalk his cue.
Despite the 90 degree weather, he wore a biker-chic ensemble familiar from countless Justin Theroux paparazzi fashion spreads: ripped black jeans, suede Common Projects boots, Vuitton belt and a sleeveless gray T-shirt that showed off his howitzer-scale guns.
Mr. Theroux does not wear shorts, even on days when the denim clings to your thighs like paint. “We all have a uniform,” he said.
Our plans were still fuzzy. For the last couple of days we had been discussing how to approach this article, his first in-depth interview since his tabloid-quaking split with Jennifer Aniston in February.
Mr. Theroux is an ironist by nature, and his instincts tilt toward the meta. In his role as style influencer, for instance, he helped turn cheap, counterfeit Gucci T-shirts into a fashion micro-craze. When I first profiled him in 2007, he framed our night out as a mock-“Wild One” ride from hell, complete with hypothetical biker gang, which he bestowed with a self-consciously moronic name, Die Fast.
Attempting to fit him into a standard celebrity profile seemed like a foolish venture, as if commissioning Jeff Koons for a family portrait. And as Mr. Theroux would point out, he has spent the last three years dodging the kind of tabloid glare he never asked for.
Once a matinee idol for the art house set, thanks to the cerebral, aloof demeanor and subtly anarchic wit he displayed in cult favorites like “American Psycho” and “Mulholland Drive,” the celebrity-industrial complex transformed him from an actor that cool people knew into an actor everyone knew.
Since the split, the glare has scarcely dimmed, as paparazzi stake out his black Ducati, leaving his shiny gold bicycle (with a red Supreme sticker) as his primary two-wheeled transportation. New York tabloids have had a field day inventing narratives for him. Justin Theroux spotted with mystery woman! Justin Theroux parties with so-and-so!
So excuse him if he wants to have a little fun with the news media when the news media comes buzzing at his door on a late-summer afternoon. He joked about making the article a parody of the fish-out-out-of-water celebrity profiles of the 1990s, in which a journalist and a movie star would play, say, laser tag in Times Square.
“Let’s do something really touristy,” Mr. Theroux said, whipping out his iPhone and Googling “tourist activities NYC.” Before long, we struck on a plan: to wander through his old haunts on the Lower East Side, then hit the Statue of Liberty.
From his apartment, we headed to Washington Square Park with Kuma, his gray rescue pit bull, leading the way.
Heading east on West Fourth Street, we wandered to the Hole, a gallery on the Bowery that featured a show by Alleged Gallery, an incubator for artists including Shepard Fairey and Cheryl Dunn, where Mr. Theroux used to hang out when he was in his 20s.
He arrived in New York in the early 1990s with a creative pedigree. His mother, Phyllis Theroux, was a style reporter for The Washington Post; his uncle is the writer Paul Theroux. Justin had studied drama and visual art at Bennington College and moved to New York with a vague plan to pursue both.
After the gallery, we wandered south, toward Chinatown. On the corner of Bowery and Canal, a tattooed woman in a checkered mini-dress and a young boy stooped to pet Kuma, seemingly oblivious to her tabloid-famous master.
Passing souvenir stalls and dumpling shops, Mr. Theroux spoke of his affection for Chinatown, which he often wanders alone. He lived in China during college and speaks better-than-passable Mandarin.
With our clothes damp with sweat, we decided to cool off at Von, a bar on Bleecker Street where he was once a bartender.
With seemingly nothing to go on, the tabloids have speculated endlessly on the reasons for the split, which usually boil down to him being too edgy and New York for the sunny Los Angeles rom-com star.
Now that the relationship is over, Mr. Theroux does not feel like he owes the public an explanation.
A few days later, when I asked if he was currently seeing anyone, he laughed. “Is this the part where I coyly raise an eyebrow and not answer the question?” he said.
From the outside, at least, his marriage to Ms. Aniston seemed to vault Mr. Theroux into a new level of fame. Suddenly, he was on the cover of magazines, marching down the red carpet with his megastar wife, sharing his manscaping habits with Ellen DeGeneres.
Either way, his Hollywood career is as busy as it has ever been. This year, he appeared with Mila Kunis in “The Spy Who Dumped Me” and with Felicity Jones in “On the Basis of Sex,” the forthcoming biopic on Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
He recently flew to London to record the voice for the Tramp for the live-animated reboot of the “Lady and the Tramp,” opposite Tessa Thompson, for Disney’s new streaming channel (set to debut in 2019).
In “Maniac,” a futuristic, Kubrick-inflected black comic thriller about a pharmaceutical experiment gone wrong, Mr. Theroux is a guest star to Emma Stone and Jonah Hill. His indelibly odd performance as a mercurial medical genius “injects the show with this syringe full of wackadoodle energy, leaving the viewers wondering what in God’s name this show is about,” said Mr. Fukunaga, who was just named as director for the next James Bond film.
His career has been marked not by a single breakthrough, but by a series of small ones. He enjoyed a mainstream breakout of sorts as a vindictive Irish mob leader in “Charlie’s Angels: Full Throttle,” from 2003. His screenplay (yes, he is a screenwriter, too) for “Tropic Thunder,” the boundary-pushing 2008 satire of Vietnam films, or really, Hollywood, which he wrote with Ben Stiller and Etan Cohen, was as subtle as a napalm strike, but resulted in an “Animal House” for the “Jackass” generation.
Mr. Theroux appeared to graduate to leading-man status with his starring role in “The Leftovers,” the critically acclaimed HBO series about a mysterious mass disappearance of 2 percent of the world population, which concluded last year after three seasons.
But conventional stardom has never been Mr. Theroux’s goal, said Damon Lindelof, a creator of “The Leftovers.” “I’ve always believed that Justin is a character actor that was cursed with being born into the body of a matinee idol,” Mr. Lindelof said.
A career without a single dominant moment so far is O.K. with Mr. Theroux. “Some people’s cardiogram just starts scribbling wildly at the age of 18, and it feels terrible for those people,” he said.
With the afternoon temperatures still hovering around brick pizza oven levels, Mr. Theroux and I decided to skip the long boat ride to Lady Liberty and headed to the Empire State Building instead.
All jokes aside, I pointed out that there was an inescapable symbolism to the moment: He had started out on those streets below so many years before, broke and anonymous. Now he was a big Hollywood star, staring down at the city from the pinnacle of fame.
Mr. Theroux raised an eyebrow at the thought of himself at any pinnacle.
