This fall’s classical music calendar features more than 100 events. Dates are subject to change.
Read more listings for art, dance, film, pop music, television and theater. Add events directly to your calendar.
THE CROSSING Luminous and acute, this vocal ensemble, based in Philadelphia, deals with questions of war, peace and national identity in “Of Arms and the Man,” a mixed program at the Park Avenue Armory that includes a premiere by Ted Hearne. (The Crossing will bring another politically charged event, “The National Anthems,” featuring works by Mr. Hearne, David Lang and Caroline Shaw, to Peak Performances at Montclair State University on Sept. 29.) Sept. 19, armoryonpark.org.
JAAP VAN ZWEDEN The New York Philharmonic’s 26th music director, an exacting Dutch maestro who last brought the Dallas Symphony Orchestra into the top tier of American ensembles, begins his tenure this season. After the genial repertory explorations and playful experiments of Alan Gilbert, this may well be an era of more driven, even fussy performances. The opening gala introduces a work by Ashley Fure alongside a Ravel piano concerto, with Daniil Trifonov, and “The Rite of Spring.” Mr. van Zweden leads a similarly broad variety over the rest of the season, including premieres by Conrad Tao, David Lang (his opera “prisoner of the state”) and Julia Wolfe (“Fire in my mouth”), as well as works by Bruckner, Louis Andriessen (a focus this year), Britten, Shostakovich, Mozart, Beethoven, Rachmaninoff, Brahms, Ives, John Adams, Schumann, Mahler and John Corigliano. “Phil the Hall,” in April, is intended to telegraph the Philharmonic’s new openness to its community; two series led by Nadia Sirota, “Nightcap” and “Sound On,” promise intimate encounters with contemporary music. The baritone Matthias Goerne is the artist in residence. (Mr. van Zweden will not, I repeat not, lead the “Home Alone” score, performed live with the film, Dec. 20-21.) Season opens on Sept. 20; nyphil.org.
OPERA PHILADELPHIA This company has been one of American opera’s success stories, recently reorienting its season toward a concentrated annual festival — O18, this year — that includes “Glass Handel” (see the Anthony Roth Costanzo listing below); the premiere of Lembit Beecher and Hannah Moscovitch’s “Sky on Swings,” with Frederica von Stade and Marietta Simpson; “Lucia di Lammermoor”; “Ne Quittez Pas,” a Poulenc riff with Edward Nelson and Patricia Racette; and “Queens of the Night.” Sept. 20-30, operaphila.org.
ANTHONY ROTH COSTANZO This gifted countertenor effortlessly bridges social and artistic worlds, as well as musical eras. He celebrates his new recording, “Glass Handel,” with a music-art-dance-theater-performance-fashion spectacle, with starry collaborators, at the Barnes Foundation as part of Opera Philadelphia’s O18 festival. (The show comes to the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine in New York in November.) Sept. 22, 23 and 30, operaphila.org.
ODYSSEY OPERA There are intriguing halves to the season of this bold Boston company, which is led by Gil Rose and opens with a pair of Gounod rarities: “La Reine de Saba” and “Le Médecin Malgré Lui.” Three little-heard operas on the Helen of Troy legend — Gluck’s “Paride ed Elena,” Strauss’s “Die Ägyptische Helena” and Offenbach’s “La Belle Hélène” — round out the year. Season opens on Sept. 22; odysseyopera.org.
‘SAMSON ET DALILA’ The Metropolitan Opera’s season begins with Saint-Saëns’s lurid biblical melodrama, featuring new, meaty roles at the company for the two stars who play the catastrophically matched lovers: Elina Garanca (who will also sing Wagner’s “Wesendonck Lieder” in recital at Carnegie Hall on Oct. 23) and Roberto Alagna. Mark Elder conducts; Darko Tresnjak (a Tony Award winner for “A Gentleman’s Guide to Love & Murder” on Broadway) directs, in his Met debut; Austin McCormick choreographs the Bacchanale, one of opera’s most famous orchestral excerpts. Opening Sept. 24, metopera.org.
JACK QUARTET These exceptional new-music specialists appear in the spooky confines of the catacomb at Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn with a program of John Zorn, Chaya Czernowin, Marcos Balter and arrangements of medieval plainchant. (On Nov. 9 the JACK, its quality unaffected by recent personnel changes, arrives at the 92nd Street Y with the New York premiere of a very New York-themed quartet by Andreia Pinto Correia, based on a poem by Hart Crane, alongside works by Sabrina Schroeder, Zosha Di Castri and Ligeti. And on April 14, the group plays Elliott Carter’s five quartets in a single, very long program at the Morgan Library & Museum.) Sept. 24, deathofclassical.com.
‘AIDA’ Anna Netrebko sings the title role at the Met for the first time, joined by Aleksandrs Antonenko and Quinn Kelsey, under Nicola Luisotti’s baton. The barn-burning mezzo-soprano Anita Rachvelishvili (Amneris) also takes on Dalila later in the season and stars again opposite Ms. Netrebko in a new production of Cilea’s potboiler “Adriana Lecouvreur” on New Year’s Eve. That opera, also starring Piotr Beczala and Ambrogio Maestri, is conducted by Gianandrea Noseda and directed by David McVicar. (Cilea’s even rarer “Gloria” will be presented by the hardworking Teatro Grattacielo earlier in the season; Ms. Netrebko is scheduled for her several-times-delayed Carnegie Hall recital debut on Dec. 9; and Ms. Rachvelishvili will reprise her Amneris with the great Verdian Riccardo Muti and his Chicago Symphony Orchestra in June.) Opens Sept. 26; metopera.org.
LEILA BORDREUIL This subtle cellist, composer and artist brings to Issue Project Room “Episodes et Mutations,” a quietly shifting auditory and visual landscape, with sounds from the Mivos Quartet and a light installation by Doron Sadja. Sept. 26, issueprojectroom.org.
HOUSTON GRAND OPERA Exiled for a season from its home at the Wortham Theater Center by Hurricane Harvey, this company returns with a concert featuring Plácido Domingo, who starred in “Aida” when the Wortham was inaugurated in 1987. Season opens on Sept. 26; houstongrandopera.org.
‘PROVING UP’ The composer Missy Mazzoli and the librettist Royce Vavrek’s follow-up to their bleakly beautiful “Breaking the Waves” is also gloomy, based on a short story about Nebraska homesteaders after the Civil War. After a run in Omaha, the work opens the season at the Miller Theater, which describes it as the first in a series of chamber operas the Miller will help create. Sept. 26, 28, millertheatre.com.
LOS ANGELES PHILHARMONIC Not content to settle for any old anniversary gala, this peerlessly ambitious orchestra celebrates its 100th birthday with dozens of commissions this season, an almost alarming concentration of music from rising composers as well as masters like John Adams, Unsuk Chin, Philip Glass and Steve Reich. It’s all a little dizzying: a new orchestral work by Andrew Norman; an array of dance partnerships; LA Fest, whose programs run from new chamber works to Moby; a Fluxus festival that includes music by La Monte Young and two of John Cage’s “Europeras”; an exploration of William Grant Still and the Harlem Renaissance; a fresh staging of Meredith Monk’s “Atlas.” A good chunk of this will be led by Gustavo Dudamel, the Philharmonic’s star music director, who makes his Met Opera debut with Verdi’s “Otello” in December. Season opens Sept. 27; laphil.com.
MUSIC BEFORE 1800 Always a trove of fascinating corners of the repertory, this series opens with Benjamin Bagby’s dramatic recitation of “Beowulf” and includes the medieval groups Alkemie and Ensemble Correspondances, which specializes in the music of 17th-century France. In January, Jeremy Rhizor’s Academy of Sacred Drama presents what it says is the modern premiere of Giovanni Antonio Gianettini’s Moses-themed oratorio “La Creatione de’ Magistrati.” Season opens Sept. 30; mb1800.org.
MOVING SOUNDS FESTIVAL Dedicated to Mahler’s influence, these four programs at the Austrian Cultural Forum, presented by the Argento New Music Project, include explorations of this master’s relationship with his wife, Alma; the vocal works; and the Ninth Symphony. The pianist and composer Elisabeth Harnik will perform a sprawling improvisation inspired by the Symphony No. 1. Oct. 1-4, acfny.org.
‘THE MILE-LONG OPERA’ A bit of performance-world Mad Libs — bringing together the architect Elizabeth Diller, the composer David Lang and the writers Anne Carson and Claudia Rankine — this spectacle, the latest massive choral immersion to hit the city, will feature a thousand singers on the High Line. Opens Oct. 3; milelongopera.com.
SAN FRANCISCO SYMPHONY Michael Tilson Thomas announced last year that in 2020 he would leave this orchestra, which he has made his own over two decades as its music director. They open Carnegie Hall’s season with the starry help of Renée Fleming and Audra McDonald, then offer a Stravinsky program the next evening. Mr. Tilson Thomas’s Perspectives series at the hall continues in March with two of the Vienna Philharmonic’s four Carnegie concerts: The first features Ives, Brahms and Beethoven, with the pianist Igor Levit; the second presents Mahler’s Ninth. On offer in May, with the New World Symphony, his prestigious orchestral academy, are Prokofiev, Berlioz, Schubert and premieres by Julia Wolfe and Mr. Tilson Thomas himself. Season opens Oct. 3; carnegiehall.org.
HIDEJIRO HONJOH This gifted player of the shamisen (the three-string Japanese banjo), interested in his traditional instrument’s contemporary uses, is joined at Japan Society by the International Contemporary Ensemble for premieres by Vijay Iyer, Nathan Davis and Yu Kuwabara, as well as works by Scott Johnson, Yuji Takahashi and Dai Fujikura. Oct. 5, japansociety.org.
SPHINX VIRTUOSI The Sphinx Organization has been at the forefront of promoting racial diversity in classical music through competitions, grants and educational activities; its flagship orchestra comes to Carnegie Hall for its annual visit with a program that includes a New York premiere by Terence Blanchard. Oct. 11, carnegiehall.org.
‘PLACE’ Written with the slam poet Saul Williams, Ted Hearne’s (“The Source”) new theater piece about gentrification is a blending of autobiography and social commentary. It brings music of classical precision and the explosive energy of pop and rock to the Brooklyn Academy of Music; Patricia McGregor directs. Oct. 11-13, bam.org.
TRINITY WALL STREET It’s the 50th anniversary of the Concerts at One series, which has offered Bach and much else in lunchtime performances at this downtown spiritual (and musical) center. That’s just one facet of Trinity’s packed season. Some highlights: Oct. 12 brings an exploration of the church’s Anglican heritage (including a new work by its indefatigable music director, Julian Wachner); Nov. 16 features a performance of Rachmaninoff’s Vespers; and on Dec. 1, Julia Wolfe’s “Anthracite Fields” comes to Carnegie Hall. New York’s essential “Messiah,” a roiling and vivid performance, also arrives in December, and a #MeToo-inspired festival in March includes Handel’s “Susanna,” Laura Elise Schwendinger’s “Artemesia” and works by Barbara Strozzi. trinitywallstreet.org.
PEOPLES’ SYMPHONY CONCERTS One of music’s under-the-radar steals returns with a densely programmed lineup of excellent, inexpensive concerts. A six-show series ends up being less than $10 a ticket, and single tickets max out at just double that. The artists include Paul Lewis, Jonathan Biss, Peter Serkin, Richard Goode and the Juilliard String Quartet. Things get started with the chamber group Russian Renaissance. Season opens Oct. 13; pscny.org.
STILE ANTICO This youthful but distinguished vocal ensemble comes to the Miller Theater with music from the court of Elizabeth I. Oct. 13, millertheatre.com.
MOMENTA FESTIVAL Four programs at the Tenri Cultural Institute and Americas Society, each organized by a different member of the discerning Momenta Quartet, include a chamber version of the “Liebestod” from “Tristan und Isolde” (with Ariadne Greif) and a new commission by Alvin Singleton. Oct. 13, 15, 17, 19, momentaquartet.com.
ORCHESTRE RÉVOLUTIONNAIRE ET ROMANTIQUE John Eliot Gardiner’s crack band of early-19th-century period instruments will bring new (that is, old) colors to works of Berlioz in a two-concert stand at Carnegie Hall. Oct. 14-15, carnegiehall.org.
MEREDITH MONK “Cellular Songs,” a quirky and poignant “meditation on themes of individual flourishing and collective belonging,” as Seth Colter Walls wrote in The New York Times, was a success for this beloved artist last season. Good news, then, that it returns in a concert version at Le Poisson Rouge. Oct. 14-16, lpr.com.
WHITE LIGHT FESTIVAL The most important of Lincoln Center’s fall offerings is the American premiere of Kaija Saariaho’s “Only the Sound Remains,” based on Ezra Pound’s translation of Noh plays, directed by Peter Sellars and starring the potent combination of Philippe Jaroussky and Davóne Tines (Nov. 17-18). Also worthwhile: William Christie and Les Arts Florissants performing Haydn’s “The Creation” (weirdly close on the heels of another Lincoln Center staging of the work this summer); the violinist Hilary Hahn playing Bach, the subject of her new album this fall on Decca; and the Takacs Quartet offering Schubert (later returning with the “Trout” Quintet in March). Oct. 16-Nov. 18, lincolncenter.org.
AMERICAN SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA Leon Botstein’s ensemble, devoted to underplayed music, begins its Carnegie Hall season with a program of Walt Whitman-inspired European works by Othmar Schoeck, Weill, Schreker and Vaughan Williams. Other concerts feature New York composers of the mid-20th century (Robert Mann, Jacob Druckman, Vivian Fine and William Schuman) and Martinu’s opera “Julietta.” (The Orchestra Now, Mr. Botstein’s academy group, will perform the New York premiere of Morton Feldman’s 1976 “Orchestra” on a May 19 program at the Metropolitan Museum of Art that’s tied to an exhibition on abstraction.) Season opens Oct. 17; carnegiehall.org.
‘LA FANCIULLA DEL WEST’ Having canceled again and again, the star tenor Jonas Kaufmann hasn’t appeared at the Met since March 2014. But he’s scheduled for four performances of this heartfelt Puccini western, starting on Oct. 17, opposite Eva-Maria Westbroek; it should be a perfect fit for his dark-hued elegance. (Mr. Kaufmann also appears at Carnegie Hall on Oct. 5 in a program that draws on German operetta and popular film of the 1920s and ’30s.) metopera.org.
IGOR LEVIT His Carnegie Hall debut was an unsettlingly vivid highlight of the 2016-17 season. Now this pianist, winner of the prestigious Gilmore Artist Award, returns for a program of variations and works inspired by other composers, including Brahms and Busoni pieces influenced by Bach, and Lisztian fantasies on Wagner and Meyerbeer. Oct. 19, carnegiehall.org.
‘MARNIE’ Based on the Winston Graham page-turner that also inspired Hitchcock’s film, Nico Muhly’s new opera about a psychologically damaged young woman who compulsively changes her identity is streamlined and atmospheric without being truly dramatic. Isabel Leonard and Christopher Maltman star opposite the countertenor Iestyn Davies, who also appears in recital at Carnegie Hall in May. Robert Spano conducts; Michael Mayer directs. (Ever prolific, Mr. Muhly has also written premieres for the Tallis Scholars, at the Miller Theater in December, and for Trinity Wall Street, in February.) Opens Oct. 19; metopera.org.
ANGELA HEWITT For the third season of what she’s described as a four-year odyssey through Bach’s keyboard works, this stylish pianist begins with Book II of “The Well-Tempered Clavier” and moves on, in May, to the toccatas and a selection of the English Suites. Oct. 21, 92y.org.
ORCHESTRA OF ST. LUKE’S For his first season as this ensemble’s leader, Bernard Labadie is focusing on Haydn, a composer who tests a conductor’s mettle. The first concert at Carnegie Hall, on Oct. 25, features La Chapelle de Québec and includes the “Nelson” Mass; the second, on Feb. 28, includes the Symphony No. 45 and Beethoven’s Piano Concerto No. 2 (with the magnificent Paul Lewis). Pablo Heras-Casado leads the third, on April 18. (Mr. Labadie also performs Bach’s Mass in B minor at Carnegie with La Chapelle de Québec and Les Violins du Roy on May 7.) carnegiehall.org.
YUJA WANG For her Perspectives series at Carnegie Hall, this dazzling pianist includes fairly standard fare — concerts with the cellist Gautier Capuçon and the violinist Leonidas Kavakos and appearances with the New World Symphony — but also more offbeat offerings: a recital with percussion and a performance alongside the music-comedy duo Igudesman & Joo. Series starts Oct. 26; carnegiehall.org.
COMPOSER PORTRAITS There are few series as satisfying as the Miller Theater’s signature dives into one composer. This season begins with Kate Soper (her “Ipsa Dixit,” featuring the Wet Ink Ensemble, in its 20th-anniversary season) and continues with the Pulitzer Prize winner Du Yun, Wang Lu, John Zorn, Tyshawn Sorey (who also has a residency at the Kitchen in Chelsea, Oct. 21-23) and David T. Little. Series opens Oct. 27; millertheatre.com.
‘MUSIC IN 12 PARTS’ Philip Glass’s neon-bright, glacially progressing chamber work is revived only rarely, and with good reason: A performance can last for hours. This marathon work returns to the Town Hall, the site of its 1974 premiere, with Mr. Glass at the helm of the ensemble. Oct. 27, thetownhall.org.
CZECH PHILHARMONIC Beginning his tenure as chief conductor and music director of this storied ensemble, the intelligent and inspired maestro Semyon Bychkov brings it to Carnegie Hall for music by Dvorak (no surprise there) and Mahler. Oct. 27-28, carnegiehall.org.
OPERA LAFAYETTE Straying a bit from its usual focus on 18th-century France, this spirited company, which shuttles between New York and the Kennedy Center in Washington, offers three Italian works: Jommelli’s “Cerere Placata,” Handel’s “Radamisto” and, with the gutsy Heartbeat Opera, Stradella’s “La Susanna.” Season opens Oct. 28; operalafayette.org.
HUNGARIAN STATE OPERA This company’s high-profile burst of cultural diplomacy comes as its home country is fast becoming a semi-autocracy under Viktor Orban. The offerings at the David H. Koch Theater include rarities — like Ferenc Erkel’s “Bank Ban,” Janos Vajda’s “Mario and the Magician” and Karl Goldmark’s “The Queen of Sheba” — as well as a favorite, Bartok’s “Bluebeard’s Castle.” Oct. 30-Nov. 5, davidhkochtheater.com.
FOR/WITH FESTIVAL Organized by the keen trumpeter and composer Nate Wooley, this two-night event at Issue Project Room takes a capacious view of music for trumpet, including works by Wadada Leo Smith, Annea Lockwood, Catherine Lamb, Ashley Fure and Felipe Lara. Oct. 31-Nov. 1, issueprojectroom.org.
MARIINSKY ORCHESTRA Under Valery Gergiev, this ensemble may well play with idiomatic color in Tchaikovsky’s “Nutcracker” on the first night of its Carnegie Hall visit; Brahms (with the pianist Nelson Freire) and Strauss come on the second. Oct. 31-Nov. 1, carnegiehall.org.
‘SATYAGRAHA’ The Met Opera’s 2008 production of Philip Glass’s shining reflection on Gandhi, which was dominated by newsprint, was a hit. (It arrives at Los Angeles Opera on Oct. 20.) The work lends itself to fanciful theatrical imaginings, which it will get yet again at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, where the companies Folkoperan and Cirkus Cirkor will stage it with acrobatics and lots of yarn. Opens Oct. 31; bam.org.
ELLIOTT SHARP As part of the 40th anniversary of the bold Brooklyn space Roulette, this intense composer and instrumentalist celebrates the release of a new album and book with solo and ensemble performances, including a realization of his graphic score “Mare Undarum.” Nov. 1, roulette.org.
AMERICAN COMPOSERS ORCHESTRA Doggedly committed to the new, this ensemble opens its two Carnegie Hall concerts with works by Valerie Coleman (scored for Imani Winds and orchestra), Alex Temple and Joan Tower, who turns 80 on Sept. 6. (The second program, in April, includes Du Yun, Gloria Coates and Morton Feldman. That’s five female composers out of six, for those keeping track.) Nov. 2, americancomposers.org.
JULIA BULLOCK One of the most radiant singers of her generation combines traditional art songs, jazz and Nina Simone classics at Caramoor on Nov. 4. Then her season-long residency at the Metropolitan Museum of Art includes a chamber version of John Adams’s Nativity oratorio “El Niño”; a program of Langston Hughes poems set to music; and her Josephine Baker program, “Perle Noire: Meditations for Joséphine.” In June she stars alongside Davóne Tines in Terence Blanchard and Kasi Lemmons’s “Fire Shut Up in My Bones,” based on Charles Blow’s memoir, at Opera Theater of St. Louis. caramoor.org, metmuseum.org, opera-stl.org.
FIVE BOROUGHS MUSIC FESTIVAL This ambitious, citywide concert series collaborates with Gotham Early Music Scene and the Americas Society on “An Empire of Silver and Gold,” a program of 18th-century Latin American music, at the St. Ignatius of Antioch Episcopal Church in Manhattan. Nov. 5, 5bmf.org.
ANDY AKIHO As artists in residence at National Sawdust in Brooklyn this season, the members of PUBLIQuartet will play “LIgNEouS” and “Karakurenai” by this vibrant composer and performer and excellent steel pan player, who will join the festivities. Nov. 7, nationalsawdust.org.
MAHAN ESFAHANI Talented but divisive, with a tendency to disparage his fellow harpsichordists — including Jean Rondeau, who plays at Weill Recital Hall at Carnegie Hall in March — this chronology-hopping artist pairs selections from Bach’s “The Well-Tempered Clavier” with works by George Lewis, Luciano Berio and Tristan Perich at the Miller Theater. (He also plays concertos by de Falla and Martinu with the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra at the 92nd Street Y in May.) Nov. 7-8, millertheatre.com.
‘MEFISTOFELE’ Absent from the Met Opera since 2000, when it was a vehicle for Samuel Ramey’s riveting portrayal of the Devil, this fiery opera by Arrigo Boito, better known as Verdi’s librettist, returns with Christian Van Horn, who’s getting a big break in the title role. He is joined by Angela Meade and Michael Fabiano; Carlo Rizzi conducts; Robert Carsen’s jovially garish production remains. Opens Nov. 8; metopera.org.
JOAN TOWER AT 80 The Jasper Quartet and Lysander Piano Trio pay tribute to this formidable composer with her own works and those by other female composers, including Jennifer Higdon, Tania León and Julia Wolfe, at National Sawdust. Nov. 11, nationalsawdust.org.
NEW YORK FESTIVAL OF SONG This engaging, ever-curious series begins its season at Merkin Concert Hall with a celebration of W. C. Handy and the blues. (Other programs include a paean to immigration and “hyphenated Americans”; an evening of scenes featuring couples; and songs inspired by García Lorca.) Nov. 14, nyfos.org.
BOSTON LYRIC OPERA Music drama in Boston is in good shape this season between Odyssey Opera and this resourceful company, which presents the premiere of “Schoenberg in Hollywood,” Tod Machover’s film- and technology-heavy work about that great composer’s flight from Nazi Germany to California. (A new, timely production of “The Handmaid’s Tale,” Poul Ruders’s grimly anxious 2000 adaptation of Margaret Atwood’s novel, arrives in May.) Nov. 14-18, blo.org.
MARC-ANDRÉ HAMELIN This pianist’s technical facility and curiosity are both profound. His Carnegie Hall program includes Busoni’s daunting arrangement of Bach’s Chaconne; works by Castelnuovo-Tedesco, Schumann and Chopin; and Alexis Weissenberg’s arrangements of songs sung by the French pop artist Charles Trénet. (Mr. Hamelin joins the Juilliard String Quartet for Dvorak at the 92nd Street Y on Feb. 8.) Nov. 15, carnegiehall.org.
DANISH STRING QUARTET One of the finest, most passionate young quartets in the world makes its debut at the 92nd Street Y with two pathbreaking pieces — one of Haydn’s Opus 20 quartets and Beethoven’s “Razumovsky” — alongside Hans Abrahamsen’s Quartet No. 1, “10 Preludes.” Nov. 17, 92y.org.
JUAN DIEGO FLÓREZ In town to sing Alfredo in “La Traviata” at the Met Opera, this pre-eminent bel canto tenor — his diamond-bright voice a bit reedy for some tastes, but his agility and energy undeniable — has been exploring heavier repertory. In recital at Carnegie Hall, he will be joined by the pianist Vincenzo Scalera. Nov. 18, carnegiehall.org.
BOSTON SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA Andris Nelsons brings his immaculate ensemble to Carnegie Hall for three concerts, including works by HK Gruber, Mahler, Strauss, Liszt, Tchaikovsky and, in one of the season’s most anticipated premieres, a new piano concerto by Thomas Adès, with Kirill Gerstein as soloist. Nov. 19 and March 19-20, carnegiehall.org.
MANNES ORCHESTRA A recent explosion of interest in the composer Julius Eastman, who died in obscurity in 1990, continues with the premiere of his restored Symphony No. II, led by Luciano Chessa at Alice Tully Hall. Nov. 20, newschool.edu/mannes.
‘IL TRITTICO’ On Dec. 14, 1918, this vivid and varied Puccini triple bill had its premiere at the Met Opera. Just shy of its centennial, it returns in Jack O’Brien’s elaborate production, with singers including Marcelo Álvarez, Amber Wagner, Kristine Opolais and Plácido Domingo, who sings the title role of the comic “Gianni Schicchi”; Bertrand de Billy conducts. (The Manhattan School of Music pairs one of the operas, “Suor Angelica,” with Nino Rota’s “I Due Timidi” in December.) Opens Nov. 23; metopera.org.
‘ALCINA’ The fine forces of the Boston Early Music Festival present this semi-staged version of Francesca Caccini’s 1625 work “La Liberazione di Ruggiero,” conducted by Paul O’Dette and Stephen Stubbs (with Robert Mealy as concertmaster), and directed by Gilbert Blin at the Morgan Library & Museum. Nov. 26-27, themorgan.org.
CHRIS THILE A charismatic mandolinist and songwriter who also hosts the radio program once known as a “A Prairie Home Companion,” this hyper-engaging artist holds the Debs Composer’s Chair at Carnegie Hall this year. On Nov. 28, he’ll pair his own new work with selections from Bach, and on March 9 he opens the hall’s monthlong Migrations festival. Among many offerings, it includes “Two Wings” on March 30, organized by the married performers Jason Moran and Alicia Hall Moran and devoted to music of the Great Migration. carnegiehall.org.
NEW JERSEY SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA This fine ensemble is perpetually underrated; a highlight of its season is a vibrant program, under the baton of Joshua Weilerstein, that includes Milhaud, Gershwin, Stravinsky and Florence Price’s Piano Concerto: a work from a composer being gradually rediscovered. Nov. 29-Dec. 2, njsymphony.org.
TALEA ENSEMBLE Works by Kate Soper and David Adamcyk anchor this probing group’s concert at the Americas Society. (Its 10th-anniversary concert in April will feature works written for Talea by Georg Friedrich Haas, Hans Thomalla, Anthony Cheung and Ashley Fure.) Nov. 30, taleaensemble.org.
‘LA TRAVIATA’ Few boldly reinterpreted stagings at the Met Opera have been as successful as Willy Decker’s single-set “La Traviata,” so there’s a high bar for Michael Mayer’s new production, which promises to reflect the passage of the seasons. Yannick Nézet-Séguin, in his first season as the company’s music director, returns to a work in which he’s already led Diana Damrau; they’re joined by Juan Diego Flórez and Quinn Kelsey. (Mr. Nézet-Séguin will also lead “Pelléas et Mélisande,” “Dialogues des Carmélites” and orchestral concerts with the Met this season, as well as three Carnegie Hall dates with his Philadelphia Orchestra.) Opens Dec. 4; metopera.org.
‘GREEK’ The composer Mark-Anthony Turnage is characteristically uproarious and bold in this 1988 opera, which updates the Oedipus myth to a decomposing vision of contemporary London. Opera Ventures and Scottish Opera’s bright, stark production, directed by Joe Hill-Gibbins, brings the piece to the Brooklyn Academy of Music, where Mr. Turnage’s “Anna Nicole” was a success in 2013. Opens Dec. 5; bam.org.
MARTIN FROST This extraordinary clarinetist plays works by Brahms (the Clarinet Sonata No. 2), Telemann and Vivaldi at Alice Tully Hall, joined by the pianist Henrik Mawe. Dec. 12, lincolncenter.org.
GREEN MOUNTAIN PROJECT This festival is the annual centerpiece of the acute ensemble that is now known, in its 10th year, as Tenet Vocal Artists. With the groups Dark Horse Consort and Blue Heron, it includes Monteverdi’s Vespers of 1610, music by women of the Italian Baroque and a program from 16th-century Spain. (Tenet, directed by Jolle Greenleaf, will also, with the Sebastians, perform “Messiah” in December and Bach’s “St. Matthew Passion” in March.) Jan. 3-6, tenet.nyc.
PROTOTYPE: OPERA/THEATER/NOW A vital home for contemporary music theater, this festival features a mix of full productions, intimate performances and works in progress. Presented by Beth Morrison Projects and Here Arts Center, this season’s offerings include Ellen Reid and Roxie Perkins’s “prism,” about a sickly young girl; the cellist and vocalist Leah Coloff’s “ThisTree”; and the multimedia “Pancho Villa From a Safe Distance.” Jan. 5-13, prototypefestival.org.
FERUS FESTIVAL Hosted by National Sawdust, this burst of new music includes Huang Ruo’s “The Sonic Great Wall,” in which audience members are asked to create sounds as they sit along paths traversed by the musicians, and an evening with the daring violinist Miranda Cuckson and the artist Katharina Rosenberger that focuses on the sonic possibilities of paper. (Mr. Huang’s new chamber opera, “Bound,” about a Vietnamese immigrant family, comes to the Baruch Performing Arts Center as a co-presentation with Fresh Squeezed Opera in April; Ms. Cuckson joins the melancholy composer and pianist Michael Hersch at Sawdust on Sept. 18.) Jan. 6-8, nationalsawdust.org.
‘ARIADNE AUF NAXOS’ The transparent and fleet-footed Cleveland Orchestra’s opera presentations have been highlights in recent years. The ensemble’s music director, Franz Welser-Möst, has a particularly nimble way with Strauss, so this comic yet heart-rending opera should be a perfect fit. Tamara Wilson, Andreas Schager, Daniela Fally and Kate Lindsey star, and Frederic Wake-Walker directs. Jan. 13, 17 and 19, clevelandorchestra.com.
SABINE DEVIEILHE Her presence on the European opera scene increasing practically by the month, this coloratura soprano comes to Carnegie’s Weill Recital Hall in a gentler mode, with songs by Debussy, Fauré, Canteloube and others. Jan. 17, carnegiehall.org.
LEIF OVE ANDSNES After releasing an album of Chopin ballades and nocturnes on Sony Classical in September, this sensitive pianist comes to Carnegie Hall with a very different program of characterful works by Schumann, Bartok and Janacek. Jan. 24, carnegiehall.org.
MATTHEW AUCOIN Balancing a career as both a composer and conductor, this gifted young artist shows off both sides with “Matt’s Playlist,” a delightfully idiosyncratic program he leads with the San Diego Symphony that includes excerpts from his opera “Crossing,” as well as works by Beethoven, Stravinsky, Lili Boulanger, Andrew Norman and Thomas Adès. (In November, after a workshop in Cincinnati, he also offers a public glimpse there and in New York of “Eurydice,” his forthcoming commission from the Metropolitan Opera, Lincoln Center Theater and Los Angeles Opera, with a libretto by the playwright Sarah Ruhl. In June, at the Morgan Library & Museum, he pays tribute to Whitman.) Jan. 25 and 27, sandiegosymphony.org.
JUILLIARD FOCUS This perpetually searching festival turns its attention to 75 years of international radio commissioning. “On the Air!” will include works written since World War II at the behest of radio stations, primarily European, like the BBC, SWR, WDR and Radio France. The final program features orchestral pieces by Betty Olivero, Ligeti and Tippett. Jan. 25-Feb. 1, juilliard.edu.
ANNA CATERINA ANTONACCI When she gave a recital in New York last winter, this Italian soprano offered a tour de force of programming and interpretive subtlety. She will appear, again under the auspices of New York City Opera, at the Appel Room at Jazz at Lincoln Center with songs by female composers. Jan. 28, nycopera.com.
JAKUB JOZEF ORLINSKI Enthusiastic, his sound often sheerly lovely, this break-dancing countertenor mines early music for a program at Carnegie’s Weill Recital Hall that is heavy on rarities, performed alongside members of New York Baroque Incorporated. Jan. 31, carnegiehall.org.
SEATTLE SYMPHONY Having made this orchestra a beacon of intriguing programming, Ludovic Morlot ends his tenure as music director with a focus on Debussy. His final season also includes the premiere of Caroline Shaw’s Piano Concerto, with Jonathan Biss as soloist. (In April, Mr. Morlot’s successor, Thomas Dausgaard, offers a program with the premiere of George Walker’s Sinfonia No. 5, “Visions,” inspired by the 2015 shooting at a historic church in Charleston, S.C.) Jan. 31- Feb. 2, seattlesymphony.org.
JEREMY DENK This shrewd and mischievous pianist brings to Carnegie Hall a program dominated by variations and transcriptions, including works by Beethoven, Mendelssohn, Schumann, Bizet and John Adams. Feb. 1, carnegiehall.org.
BEHZOD ABDURAIMOV In his 20s yet already adept at balancing technical flair and understated intelligence, this pianist makes his debut at the 92nd Street Y with a formidable program: Liszt’s transcription of the “Liebestod” from “Tristan und Isolde” and that composer’s Sonata in B minor, alongside Prokofiev’s piano version of 10 pieces from his “Romeo and Juliet.” Feb. 2, 92y.org.
LEON FLEISHER AT 90 Lionized as both a performer and teacher, this pianist, who turned 90 in July, will belatedly celebrate with solos by Bach and Kirchner and collaborations with friends and students like Jonathan Biss, Yefim Bronfman and Katherine Jacobson. Feb. 5, carnegiehall.org.
DANIIL TRIFONOV 63 years Mr. Fleisher’s junior, this brilliant 27-year-old Russian is at the forefront of a new generation of pianists. As a Perspectives artist, he was omnipresent at Carnegie Hall last season; this year he returns for a single solo recital, with works by Beethoven, Schumann and Prokofiev. (He also continues his Rachmaninoff cycle with Yannick Nézet-Séguin and the Philadelphia Orchestra, releasing a recording of the second and fourth concertos in October, and he appears at Carnegie with the Met Orchestra in May.) Feb. 9, carnegiehall.org.
ACCADEMIA BIZANTINA This crisply exciting early-music ensemble is led by a guest, the violinist Giuliano Carmignola, in works by Mozart and Haydn at Alice Tully Hall. Feb. 12, lincolncenter.org.
MAKI NAMEKAWA AND DENNIS RUSSELL DAVIES Unusual Shostakovich arrangements for two pianos are on the agenda at the Morgan Library & Museum: versions of his own feverish Symphony No. 4 and Stravinsky’s “Symphony of Psalms.” Feb. 12, themorgan.org.
ROYAL CONCERTGEBOUW ORCHESTRA With this celebrated ensemble’s chief conductor, Daniele Gatti, removed in the wake of accusations of inappropriate behavior, it’s unclear as of press time who will lead this set of Carnegie Hall concerts; the programs currently include works by Beethoven, Strauss, Guillaume Connesson, Weber, Mozart and Brahms. Feb. 14-15, carnegiehall.org.
JORDI SAVALL A legend of early music, constantly exploring new corners of the repertory and the globe, and all Carnegie Hall can muster is what made him famous, “Tous les Matins du Monde,” his gamba-heavy program based on the 1991 film of the same title? Doubtless it will be lovely, but it seems a missed opportunity nevertheless. Feb. 21, carnegiehall.org.
DETROIT SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA You’d be hard-pressed to find a more clever orchestral program in America this season, or a more intriguing celebration of Leonard Bernstein’s centennial: selections from “West Side Story” (1957) paired with John Cage’s epochal exploration of silence and what surrounds it, “4’33,” from just five years earlier. Barber’s Violin Concerto and a new piece by Kristin Kuster round out the concert, a tribute to this orchestra’s playful creativity. (Season highlights also include a program of Steve Reich, Philip Glass and John Luther Adams; Andrew Norman’s “Play”; Daniel Bjarnason’s Violin Concerto; a mandolin concerto by Anna Clyne; and a new work by Juliet Palmer.) Feb. 21-22, dso.org.
MATTHEW POLENZANI There’s a heartening helping of appearances this season by this tenor, whose Mozartian gallantry has settled into a kind of heroic grace. Star turns at the Met Opera in Tchaikovsky’s “Iolanta” (in January and February) and Mozart’s “La Clemenza di Tito” (in March and April) are bookends for a Carnegie Hall recital with works by Schubert, Beethoven, Brahms and, most compelling, Janacek’s haunting cycle “The Diary of One Who Disappeared,” with the mezzo-soprano Jennifer Johnson Cano. Feb. 24, carnegiehall.org.
ANDRAS SCHIFF “Nothing short of astounding” was James R. Oestreich’s account of this eminent pianist’s appearance at Carnegie Hall in April. Mr. Schiff returns with a characteristically capacious program of works by Bach, Bartok, Janacek and Schumann. March 7, carnegiehall.org.
‘DER RING DES NIBELUNGEN’ It’s back! Robert Lepage’s technologically ambitious, creaky, costly and brainless production of Wagner’s epochal “Ring” cycle — its starring attraction a fantastically heavy, many-planked “machine” — has muscled onto to the Met’s stage for another go (or, rather, three). Philippe Jordan, his conducting tending toward the competently bland, leads casts that include Christine Goerke (much anticipated as Brünnhilde), Greer Grimsley, Michael Volle, Stefan Vinke, Andreas Schager, Stuart Skelton, Eva-Maria Westbroek, Tomasz Konieczny and Jamie Barton. Opens March 9; metopera.org.
‘AL NAHAROT BAVEL’ If you need a chaser for “Das Rheingold,” the ensembles Parthenia and Artek collaborate on this program, which translates to “By the Waters of Babylon.” It’s a celebration of Jewish composers of the Renaissance and early Baroque, including Salamone Rossi and members of the Lupo and Bassano families, at the Center for Jewish History, near Union Square. March 10, parthenia.org.
PHILHARMONIA ORCHESTRA Esa-Pekka Salonen brings this powerful ensemble to David Geffen Hall for a pair of performances: Bruckner’s Seventh Symphony, a classic orchestral test, on the first program, and, on the second, Sibelius (“The Oceanides”), Stravinsky (“The Firebird”) and Mr. Salonen’s own dazzlingly virtuosic Cello Concerto (with Truls Mork). March 10-11, lincolncenter.org.
PHILHARMONIA BAROQUE ORCHESTRA Not to be confused with the London-based ensemble above, this early-music group from San Francisco and its leader, Nicholas McGegan, are joined at Alice Tully Hall by Anne Sofie von Otter and Anthony Roth Costanzo in works by Handel, Purcell, Arvo Pärt and Caroline Shaw. March 12, lincolncenter.org.
THOMAS ADÈS AND KIRILL GERSTEIN Mr. Adès, one of our essential composers and a fine pianist, is joined at Carnegie Hall by another excellent set of hands in works by Debussy, Stravinsky (Shostakovich’s transcription of the “Symphony of Psalms,” again!), Lutoslawski, Ravel and, yes, Mr. Adès. March 13, carnegiehall.org.
THEATER OF VOICES This superb vocal ensemble presents the New York premiere of a work by Arvo Pärt with an accompanying film by Phie Ambo and the completion of David Lang’s cycle “the writings.” March 20, carnegiehall.org.
EMANUEL AX Poised and lucid, this veteran pianist brings a mixed program to Carnegie: George Benjamin, Brahms, Schumann (the “Fantasiestücke”), Ravel and Chopin. March 27, carnegiehall.org.
MAHLER CHAMBER ORCHESTRA With her frequent Mozart collaborators, the Cleveland Orchestra, not traveling to New York this season, the gorgeously graceful pianist Mitsuko Uchida gets her fix with this fine ensemble, then returns for Schubert recitals on April 30 and May 4. March 29, carnegiehall.org.
‘DIDO AND AENEAS’ The Temple of Dendur at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, a striking space for just about anything, will provide an appropriately antique, if geographically imprecise, setting for Purcell’s classic opera, performed by the venerable Handel and Haydn Society. March 30, metmuseum.org.
PIOTR ANDERSZEWSKI An elegant program for this penetrating pianist at Alice Tully Hall: Beethoven’s “Diabelli” Variations, introduced by a selection from Bach’s “The Well-Tempered Clavier.” April 2, lincolncenter.org.
YEFIM BRONFMAN Another thoughtful pianist, though one with a reputation for more extroversion, Mr. Bronfman brings a program that includes Schumann, Debussy and Schubert to Carnegie Hall. April 4, carnegiehall.org.
QUATUOR AROD Ebullient and incisive, this group arrives at Carnegie’s intimate Weill Recital Hall with a program of Haydn, Brahms and Bartok. April 5, carnegiehall.org.
BUDAPEST FESTIVAL ORCHESTRA A deep dive into (more) Bartok over two evenings, this sprightly orchestra’s stand will doubtless be enlivened by its music director Ivan Fischer’s surprises. April 5-6, carnegiehall.org.
‘ST. JOHN PASSION’ The latest in a recent spate of Easter performances of this harrowing Bach work (perhaps at the expense of outings of the “St. Matthew Passion”) is a presentation by the shining St. Thomas Choir of Men and Boys, with the ensemble New York Baroque Incorporated. April 11, saintthomaschurch.org.
MUSIC ON FILM Michael Kimmelman, the architecture critic of The New York Times and an accomplished pianist, will introduce three helpings of masters of his instrument at the Walter Reade Theater. The footage includes the Beethoven of Serkin, Arrau and Backhaus; Chopin from Rubinstein, Horowitz and Argerich; and Glenn Gould’s Bach. April 13 and 27, lincolncenter.org.
‘SEMELE’ Few musical events have settled into tradition as happily as the annual Handelian visit of Harry Bicket and his English Concert to Carnegie Hall, this season presenting this sparkling oratorio with a cast led by Brenda Rae and Elizabeth DeShong. April 14, carnegiehall.org.
GEORGE CRUMB AT 90 The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center celebrates a vital American composer with two programs of work, ranging from 1947 to a new commission. The society also presents the Escher Quartet and a new work by Andrew Norman on May 7, in addition to its superb new-music series in the Rose Studio, which includes premieres by Anthony Cheung (Jan. 17) and Mark-Anthony Turnage (May 16). April 14 and 16, chambermusicsociety.org.
MET ORCHESTRA Yannick Nézet-Séguin leads the final two concerts in this ensemble’s post-opera-season escape from Lincoln Center to Carnegie Hall. There’s a French program of Debussy, Dutilleux and Ravel, as well as a pairing of Mahler’s “Rückert Lieder” (sung by Elina Garanca) and Bruckner’s Seventh Symphony. (Valery Gergiev conducts the first concert, featuring Schumann’s Piano Concerto, with Daniil Trifonov, and Schubert’s Ninth Symphony.) May 18; June 3 and 14; carnegiehall.org.
NATIONAL SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA A rupture between the Teatro Regio of Turin, Italy, and its conductor, Gianandrea Noseda, forced the cancellation of the company’s American tour and Carnegie Hall concert. Happily, Mr. Noseda’s National Symphony could fill the date, with a program of Liszt (the “Dante” Symphony) and Rossini’s “Stabat Mater.” May 19, carnegiehall.org.
PITTSBURGH SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA Few lead the standard repertory with as much eloquence and humanity as Manfred Honeck, this orchestra’s music director. Recently spoken of as a candidate for the same position with the New York Philharmonic, he will bring his band to the Philharmonic’s turf with a program of Beethoven (the “Emperor” Piano Concerto, with Till Fellner) and Mahler’s Fifth Symphony. May 19, lincolncenter.org.
‘ATLAS’ Meredith Monk’s delicate, earthy, moody, witty 1991 opera, a stylized narrative loosely based on Alexandra David-Néel’s early-20th-century travels in Asia, will finally get a new staging, courtesy of the Los Angeles Philharmonic and the sensitive director Yuval Sharon. June 11-12, laphil.com.
‘STONEWALL’ Commemorating the 50th anniversary of the Stonewall riots, a landmark in the gay rights movement, New York City Opera has commissioned a work by the composer Iain Bell and the librettist Mark Campbell. It promises to depict “a diverse group of characters whose lives collide at that pivotal moment in history.” Opens June 19; stonewallopera.com.