Revelations about Brett Kavanaugh and Rod Rosenstein got the week started on a tumultuous note. Where are we headed now?
Ms. Collins and Mr. Stephens are opinion columnists. They converse every other week.
Bret Stephens: Good morning, Gail. I know we’ll have plenty to say about Blasey v. Kavanaugh today, but, first, Rod Rosenstein! The Times had a bombshell story last week saying the deputy attorney general felt so badly used by President Trump last year after the firing of James Comey that he considered wearing a wire to record the president’s ranting. Rosenstein denied it categorically and the Republican establishment urged Trump not to fire him.
First thing Monday morning, news breaks that Rosenstein is close to resigning. Or not. Two questions for you. First, should we rename Eighth Avenue, where we converse, “Avenue of the Rosenstein?” Second, is this the beginning of the end for the Trump presidency or the beginning of the end for the Justice Department?
Gail Collins: Yow, Bret. What was that old Chinese curse about living in interesting times?
I have a lot more faith in the staying power of the Justice Department than in the staying power of the president. But we’ll see. And renaming Eighth Avenue — you know the way Rosenstein’s fate has been bouncing around, I’m thinking maybe we could find him a nice traffic rotary upstate.
Bret: If Trump fires Rosenstein, he gets rid of the guy who has been Robert Mueller’s main protector at Justice. Yet firing him on charges of insubordination means believing that the Fake News got the story about Rosenstein’s 25th Amendment musings right. This may be the ultimate Trumpian dilemma.
Let’s switch tack and talk about Brett Kavanaugh’s nomination. Trump broke radio silence on Christine Blasey Ford’s accusation against the judge by tweeting that if the attack had been bad she or her parents would have reported it to the police.
I have mixed views about the case, but if you are going to defend Kavanaugh this seems to me as nearly the worst argument to make. Your thoughts?
Gail: The Kavanaugh story is about sex, but it’s also about class. The country now sees Brett Kavanaugh as a rich, drunken thug who left some young women with very traumatic memories.
I still wouldn’t want to vote for him. But as things stand now, even if he’s confirmed he’ll still be the walking, talking symbol of how men just don’t get it.
Given the way things are cartwheeling around right now, I wouldn’t put any bets on how this will end. What about you?
Bret: I think the Senate does need to hear from Blasey and Kavanaugh directly, either in public session or behind closed doors. Mark Judge, whom Blasey has identified as the other guy in the room, should testify as well, along with anyone else who was supposedly at the party or with Blasey or Kavanaugh at the time of the alleged assault. I also think the F.B.I. ought to conduct an expedited investigation, recognizing, first, that it can’t drag on forever, and second, that there are limits to what it can be expected to find about a 36-year-old case that went unreported at the time. We are not going to get to a “beyond a reasonable doubt” standard of proof, but we might try to reach the “clear and convincing” evidence standard often used in civil or administrative cases. I’d even settle for the somewhat lower “preponderance of evidence” standard.
Basically, I think Blasey has a right to be heard and have her claims impartially examined. And Kavanaugh is entitled to a presumption of innocence and an opportunity to clear his name.
Gail: As usual you’re being extremely reasonable. And if I was running the committee I would totally follow your directives.
But deep down, this isn’t really about whether Christine Blasey Ford is telling the truth. I suspect most people, including many of the Judiciary Republicans, privately thinks she is. The real issue is whether a respected judge can be held accountable for a drunken sexual assault he made as a teenager.
Or at least that was the issue until a woman from Kavanaugh’s college years spoke up. Bret, I have no idea how many issues — and charges — we’re going to have before this is over. What I do know is that we’re at a marker in the transformation of Western culture — how’s that for a sweeping statement? Powerful men are going down because they failed to realize women were genuinely equal, not only when it comes to getting jobs and promotions, but also when it comes to how they’re treated at work, and even at a party of drunken teenagers.
Bret: Oh, good, we disagree (I think). There are all sorts of important conversations to be had about cultural transformation. And there is every reason to embrace a transformation that moves in the direction of full and meaningful equality for women, as well as vastly greater awareness of sexual harassment and assault, and far less tolerance of it.
But that’s not what this moment is about. I think it’s about the truth and who is telling it: Blasey or Kavanaugh. I don’t want to accept a world in which Blasey’s allegation — and now another accusation from Deborah Ramirez, a classmate of Kavanaugh’s at Yale — is breezily dismissed as some kind of unprovable charge about some no-big-deal event from long ago. But neither do I want to accept one in which mere accusation without substantial corroboration can destroy a person’s career and reputation. I don’t think that helps anyone.
I don’t know what the Republicans on the Judiciary Committee privately believe about Blasey’s accusations. But it seems to me the right approach is to acknowledge that none of us really knows, that prejudgment is bad judgment, and that we should try to get as much information as possible to reach a clearer determination.
Question for you: What kind of evidence would persuade you that Kavanaugh is being truthful?
Gail: Well, if somebody else appeared and said, “No, I was the one who molested that girl — Brett was in the other room passed out in front of the fireplace,” I’d expect the committee to listen.
But here’s my other bottom line. Nobody deserves a lifetime Supreme Court nomination. This isn’t like the right to buy a home or to be employed. It’s an exceptional honor. If the Senate decided Kavanaugh should stay in the superpowerful Court of Appeals, I don’t see it as the equivalent of putting him in the stockades.
Bret: There you go again, Gail, getting me to agree with you. My rejoinder is that a baseless accusation is wrong no matter what, even if the result is something other than jail. And certain accusations, especially if they concern sexual assault, will hang on the accused forever, which is why it is particularly important to ensure they are true. But go on.
Gail: Well, we’ve got a ways to go before this one’s done. Let’s talk for a minute about something else. What’s your favorite congressional race right now? I’m obsessed with the Texas Senate seat but I’d totally understand if you picked the Republican congressman in Arizona whose siblings made a commercial begging people to vote for the other guy.
Bret: That commercial was really something. We should get that family into some sort of group therapy.
I share your enthusiasm for the Texas Senate race, for a couple of small reasons and one very big one. Small reasons: I like Beto O’Rourke, the Democratic challenger, and I like the idea that Texas can turn a bit purple if you have a candidate with energy, wit and a human touch.
The big reason is that I despise Ted Cruz. That is “D-e-s-p-i-s-e,” in case I haven’t spelled out my loathing clearly enough. Would you like to know why?
Gail: Oh, gosh, please go on.
Bret: Because he’s like a serpent covered in Vaseline. Because he treats the American people like two-bit suckers in 10-gallon hats.  Because of his phony piety and even phonier principles. Because I see him as the spiritual love child of the 1980s televangelist Jimmy Swaggart and Jack Nicholson’s character in “The Shining.” Because his ethics are purely situational. Because he makes Donald Trump look like a human being by comparison. Because “New York values.” Because his fellow politicians detest him, and that’s just among Republicans. Because he never got over being the smartest kid in eighth grade. Because he’s conniving enough to try to put one over you, but not perceptive enough to realize that you see right through him. Because he’s the type of man who would sell his family into slavery if that’s what it took to get elected. And that he would use said slavery as a sob story to get himself re-elected.
Otherwise, you might say I’m his No. 1 fan.
Gail: Well, O.K. Not much I can add on that end.
But wait a minute, I do have one question. This is a six-year term. Presuming a Democrat defeats Trump in 2020 (pause for short novena to the Blessed Mother), what if the Senate was still teetering by a one vote-margin? Say the new president’s priorities included increasing government regulation, moving the U.S. embassy back to Tel Aviv from Jerusalem and raising taxes on high-income people and corporations.
If the deciding vote on all these things you don’t like was going to be the Senator from Texas, who would you want it to be — the highly principled and sincere Democrat Beto O’Rourke or a certain Republican slimy snake?
Bret: Not fair, Gail. The fate of the Republic versus my self-respect. Let me answer that in our next conversation.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion).