WASHINGTON — Most Supreme Court appointments are in a way inconsequential. A conservative replaces a conservative, a liberal replaces a liberal, and the court’s basic direction is unchanged.
That is not the case with the nomination of Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh, whose Senate confirmation hearings will begin on Tuesday. Judge Kavanaugh is considerably more conservative than the justice he would replace, Anthony M. Kennedy.
But there is a more subtle, and important, reason that President Trump’s pick of Judge Kavanaugh could remake the court. His confirmation would result in a rare replacement of the court’s swing justice, moving Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. — a much more reliably conservative vote than Justice Kennedy — to the court’s ideological center.
It has been more than 80 years since a chief justice was the swing vote. If Chief Justice Roberts assumes that position, legal scholars said, he will lead a solid five-member conservative majority that would most likely restrict access to abortion, limit the use of race-conscious decisions in areas like college admissions, uphold voting restrictions, expand gun rights, strike down campaign finance regulations and give religion a greater role in public life.
“John Roberts would be the least swinging swing justice in the post-World War II era,” said Justin Driver, a law professor at the University of Chicago.
That would be a major break from the role that Justice Kennedy, a moderate conservative who was appointed by President Ronald Reagan, played for years on the court. Justice Kennedy at times voted with the court’s four-member liberal wing on issues like abortion, affirmative action, gay rights and the death penalty.
Justice Kennedy and Chief Justice Roberts were on the opposite sides of 51 closely divided decisions in which Justice Kennedy joined the court’s liberals, according to data collected by Lee Epstein and Andrew D. Martin of Washington University in St. Louis and Kevin Quinn of the University of Michigan. All of those precedents are at risk, Professor Epstein said.
Only one of the previous five Supreme Court confirmation hearings concerned a nominee who would go on to change the ideological balance on the court. That was a dozen years ago, and it led directly to the Citizens United decision on campaign finance.
In that change on the court, Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. replaced the more moderate Justice Sandra Day O’Connor. That made Justice Kennedy the sole justice at the court’s ideological center.
Justice Alito joined Justice Kennedy’s majority opinion in 2010 in the court’s 5-to-4 decision in Citizens United, which overruled part of a 2003 opinion by Justice O’Connor. Justice Alito also joined Justice Kennedy’s majority opinion in 2007 in another 5-to-4 decision, that one sustaining the federal Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act. Seven years earlier, the court had struck down a very similar Nebraska law, with Justice O’Connor in the majority.
But the differences between Justice O’Connor and Justice Kennedy pale in comparison to the ones between Justice Kennedy and Chief Justice Roberts. 
“Justice Kennedy’s departure is likely to lead to far more dramatic change in the court than the departure of Justice O’Connor did,” said Irv Gornstein, executive director of the Supreme Court Institute at Georgetown University.
By contrast, the other appointments since 2005 did not alter the court’s basic direction. Chief Justice Roberts’s replacement of Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justice Neil M. Gorsuch’s replacement of Justice Antonin Scalia substituted conservatives for conservatives. Justice Sonia Sotomayor’s replacement of Justice David H. Souter and Justice Elena Kagan’s replacement of Justice John Paul Stevens substituted liberals for liberals.
While Chief Justice Roberts, 63, would represent a sharp change as the swing justice, that does not mean that the court will make a sudden leap to the right. Chief Justice Roberts is generally inclined to move in incremental steps, and he cares about the Supreme Court’s legitimacy and prestige. “It is a jolt to the legal system when you overrule a precedent,” he said at his confirmation hearings in 2005.
That did not stop him from joining a decision in June that overruled a 40-year-old precedent in a decision that dealt a sharp blow to public labor unions. In general, though, a court with the chief justice at its center would most likely move steadily to the right in measured steps.
Republicans are confident that they can quickly confirm Judge Kavanaugh. Erwin Chemerinsky, the dean of the law school at the University of California, Berkeley, said there was a good way to determine where the Supreme Court would head if that happens.
In 2016, in Whole Woman’s Health v. Hellerstedt, Justice Kennedy joined the court’s four liberals to strike down parts of a Texas law that would have drastically reduced the number of abortion clinics in the state, leaving them only in the largest metropolitan areas.
That same year, he wrote the majority opinion in Fisher v. University of Texas, upholding a race-conscious admissions program at the state’s flagship university.
Both decisions would almost certainly have come out differently had Justice Gorsuch, Mr. Trump’s first appointee, and Judge Kavanaugh been on the court.
While Judge Kavanaugh may face few obvious obstacles to his confirmation, his Senate hearings will still be bruising for other reasons. There is lingering bitterness among liberals over the Republican blockade of Judge Merrick B. Garland, President Barack Obama’s Supreme Court nominee. Democrats argue that they have not seen the documents they need to assess Judge Kavanaugh’s record, a clamor that grew over the weekend as the White House said it was withholding 100,000 pages, citing executive privilege. And some Democrats question the legitimacy of a Supreme Court appointment by a president under investigation over his campaign’s ties to Russia and what critics call obstruction of justice.
Judge Kavanaugh is 53. If he joins the Supreme Court, he will most likely serve for decades. His views may shift. Other Republican appointees, including Justices Stevens and Souter, drifted left over time. Even Chief Justice Roberts, in a rare deviation from his conservative track record, voted with the court’s liberals in two cases saving aspects of Mr. Obama’s health care law.
But recent appointees have almost never disappointed their supporters, and Judge Kavanaugh is not likely to be an exception.
Thirteen years ago, Chief Justice Roberts’s performance at his confirmation hearings was so smooth and winning that Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, said he had “retired the trophy” for an outstanding performance by a judicial nominee.
Chief Justice Roberts has since joked about the “odd historical quirk” that gives chief justices only one vote. If Judge Kavanaugh is confirmed, Chief Justice Roberts will still have just one vote. But it will be the crucial one.