Alex Eaton-Salners piles it on.
THURSDAY PUZZLE — The interesting thing about rebus elements in puzzles (Yes, you can write more than one letter in a square, and here is how you do that on your devices) is how much they divide us as solvers.
Most people get used to them, because they are a fact of life in crossword puzzles, but for those who are new to solving, it can come as a shock that this is allowed. Sometimes we hear from veteran solvers as well. “One square, one letter” is something that we hear a lot, but I think we can afford to be more open-minded about the puzzles. This is a game, after all. We’re supposed to be challenging ourselves and having fun. If all the puzzles were the same, this game would become very boring.
Alex Eaton-Salners is back, and I agree with his notes below that perhaps we are seeing more puzzles with rebus elements lately because there is a backlog in the inventory. Whatever the reason, Mr. Eaton-Salners’s theme reminds us of one of the perils of office work.
16A: It’s Thursday, so solvers lose the hockey hint that would have made this a no-brainer. When a player feints one way on the ice, it’s called a “deke.” “Made a false move?” gets a question mark because it sort of hints at deking, but it also might be any other kind of false move. Past tense clue gets a past tense answer, so we wind up with DEKED.
45A: I had _U_S for “Tatooine has two of them” and immediately thought “PUBS!”, but that could just be because I’m moving in the next few weeks and am stressed out. The answer, of course, is SUNS.
63A: “Beach house?” could be a luxurious home by the sea, but that would be an anti-crustacean way to look at things, wouldn’t it? Some beach inhabitants are not human. You’ve met Marcel the Shell With Shoes On, haven’t you?
1D: Q.E.D. is an initialism of the Latin “Quod erat demonstrandum,” and means “What was to be demonstrated.” I’m told that it is usually seen at the end of mathematical proofs, or when your child is trying to argue with you.
4D: Remember, when you see a clue that hints at top, bottom, beginning of, end of, or even middle of, you are supposed to look for a letter or letters in the word it is modifying. “Middle of a puzzle?” wants you to look for the letters that make up the middle of the word “puzzle,” and those would be the two ZEES.
17D: This was especially tricky, because “kicks” can also be slang for shoes or sneakers. Today, the “Place to get one's kicks?” is a DOJO, where you would be kicking as you learn (Japanese) martial arts.
49D: TIL that three barleycorns equaled ONE INCH, at least under King Edward II of England.
51D: I so wanted this to be HEMS, because a partner clue typically asks for the partner word in a phrase where two words are separated by the word “and,” which would give us “HEMS and haws.” I get why the answer is HEES (as in “hee haw”), but would not have gotten that on the first try.
I hope this isn’t a weird question, but are physical INBOXes and OUTBOXes still a thing? With the prevalence of electronic communication, I don’t believe that I have seen a genuine IN- or OUTBOX since the 1980s. For those who have absolutely no idea what they are, they are/were letter-size bins, usually stacked on top of each other, and your work would be placed in the INBOX. When you completed it, you would place it in the OUTBOX and an administrative assistant would come and take it to who knows where.
Anyway, the theme includes four phrases that contain both the words IN and OUT, and those two words are each written in their own single square, giving us IN boxes and OUT boxes.
For example, at 30A, the answer to the clue “Goal for Ponce de León” is THE FOUNTA[IN] OF Y[OUT]H.
Mr. Eaton-Salners has cleverly tucked the revealer down in the south east and even managed to stack them, like the real thing: We have [IN]BOX at 69A and right below that, we have [OUT]BOX at 72A. Nicely done, and that couldn’t have been easy.
I suspect Will and crew have a backlog of rebus puzzles in their Thursday inventory. This one took nearly as long to go from acceptance to publication (17 months) as my first five Thursday puzzles combined.
Since I created this puzzle so long ago, I see it now through a very different set of eyes. When I wrote it, I was really into creating pangrammatic grids (i.e., using all the letters of the alphabet at least once). While Scrabble-y letters can be great since they're generally rarer in crosswords, if I were making this puzzle today, I would prioritize smoother fill over including the last few letters of the alphabet. For example, QED, UTE, and ETRE seem like a high price to pay for the Q in the upper-left corner.
On the other hand, I still agree with my decision to deploy the Utah block (i.e., the Utah-shaped clump of five contiguous black squares) in the lower right. Once THIN OUT, INBOX, and OUTBOX were in place, if I hadn't done so (i.e., if I had put a black square where the S in SHELL is and removed the three black squares to the left), then there would have been only one entry into that corner (THIN OUT). To create good grid flow, you want at least two words to connect any isolated section with the rest of the grid.
Two other things I like about this puzzle: 1) the symmetry between CARPING ABOUT and RAINBOW TROUT; and 2) the image of a stacked INBOX/OUTBOX sitting on someone's desk. My original cluing for the INBOX/OUTBOX revealer was to treat them as a unit (emphasizing the visual nature of the stacking), but hopefully solvers will still get the picture in the puzzle's current incarnation.
