CITY OF SCIENCE at the Sports and Recreation Center, College of Staten Island (Sept. 23, 10 a.m.-4 p.m.). It shouldn’t surprise anyone to hear that New York is a city of science, but it is especially so on the weekends when this free touring festival visits. A satellite event of the annual World Science Festival, City of Science offers large-scale interactive exhibits and experiments, like opportunities for children to walk on water (courtesy of cornstarch and the principles governing what are known as non-Newtonian fluids) and investigate a seismic accelerator, which can blast objects 20 feet into the air. This Staten Island edition will also feature the debut of a demonstration on how to use the mind to operate a motor, as well as local programs that require advance registration: tours of the college’s Astrophysical Observatory (currently full, but spaces may become available 15 minutes before start time), and, for visitors 8 and older, two animal behaviorist apprenticeships in which to study the social behavior of the naked mole rat.
FALL FAMILY DAY: STORYTELLING THROUGH MUSIC at the Resnick Education Wing, Carnegie Hall (Sept. 23, noon-4 p.m.). Words are only one means of relating a tale. This free celebration (admission is first come first served) will explore the narrative ability not only of music, but also of visual art and dance. The activities, geared toward children 3 to 10, include inventing stories with the musician Riza Printup, for which a jazz band will improvise a soundtrack; providing sounds and movement as the illustrator Jeff Hopkins draws a tale in real time; building storytelling sticks (like shaman or prayer sticks) for a musical session with Bash the Trash; and taking in performances by the Afrofuturist duo Soul Science Lab and the dancing storytellers of Creative Stage. Young aspiring composers can also learn the basics of scoring a film.
KINGSLAND WILDFLOWERS FESTIVAL at Kingsland Wildflowers (Sept. 22, noon-4 p.m.). Homes in New York often occupy the sky, but these days, gardens do, too. This free event honors the 22,000 square feet of indigenous grasses and wildflowers planted on the roof of a warehouse in Greenpoint, Brooklyn. The site, Kingsland Wildflowers, also sponsors environmental programs connected with its bird-and-insect habitat. At the festival, to be held rain or shine, options for children will include joining a mapping project with Trout in the Classroom, bird-watching with New York City Audubon, learning about and seeing live species from the Wild Bird Fund, and making naturalists’ notebooks and going on a garden scavenger hunt with Eckford Street Studio.
SUBMERGE NYC MARINE SCIENCE FESTIVAL at Pier 84, Hudson River Park (Sept. 22, 11 a.m.-4 p.m.; rain date is Sept. 23). Don’t worry: No children at this free event will actually go underwater, but they will meet many of the species that live there, as well as have the chance to operate a submersible robotic vehicle. Produced by the Hudson River Park Estuary Lab, the festival will include kayaking and catch-and-release fishing; a science stage offering marine-themed performances and live birds of prey; the Discovery Lab, where young participants can see plankton under a microscope and observe an oyster dissection; and the River Ranger Kid Zone, which has a touch tank filled with creatures. Arm-of-the-Sea Theater will also present “City That Drinks the Mountain Sky: Part 2,” a play using large-scale puppets to illustrate the latest challenges to New York’s water supply.
