BROOKLYN SCHOOL GARDENS CRAWL at the Old Stone House (9 a.m.-4:30 p.m.). Many public schools in Brooklyn nurture more than young minds; they cultivate vegetables and flowers, too. Produced by Garden Train, a school gardens consortium, and the citywide initiative Grow to Learn NYC, this free celebration of school and community ties offers a journey of discovery in neighborhoods from Red Hook to Kensington. It begins with bagels and welcoming remarks at the Old Stone House in Park Slope, where families can pick up mock passports and maps (also available online) showing the 10 participating schools. From 10 a.m. to 2 p.m., children can visit as many of the gardens as they like; those collecting passport stamps from at least three will be eligible for prizes. Each school will present activities, including planting daffodil bulbs, making wildflower bouquets and, at Public School 146, painting watercolor portraits of the garden’s real chickens. The day will end at 3:15 back at the Old Stone House with live music, an after-party and a family yoga session.
SONIA DE LOS SANTOS FAMILY CONCERT at the Jewish Museum (Sept. 30, 11:30 a.m.). The title of Ms. De Los Santos’s new album is “¡Alegría!” (“Joy!”), something she plans to spread during her first appearance at this museum. Born in Mexico, she will celebrate not only her Latin American heritage but also the roots of Sukkot, the Jewish harvest festival, by sharing songs about nature. Presenting a bilingual, interactive program for little listeners — the recommended ages are 2 to 8 — she will perform both her own work and favorites like “Esta Es Tu Tierra,” which children will recognize as “This Land Is Your Land.” The museum is also offering ticket packages that include the concert and Picture This!, a 10 a.m. program comprising a gallery tour, a story, art making and a snack.
FAMILY EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS FESTIVAL at the Staten Island Children’s Museum (Sept. 29, noon-5 p.m.). Ambulances and fire engines often signal disaster, but their appearances at this annual event will be educational and even fun. Sponsored by N.Y.C. Emergency Management, the free festival invites children to talk to police officers, firefighters and rescue workers; investigate their equipment; and learn how to stay safe in the face of danger. Some favorite guests will also appear: an actress portraying Ready Girl, an emergency preparedness superhero, and the four-legged stars of the New York Police Department mounted and canine units.
‘GUMSHOE’ at the Abrons Arts Center (Sept. 28-Oct. 7). Trusty Sidekick Theater Company, known for its innovative and often immersive children’s productions, has acquired some trusty sidekicks of its own: Called the Young Devisers, they’re actors ages 9 through 13 selected to help the troupe create and perform new site-specific works. This show, their debut, also enlists some other fresh-faced types — the audience members — to unravel the plot. Commissioned by the Abrons Arts Center to honor the 125th anniversary of its home, the Henry Street Settlement House, the play starts outdoors at a 1956 garden party organized by the 13-year-old heir of Lillian Wald, the house’s real founder. In the fictional script, it turns out that Wald left a time capsule containing a portable vault that can be opened only with a secret code. Young theatergoers — the show is geared toward those 8 and older — join the play’s detectives to visit characters and unearth clues, ending up inside the house and discovering a little history along the way.
KIDS ’N COMEDY BACK TO SCHOOL SHOW at Gotham Comedy Club (Sept. 30, 1 p.m.). The school year is really underway — might as well laugh about it. This 90-minute show, for audiences 9 and older, features tween and teenage stand-up comics, who always approach academia with a sense of humor. Their past season-opener subjects have included schedule mix-ups, strange teachers and summer memories. Obscenity and kindergarten-style jokes are strictly banned, while sophisticated wit is strongly encouraged. Reservations are required, and this Manhattan club offers a menu for children under 12.
MACHINE DE CIRQUE at the New Victory Theater (Sept. 28-Oct. 7). What happens when you marry the arts and technology? In the case of this Québec City troupe, you get an unusual circus. Opening the New Victory’s fall season, this team of four energetic young acrobats and one frenetic composer-musician presents an hourlong show filled with comedy, percussion, and aerial and other feats. The company’s members have earned fame for executing the most consecutive back flips on a teeterboard (per Guinness World Records) and for performing a routine while dressed only in bath towels — without being too, well, revelatory.
THE MEDIEVAL FESTIVAL in Fort Tryon Park (Sept. 30, 11:30 a.m.-6 p.m.). Knights in armor, ladies-in-waiting, sorcerers, squires and seers. Children know them from fairy tales, but this is a chance to see them in the flesh (or close approximations thereof). On Sunday, the Society for Creative Anachronism will turn this Upper Manhattan park into a medieval village in a free celebration that starts with a royal procession and ends with a real — though generally bloodless — jousting tournament. In between, young medievalists can enjoy storytelling, magic and shows (including a face-off between Robin Hood’s forces and those of the Sheriff of Nottingham that requires audience participation); watch falconry and get a close-up look at the birds; and (safely) try out ancient games and foam-padded weaponry. Organized by the Washington Heights and Inwood Development Corporation, the annual festival will also present circus arts, sword swallowing and a new Roman soldier encampment. Here, the fun is infectious, but the plague — you’ll see a few victims — isn’t.
PAJAMA WALK AND FAMILY FESTIVAL at Pier 84, Hudson River Park (Sept. 29, 10 a.m.-2:30 p.m.). This is one day when you shouldn’t have to nag your kids about hanging around in their pj’s long past breakfast. Such attire is encouraged for this charity event, which will raise funds for the Pajama Program, an initiative to provide new pajamas and books to children who are homeless, in foster care or otherwise affected by family instability. Check-in starts at 10 a.m. on the pier, between West 43rd and 44th Streets (participants can register online or on site), followed, at 10:30, by the one-mile walk. At 11:15, the pier will host the festival, which will include carnival games, food, a 30-minute yoga-and-music class from Yogi Tales, a catwalk for pajama-clad little ones and a performance from the children’s rocker and balladeer Laurie Berkner, who should keep everyone thoroughly awake.