As Christine Blasey Ford testified Thursday in the Supreme Court nominee Brett M. Kavanaugh’s confirmation hearing before the Senate Judiciary Committee, she was guided through her initial questioning, on behalf of Republican members, by a veteran Arizona sex crimes prosecutor, Rachel Mitchell.
Though Ms. Mitchell’s cross-examinations might typically be expected to target suspects, her questioning in the first part of the hearing on Thursday — low-key, patient, but persistent — probed the details of an accuser’s account, looking for conflicting or missing details.
How did Dr. Blasey get home from the party where she said Judge Kavanaugh had assaulted her? Why did she say she had heard conversation downstairs, then say she did not? What communication has she had with people she said were at the party, but who claim not to remember it? Who paid for her polygraph test?
Next, though, she turned to Judge Kavanaugh, with questions that seemed aimed at eliminating any possibility of ambivalence in his account. Had he ever drunk so much that he blacked out, or woke up without some of his clothing? Had he ever at any time engaged in sexual behavior with Dr. Blasey, even if it was consensual? What about those changes on his calendar from 1982?
Heather Grossman, a quadriplegic woman in Arizona paralyzed from the neck down, was at her wits’ end.
The police had recommended felony abuse charges against her ex-husband, an heir to a truck-leasing fortune whom she had accused of spitting in her face, beating her and throwing bags of dog feces at her. But the prosecutor running the sex crimes and family violence unit in Phoenix, Rachel Mitchell, declined to press charges after questioning the woman’s credibility.
Ms. Mitchell, a veteran prosecutor in Arizona’s Maricopa County attorney’s office, has a long record as an evenhanded prosecutor of sex and domestic abuse cases, though some Arizonans, like Ms. Grossman, have expressed disappointment that she is not always as aggressive against abuse suspects as they would like.
On Thursday, she takes on her highest-profile case yet: As the Senate Judiciary Committee hears testimony from Christine Blasey Ford, the first woman to accuse the Supreme Court nominee Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh of sexual assault, it is Ms. Mitchell set to lead the questioning for the Republican membership.
A registered Republican, Ms. Mitchell has worked more than a quarter-century in a county attorney’s office long dominated by Republicans. She has a reputation for political impartiality, though, which has prompted some colleagues to wonder why she accepted an assignment that places her squarely in the middle of one of the nation’s most polarizing political debates — tasked with examining the credibility of one of three women to publicly accuse Judge Kavanaugh of sexual assault.
 Ms. Mitchell discussed her job in a 2012 interview with FrontLine Magazine, the journal of Foundations Baptist Fellowship International, a fundamentalist group that cautioned in a blog post this week that some women fabricate allegations of sexual assault.
 Here are their allegations and his responses.
In the interview, Ms. Mitchell said she first became familiar with issues around child sex crimes when she was paired with a senior attorney who was working a case involving a youth choir director accused of misconduct.
Ms. Mitchell gained prominence during the sexual abuse scandal that engulfed the Phoenix Diocese of the Roman Catholic Church more than a decade ago and continues to simmer. In 2005, she won a conviction on child molestation charges of Paul LeBrun, a former Catholic priest who was sentenced to 111 years in prison.
Ms. Mitchell’s long tenure in the sex crimes unit in one of the country’s most populous counties has not been without controversy. The Maricopa County attorney’s office was a target of a lawsuit filed this month over child pornography charges that were mistakenly brought against an innocent man in 2017.
Ms. Mitchell had previously come under scrutiny in 2011 after a former elder in a Jehovah’s Witness church in Phoenix admitted to sexually abusing a boy in the 1980s but was sentenced to only six months in jail. The defendant had been allowed to plead guilty to reduced charges that did not include crimes that occurred during the victim’s pre-teenage years.
Ms. Grossman, the quadriplegic whose ex-husband was never prosecuted, published a scathing memoir about her abuse.
Judge Kavanaugh has strongly denied that the episode Dr. Blasey has described, as well as those outlined by two other accusers, ever took place. Some legal analysts and colleagues of Ms. Mitchell have questioned the use of a prosecutor to question an accuser in a case that has not been subject to a fact-finding law enforcement investigation.
Dr. Blasey had initially made it clear she wanted the F.B.I. to interview potential witnesses before she presented her testimony. But Republican senators, many of whom see the sex abuse allegations as a politically motivated attempt to block Judge Kavanaugh’s confirmation, insisted the hearings proceed without further delay.
“The structure of the questioning that Rachel Mitchell was hired to do is very biased and unfair,” said Janet Warren, a professor of psychiatry and neurobehavioral sciences at the University of Virginia.
Still, Monica Gellman, a former deputy county attorney for Maricopa County who worked under Ms. Mitchell, said that she expected her former boss to be as thorough as possible given the limited time frame in which she has to work. She said that Ms. Mitchell has handled other cases in which accusers, like Dr. Blasey, have recalled events that allegedly occurred decades in the past.
“Rachel is someone who is very familiar with cases of delayed disclosure,” Ms. Gellman said.
Similarly, Bill Richardson, a retired police detective in Arizona with extensive experience investigating sex crimes, said he expected Ms. Mitchell to approach her assignment with professionalism.
